FELIX HOLT , 
 the RADICAL 

 BY 
 GEORGE ELIOT 

 upon the midland now the industrious muse doth fall , 
 the shire which we the heart of England well may call . 

 my native country thou , which so brave spirit hast breed , 
 if there be virtue yet remain in the earth , 
 or any good of thine thou bred'st into my birth , 
 accept it as thine own , whilst now I sing of thee , 
 of all thy later brood the unworthi though I be . 
  Drayton ; Polyolbion . 

 INTRODUCTION . 

 five - and - thirty year ago the glory have not yet depart from the old coach road : the great roadside inn be still brilliant with well - polish tankard , the smile glance of pretty barmaid , and the repartee of jocose hostler ; the mail still announce itself by the merry note of the horn ; the hedge - cutter or the rick - thatcher might still know the exact hour by the unfailing yet otherwise meteoric apparition of the pea - green Tally - ho or the yellow Independent ; and elderly gentleman in pony - chaise , quarter nervously to make way for the rolling , swing swiftness , have not cease to remark that time be finely change since they use to see the pack - horse and hear the tinkling of their bell on this very highway . 

 in those day there be pocket borough , a Birmingham unrepresented in Parliament and compel to make strong representation out of it , unrepeale corn - law , three - and - sixpenny letter , a brawny and many - breed pauperism , and other depart evil ; but there be some pleasant thing , too , which have also depart . Non omnia grandior ata qua fugiamus habet , say the wise goddess : you have not the good of it in all thing , o youngster ! the elderly man have his enviable memory , and not the least of they be the memory of a long journey in mid - spring or autumn on the outside of a stage coach . Posterity may be shoot , like a bullet through a tube , by atmospheric pressure , from Winchester to Newcastle : that be a fine result to have among our hope ; but the slow , old fashioned way of get from one end of our country to the other be the well thing to have in the memory . the tube - journey can never lend much to picture and narrative ; it be as barren as an exclamatory o ! whereas , the happy outside passenger , seat on the box from the dawn to the gloaming , gather enough story of english life , enough of english labor in town and country , enough aspect of earth and sky , to make episode for a modern odyssey . suppose only that his journey take he through that central plain , water at one extremity by the Avon , at the other by the Trent . as the morning silver the meadow with their long line of bushy willow mark the water - course , or burnish the 4   golden corn - rick cluster near the long roof of some midland homestead , he see the full - uddered cow drive from their pasture to the early milking . perhaps it be the shepherd , head - servant of the farm , who drive they , his sheep - dog follow with a heedless , unofficial air , as of a beadle in undress . the shepherd , with a slow and slouch walk , time by the walk of graze beast , move aside , as if unwillingly , throw out a monosyllabic hint to his cattle ; his glance , accustom to rest on thing very near the earth , seem to lift itself with difficulty to the coachman . mail or stage coach for he belong to the mysterious distant system of thing call " Gover'ment , " which , whatever it might be , be no business of his , any more than the most outlying nebula or the coal - sack of the southern hemisphere : his solar system be the parish ; the master 's temper and the casualty of lamb - time be his region of storm . he cut his bread and bacon with his pocket - knife , and feel no bitterness except in the matter of pauper laborer and the bad - luck that send contrarious season and the sheep - rot . he and his cow be soon leave behind , and the homestead , too , with its pond overhang by elder - tree , its untidy kitchen - garden and cone - shape yew - tree arbor . but everywhere the bushy hedgerow waste the land with their straggle beauty , shroud the grassy border of the pasture with catkine hazel , and toss their long blackberry branch on the corn - field . perhaps they be white with May , or star with pale pink dog - rose ; perhaps the urchin be already nut among they , or gather the plenteous crab . it be worth the journey only to see those hedgerow , the liberal home of unmarketable beauty of the purple blossom , ruby - berry nightshade , of the wild convolvulus climbing and spread in tendriled strength till it make a great curtain of pale - green heart and white trumpet , of the many - tube honey - suckle which , in its most delicate fragrance , hide a charm more subtle and penetrate than beauty . even if it be winter , the hedgerow show their coral , the scarlet haw , the deep - crimson hip , with linger brown leaf to make a resting - place for the jewel of the hoar - frost . such hedgerow be often as tall as the laborer ' cottage dot along the lane , or cluster into a small hamlet , their little dingy window telling , like thick - film eye , of nothing but the darkness within . the passenger on the coach - box , bowl 5   along above such a hamlet , see chiefly the roof of it : probably it turn its back on the road , and seem to lie away from everything but its own patch of earth and sky , away from the parish church by long field and green lane , away from all intercourse except that of tramp . if its face could be see , it be most likely dirty ; but the dirt be protestant dirt , and the big , bold , gin - breathing tramp be protestant tramp . there be no sign of superstition near , no crucifix or image to indicate a misguided reverence : the inhabitant be probably so free from superstition that they be in much less awe of the parson than of the overseer . yet they be save from the excess of Protestantism by not know how to read , and by the absence of handloom and mine to be the pioneer of Dissent : they be keep safely in the via medium of indifference , and could have register themselves in the census by a big black mark as member of the Church of England . 

 but there be trim cheerful village too , with a neat or handsome parsonage and gray church set in the midst ; there be the pleasant tinkle of the blacksmith 's anvil , the patient cart horse wait at his door ; the basket - maker peel his willow wand in the sunshine ; the wheelwright put his last touch to a blue cart with red wheel ; here and there a cottage with bright transparent window show pot full of bloom balsam or geranium , and little garden in front all double daisy or dark wallflower ; at the well , clean and comely woman carry yoked bucket , and toward the free school small Britons dawdle on , and handle their marble in the pocket of unpatched corduroy adorn with brass button . the land around be rich and marly , great corn - stack stand in the rick - yard for the rick - burner have not find their way hither ; the homestead be those of rich farmer who pay no rent , or have the rare advantage of a lease , and could afford to keep the corn till price have rise . the coach would be sure to overtake some of they on their way to their outlying field or to the market - town , sit heavily on their well - groom horse , or weigh down one side of an olive - green gig . they probably think of the coach with some contempt , as an accommodation for people who have not their own gig , or who , want to travel to London and such distant place , belong to the trading and less solid part of the nation . the passenger on the box could see that this be the district of protuberant optimist , sure that old England be the good of all possible country , and that if there be any fact which have not fall under their own 6   observation , they be fact not worth observe : the district of clean little market - town without manufacture , of fat living , an aristocratic clergy , and low poor - rate . but as the day wear on the scene would change : the land would begin to be blacken with coal - pit , the rattle of handloom to be hear in hamlet and village . here be powerful man walk queerly with knee bent outward from squat in the mine , go home to throw themselves down in their blacken flannel and sleep through the daylight , then rise and spend much of their high wage at the ale - house with their fellow of the Benefit Club ; here the pale eager face of the handloom - weaver , man and woman , haggard from sit up late at night to finish the week 's work , hardly begin till the Wednesday . everywhere the cottage and the small child be dirty , for the languid mother give their strength to the loom ; pious dissent woman , perhaps , who take life patiently , and think that salvation depend chiefly on predestination , and not at all on cleanliness . the gable of dissent chapel now make a visible sign of religion , and of a meeting - place to counterbalance the ale - house , even in the hamlet ; but if a couple of old termagant be see tear each other 's cap , it be a safe conclusion that , if they have not receive the sacrament of the Church , they have not at least give in to schismatic rite , and be free from the error of Voluntaryism . the breath of the manufacture town , which make a cloudy day and a red gloom by night on the horizon , diffuse itself over all the surround country , fill the air with eager unrest . here be a population not convince that old England be as good as possible ; here be multitudinous man and woman aware that their religion be not exactly the religion of their ruler , who might therefore be well than they be , and who , if well , might alter many thing which now make the world perhaps more painful than it need be , and certainly more sinful . yet there be the gray steeple too , and the churchyard , with their grassy mound and venerable headstone , sleep in the sunlight ; there be broad field and homestead , and fine old wood cover a rise ground , or stretch far by the roadside , allow only peep at the park and mansion which they shut in from the work day world . in these midland district the traveller pass rapidly from one phase of english life to another : after look down on a village dingy with coal - dust , noisy with the shaking of loom , he might skirt a parish all of field ,   7   high hedge , and deep rut lane ; after the coach have rattle over the pavement of a manufacturing town , the scene of riot and trade - union meeting , it would take he in another ten minute into a rural region , where the neighborhood of the town be only feel in the advantage of a near market for corn , cheese , and hay , and where man with a considerable banking account be accustom to say that " they never meddle with politic themselves . " the busy scene of the shuttle and the wheel , of the roar furnace , of the shaft and the pulley , seem to make but crowded nest in the midst of the large - space , slow - move life of homestead and far - away cottage and oak - shelter park . look at the dwelling scatter amongst the woody flat and the plow upland , under the low gray sky which overhang they with an unchanging stillness as if Time itself be pause , it be easy for the traveller to conceive that town and country have no pulse in common , except where the handloom make a far - reach straggling fringe about the great centre of manufacture ; that till the agitation about the Catholics in ' 29 , rural Englishmen have hardly know more of Catholics than of the fossil mammal ; and that their notion of Reform be a confused combination of rick - burner , trade - union , Nottingham riot , and in general whatever require the calling out of the yeomanry . it be still easy to see that , for the most part , they resist the rotation of crop and stand by their fallow : and the coachman would perhaps tell how in one parish an innovating farmer , who talk of Sir Humphrey Davy , have be fairly drive out by popular dislike , as if he have be a confounded Radical ; and how , the parson have one Sunday preach from the word , " break up your fallow - ground , " the people think he have make the text out of his own head , otherwise it would never have come ' so pat " on a matter of business ; but when they find it in the Bible at home , some say it be an argument for fallow   else why should the Bible mention fallow ? , but a few of the weak sort be shake , and think it be an argument that fallow should be do away with , else the Bible would have say , " let your fallow lie " ; and the next morning the parson have a stroke of apoplexy , which , as coincident with a dispute about fallow , so set the parish against the innovate farmer and the rotation of crop , that he could stand his ground no long , and transfer his lease . 

  8 

 the coachman be an excellent travel companion and commentator on the landscape : he could tell the name of site and person , and explain the meaning of group , as well as the shade of Virgil in a more memorable journey ; he have as many story about parish , and the man and woman in they , as the Wanderer in the " Excursion , " only his style be different . his view of life have originally be genial , such as become a man who be well warm within and without , and hold a position of easy , undisputed authority ; but the recent initiation of railway have embitter he : he now , as in a perpetual vision , see the ruin country strew with shattered limb , and regard Mr. Huskisson 's death as a proof of God 's anger against Stephenson . " why , every inn on the road would be shut up ! " and at that word the coachman look before he with the blank gaze of one who have drive his coach to the outermost edge of the universe , and see his leader plunge into the abyss . still he would soon relapse from the high prophetic strain to the familiar one of narrative . he know whose the land be wherever he drive ; what nobleman have half - ruin themselves by gambling ; who make handsome return of rent ; and who be at dagger - draw with his eld son . he perhaps remember the father of actual baronet , and know story of their extravagant or stingy housekeeping ; whom they have marry , whom they have horsewhip , whether they be particular about preserve their game , and whether they have have much to do with canal company . about any actual land proprietor he could also tell whether he be a Reformer or an anti - Reformer . that be a distinction which have " turn up " in latter time , and along with it the paradox , very puzzling to the coachman 's mind , that there be man of old family and large estate who vote for the Bill . he do not grapple with the paradox ; he let it pass , with all the discreetness of an experienced theologian or learn scholiast , prefer to point his whip at some object which could raise no question . 

 no such paradox trouble our coachman when , leave the town of Treby Magna behind he , he drive between the hedge for a mile or so , cross the queer long bridge over the river Lapp , and then put his horse to a swift gallop up the hill by the low - nestle village of Little Treby , till they be on the fine level road , skirt on one side by grand larch , oak , and wych elm , which sometimes open so far as to let the traveller see that there be a park behind they . 

  9 

 how many time in the year , as the coach roll past the neglect - look lodge which interrupt the screen of tree , and show the river wind through a finely - timbere park , have the coachman answer the same question , or tell the same thing without be question ! that ? oh , that be Transome Court , a place there have be a fine sight of lawsuit about . generation back , the heir of the Transome name have somehow bargain away the estate , and it fall to the Durfeys , very distant connection , who only call themselves Transomes because they have get the estate . but the Durfeys ' claim have be dispute over and over again ; and the coachman , if he have be ask , would have say , though he might have to fall down dead the next minute , that property do not   always get into the right hand . however , the lawyer have find their luck in it ; and people who inherit estate that be lawe about often live in they as poorly as a mouse in a hollow cheese ; and , by what he could make out , that have be the way with these present durfey , or Transomes , as they call themselves . as for Mr. Transome , he be as poor , half - witte a fellow as you would wish to see ; but she be master , have come of a high family , and have a spirit you might see it in her eye and the way she sit her horse . forty year ago , when she come into this country , they say she be a pictur ' ; but her family be poor , and so she take up with a hatchet - face fellow like this Transome . and the eld son have be just such another as his father , only bad a wild sort of half - natural , who get into bad company . they say his mother hat he and wish he dead ; for she would get another son , quite of a different cut , who have go to foreign part when he be a youngster , and she want she favorite to be heir . but heir or no heir , Lawyer Jermyn have have his picking out of the estate . not a door in his big house but what be the fine polished oak , all get off the Transome estate . if anybody like to believe he pay for it , they be welcome . however , Lawyer Jermyn have sit on that box - seat many and many a time . he have make the will of most people thereabout . the coachman would not say that Lawyer Jermyn be not the man he would choose to make his own will some day . it be not so well for a lawyer to be over - honest , else he might not be up to other people 's trick . and as for the Transome business , there have be in and out in time go by , so that you could not   look into it straight backward . at this Mr. Sampson   everybody in North Loamshire know Sampson 's coach   would screw his 10   feature into a grimace expressive of entire neutrality , and appear to aim his whip at a particular spot on the horse 's flank . if the passenger be curious for further knowledge concern the Transome affair , Sampson would shake his head and say there have be fine story in his time ; but he never condescend to state what the story be . some attribute this reticence to a wise incredulity , other to a want of memory , other to simple ignorance . but at least Sampson be right in say that there have be fine story mean , ironically , story not altogether creditable to the party concern . 

 and such story often come to be fine in a sense that be not ironical . for there be seldom any wrong - doing which do not carry along with it some downfall of blindly - climb hope , some hard entail of suffering , some quickly - satiate desire that survive , with the life in death of old paralytic vice , to see itself curse by its woeful progeny some tragic mark of kinship in the one brief life to the far - stretch life that go before , and to the life that be to come after , such as have raise the pity and terror of man ever since they begin to discern between will and destiny . but these thing be often unknown to the world ; for there be much pain that be quite noiseless ; and vibration that make human agony be often a mere whisper in the roar of hurry existence . there be glance of hatred that stab and raise no cry of murder ; robbery that leave man or woman forever beggar of peace and joy , yet keep secret by the sufferer commit to no sound except that of low moan in the night , see in no writing except that make on the face by the slow month of suppress anguish and early morning tear . many an inherit sorrow that have mar a life have be breathe into no human ear . 

 the poet have tell we of a dolorous enchant forest in the under world . the thorn - bush there , and the thick - bark stem , have human history hide in they ; the power of unuttered cry dwell in the passionless - seem branch , and the red warm blood be darkly feed the quivering nerve of a sleepless memory that watch through all dream . these thing be a parable . 

  11 

 CHAPTER I. 

 he leave I when the down upon his lip 
 Lay like the shadow of a hover kiss . 
 " beautiful mother , do not grieve , " he say ; 
 " I will be great , and build our fortune high . 
 and you shall wear the long train at court , 
 and look so queenly , all the lord shall say , 
 ' she be a royal changeling : there be some crown 
 lack the right head , since hers wear naught but braid . ' " 
 O , he be come now but I be gray : 
 and he 
 on the first of September , in the memorable year 1832 , some one be expect at Transome Court . as early as two o'clock in the afternoon the aged lodge - keeper have open the heavy gate , green as the tree trunk be green with nature 's powdery paint , deposited year after year . already in the village of Little Treby , which lie on the side of a steep hill not far off the lodge - gate , the eld matron sit in their good gown at the few cottage door border the road , that they might be ready to get up and make their courtesy when a travel carriage should come in sight ; and beyond the village several small boy be station on the look - out , intend to run a race to the barn - like old church , where the sexton wait in the belfry ready to set the one bell in joyful agitation just at the right moment . 

 the old lodge - keeper have open the gate and leave it in the charge of his lame wife , because he be want at the Court to sweep away the leaf , and perhaps to help in the stable . for though Transome Court be a large mansion , build in the fashion of Queen Anne 's time , with a park and ground as fine as any to be see in Loamshire , there be very few servant about it . especially , it seem , there must be a lack of gardener ; for , except on the terrace surround with a stone parapet in front of the house , where there be a parterre , keep with some neatness , grass have spread itself over the gravel walk , and over all the low mound once carefully cut as black bed for the shrub and large plant . many of the window have the shutter close , and under the grand Scotch fir that stoop toward one corner , the brown fir - needle of many year lie in a small stone balcony in front of two such darken window . all round , both near and far , there be grand tree , motionless in the still sunshine , and , like all large motionless thing , seem to add to the stillness . here and there a leaf flutter down ; petal fall in a silent shower ; a heavy moth flutter by , and , when it settle , seem to fall wearily ; the tiny bird alight on the walk , and hop about in perfect tranquillity ; even a stray rabbit sit 12   nibble a leaf that be to its liking , in the middle of a grassy space , with an air that seem quite impudent in so timid a creature . no sound be to be hear louder than a sleepy hum , and the soft monotony of run water hurrying on to the river that divide the park . stand on the south or east side of the house , you would never have guess that an arrival be expect . 

 but on the west side , where the carriage entrance be , the gate under the stone archway be throw open ; and so be the double door of the entrance - hall , let in the warm light on the scagliola pillar , the marble statue , and the broad stone staircase , with its mat wear into large hole . and , strong sign of expectation than all , from one of the door that surround the entrance - hall , there come forth from time to time a lady , who walk lightly over the polished stone floor , and stand on the door - step and watch and listen . she walk lightly , for her figure be slim and finely form , though she be between fifty and sixty . she be a tall , proud - look woman , with abundant gray hair , dark eye and eyebrow , and a somewhat eagle - like yet not unfeminine face . her tight - fit black dress be much worn ; the fine lace of her cuff and collar , and of the small veil that fall backward over her high comb , be visibly mend ; but rare jewel flash on her hand , which lie on her fold black - clothe arm like finely - cut onyx cameo . 

 meantime Mrs. Transome go to the door - step , watch and listen in vain . each time she return to the same room ; it be a moderate - sized comfortable room , with low ebony bookshelf round it , and it form an ante - room to a large library , of which a glimpse could be see through an open doorway , partly obstruct by a heavy tapestry curtain draw on one side . there be a great deal of tarnished gilding and dinginess on the wall and furniture of this small room , but the picture above the bookcase be all of a cheerful kind : portrait in pastel of pearly - skin lady with hair - powder , blue ribbon , and low bodice ; a splendid portrait in oil of a Transome in the gorgeous dress of the restoration ; another of a Transome in his boyhood , with his hand on the neck of a small pony ; and a large Flemish battle - piece , where war seem only a picturesque blue - and - red accident in a vast sunny expanse of plain and sky . probably such cheerful picture have be choose because this be Mrs. Transome 's usual sitting - room : it be certainly for this reason that , near the chair in which she seat herself each time she 13   re - enter , there hang a picture of a youthful face which bear a strong resemblance to her own : a beardless but masculine face , with rich brown hair hang low on the forehead , and undulate beside each cheek down to the loose white cravat . near this same chair be her write table , with vellum - cover account - book on it , the cabinet in which she keep she neatly - arrange drug , her basket for her embroidery , a folio volume of architectural engraving from which she take her embroidery - pattern , a number of the " North Loamshire Herald , " and the cushion for her fat Blenheim , which be too old and sleepy to notice its mistress 's restlessness . for , just now , Mrs. Transome could not abridge the sunny tedium of the day by the feeble interest of her usual indoor occupation . her consciousness be absorb by memory and prospect , and except that she walk to the entrance - door to look out , she sit motionless with fold arm , involuntarily from time to time turn toward the portrait close by she , and as often , when its young brown eye meet her , turn away again with self - check resolution . 

 at last , prompt by some sudden thought or by some sound , she rise and go hastily beyond the tapestry curtain into the library . she pause near the door without speak : apparently she only wish to see that no harm be be do . a man near seventy than sixty be in the act of range on a large library - table a series of shallow drawer , some of they contain dry insect , other mineralogical specimen . his pale mild eye , recede low jaw , and slight frame , could never have express much vigor , either bodily or mental ; but he have now the unevenness of gait and feebleness of gesture which tell of a past paralytic seizure . his threadbare clothe be thoroughly brush : his soft white hair be carefully part and arrange : he be not a neglect - look old man ; and at his side a fine black retriever , also old , sit on its haunch , and watch he as he go to and fro . but when Mrs. Transome appear within the doorway , her husband pause in his work and shrink like a timid animal look at in a cage where flight be impossible . he be conscious of a troublesome intention , for which he have be rebuke before that of disturb all his specimen with a view to a new arrangement . 

 after an interval , in which his wife stand perfectly still , observe he , he begin to put back the drawer in their place in the row of cabinet which extend under the bookshelf at one end of the 14   library . when they be all put back and close , Mrs. Transome turn away , and the frightened old man seat himself with Nimrod the retriever on an ottoman . peep at he again , a few minute after , she see that he have his arm round Nimrod 's neck , and be utter his thought to the dog in a loud whisper , as little child do to any object near they when they believe themselves unwatche . 

 at last the sound of the church - bell reach Mrs. Transome 's ear , and she know that before long the sound of wheel must be within hearing ; but she do not at once start up and walk to the entrance - door . she sit still , quiver and listening ; her lip become pale , her hand be cold and trembling . be her son really come ? she be far beyond fifty ; and since her early gladness in this well - love boy , the harvest of her life have be scanty . could it be that now when her hair be gray , when sight have become one of the day 's fatigue , when her young accomplishment seem almost ludicrous , like the tone of her first harpsichord and the word of the song long brown with age she be go to reap an assured joy ? to feel that the doubtful deed of her life be justify by the result , since a kind Providence have sanction they ? to be no long tacitly pity by her neighbor for her lack of money , her imbecile husband , her graceless eldest - bear , and the loneliness of her life ; but to have at her side a rich , clever , possibly a tender , son ? yes ; but there be the fifteen year of separation , and all that have happen in that long time to throw she into the background of her son 's memory and affection . and yet do not man sometimes become more filial in their feeling when experience have mellow they , and they have themselves become father ? still , if Mrs. Transome have expect only her son , she would have tremble less ; she expect a little grandson also : and there be reason why she have not be enrapture when her son have write to she only when he be on the eve of return that he already have an heir bear to he . 

 but the fact must be accept as they stand , and , after all , the chief thing be to have her son back again . such pride , such affection , such hope as she cherish in this fifty - sixth year of her life , must find their gratification in he or nowhere . once more she glance at the portrait . the young brown eye seem to dwell on her pleasantly ; but , turn from it with a sort of impatience , and say aloud , " of course 15   he will be alter ! " she rise almost with difficulty , and walk more slowly than before across the hall to the entrance - door . 

 already the sound of wheel be loud upon the gravel . the momentary surprise of see that it be only a post - chaise , without a servant or much luggage , that be pass under the stone archway and then wheel round against the flight of stone step , be at once merge in the sense that there be a dark face under a red travel - cap look at she from the window . she see nothing else ; she be not even conscious that the small group of her own servant have muster , or that old Hickes the butler have come forward to open the chaise door . she hear herself call " Mother ! " and feel a light kiss on each cheek ; but strong than all that sensation be the consciousness which no previous thought could prepare she for , that this son who have come back to she be a stranger . three minute before , she have fancy that , in spite of all change work by fifteen year of separation , she should clasp her son again as she have do at their parting ; but in the moment when their eye meet , the sense of strangeness come upon she like a terror . it be not hard to understand that she be agitated , and the son lead she across the hall to the sitting - room , close the door behind they . then he turn toward she and say , smile 

 " you would not have know I , eh , mother ? " 

 it be perhaps the truth . if she have see he in a crowd , she might have look at he without recognition not , however , without startled wonder ; for though the likeness to herself be no long strike , the year have overlay it with another likeness which would have arrest she . before she answer he , his eye , with a keen restlessness , as unlike as possible to the linger gaze of the portrait , have travel quickly over the room , alight on she as she say 

 " everything be change , Harold . I be an old woman , you see . " 

 " but straighter and more upright than some of the young one ! " say Harold ; inwardly , however , feel that age have make his mother 's face very anxious and eager . " the old woman at Smyrna be like sack . you have   not get clumsy and shapeless . how be it I have the trick of get fat ? "   here Harold lift his arm and spread out his plump hand .   " I remember my father be as thin as a herring . how be my father ? where be he ? " 

 Mrs. Transome just point to the curtain doorway , and let her son pass through it alone . she be not give to tear : but now , under the 16   pressure of emotion that could find no other vent , they burst forth . she take care that they should be silent tear , and before Harold come out of the library again they be dry . Mrs. Transome have not the feminine tendency to seek influence through pathos ; she have be use to rule in virtue of acknowledge superiority . the consciousness that she have to make her son 's acquaintance , and that her knowledge of the youth of nineteen might help she little in interpret the man of thirty - four , have fall like lead on her soul ; but in this new acquaintance of theirs she care especially that her son , who have see a strange world , should feel that he be come home to a mother who be to be consult on all thing , and who could supply his lack of the local experience necessary to an english landholder . her part in life have be that of the clever sinner , and she be equip with the view , the reason , and the habit which belong to that character ; life would have little meaning for she if she be to be gently thrust aside as a harmless elderly woman . and besides , there be secret which her son must never know . so , by the time Harold come from the library again , the trace of tear be not discernible , except to a very careful observer . and he do not observe his mother carefully ; his eye only glance at she on their way to the North Loamshire Herald , lie on the table near she , which he take up with his left hand , as he say 

 " Gad ! what a wreck poor father be ! paralysis , eh ? terribly shrink and shake crawl about among his book and beetle as usual , though . well , it be a slow and easy death . but he be not much over sixty - five , be he ? " 

 " Sixty - seven , count by birthday ; but your father be bear old , I think , " say Mrs. Transome , a little flushed with the determination not to show any unasked for feel . her son do not notice she . all the time he have be speak his eye have be run down the column of the newspaper . 

 " but your little boy , Harold where be he ? how be it he have not come with you ? " 

 " oh , I leave he behind , in town , " say Harold , still look at the paper . " my man Dominic will bring he , with the rest of the luggage . ah , I see it be young debarry , and not my old friend Sir Maximus , who be offer himself as candidate for North Loamshire . " 

 " yes . you do not answer I when I write to you to London about your standing . there be no other Tory candidate speak of , and you would have all the Debarry interest . " 17 

 " I hardly think that , " say Harold , significantly . 

 " why ? Jermyn say a Tory candidate can never be get in without it . " 

 " but I shall not be a Tory candidate . " 

 Mrs. Transome feel something like an electric shock . 

 " what then ? " she say , almost sharply . " you will not call yourself a Whig ? " 

 " God forbid ! I be a Radical . " 

 Mrs. Transome 's limb totter ; she sink into a chair . here be a distinct confirmation of the vague but strong feeling that her son be a stranger to she . here be a revelation to which it seem almost as impossible to adjust her hope and notion of a dignified life as if her son have say that he have be convert to Mahometanism at Smyrna , and have four wife , instead of one son , shortly to arrive under the care of Dominic . for the moment she have a sickening feeling that it be of no use that the long - delay good fortune have come at last all of no use though the unloved Durfey be dead and bury , and though Harold have come home with plenty of money . there be rich Radicals , she be aware , as there be rich Jews and dissenter , but she have never think of they as county people . Sir Francis Burdett have be generally regard as a madman . it be well to ask no question , but silently to prepare herself for anything else there might be to come . 

 " will you go to your room , Harold , and see if there be anything you would like to have alter ? " 

 " yes , let we go , " say Harold , throw down the newspaper , in which he have be rapidly read almost every advertisement while his mother have be go through her sharp inward struggle . " Uncle Lingon be on the bench still , I see , " he go on , as he follow she across the hall ; " be he at home will he be here this evening ? " 

 " he say you must go to the rectory when you want to see he . you must remember you have come back to a family with old - fashioned notion . your uncle think I ought to have you to myself in the first hour or two . he remember that I have not see my son for fifteen year . " 

 " ah , by Jove ! fifteen year so it be ! " say Harold , take his mother 's hand and draw it under his arm ; for he have perceive that her word be charge with an intention . " and you be as straight as an arrow 18   still ; you will carry the shawl I have bring you as well as ever . " 

 they walk up the broad stone step together in silence . under the shock of discover her son 's Radicalism , Mrs. Transome have no impulse to say one thing rather than another ; as in a man who have just be brand on the forehead all wonte motif would be uproot . Harold , on his side , have no wish oppose to filial kindness , but his busy thought be determine by habit which have no reference to any woman 's feeling ; and even if he could have conceive what his mother 's feeling be , his mind , after that momentary arrest , would have dart forward on its usual course . 

 " I have give you the south room , Harold , " say Mrs. Transome , as they pass along a corridor light from above and line with old family picture . " I think they would suit you well , as they all open into each other , and this middle one will make a pleasant sitting - room for you . " 

 " Gad ! the furniture be in a bad state , " say Harold , glance around at the middle room which they have just enter ; " the moth seem to have get into the carpet and hanging . " 

 " I have no choice except moth or tenant who would pay rent , " say Mrs. Transome . " we have be too poor to keep servant for uninhabited room . " 

 " what ! you have   be rather pinch , eh ? " 

 " you find we live as we have be live these twelve year . " 

 " ah , you have   have Durfey 's debt as well as the lawsuit confound they ! it will make a hole in sixty thousand pound to pay off the mortgage . however , he be go now , poor fellow ; and I suppose I should have spend more in buy an english estate some time or other . I always mean to be an Englishman , and thrash a lord or two who thrash I at Eton . " 

 " I hardly think you could have mean that , Harold , when I find you have marry a foreign wife . " 

 " would you have have I wait for a consumptive lackadaisical Englishwoman , who would have hang all her relation around my neck ? I hate english wife ; they want to give their opinion about everything . they interfere with a man 's life . I shall not marry again . " 

 Mrs. Transome bite her lip , and turn away to draw up a blind . she would not reply to word which show how completely any conception of herself and her feeling be exclude from her son 's inward world . 

  19 

 as she turn round again she say , " I suppose you have be use to great luxury ; these room look miserable to you , but you can soon make any alteration you like . " 

 " oh , I must have a private sitting - room fit up for myself down - stair . and the rest be bedroom , I suppose , " he go on , open a side - door . " ah , I can sleep here a night or two . but there be a bedroom down - stair , with an ante - room , I remember , that would do for my man Dominic and the little boy . I should like to have that . " 

 " your father have sleep there for year . he will be like a distracted insect , and never know where to go , if you alter the track he have to walk in . " 

 " that be a pity . I hate go up - stair . " 

 " there be the steward 's room : it be not use , and might be turn into a bedroom . I can not   offer you my room , for I sleep up - stair . "   Mrs. Transome 's tongue could be a whip upon occasion , but the lash have not fall on a sensitive spot . 

 " no ; I be determined not to sleep up - stair . we will see about the steward 's room to - morrow , and I dare say I shall find a closet of some sort for Dominic . it be a nuisance he have to stay behind , for I shall have nobody to cook for I . ah , there be the old river I use to fish in . I often think , when I be at Smyrna , that I would buy a park with a river through it as much like the Lapp as possible . Gad , what fine oak those be opposite ! some of they must come down , though . " 

 " I have   hold every tree sacred on the demesne , as I tell you , Harold . I trust to your get the estate some time , and release it ; and I determine to keep it worth release . a park without fine timber be no well than a beauty without tooth and hair . " 

 " Bravo , mother ! " say Harold , put his hand on her shoulder . " ah , you have   have to worry yourself about thing that do not   properly belong to a woman my father be weakly . we will set all that right . you shall have nothing to do now but to be grandmamma on satin cushion . " 

 " you must excuse I from the satin cushion . that be a part of the old woman 's duty I be not prepare for . I be use to be chief bailiff , and to sit in the saddle two or three hour every day . there be two farm on our hand besides the Home Farm . " 

 " Phew - ew ! Jermyn manage the estate badly , then . that will not last under my reign , " say Harold , turn on his heel and feeling in his pocket for the key of his portmanteau , which have be bring up . 20 

 " perhaps when you have   be in England a little long , " say Mrs. Transome , color as if she have be a girl , " you will understand well the difficulty there be in let farm these time . " 

 " I understand the difficulty perfectly , mother . to let farm , a man must have the sense to see what will make they invite to farmer , and to get sense supply on demand be just the most difficult transaction I know of . I suppose if I ring there be some fellow who can act as valet and learn to attend to my hookah ? " 

 " there be Hickes the butler , and there be Jabez the footman ; those be all the man in the house . they be here when you leave . " 

 " oh , I remember Jabez he be a dolt . I will have old Hickes . he be a neat little machine of a butler ; his word use to come like the click of an engine . he must be an old machine now , though . " 

 " you seem to remember some thing about home wonderfully well , Harold . " 

 " never forget place and people how they look and what can be do with they . all the country round here lie like a map in my brain . a deuce pretty country too ; but the people be a stupid set of old Whigs and Tories . I suppose they be much as they be . " 

 " I be , at least , Harold . you be the first of your family that ever talk of be a Radical . I do not think I be take care of our old oak for that . I always think Radicals ' house stand star above poor stick of young tree and iron hurdle . " 

 " yes , but the radical stick be grow , mother , and half the Tory oak be rot , " say Harold , with gay carelessness . " you have   arrange for Jermyn to be early to - morrow ? " 

 " he will be here to breakfast at nine . but I leave you to Hickes now ; we dine in an hour . " 

 Mrs. Transome go away and shut herself in her own dressing - room . it have come to pass now this meeting with the son who have be the object of so much longing ; whom she have long for before he be bear , for whom she have sin , from whom she have wrench herself with pain at their parting , and whose come again have be the one great hope of her year . the moment be go by ; there have be no ecstasy , no gladness even ; hardly half an hour have pass , and few word have be speak , 21   yet with that quickness in weave new future which belong to woman whose action have keep they in habitual fear of consequence , Mrs. Transome think she see with all the clearness of demonstration that her son 's return have not be a good for she in the sense of make she any happy . 

 she stand before a tall mirror , go close to it and look at her face with hard scrutiny , as if it be unrelated to herself . no elderly face can be handsome , look at in that way ; every little detail be startlingly prominent , and the effect of the whole be lose . she see the dry - up complexion , and the deep line of bitter discontent about the mouth . 

 " I be a hag ! " she say to herself   she be accustom to give her thought a very sharp outline , " an ugly old woman who happen to be his mother . that be what he see in I , as I see a stranger in he . I shall count for nothing . I be foolish to expect anything else . " 

 she turn away from the mirror and walk up and down her room . 

 " what a likeness ! " she say , in a loud whisper ; " yet , perhaps , no one will see it besides I . " 

 she throw herself into a chair , and sit with a fixed look , see nothing that be actually present , but inwardly see with painful vividness what have be present with she a little more than thirty year ago the little round - limbe creature that have be lean against her knee , and stamp tiny foot , and look up at she with gurgling laughter . she have think that the possession of this child would give unity to her life , and make some gladness through the change year that would grow as fruit out of these early maternal caress . but nothing have come just as she have wish . the mother 's early rapture have last but a short time , and even while they last there have grow up in the midst of they a hungry desire , like a black poisonous plant feeding in the sunlight , the desire that her first , rickety , ugly , imbecile child should die , and leave room for her darling , of whom she could be proud . such desire make life a hideous lottery , where everyday may turn up a blank ; where man and woman who have the soft bed and the most delicate eating , who have a very large share of that sky and earth which some be bear to have no more of than the fraction to be get in a crowded entry , yet grow haggard , fevere , and restless , like those who watch in other lottery . day after day , year after year , have yield blank ; new care have come , bring other desire for 22   result quite beyond her grasp , which must also be watch for in the lottery ; and all the while the round - limbe pet have be grow into a strong youth , who like many thing well than his mother 's caress , and who have a much keener consciousness of his independent existence than of his relation to she : the lizard 's egg , that white round passive prettiness , have become a brown , darting , determined lizard . the mother 's love be at first an absorbing delight , blunt all other sensibility ; it be an expansion of the animal existence ; it enlarge the imagined range for self to move in : but in after year it can only continue to be joy on the same term as other long - live love that be , by much suppression of self , and power of live in the experience of another . Mrs. Transome have darkly feel the pressure of that unchangeable fact . yet she have clung to the belief that somehow the possession of this son be the good thing she live for ; to believe otherwise would have make her memory too ghastly a companion . some time or other , by some mean , the estate she be struggle to save from the grasp of the law would be Harold 's . somehow the hat Durfey , the imbecile eld , who seem to have become tenacious of a despicable squandering life , would be get rid of ; vice might kill he . meanwhile the estate be burden : there be no good prospect for any heir . Harold must go and make a career for himself and this be what he be bent on , with a precocious clearness of perception as to the condition on which he could hope for any advantage in life . like most energetic nature , he have a strong faith in his luck ; he have be gay at their parting , and have promise to make his fortune ; and in spite of past disappointment , Harold 's possible fortune still make some ground for his mother to plant her hope in . his luck have not fail he ; yet nothing have turn out accord to her expectation . her life have be like a spoiled shabby pleasure - day , in which the music and the procession be all miss , and nothing be leave at evening but the weariness of strive after what have be fail of . Harold have go with the Embassy to Constantinople , under the patronage of a high relative , his mother 's cousin ; he be to be diplomatist , and work his way upward in public life . but his luck have take another shape : he have save the life of an armenian banker , who in gratitude have offer he a prospect which his practical mind have prefer to the problematic promise of diplomacy and high - bear cousinship . Harold have become a merchant and banker at Smyrna ; and let the year pass without care to find the possibility of 23   visit his early home , and have show no eagerness to make his life at all familiar to his mother , ask for letter about England , but write scantily about himself . Mrs. Transome have keep up the habit of write to her son , but gradually the unfruitful year have dull her hope and yearning ; increase anxiety about money have worry she , and she be more sure of be fret by bad news about her dissolute eld son than of hear anything to cheer she from Harold . she have begin to live merely in small immediate care and occupation , and like all eager - minded woman who advance in life without any activity of tenderness or any large sympathy , she have contract small rigid habit of thinking and acting , she have she " way " which must not be cross , and have learn to fill up the great void of life with give small order to tenant , insist on medicine for infirm cottager , win small triumph in bargain and personal economy , and parry ill - natured remark of Lady Debarry 's by lancet - edge epigram . so her life have go on till more than a year ago , when that desire which have be so hungry when she be a bloom young mother , be at last fulfil at last , when her hair be gray , and her face look bitter , restless , and unenjoying , like her life . the news come from Jersey that Durfey , the imbecile son , be dead . now Harold be heir to the estate ; now the wealth he have gain could release the land from its burden ; now he would think it worth while to return home . a change have come over her life , and the sunlight break the cloud at evening be pleasant , though the sun must sink before long . hope , affection , the sweet part of her memory , start from their wintry sleep , and it once more seem a great good to have have a second son who in some way have cost she dearly . but again there be condition she have not reckon on . when the good tiding have be send to Harold , and he have announce that he would return so soon as he could wind up his affair , he have for the first time inform his mother that he have be marry , that his greek wife be no long live , but that he should bring home a little boy , the fine and most desirable of heir and grandson . Harold seat in his distant Smyrna home consider that he be take a rational view of what thing must have become by this time at the old place in England , when he figure his mother as a good elderly lady , who would necessarily be delighted with the possession on any term of a healthy grandchild , and would not mind much about the particular of a long - conceal marriage . 24 

 Mrs. Transome have tear up that letter in a rage . but in the month which have elapse before Harold could actually arrive , she have prepare herself as well as she could to suppress all reproach or query which her son might resent , and to acquiesce in his evident wish . the return be still look for with longing ; affection and satisfied pride would again warm her later year . she be ignorant what sort of man Harold have become now , and of course he must be change in many way ; but though she tell herself this , still the image that she know , the image fondness clung to , necessarily prevail over the negative insist on by her reason . 

 and so it be , that when she have move to the door to meet he , she have be sure that she should clasp her son again , and feel that he be the same who have be her boy , her little one , the love child of her passionate youth . an hour seem to have change everything for she . a woman 's hope be weave of sunbeam ; a shadow annihilate they . the shadow which have fall over Mrs. Transome in this first interview with her son be the presentiment of her powerlessness . if thing go wrong , if Harold get unpleasantly dispose in a certain direction where her chief dread have always lain , she seem to foresee that her word would be of no avail . the keenness of her anxiety in this matter have serve as insight ; and Harold 's rapidity , decision , and indifference to any impression in other , which do not far or impede his own purpose , have make themselves feel by she as much as she would have feel the unmanageable strength of a great bird which have alight near she , and allow she to stroke its wing for a moment because food lie near she . 

 under the cold weight of these thought Mrs. Transome shiver . that physical reaction rouse she from her reverie , and she could now hear the gentle knock at the door to which she have be deaf before . notwithstanding her activity and the fewness of her servant , she have never dress herself without aid ; nor would that small , neat , exquisitely clean old woman who now present herself have wish that her labor should be save at the expense of such a sacrifice on her lady 's part . the small old woman be Mrs. Hickes , the butler 's wife , who act as housekeeper , lady's - maid , and superintendent of the kitchen the large stony scene of inconsiderable cooking . forty year ago she have enter Mrs. Transome 's service , when that lady 25   be beautiful Miss Lingon , and her mistress still call she Denner , as she have do in the old day . 

 " the bell have ring , then , Denner , without my hear it ? " say Mrs. Transome , rise . 

 " yes , madam , " say Denner , reach from a wardrobe an old black velvet dress trim with much - mend point , in which Mrs. Transome be will not to look queenly of an evening . 

 Denner have still strong eye of that short - sighted kind which see through the narrow chink between the eyelash . the physical contrast between the tall , eagle - face , dark - eyed lady , and the little peer wait woman , who have be round - feature and of pale mealy complexion from her youth up , have doubtless have a strong influence in determine Denner 's feeling toward her mistress , which be of that worshipful sort pay to a goddess in age when it be not think necessary or likely that a goddess should be very moral . there be different order of being so run Denner 's creed and she belong to another order than that to which her mistress belong . she have a mind as sharp as a needle , and would have see through and through the ridiculous pretension of a bear servant who do not submissively accept the rigid fate which have give she bear superior . she would have call such pretension the wriggling of a worm that try to walk on its tail . there be a tacit understanding that Denner know all her mistress 's secret , and her speech be plain and unflattering ; yet with wonderful subtlety of instinct she never say anything which Mrs. Transome could feel humiliate by , as by familiarity from a servant who know too much . Denner identify her own dignity with that of her mistress . she be a hard - head godless little woman , but with a character to be reckon on as you reckon on the quality of iron . 

 peer into Mrs. Transome 's face she see clearly that the meeting with the son have be a disappointment in some way . she speak with a refined accent , in a low quick , monotonous tone 

 " Mr. Harold be dress ; he shake I by the hand in the corridor , and be very pleasant . " 

 " what an alteration , Denner ! no likeness to I now . " 

 " handsome , though , spite of his be so browned and stout . there be a fine presence about Mr. Harold . I remember you use to say , madam , there be some people you would always know be in the room though they stand round a corner , and other you might never see till you run against they . that be as true as truth . and as for likeness , thirty - five and sixty be not much alike , only to people 's memory . " 26 

 Mrs. Transome know perfectly that Denner have divine her thought . 

 " I do not   know how thing will go on now , but it seem something too good to happen that they will go on well . I be afraid of ever expect anything good again . " 

 " that be weakness , madam . thing do not   happen because they be bad or good , else all egg would be addle or none at all , and at the most it be but six to the dozen . there be good chance and bad chance , and nobody 's luck be pull only by one string . " 

 " what a woman you be , Denner ! you talk like a french infidel . it seem to I you be afraid of nothing . I have be full of fear all my life always see something or other hang over I that I could not   bear to happen . " 

 " well , madam , put a good face on it , and do not   seem to be on the look - out for crow , else you will set other people watch . here you have a rich son come home , and the debt will all be pay , and you have your health and can ride about , and you have   such a face and figure , and will have if you live to be eighty , that everybody be cap in hand to you before they know you who be ; let I fasten up your veil a little higher : there be a good deal of pleasure in life for you yet . " 

 " Nonsense ! there be no pleasure for old woman , unless they get it out of torment other people . what be your pleasure , Denner besides be a slave to I ? " 

 " oh , there be pleasure in know one be not a fool , like half the people one see about . and manage one 's husband be some pleasure ; and do all one 's business well . why , if I have   only get some orange flower to candy , I should not   like to die till I see they all right . then there be the sunshine now and then ; I like that as the cat do . I look upon it , life be like our game at whist , when bank and his wife come to the still - room of an evening . I do not   enjoy the game much , but I like to play my card well , and see what will be the end of it ; and I want to see you make the good of your hand , madam , for your luck have be mine these forty year now . but I must go and see how Kitty dish up the dinner , unless you have any more command . " 

 " no , Denner ; I be go down immediately . " 

 as Mrs. Transome descend the stone staircase in her old black velvet and point , her appearance justify Denner 's personal compliment . she have that high - bear , imperious air which would have mark she as an 27   object of hatred and revile by a revolutionary mob . her person be too typical of social distinction to be pass by with indifference by any one : it would have fit an empress in her own right , who have have to rule in spite of faction , to dare the violation of treaty and dread retributive invasion , to grasp after new territory , to be defiant in desperate circumstance , and to feel a woman 's hunger of the heart forever unsatisfie . yet Mrs. Transome 's care and occupation have not be at all of an imperial sort . for thirty year she have lead the monotonous , narrow life which use to be the lot of our poor gentry ; who never go to town , and be probably not on speak term with two out of the five family whose park lie within the distance of a drive . when she be young she have be think wonderfully clever and accomplish , and have be rather ambitious of intellectual superiority have secretly pick out for private reading the high part of dangerous french author and in company have be able to talk of Mr. Burke 's style , or of Chateaubriand 's eloquence have laugh at the Lyrical Ballads , and admire Mr. Southey 's Thalaba . she always think that the dangerous french writer be wicked and that her reading of they be a sin ; but many sinful thing be highly agreeable to she , and many thing which she do not doubt to be good and true be dull and meaningless . she find ridicule of biblical character very amusing , and she be interested in story of illicit passion ; but she believe all the while that truth and safety lie in due attendance on prayer and sermon , in the admirable doctrine and ritual of the Church of England , equally remote from Puritanism and Popery ; in fact , in such a view of this world and the next as would preserve the exist arrangement of english society quite unshaken , keep down the obtrusiveness of the vulgar and the discontent of the poor . the history of the Jews , she know , ought to be prefer to any profane history ; the Pagans , of course , be vicious , and their religion quite nonsensical , consider as religion but classical learning come from the Pagans ; the Greeks be famous for sculpture ; the Italians for painting ; the middle age be dark and papistical ; but now Christianity go hand in hand with civilization , and the providential government of the world , though a little confused and entangle in foreign country , in our favored land be clearly see to be carry forward on Tory and Church of England principle , sustain by the succession of the House of Brunswick , and by sound English divine . for Miss Lingon have have a 28   superior governess , who hold that a woman should be able to write a good letter , and to express herself with propriety on general subject . and it be astonish how effective this education appear in a handsome girl , who sit supremely well on horseback , sing and play a little , paint small figure in water - color , have a naughty sparkle in her eye when she make a daring quotation , and an air of serious dignity when she recite something from her store of correct opinion . but however such a stock of idea may be make to tell in elegant society , and during a few season in town , no amount of bloom and beauty can make they a perennial source of interest in thing not personal ; and the notion that what be true and , in general , good for mankind , be stupid and drug - like , be not a safe theoretic basis in circumstance of temptation and difficulty . Mrs. Transome have be in her bloom before this century begin , and in the long painful year since then , what she have once regard as her knowledge and accomplishment have become as valueless as old - fashioned stucco ornament , of which the substance be never worth anything , while the form be no long to the taste of any live mortal . cross , mortification , money - care , conscious blame - worthiness , have change the aspect of the world for she ; there be anxiety in the morning sunlight ; there be unkind triumph or disapprove pity in the glance of greet neighbor ; there be advance age , and a contracting prospect in the change season as they come and go . and what could then sweeten the day to a hungry , much - exact self like Mrs. Transome 's ? under protract ill every live creature will find something that make a comparative ease , and even when life seem weave of pain , will convert the fainter pang into a desire . Mrs. Transome , whose imperious will have avail little to ward off the great evil of her life , find the opiate for her discontent in the exertion of she will about small thing . she be not cruel , and could not enjoy thoroughly what she call the old woman 's pleasure of tormenting ; but she like every little sign of power her lot have leave she . she like that a tenant should stand bareheade below she as she sit on horseback . she like to insist that work do without her order should be undo from begin to end . she like to be courtesie and bow to by all the congregation as she walk up the little barn of a church . she like to change a laborer 's medicine fetch from the doctor , and substitute a prescription of her own . 29   if she have only be more haggard and less majestic , those who have glimpse of her outward life might have say she be a tyrannical , grip harridan , with a tongue like a razor . no one say exactly that ; but they never say anything like the full truth about she , or divine what be hide under that outward life a woman 's keen sensibility and dread , which lie screen behind all her petty habit and narrow notion , as some quivering thing with eye and throb heart may lie crouch behind wither rubbish . the sensibility and dread have palpitate all the fast in the prospect of her son 's return ; and now that she have see he , she say to herself , in her bitter way , " it be a lucky eel that escape skin . the good happiness I shall ever know , will be to escape the bad misery . " 

 CHAPTER II . 

 a jolly parson of the good old stock , 
 by birth a gentleman , yet homely too , 
 suit his phrase to Hodge and Margery 
 whom he once christen , and have marry since , 
 a little lax in doctrine and in life . 
 not think God be captious in such thing 
 as what a man might drink on holiday , 
 but hold true religion be to do 
 as you would be do by which could never mean 
 that he should preach three sermon in a week . 
 Harold Transome do not choose to spend the whole evening with his mother . it be his habit to compress a great deal of effective conversation into a short space of time , ask rapidly all the question he want to get answer , and dilute no subject with irrelevancy , paraphrase , or repetition . he volunteer no information about himself and his past life at Smyrna , but answer pleasantly enough , though briefly , whenever his mother ask for any detail . he be evidently ill - satisfied as to his palate , try red pepper to everything , then ask if there be any relishing sauce in the house , and when Hickes bring various home - fill bottle , try several , find they failure , and finally fall back from his plate in despair . yet he remain good - humor , say something to his father now and then for the sake of be kind , and look on with a pity shrug as he see he watch Hickes cut his food . Mrs. Transome think with some bitterness that Harold show more feeling for her feeble husband who have never care in the least about he , than for she , 30   who have give he more than the usual share of mother 's love . an hour after dinner , Harold , who have already be turn over the leaf of his mother 's account - book , say 

 " I shall just cross the park to the parsonage to see my uncle Lingon . " 

 " very well . he can answer more question for you . " 

 " yes , " say Harold , quite deaf to the innuendo , and accept the word as a simple statement of the fact . " I want to hear all about the game and the North Loamshire hunt . I be fond of sport ; we have a great deal of it at Smyrna , and it keep down my fat . " 

 the Reverend John Lingon become very talkative over his second bottle of port , which be open on his nephew 's arrival . he be not curious about the manner of Smyrna , or about Harold 's experience , but he unbosom himself very freely as to what he himself like and dislike , which of the farmer he suspect of kill the fox , what game he have bag that very morning , what spot he would recommend as a new cover , and the comparative flatness of all exist sport compare with cock - fighting , under which Old England have be prosperous and glorious , while , so far as he could see , it have gain little by the abolition of a practice which sharpen the faculty of man , gratify the instinct of the fowl , and carry out the design of heaven in its admirable device of spur . from these main topic , which make his point of departure and return , he ramble easily enough at any new suggestion or query ; so that when Harold get home at a late hour , he be conscious of have gather from amidst the pompous full - toned triviality of his uncle 's chat some impression , which be of practical importance . among the rector 's dislikes , it appear , be Mr. Matthew Jermyn . 

 " a fat - handed , glib - tongue fellow , with a scented cambric handkerchief ; one of your educate low - breed fellow ; a foundling who get his Latin for nothing at Christ 's Hospital ; one of your middle - class upstart who want to rank with gentleman , and think they will do it with kid glove and new furniture . " 

 but since Harold mean to stand for the county , Mr. Lingon be equally emphatic as to the necessity of his not quarrel with Jermyn till the election be over . Jermyn must be his agent ; Harold must wink hard till he find himself safely return ; and even then it might be well to let Jermyn drop gently and raise no scandal . he himself have no quarrel with the fellow : a clergyman should have no quarrel , and he make it a 31   point to be able to take wine with any man he meet at table . and as to the estate , and his sister 's go too much by Jermyn 's advice , he never meddle with business : it be not his duty as a clergyman . that , he consider , be the meaning of Melchisedec and the tithe , a subject , into which he have go to some depth thirty year ago , when he preach the Visitation sermon . 

 the discovery that Harold mean to stand on the liberal side nay , that he boldly declare himself a Radical be rather startling ; but to his uncle 's good - humor , beatify by the sipping of port - wine , nothing could seem highly objectionable , provide it do not disturb that operation . in the course of half an hour he have bring himself to see that anything really worthy to be call British Toryism have be entirely extinct since the Duke of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel have pass the Catholic Emancipation Bill ; that Whiggery , with its right of man stop short at ten - pound householder , and its policy of pacify a wild beast with a bite , be a ridiculous monstrosity ; that therefore , since an honest man could not call himself a Tory , which it be , in fact , as impossible to be now as to fight for the old Pretender , and could still less become that execrable monstrosity a Whig , there remain but one course open to he . " why , lad , if the world be turn into a swamp , I suppose we should leave off shoe and stocking , and walk about like crane " whence it follow plainly enough that , in these hopeless time , nothing be leave to man of sense and good family but to retard the national ruin by declare themselves radical , and take the inevitable process of change everything out of the hand of beggarly demagogue and purse - proud tradesman . it be true the rector be help to this chain of reasoning by Harold 's remark ; but he soon become quite ardent in assert the conclusion . 

 " if the mob can not   be turn back , a man of family must try and head the mob , and save a few home and hearth , and keep the country up on its last leg as long as he can . and you be a man of family , my lad dash it ! you be a Lingon , whatever else you may be , and I will stand by you . I have   no great interest ; I be a poor parson . I have   be force to give up hunting ; my pointer and a glass of good wine be the only decency become my station that I can allow myself . but I will give you my countenance I will stick to you as my nephew . there be no need for I to change side exactly . I be bear a Tory , and I shall never be a 32   bishop . but if anybody say you be in the wrong , I shall say , ' my nephew be in the right ; he have turn Radical to save his country . if William Pitt have be live now he would have do the same ; for what do he say when he be die ? not ' oh , save my party ! ' but ' oh , save my country , heaven ! ' that be what they din in our ear about Peel and the Duke ; and now I will turn it round upon they . they shall be hoist with their own petard . yes , yes , I will stand by you . " 

 Harold do not feel sure that his uncle would thoroughly retain this satisfactory thread of argument in the uninspired hour of the morning ; but the old gentleman be sure to take the fact easily in the end , and there be no fear of family coolness or quarrel on this side . Harold be glad of it . he be not to be turn aside from any course he have choose ; but he dislike all quarrel as an unpleasant expenditure of energy that could have no good practical result . he be at once active and luxurious ; fond of mastery , and good - natured enough to wish that every one about he should like his mastery ; not care greatly to know other people 's thought , and ready to despise they as blockhead if their thought differ from his , and yet solicitous that they should have no colorable reason for slight thought about he . the blockhead must be force to respect he . hence , in proportion as he foresee his equal in the neighborhood would be indignant with he for his political choice , he care keenly about make a good figure before they in every other way . his conduct as a landholder be to be judicious , his establishment be to be keep up generously , his imbecile father treat with careful regard , his family relation entirely without scandal . he know that affair have be unpleasant in his youth that there have be ugly lawsuit and that his scapegrace brother Durfey have help to lower still far the depressed condition of the family . all this must be retrieve , now that event have make Harold the head of the Transome name . 

 Jermyn must be use for the election , and after that if he must be get rid of , it would be well to shake he loose quietly ; his uncle be probably right on both these point . but Harold 's expectation that he should want to get rid of Jermyn be found on other reason than his scented handkerchief and his charity - school Latin . 

 if the lawyer have be presume on Mrs. Transome 's ignorance as a woman , and on the stupid rakishness of the original heir , the new 33   heir would prove to he that he have calculate rashly . otherwise , Harold have no prejudice against he . in his boyhood and youth he have see Jermyn frequent Transome Court , but have regard he with that total indifference with which youngster be apt to view those who neither deny they pleasure nor give they any . Jermyn use to smile at he , and speak to he affably ; but Harold , half proud , half shy , get away from such patronage as soon as possible ; he know Jermyn be a man of business ; his father , his uncle , and Sir Maximus Debarry do not regard he as a gentleman and their equal . he have know no evil of the man ; but he see now that if he be really a covetous upstart , there have be a temptation for he in the management of the Transome affair ; and it be clear that the estate be in a bad condition . 

 when Mr. Jermyn be usher into the breakfast - room the next morning , Harold find he surprisingly little alter by the fifteen year . he be gray , but still remarkably handsome ; fat , but tall enough to bear that trial to man 's dignity . there be as strong a suggestion of toilette about he as if he have be five - and - twenty instead of nearly sixty . he choose always to dress in black , and be especially addict to black satin waistcoat , which carry out the general sleekness of his appearance ; and this , together with his white , fat , but beautifully - shape hand , which he be in the habit of rub gently on his entrance into a room , give he very much the air of a lady 's physician . Harold remember with some amusement his uncle 's dislike of those conspicuous hand ; but as his own be soft and dimpled , and as he too be give to the innocent practice of rub those member , his suspicion be not yet deepen . 

 " I congratulate you , Mrs. Transome , " say Jermyn , with a soft and deferential smile , " all the more , " he add , turn toward Harold , " now I have the pleasure of actually see your son . I be glad to perceive that an eastern climate have not be unfavorable to he . " 

 " no , " say Harold , shake Jermyn 's hand carelessly , and speak with more than his usual brusqueness , " the question be , whether the english climate will agree with I . it be deuce shift and damp ; and as for the food , it would be the fine thing in the world for this country if the southern cook would change their religion , get persecute , and fly to England , as the old silk - weaver do . " 

 " there be plenty of foreign cook for those who be rich enough to pay for they , I suppose , " say Mrs. Transome , " but they be unpleasant 34   people to have about one 's house . " 

 " Gad ! I do not   think so , " say Harold . 

 " the old servant be sure to quarrel with they . " 

 " that be no concern of mine . the old servant will have to put up with my man Dominic , who will show they how to cook and do everything else in a way that will rather astonish they . " 

 " old people be not so easily teach to change all their way , Harold . " 

 " well , they can give up and watch the young one , " say Harold , think only at that moment of old Mrs. Hickes and Dominic . but his mother be not think of they only . 

 " you have a valuable servant , it seem , " say Jermyn , who understand Mrs. Transome well than her son do , and wish to smoothen the current of their dialogue . 

 " oh , one of those wonderful southern fellow that make one 's life easy . he be of no country in particular . I do not   know whether he be most of a Jew , a Greek , an italian , or a spaniard . he speak five or six language , one as well as another . he be cook , valet , major - domo , and secretary all in one ; and what be more , he be an affectionate fellow I can trust to his attachment . that be a sort of human speciman that do not   grow here in England , I fancy . I should have be badly off if I could not have bring Dominic . " 

 they sit down to breakfast with such slight talk as this go on . each of the party be preoccupy and uneasy . Harold 's mind be busy construct probability about what he should discover of Jermyn 's mismanagement or dubious application of fund , and the sort of self - command he must in the bad case exercise in order to use the man as long as he want he . Jermyn be closely observe Harold with an unpleasant sense that there be an expression of acuteness and determination about he which would make he formidable . he would certainly have prefer at that moment that there have be no second heir of the Transome name to come back upon he from the East . Mrs. Transome be not observe the two man ; rather , her hand be cold , and her whole person shake by their presence ; she seem to hear and see what they say and do with preternatural acuteness , and yet she be also see and hear what have be say and do many year before , and feel a dim terror about the future . there be piteous sensibility in this faded woman , who thirty - four year ago , in the 35   splendor of her bloom , have be imperious to one of these man , and have rapturously press the other as an infant to her bosom , and now know that she be of little consequence to either of they . 

 " well , what be the prospect about election ? " say Harold , as the breakfast be advance . " there be two whig and one conservative likely to be in the field , I know . what be your opinion of the chance ? " 

 Mr. Jermyn have a copious supply of word which often lead he into periphrase , but he cultivate a hesitating stammer , which , with a handsome impassiveness of face , except when he be smile at a woman , or when the latent savageness of his nature be thoroughly rouse , he have find useful in many relation , especially in business . no one could have find out that he be not at his ease . " my opinion , " he reply , " be in a state of balance at present . this division of the county , you be aware , contain one manufacturing town of the first magnitude , and several small one . the manufacturing interest be widely disperse . so far a there be a presumption a in favor of the two liberal candidate . still , with a careful canvass of the agricultural district , such as those we have round we at Treby Magna , I think a the augury a would not be unfavorable to the return of a Conservative . a fourth candidate of good position , who should coalesce with Mr. Debarry a " 

 here Mr. Jermyn hesitate for the third time , and Harold break in . 

 " that will not be my line of action , so we need not discuss it . if I put up it will be as a Radical ; and I fancy , in any county that would return Whigs there would be plenty of voter to be comb off by a Radical who offer himself with good pretension . " 

 there be the slight possible quiver discernible across Jermyn 's face . otherwise he sit as he have do before , with his eye fix abstractedly on the frill of a ham before he , and his hand trifle with his fork . he do not answer immediately , but , when he do , he look round steadily at Harold . 

 " I be delighted to perceive that you have keep yourself so thoroughly acquaint with english politic . " 

 " oh , of course , " say Harold , impatiently . " I be aware how thing have be go on in England . I always mean to come back ultimately . I suppose I know the state of Europe as well as if I have be stationary at Little Treby for the last fifteen year . if a man go to the East , 36   people seem to think he get turn into something like the one - eyed calender in the ' Arabian Nights ! ' " 

 " yet I should think there be some thing which people who have be stationary at Little Treby could tell you , Harold , " say Mrs. Transome . " it do not signify about your hold radical opinion at Smyrna ; but you seem not to imagine how your put up as a Radical will affect your position here , and the position of your family . no one will visit you . and then the sort of people who will support you ! you really have no idea what an impression it convey when you say you be a Radical . there be none of our equal who will not feel that you have disgrace yourself . " 

 " Pooh ! " say Harold , rise and walk along the room . 

 but Mrs. Transome go on with grow anger in her voice " it seem to I that a man owe something to his birth and station , and have no right to take up this notion or other , just as it suit his fancy ; still less to work at the overthrow of his class . that be what every one say of Lord Grey , and my family at least be as good as Lord Grey 's . you have wealth now , and might distinguish yourself in the county ; and if you have be true to your color as a gentleman , you would have have all the great opportunity , because the time be so bad . the Debarrys and Lord Wyvern would have set all the more store by you . for my part , I can not   conceive what good you propose to yourself . I only entreat you to think again before you take any decide step . " 

 " Mother , " say Harold , not angrily or with any raising of his voice , but in a quick , impatient manner , as if the scene must be get through as quickly as possible ; " it be natural that you should think in this way . woman , very properly , do not   change their view , but keep to the notion in which they have be bring up . it do not   signify what they think they be not call upon to judge or to act . you must leave I to take my own course in these matter , which properly belong to man . beyond that , I will gratify any wish you may choose to mention . you shall have a new carriage and a pair of bay all to yourself ; you shall have the house do up in first - rate style , and I be not think of marry . but let we understand that there shall be no further collision between we on subject on which I must be master of my own action . " 

 " and you will put the crown to the mortification of my life , Harold . I do not   know who would be a mother if she could foresee what a slight 37   thing she will be to her son when she be old . " 

 Mrs. Transome here walk out of the room by the near way the glass door open toward the terrace . Mr. Jermyn have rise too , and his hand be on the back of his chair . he look quite impassive : it be not the first time he have see Mrs. Transome angry ; but now , for the first time , he think the outburst of her temper would be useful to he . she , poor woman , know quite well that she have be unwise , and that she have be make herself disagreeable to Harold to no purpose . but half the sorrow of woman would be avert if they could repress the speech they know to be useless nay , the speech they have resolve not to utter . Harold continue his walk a moment long , and then say to Jermyn 

 " you smoke ? " 

 " no , I always defer to the lady . Mrs. Jermyn be peculiarly sensitive in such matter , and do not   like tobacco . " 

 Harold , who , underneath all the tendency which have make he a Liberal , have intense personal pride , think , " confound the fellow with his Mrs. Jermyn ! do he think we be on a footing for I to know anything about his wife ? " 

 " well , I take my hookah before breakfast , " he say aloud , ' so , if you like , we will go into the library . my father never get up till midday , I find . " 

 " sit down , sit down , " say Harold , as they enter the handsome , spacious library . but he himself continue to stand before a map of the county which he have open from a series of roller occupy a compartment among the bookshelf . " the first question , Mr. Jermyn , now you know my intention , be , whether you will undertake to be my agent in this election , and help I through ? there be no time to be lose , and I do not   want to lose my chance , as I may not have another for seven year . I understand , " he go on , flash a look straight at Jermyn , " that you have not take any conspicuous course in politic , and I know that Labron be agent for the Debarrys . " 

 " oh a my dear sir a man necessarily have his political conviction , but of what use be it for a professional man a of some education , to talk of they in a little country town ? there really be no comprehension of public question in such place . party feeling , indeed , be quite asleep here before the agitation about the Catholic Relief Bill . it be true that I concur with our incumbent in get up a petition against the Reform Bill , 38   but I do not state my reason . the weak point in that Bill be a too palpable , and I fancy you and I should not differ much on that head . the fact be , when I know that you be to come back to we , I keep myself in reserve , though I be much press by the friend of Sir James Clement , the ministerial candidate , who be " 

 " however , you will act for I that be settle ? " say Harold . 

 " certainly , " say Jermyn , inwardly irritate by Harold 's rapid manner of cut he short . 

 " which of the liberal candidate , as they call themselves , have the well chance , eh ? " 

 " I be go to observe that Sir James Clement have not so good a chance as Mr. Garstin , suppose that a third liberal candidate present himself . there be two sens in which a politician can be liberal " here Mr. Jermyn smile " Sir James Clement be a poor baronet , hop for an appointment , and can not   be expect to be liberal in that wide sense which command majority . " 

 " I wish this man be not so much of a talker , " think Harold , " he will bore I . we shall see , " he say aloud , " what can be do in the way of combination . I will come down to your office after one o'clock if it will suit you ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " ah , and you will have all the list and paper and necessary information ready for I there . I must get up a dinner for the tenant , and we can invite whom we like besides the tenant . just now , I be go over one of the farm on hand with the bailiff . by the way , that be a desperately bad business , have three farm unlet how come that about , eh ? " 

 " that be precisely what I want to say a few word about to you . you have observe already how strongly Mrs. Transome take certain thing to heart . you can imagine that she have be severely try in many way . Mr. Transome 's want of health ; Mr. Durfey 's habit a " 

 " yes , yes . " 

 she be a woman for whom I naturally entertain the high respect , and she have have hardly any gratification for many year , except the sense of have affair to a certain extent in her own hand . she object to change ; she will not have a new style of tenant ; she like the old stock of farmer who milk their own cow , and send their young daughter out to service : all this make it difficult to do the good 39   with the estate . I be aware thing be not as they ought to be , for , in point of fact , improve agricultural management be a matter in which I take considerable interest , and the farm which I myself hold on the estate you will see , I think , to be in a superior condition . but Mrs. Transome be a woman of strong feeling , and I would urge you , my dear sir , to make the change which you have , but which I have not the right to insist on , as little painful to she as possible . " 

 " I shall know what to do , sir , never fear , " say Harold , much offended . 

 " you will pardon , I hope , a perhaps undue freedom of suggestion from a man of my age , who have be so long in a close connection with the family affair a I have never consider that connection simply in a light of business a " 

 " Damn he , I will soon let he know that I do , " think Harold . but in proportion as he find Jermyn 's manner annoying , he feel the necessity of control himself . he despise all person who defeat their own project by the indulgence of momentary impulse . 

 " I understand , I understand , " he say aloud . " you have   have more awkward business on your hand than usually fall to the share of a family lawyer . we shall set everything right by degree . but now as to the canvassing . I have   make arrangement with a first - rate man in London , who understand these matter thoroughly a solicitor , of course he have carry no end of man into Parliament . I will engage he to meet we at Duffield say when ? " 

 the conversation after this be drive carefully clear of all angle , and end with determined amicableness . when Harold , in his ride an hour or two afterward , encounter his uncle shoulder a gun , and follow by one black and one liver - spot pointer , his muscular person with its red eagle face set off by a velveteen jacket and leather legging , Mr. Lingon 's first question be 

 " well , lad , how have you get on with Jermyn ? " 

 " oh , I do not   think I shall like the fellow . he be a sort of amateur gentleman . but I must make use of he . I expect whatever I get out of he will only be something short of fair pay for what he have get out of we . but I shall see . " 

 " ay , ay , use his gun to bring down your game , and after that , beat the thief with the butt end . that be wisdom and justice and pleasure all in one talk between ourselves as uncle and nephew . but I say , Harold , I be go to tell you , now I come to think of it , this be 40   rather a nasty business , your call yourself a Radical . I have   be turn it over in after - dinner speech , but it look awkward it be not what people be use to it want a good deal of Latin to make it go down . I shall be worried about it at the session , and I can think of nothing neat enough to carry about in my pocket by way of answer . " 

 " nonsense , uncle ! I remember what a good speechifier you always be ; you will never be at a loss . you only want a few more evening to think of it . " 

 " but you will not be attack the Church and the institution of the country you will not be go those length ; you will keep up the bulwark , and so on , eh ? " 

 " no , I shall not   attack the Church , only the income of the bishop , perhaps , to make they eke out the income of the poor clergy . " 

 " well , well , I have no objection to that . nobody like our bishop : he be all greek and greediness ; too proud to dine with his own father . you may pepper the bishop a little . but you will respect the constitution hand down , etc . and you will rally round the throne and the king , God bless he , and the usual toast , eh ? " 

 " of course , of course . I be a Radical only in root out abuse . " 

 " that be the word I want , my lad ! " say the vicar , slap Harold 's knee . " that be a spool to wind a speech on . abuse be the very word ; and if anybody show himself offend , he will put the cap on for himself . " 

 " I remove the rotten timber , " say Harold , inwardly amuse , " and substitute fresh oak , that be all . " 

 " well do , my boy ! by George , you will be a speaker ! but I say , Harold , I hope you have   get a little Latin left . this young Debarry be a tremendous fellow at the classic , and walk on stilt to any length . he be one of the new conservative . Old Sir Maximus do not   understand he at all . " 

 " that will not   do at the husting , " say Harold . " he will get knock off his stilt pretty quickly there . " 

 " bless I ! it be astonishing how well you be up in the affair of the country , my boy . but rub up a few quotation ' Quod turpe boni decebat Crispinum ' and that sort of thing just to show Debarry what you could do if you like . but you want to ride on ? " 

 " yes ; I have an appointment at Treby . good - bye . " 

 " he be a cleverish chap , " mutter the vicar , as Harold ride away . " when he be have plenty of english exercise , and bring out his knuckle a 41   bit , he will be a Lingon again as he use to be . I must go and see how Arabella take his be a Radical . it be a little awkward ; but a clergyman must keep peace in a family . confound it ! I be not bind to love toryism well than my own flesh and blood , and the manor I shoot over . that be a heathenish , Brutus - like sort of thing , as if Providence could not   take care of the country without my quarrelling with my own sister 's son ! " 

 CHAPTER III . 

 ' Twas town , yet country too : you feel the warmth 
 of cluster house in the wintry time : 
 sup with a friend , and go by lantern home . 
 yet from your chamber window you could hear 
 the tiny bleat of new - yeane lamb , or see 
 the child bend beside the hedgerow bank 
 to pluck the primrose . 
 Treby Magna , on which the Reform Bill have thrust the new honor of be a polling - place , have be , at the beginning of the century , quite a typical old market - town , lie in pleasant sleepiness among green pasture , with a rush - fringe river meander through they . its principal street have various handsome and tall - windowed brick house with wall garden behind they ; and at the end , where it widen into the market - place , there be the cheerful rough - stuccoed front of that excellent inn , the Marquis of Granby , where the farmer put up their gig , not only on fair and market day , but on exceptional sunday when they come to church . and the church be one of those fine old english structure worth travel to see , stand in a broad churchyard with a line of solemn yew - tree beside it , and lift a majestic tower and spire far above the red - and - purple roof of the town . it be not large enough to hold all the parishioner of a parish which stretch over distant village and hamlet ; but then they be never so unreasonable as to wish to be all in at once , and have never complain that the space of a large side - chapel be take up by the tomb of the Debarrys , and shut in by a handsome iron screen . for when the black Benedictines cease to pray and chant in this church , when the Blessed Virgin and St. Gregory be expel , the Debarrys , as lord of the manor , naturally come next to Providence and take the place of the saint . long before that time , indeed , there have be a Sir Maximus Debarry who have be at the fortifying of the old castle , which now stand in ruin in the 42   midst of the green pasture , and with its shelter wall toward the north make an excellent strawyard for the pig of Wace    Co. , brewer of the celebrate Treby beer . Wace    Co. do not stand alone in the town as prosperous trader on a large scale , to say nothing of those who have retire from business ; and in no country town of the same small size as Treby be there a large proportion of family who have handsome set of china without handle , hereditary punch - bowl , and large silver ladle with a Queen Anne 's guinea in the centre . such people naturally take tea and sup together frequently ; and as there be no professional man or tradesman in Treby who be not connect by business , if not by blood , with the farmer of the district , the rich sort of these be much invite , and give invitation in their turn . they play at whist , eat and drink generously , praise Mr. Pitt and the war as keep up price and religion , and be very humorous about each other 's property , have much the same coy pleasure in allusion to their secret ability to purchase , as blushing lass sometimes have in joke about their secret preference . the rector be always of the Debarry family , associate only with county people , and be much respected for his affability ; a clergyman who would have take tea with the townspeople would have give a dangerous shock to the mind of a Treby churchman . 

 such be the old - fashion , grazing , brewing , wool - packing , cheese - loading life of Treby Magna , until there befell new condition , complicate its relation with the rest of the world , and gradually awakening in it that high consciousness which be know to bring high pain . first come the canal ; next , the working of the coal - mine at Sproxton , two mile off the town ; and thirdly , the discovery of a saline spring , which suggest to a too constructive brain the possibility of turn Treby Magna into a fashionable watering - place . so dare an idea be not originate by a native Trebian , but by a young lawyer who come from a distance , know the dictionary by heart , and be probably an illegitimate son of somebody or other . the idea , although it promise an increase of wealth to the town , be not well receive at first ; lady object to see " object " draw about in hand - carriage , the doctor foresee the advent of unsound practitioner , and most retail tradesman concur with he that new doing be usually for the advantage of new people . the more unanswerable reasoner urge that Treby have prosper without bath , and it be yet to be see how it would prosper with 43   they ; while a report that the propose name for they be Bethesda Spa , threaten to give the whole affair a blasphemous aspect . even Sir Maximus Debarry , who be to have an unprecedented return for the thousand he would lay out on a pump - room and hotel , regard the thing as a little too new , and hold back for some time . but the persuasive power of the young lawyer , Mr. Matthew Jermyn , together with the opportune opening of a stone - quarry , triumph at last ; the handsome building be erect , an excellent guide - book and descriptive card , surmount by vignette , be print , and Treby Magna become conscious of certain fact in its own history of which it have previously be in content ignorance . 

 but it be all in vain . the Spa , for some mysterious reason , do not succeed . some attribute the failure to the coal - mine and the canal ; other to the peace , which have have ruinous effect on the country ; and other , who dislike Jermyn , to the original folly of the plan . among these last be Sir Maximus himself , who never forgave the too persuasive attorney : it be Jermyn 's fault not only that a useless hotel have be build , but that he , Sir Maximus , be straiten for money , have at last let the building , with the adjacent land lie on the river , on a long lease , on the supposition that it be to be turn into a tape manufactory a bitter thing to any gentleman , and especially to the representative of one of the old family in England . 

 in this way it happen that Treby Magna gradually pass from be simply a respectable market town the heart of a great rural district , where the trade be only such as have close relation with the local land interest and take on the more complex life bring by mine and manufacture , which belong more directly to the great circulate system of the nation than to the local system to which they have be superadde ; and in this way it be that Trebian Dissent gradually alter its character . formerly it have be of a quiescent , well - to - do kind , represent architecturally by a small , venerable , dark - pewe chapel , build by Presbyterians , but long occupy by a sparse congregation of independent , who be as little move by doctrinal zeal as their church - go neighbor , and do not feel themselves deficient in religious liberty , inasmuch as they be not hinder from occasionally slumber in their pew , and be not oblige to go regularly to the weekly prayer - meeting . but when stone - pit and 44   coal - pit make new hamlet that threaten to spread up to the very town , when the tape - weaver come with their news - read inspector and book - keeper , the independent chapel begin to be fill with eager man and woman , to whom the exceptional possession of religious truth be the condition which reconcile they to a meagre existence , and make they feel in secure alliance with the unseen but supreme rule of a world in which their own visible part be small . there be dissenter in Treby now who could not be regard by the Church people in the light of old neighbor to whom the habit of go to chapel be an innocent , unenviable inheritance along with a particular house and garden , a tan - yard , or a grocery business Dissenters who , in their turn , without meaning to be in the least abusive , speak of the high - breed rector as a blind leader of the blind . and Dissent be not the only thing that the time have alter ; price have fall , poor - rate have rise , rent and tithe be not elastic enough , and the farmer 's fat sorrow have become lean ; he begin to speculate on cause , and to trace thing back to that causeless mystery , the cessation of one - pound note . thus , when political agitation sweep in a current through the country , Treby Magna be prepared to vibrate . the Catholic Emancipation Bill open the eye of neighbor and make they aware how very injurious they be to each other and to the welfare of mankind generally . Mr. Tiliot , the Church spirit - merchant , know now that Mr. Nuttwood , the oblige grocer , be one of those dissenter , deist , socinian , Papists , and Radicals , who be in league to destroy the Constitution . a retire old London tradesman , who be believe to understand politic , say that think people must wish George III be alive again in all his early vigor of mind : and even the farmer become less materialistic in their view of cause , and refer much to the agency of the devil and the Irish Romans . the rector , the Reverend Augustus Debarry , really a fine speciman of the old - fashioned aristocratic clergyman , preach short sermon , understand business , and act liberally about his tithe , have never before find himself in collision with dissenter ; but now he begin to feel that these people be a nuisance in the parish , that his brother Sir Maximus must take care lest they should get land to build more chapel , and that it might not have be a bad thing if the law have furnish he as a magistrate with a power of put a stop to the political sermon of the Independent preacher , which , in their way , 45   be as pernicious source of intoxication as the beerhouse . the Dissenters , on their side , be not dispose to sacrifice the cause of truth and freedom to a temporize mildness of language ; but they defend themselves from the charge of religious indifference , and solemnly disclaim any lax expectation that Catholics be likely to be save urge , on the contrary , that they be not too hopeful about Protestants who adhere to a bloated and worldly Prelacy . thus Treby Magna , which have live quietly through the great earthquake of the French Revolution and the napoleonic war , which have remain unmove by the " Rights of Man , " and see little in Mr. Cobbett 's " Weekly Register " except that he hold eccentric view about potato , begin at last to know the high pain of a dim political consciousness ; and the development have be greatly help by the recent agitation about the Reform Bill . Tory , Whig , and Radical do not perhaps become clear in their definition of each other ; but the name seem to acquire so strong a stamp of honor or infamy , that definition would only have weaken the impression . as to the short and easy method of judge opinion by the personal character of those who hold they , it be liable to be much frustrated in Treby . it so happen in that particular town that the Reformers be not all of they large - hearted patriot or ardent lover of justice ; indeed , one of they , in the very midst of the agitation , be detect in use unequal scale a fact to which many Tories point with disgust as show plainly enough , without further argument , that the cry for a change in the representative system be hollow trickery . again , the Tories be far from be all oppressor , dispose to grind down the working class into serfdom ; and it be undeniable that the inspector at the tape manufactory , who speak with much eloquence on the extension of the suffrage , be a more tyrannical personage than open - handed Mr. Wace , whose chief political tenet be that it be all nonsense to give man vote when they have no stake in the country . on the other hand there be some Tories who give themselves a great deal of leisure to abuse hypocrite , Radicals , dissenter , and atheism generally , but whose inflame face , theistic swearing , and frankness in express a wish to borrow , certainly do not mark they out strongly as hold opinion likely to save society . 

 the Reformers have triumph : it be clear that the wheel be go whither they be pull , and they be in fine spirit for 46   exertion . but if they be pull toward the country 's ruin , there be the more need for other to hang on behind and get the wheel to stick if possible . in Treby , as elsewhere , people be tell they must " rally " at the come election ; but there be now a large number of waverer man of flexible , practical mind , who be not such bigot as to cling to any view when a good tangible reason could be urge against they ; while some regard it as the most neighborly thing to hold a little with both side , and be not sure that they should rally or vote at all . it seem an invidious thing to vote for one gentleman rather than another . 

 these social change in Treby parish be comparatively public matter , and this history be chiefly concerned with the private lot of a few man and woman ; but there be no private life which have not be determine by a wide public life , from the time when the primeval milkmaid have to wander with the wandering of her clan , because the cow she milk be one of a herd which have make the pasture bare . even in that conservatory existence where the fair Camellia be sigh for by the noble young Pine - apple , neither of they need to care about the frost , or rain outside , there be a nether apparatus of hot water pipe liable to cool down on a strike of the gardener or a scarcity of coal . and the life we be about to look back upon do not belong to those conservatory specie ; they be root in the common earth , have to endure all the ordinary chance of past and present weather . as to the weather of 1832 , the Zadkiel of that time have predict that the electrical condition of the cloud in the political hemisphere would produce unusual perturbation in organic existence , and he would perhaps have see a fulfillment of his remarkable prophecy in that mutual influence of dissimilar destiny which we shall see gradually unfold itself . for if the mixed political condition of Treby Magna have not be act on by the passing of the Reform Bill , Mr. Harold Transome would not have present himself as a candidate for North Loamshire , Treby would not have be a polling - place , Mr. Matthew Jermyn would not have be on affable term with a dissent preacher and his flock , and the venerable town would not have be placard with handbill , more or less complimentary and retrospective condition in this case essential to the " where , " and the " what , " without which , as the learn know , there can be no event whatever . 

 for example , it be through these condition that a young man name Felix Holt make a considerable difference in the life of Harold 47   Transome , though nature and fortune seem to have do what they could to keep the lot of the two man quite aloof from each other . Felix be heir to nothing well than a quack medicine ; his mother live up a back street in Treby Magna , and her sitting - room be ornament with her good tea - tray and several frame testimonial to the virtue of Holt 's Cathartic Lozenges and Holt 's Restorative Elixir . there could hardly have be a lot less like Harold Transome 's than this of the quack doctor 's son , except in the superficial fact that he call himself a Radical , that he be the only son of his mother , and that he have lately return to his home with idea and resolve not a little disturbing to that mother 's mind . 

 but Mrs. Holt , unlike Mrs. Transome , be much disposed to reveal her trouble , and be not without a counsellor into whose ear she could pour they . on this second of September , when Mr. Harold Transome have have his first interview with Jermyn , and when the attorney go back to his office with new view of canvass in his mind , Mrs. Holt have put on her bonnet as early as nine o'clock in the morning , and have go to see the Reverend Rufus Lyon , minister of the Independent Chapel usually speak of as " Malthouse Yard . " 

 CHAPTER IV . 

 " a pious and painful preacher . " Fuller . 

 Mr. Lyon live in a small house , not quite so good as the parish clerk 's , adjoin the entry which lead to the Chapel Yard . the new prosperity of Dissent at Treby have lead to an enlargement of the chapel , which absorb all extra fund and leave none for the enlargement of the minister 's income . he sit this morning , as usual , in a low up - stair room , call his study , which , by mean of a closet capable of hold his bed , serve also as a sleep - room . the bookshelf do not suffice for his store of old book , which lie about he in pile so arrange as to leave narrow lane between they ; for the minister be much give to walk about during his hour of meditation , and very narrow passage would serve for his small leg , unencumbered by any other drapery than his black silk stocking and the flexible , though prominent , bow of black ribbon that tie his knee - breech . he be walk about now , with his hand clasp behind he , an attitude in which his body seem to bear about the same proportion to his head as the low part of a stone Hermes bear to the carven image that crown it . his face look old 48   and wear , yet the curtain of hair that fall from his bald crown and hang about his neck retain much of its original auburn tint , and his large , brown , short - sighted eye be still clear and bright . at the first glance , every one think he a very odd - looking rusty old man ; the free - school boy often hoot after he , and call he " revelation " ; and to many respectable Church people , old Lyon 's little leg and large head seem to make Dissent additionally preposterous . but he be too short - sighted to notice those who titter at he too absent from the world of small fact and petty impulse in which titterer live . with Satan to argue against on matter of vital experience as well as of church government , with great text to meditate on , which seem to get deep as he try to fathom they , it have never occur to he to reflect what sort of image his small person make on the retina of a light - minded beholder . the good Rufus have his ire and his egoism ; but they exist only as the red heat which give force to his belief and his teaching . he be susceptible concern the true office of deacon in the primitive Church , and his small nervous body be jarred from head to foot by the concussion of an argument to which he see no answer . in fact , the only moment when he could be say to be really conscious of his body , be when he tremble under the pressure of some agitate thought . 

 he be meditate on the text for his Sunday morning sermon , " and all the people say , amen " a mere mustard - seed of a text , which have split at first only into two division , " what be say , " and " who say it " ; but these be grow into a many - branched discourse , and the preacher 's eye dilate , and a smile play about his mouth till , as his manner be , when he feel happily inspire , he have begin to utter his thought aloud in the varied measure and cadence habitual to he , change from a rapid but distinct undertone to a loud emphatic rallentando . 

 " my brother , do you think that great shout be raise in Israel by each man be wait to say ' amen ' till his neighbor have say aman ? do you think there will be a great shout for the right the shout of a nation as of one man , rounded and whole , like the voice of the archangel that bind together all the listener of earth and heaven if every Christian of you peep round to see what his neighbor in good coat be do , or else put his hat before his face that he may shout and never be hear ? but this be what you do : when the servant of God stand up 49   to deliver his message , do you lay your soul beneath the Word as you set out your plant beneath the fall rain ? no ; one of you send his eye to all corner , he smother his soul with small question , ' what do brother Y. think ? ' ' be this doctrine high enough for brother Z. ? ' ' will the church member be please ? ' and another " 

 here the door be open , and old Lyddy , the minister 's servant , put in her head to say , in a tone of despondency , finish with a groan , " here be Mrs. Holt want to speak to you ; she say she come out of season , but she be in trouble . " 

 " Lyddy , " say Mr. Lyon , fall at once into a quiet conversational tone , " if you be wrestle with the enemy , let I refer you to Ezekiel the thirteenth and twenty - second , and beg of you not to groan . it be a stumble - block and offence to my daughter ; she would take no broth yesterday , because she say you have cry into it . thus you cause the truth to be lightly speak of , and make the enemy rejoice . if your faceache give he an advantage , take a little warm ale with your meat I do not grudge the money . " 

 " if I think my drinking warm ale would hinder poor dear Miss Esther from speak light but she hat the smell of it . " 

 " answer not again , Lyddy , but send up Mistress Holt to I . " 

 Lyddy close the door immediately . 

 " I lack grace to deal with these weak sister , " say the minister , again think aloud , and walk . " their need lie too much out of the track of my meditation , and take I often unawares . mistress Holt be another who darken counsel by word without knowledge , and anger the reason of the natural man . Lord , give I patience . my sin be heavy to bear than this woman 's folly . come in , Mrs. Holt come in . " 

 he hasten to disencumber a chair of Matthew Henry 's Commentary , and beg his visitor to be seat . she be a tall elderly woman , dress in black , with a light - brown front and a black band over her forehead . she move the chair a little and seat herself in it with some emphasis , look fixedly at the opposite wall with a hurt and argumentative expression . Mr. Lyon have place himself in the chair against his desk , and wait with the resolute resignation of a patient who be about to undergo an operation . but his visitor do not speak . 

  50 

 " you have something on your mind , Mrs. Holt ? " he say , at last . 

 " indeed I have , sir , else I should not   be here . " 

 " speak freely . " 

 " it be well known to you , Mr. Lyon , that my husband , Mr. Holt , come from the north , and be a member in Malthouse Yard long before you begin to be pastor of it , which be seven year ago last Michaelmas . it be the truth , Mr. Lyon , and I be not that woman to sit here and say it if it be not   true . " 

 " certainly , it be true . " 

 " and if my husband have be alive when you would come to preach upon trial , he would have be as good a judge of your gift as Mr. Nuttwood or Mr. Muscat , though whether he would have agree with some that your doctrine be not   high enough , I can not   say . for myself , I have   my opinion about high doctrine . " 

 " be it my preach you come to speak about ? " say the minister , hurry in the question . 

 " no , Mr. Lyon , I be not that woman . but this I will say , for my husband die before your time , that he have a wonderful gift in prayer , as the old member well know , if anybody like to ask them , not believe my word , and he believe himself that the receipt for the Cancer Cure , which I have   send out in bottle till this very last April before September as now be , and have bottle stand by I he believe it be send to he in answer to prayer ; and nobody can deny it , for he pray most regular , and read out of the green baize Bible . " 

 Mrs. Holt pause , appear to think that Mr. Lyon have be successfully confute , and should show himself convince . 

 " have any one be asperse your husband 's character ? " say Mr. Lyon , with a slight initiative toward that relief of groan for which he have reprove Lyddy . 

 " Sir , they daredn't . for though he be a man of prayer , he do not   want skill and knowledge to find thing out for himself ; and that be what I use to say to my friend when they wonder at my marry a man from Lancashire , with no trade nor fortune , but what he would get in his head . but my husband 's tongue ' ud have be a fortune to anybody , and there be many a one say it be as good as a dose of physic to hear he talk ; not but what that get he into trouble in Lancashire , but he always say , if the bad come to the bad , he could go and preach to the black . but he do well than that , Mr. Lyon , for he marry I ; and this I will say , that for age , and conduct , and manage " 

  51 

 " Mistress Holt , " interrupt the minister , " these be not the thing whereby we may edify one another . let I beg of you to be as brief as you can . my time be not my own . " 

 " well , Mr. Lyon , I have   a right to my own character ; and I be one of your congregation , though I be not a church member , for I be bear in the General Baptist connection : and as for be save without work , there be a many , I dare say , can not   do without that doctrine ; but I thank the Lord I never need to put myself on a level with the thief on the cross . I have   do my duty , and more , if anybody come to that ; for I have   go without my bit of meat to make broth for a sick neighbor : and if there be any of the church member say they have   do the same , I would ask they if they have the sinking at the stomach as I have ; for I have   ever strove to do the right thing , and more , for good - natured I always be ; and I little think , after be respect by everybody , I should come to be reproach by my own son . and my husband say , when he be a - die ' Mary , ' he say , ' the Elixir , and the Pills , and the Cure will support you , for they have   a great name in all the country round , and you will pray for a blessing on they . ' and so I have   do , Mr. Lyon ; and to say they be not good medicine , when they have   be take for fifty mile round by high and low , rich and poor , and nobody speak against them but Dr. Lukin , it seem to I it be a flying in the face of Heaven ; for if it be wrong to take the medicine , could not   the blessed Lord have stop it ? " 

 Mrs. Holt be not give to tear ; she be much sustain by conscious unimpeachableness , and by an argumentative tendency which usually check the too great activity of the lachrymal gland ; nevertheless her eye have become moist , her finger play on her knee in an agitated manner , and she finally pluck a bit of her gown and hold it with great nicety between her thumb and finger . Mr. Lyon , however , by listen attentively , have begin partly to divine the source of her trouble . 

 " be I wrong in gather from what you say , Mistress Holt , that your son have object in some way to your sale of your late husband 's medicine ? " 

 " Mr. Lyon , he be masterful beyond everything , and he talk more than his father do . I have   get my reason , Mr. Lyon , and if anybody talk sense I can follow he ; but Felix talk so wild , and contradict his mother . and what do you think he say , after give up his ' prenticeship , and go off to study at Glasgow , and get through all the bit of money his 52   father save for his bringing - up what have all his learning come to ? he say I would well never open my Bible , for it be as bad poison to I as the pill be to half the people as swallow them . you will not speak of this again , Mr. Lyon I do not   think ill enough of you to believe that . for I suppose a Christian can understand the word o ' God without go to Glasgow , and there be text upon text about ointment and medicine , and there be one as might have be for a receipt of my husband 's it be just as if it be a riddle , and Holt 's Elixir be the answer . " 

 " your son use rash word , Mistress Holt , " say the minister , " but it be quite true that we may err in give a too private interpretation to the scripture . the word of God have to satisfy the large need of his people , like the rain and the sunshine which no man must think to be mean for his own patch of seed - ground solely . will it not be well that I should see your son , and talk with he on these matter ? he be at chapel , I observe , and I suppose I be to be his pastor . " 

 " that be what I want to ask you , Mr. Lyon . for perhaps he will listen to you , and not talk you down as he do his poor mother . for after we have be to chapel , he speak well of you than he do of most : he say you be a fine old fellow , and an old - fashioned Puritan he use dreadful language , Mr. Lyon ; but I see he do not   mean you ill , for all that . he call most folk 's religion rottenness ; and yet another time he will tell I I ought to feel myself a sinner , and do God 's will and not my own . but it be my belief he say first one thing and then another only to abuse his mother . or else he be go off his head , and must be send to a ' sylum . but if he write to the North Loamshire Herald first , to tell everybody the medicine be good for nothing , how can I ever keep he and myself ? " 

 " tell he I shall feel favor if he will come and see I this evening , " say Mr. Lyon , not without a little prejudice in favor of the young man , whose language about the preacher in Malthouse Yard do not seem to he to be altogether dreadful . " meanwhile , my friend , I counsel you to send up a supplication , which I shall not fail to offer also , that you may receive a spirit of humility and submission , so that you may not be hinder from see and follow the divine guidance in this matter by any false light of pride and obstinacy . of this more when I have speak with your son . " 

 " I be not proud or obstinate , Mr. Lyon . I never do say I be everything that be bad , and I never will . and why this trouble should be send on 53   I above everybody else for I have not   tell you all . he be make himself a journeyman to Mr. Prowd the watchmaker after all this learning and he say he will go with patch on his knee , and he shall like himself the well . and as for he have little boy to teach , they will come in all weather with dirty shoe . if it be madness , Mr. Lyon , it be no use your talk to he . " 

 " we shall see . perhaps it may even be the disguised working of grace within he . we must not judge rashly . many eminent servant of God have be lead by way as strange . " 

 " then I be sorry for their mother , that be all , Mr. Lyon ; and all the more if they have be well - speak - on woman . for not my big enemy , whether it be he or she , if they will speak the truth , can turn round and say I have   deserve this trouble . and when everybody get their due , and people 's doing be speak of on the house - top , as the Bible say they will be , it will be know what I have   go through with those medicine the pound and the pouring , and the let stand , and the weighing up early and down late there be nobody know yet but one that be worthy to know ; and the paste o ' the print label right side upwards . there be few woman would have go through with it ; and it be reasonable to think it will be make up to I ; for if there be promise and purchase blessing , I should think this trouble be purchase them . for if my son Felix do not   have a strait - waistcoat put on he , he will have his way . but I say no more . I wish you good - morning , Mr. Lyon , and thank you , though I well know it be your duty to act as you be do . and I never trouble you about my own soul , as some do who look down on I for not be a church member . " 

 " Farewell , Mistress Holt , farewell . I pray that a more powerful teacher than I be may instruct you . " 

 the door be close , and the much - try Rufus walk about again , say aloud , groaningly 

 " this woman have sit under the Gospel all her life , and she be as blind as a heathen , and as proud and stiff - neck as a Pharisee ; yet she be one of the soul I watch for . ' tis true that even Sara , the choose mother of God 's people , show a spirit of unbelief , and perhaps of selfish anger ; and it be a passage that bear the unmistakable signet , ' do honor to the wife or woman , as unto the weak vessel . ' for therein be the great check put on the ready scorn of the natural man . " 

  54 

 CHAPTER V. 

 1st Citizen . Sir , there be a hurry in the vein of youth 
 that make a vice of virtue by excess . 
 2d Citizen . what if the coolness of our tardier vein 
 be loss of virtue ? 
 1st Citizen . all thing cool with time 
 the sun itself , they say , till heat shall find 
 a general level , nowhere in excess . 
 2d Citizen . ' tis a poor climax , to my weak thought , 
 that future middlingness . 
 in the evening , when Mr. Lyon be expect the knock at the door that would announce Felix Holt , he occupy his cushionless arm - chair in the sitting - room , and be skim rapidly , in his short - sighted way , by the light of one candle , the page of a missionary report , emit occasionally a slight " Hm - m " that appear to be expressive of criticism rather than of approbation . the room be dismally furnish , the only object indicate an intention of ornament be a bookcase , a map of the Holy Land , an engraved portrait of Dr. Doddridge , and a black bust with a colored face , which for some reason or other be cover with green gauze . yet any one whose attention be quite awake must have be aware , even on enter , of certain thing that be incongruous with the general air of sombreness and privation . there be a delicate scent of dry rose - leaf ; the light by which the minister be read be a wax - candle in a white earthenware candle - stick , and the table on the opposite side of the fireplace hold a dainty work - basket frille with blue satin . 

 Felix Holt , when he enter , be not in an observant mood ; and when , after seat himself , at the minister 's invitation , near the little table which hold the work - basket , he star at the wax - candle opposite to he , he do so without any wonder or consciousness that the candle be not of tallow . but the minister 's sensitiveness give another interpretation to the gaze which he divine rather than see ; and in alarm lest this inconsistent extravagance should obstruct his usefulness , he hasten to say 

 " you be doubtless amazed to see I with a wax - light , my young friend ; but this undue luxury be pay for with the earning of my daughter , who be so delicately frame that the smell of tallow be loathsome to she . " 

 " I heed not the candle , sir . I thank Heaven I be not a mouse to have a nose that take note of wax or tallow . " 

 the loud abrupt tone make the old man vibrate a little . he have be stroke his chin gently before , with a sense that he must be very 55   quiet and deliberate in his treatment of the eccentric young man ; but now , quite unreflectingly , he draw forth a pair of spectacle , which he be in the habit of use when he want to observe his interlocutor more closely than usual . 

 " and I myself , in fact , be equally indifferent , " he say , as he open and adjust his glass , ' so that I have a sufficient light on my book . " here his large eye look discerningly through the spectacle . 

 " ' tis the quality of the page you care about , not of the candle , " say Felix , smile pleasantly enough at his inspector . " you be think that you have a roughly - write page before you now . " 

 that be true . the minister , accustom to the respectable air of provincial townsman , and especially to the sleek well - clip gravity of his own male congregation , feel a slight shock as his glass make perfectly clear to he the shaggy - head , large - eye , strong - limbed person of this questionable young man , without waistcoat or cravat . but the possibility , support by some of Mrs. Holt 's word , that a disguised work of grace might be go on in the son of whom she complain so bitterly , check any hasty interpretation . 

 " I abstain from judge by the outward appearance only , " he answer , with his usual simplicity . " I myself have experience that when the spirit be much exercise it be difficult to remember neck - band and string and such small accident of our vesture , which be nevertheless decent and needful so long as we sojourn in the flesh . and you , too , my young friend , as I gather from your mother 's troubled and confused report , be undergo some travail of mind . you will not , I trust , object to open yourself fully to I , as to an aged pastor who have himself have much inward wrestling , and have especially know much temptation from doubt . " 

 " as to doubt , " say Felix , loudly and brusquely as before , " if it be those absurd medicine and gull advertisement that my mother have be talk of to you and I suppose it be I have   no more doubt about they than I have about pocket - picking . I know there be a stage of speculation in which a man may doubt whether a pickpocket be blameworthy but I be not one of your subtle fellow who keep look at the world through their own leg . if I allow the sale of those medicine to go on , and my mother to live out of the proceed when I can keep she by the honest labor of my hand , I have   not the least doubt that I should be a rascal . " 

  56 

 " I would fain enquire more particularly into your objection to these medicine , " say Mr. Lyon , gravely . notwithstanding his conscientiousness and a certain originality in his own mental disposition , he be too little use to high principle quite dissociate from sectarian phraseology to be as immediately in sympathy with it as he would otherwise have be . " I know they have be well report of , and many wise person have try remedy providentially discover by those who be not regular physician , and have find a blessing in the use of they . I may mention the eminent Mr. Wesley , who , though I hold not altogether with his arminian doctrine , nor with the usage of his institution , be nevertheless a man of God ; and the journal of various Christians whose name have leave a sweet savor , might be cite in the same sense . moreover , your father , who originally concoct these medicine and leave they as a provision for your mother , be , as I understand , a man whose walk be not unfaithful . " 

 " my father be ignorant , " say Felix , bluntly . " he know neither the complication of the human system , nor the way in which drug counteract each other . ignorance be not so damnable as humbug , but when it prescribe pill it may happen to do more harm . I know something about these thing . I be ' prentice for five miserable year to a stupid brute of a country apothecary my poor father leave money for that he think nothing could be fine for I . no matter : I know that the Cathartic Pills be a drastic compound which may be as bad as poison to half the people who swallow they ; that the Elixir be an absurd farrago of a dozen incompatible thing ; and that the Cancer Cure might as well be bottled ditch - water . " 

 Mr. Lyon rise and walk up and down the room . his simplicity be strongly mix with sagacity as well as sectarian prejudice , and he do not rely at once on a loud - speak integrity Satan might have flavor it with ostentation . presently he ask , in a rapid , low tone , " how long have you know this , young man ? " 

 " well put , sir , " say Felix . " I have   know it a good deal long than I have act upon it , like plenty of other thing . but you believe in conversion ? " 

 " yea , verily . " 

 " so do I. I be convert by six week ' debauchery . " 

 the minister start . " young man , " he say , solemnly , go up close to Felix and lay a hand on his shoulder , ' speak not lightly of the 57   divine operation , and restrain unseemly word . " 

 " I be not speak lightly , " say Felix . " if I have not see that I be make a hog of myself very fast , and that pig - wash , even if I could have get plenty of it , be a poor sort of thing , I should never have look life fairly in the face to see what be to be do with it . I laugh out loud at last to think that a poor devil like I , in a Scotch garret , with my stocking out at heel and a shilling or two to be dissipate upon , with a smell of raw haggis mount from below , and old woman breathe gin as they pass I on the stair want to turn my life into easy pleasure . then I begin to see what else it could be turn into . not much , perhaps . this world be not a very fine place for a good many of the people in it . but I have   make up my mind it shall not   be the bad for I , if I can help it . they may tell I I can not   alter the world that there must be a certain number of sneak and robber in it , and if I do not   lie and filch somebody else will . well then , somebody else shall , for I will not . that be the upshot of my conversion , Mr. Lyon , if you want to know it . " 

 Mr. Lyon remove his hand from Felix 's shoulder and walk about again . " do you sit under any preacher at Glasgow , young man ? " 

 " no : I hear most of the preacher once , but I never want to hear they twice . " 

 the good Rufus be not without a slight rise of resentment at this young man 's want of reverence . it be not yet plain whether he want to hear twice the preacher in Malthouse Yard . but the resentful feeling be carefully repress : a soul in so peculiar a condition must be deal with delicately . 

 " and now , may I ask , " he say , " what course you mean to take , after hinder your mother from make and sell these drug ? I speak no more in their favor after what you have say . God forbid that I should strive to hinder you from seek whatsoever thing be honest and honorable . but your mother be advanced in year ; she need comfortable sustenance ; you have doubtless consider how you may make her amend ? ' he that provideth not for his own ' I trust you respect the authority that so speak . and I will not suppose that , after be tender of conscience toward stranger , you will be careless toward your mother . there be indeed some who , take a mighty charge on their 58   shoulder , must perforce leave their household to Providence , and to the care of humbler brother , but in such a case the call must be clear . " 

 " I shall keep my mother as well nay , well than she have keep herself . she have always be frugal . with my watch and clock cleaning , and teach one or two little chap that I have   get to come to I , I can earn enough . as for I , I can live on bran porridge . I have the stomach of a rhinoceros . " 

 " but for a young man so well furnish as you , who can questionless write a good hand and keep book , be it not well to seek some high situation as clerk or assistant ? I could speak to Brother Muscat , who be well acquainted with all such opening . any place in Pendrell 's Bank , I fear , be now close against such as be not Churchmen . it use not to be so , but a year ago he discharge Brother Bodkin , although he be a valuable servant . still , something might be find . there be rank and degree and those who can serve in the high must not unadvisedly change what seem to be a providential appointment . your poor mother be not altogether " 

 " excuse I , Mr. Lyon ; I have   have all that out with my mother , and I may as well save you any trouble by tell you that my mind have be make up about that a long while ago . I will take no employment that oblige I to prop up my chin with a high cravat , and wear strap , and pass the livelong day with a set of fellow who spend their spare money on shirt pin . that sort of work be really low than many handicraft ; it only happen to be pay out of proportion . that be why I set myself to learn the watchmaking trade . my father be a weaver first of all . it would have be well for he if he have remain a weaver . I come home through Lancashire and see an uncle of mine who be a weaver still . I mean to stick to the class I belong to people who do not   follow the fashion . " 

 Mr. Lyon be silent a few moment . this dialogue be far from plain sailing ; he be not certain of his latitude and longitude . if the despiser of Glasgow preacher have be argue in favor of gin and Sabbath - breaking , Mr. Lyon 's course would have be clear . " well , well , " he say , deliberately , " it be true that St. Paul exercise the trade of tent - making , though he be learn in all the wisdom of the Rabbis . " 

 " St. Paul be a wise man , " say Felix . " why should I want to get into the middle class because I have some learning ? the most of the middle class be as ignorant as the work people about everything that 59   do not   belong to their own Brummagem life . that be how the workingman be leave to foolish device and keep worsen themselves : the good head among they forsake their boon comrade , and go in for a house with a high door - step and a brass knocker . " 

 Mr. Lyon stroke his mouth and chin , perhaps because he feel some disposition to smile ; and it would not be well to smile too readily at what seem but a weedy resemblance of christian unworldliness . on the contrary , there might be a dangerous snare in an unsanctified outstepping of average christian practice . 

 " nevertheless , " he observe , gravely , " it be by such self - advancement that many have be enable to do good service to the cause of liberty and to the public well - being . the ring and the robe of Joseph be no object for a good man 's ambition , but they be the sign of that credit which he win by his divinely - inspire skill , and which enable he to act as a saviour to his brother . " 

 " oh , yes , your ringed and scented man of the people ! I will not   be one of they . let a man once throttle himself with a satin stock , and he will get new want and new motif . metamorphosis will have begin at his neck - joint , and it will go on till it have change his liking first and then his reasoning , which will follow his liking as the foot of a hungry dog follow his nose . I will have none of your clerkly gentility . I might end by collect greasy pence from poor man to buy myself a fine coat and a glutton 's dinner , on pretence of serve the poor man . I would soon be Paley 's fat pigeon than a demagogue all tongue and stomach , though " here Felix change his voice a little " I should like well enough to be another sort of demagogue , if I could . " 

 " then you have a strong interest in the great political movement of these time ? " say Mr. Lyon , with a perceptible flashing of the eye . 

 " I should think so . I despise every man who have not or , have it , do not   try to rouse it in other man . " 

 " right , my young friend , right , " say the minister , in a deep cordial tone . inevitably his mind be draw aside from the immediate consideration of Felix Holt 's spiritual interest by the prospect of political sympathy . in those day so many instrument of God 's cause in the fight for religious and political liberty hold creed that be painfully wrong , and , indeed , irreconcilable with salvation ! " that be my own view , which I maintain in the face of some opposition from 60   brother who contend that a share in public movement be a hindrance to the close walk , and that the pulpit be no place for teach man their duty as member of the commonwealth . I have have much puerile blame cast upon I because I have utter such name as Brougham and Wellington in the pulpit . why not Wellington as well as Rabshakeh ? and why not Brougham as well as Balaam ? do God know less of man than he do in the day of Hezekiah and Moses ? be his arm shorten , and be the world become too wide for his providence ? but , they say , there be no politic in the New Testament " 

 " well , they be right enough there , " say Felix , with his usual unceremoniousness . 

 " what ! you be of those who hold that a christian minister should not meddle with public matter in the pulpit ? " say Mr. Lyon , color . " I be ready to join issue on that point . " 

 " not I , sir , " say Felix ; " I should say , teach any truth you can , whether it be in the Testament or out of it . it be little enough anybody can get hold of , and still less what he can drive into the skull of a pence - counting , parcel - tie generation , such as mostly fill your chapel . " 

 " young man , " say Mr. Lyon , pause in front of Felix . he speak rapidly , as he always do , except when his word be specially weight with emotion : he overflow with matter , and in his mind matter be always completely organize into word . " I speak not on my own behalf , for not only have I no desire that any man should think of I above that which he seeth I to be , but I be aware of much that should make I patient under a disesteem rest even on too hasty a construction . I speak not as claim reverence for my own age and office not to shame you , but to warn you . it be good that you should use plainness of speech , and I be not of those who would enforce a submissive silence on the young , that they themselves , be elder , may be hear at large ; but Elihu be the young of Job 's friend , yet be there a wise rebuke in his word ; and the aged Eli be teach by a revelation to the boy Samuel . I have to keep a special watch over myself in this matter , inasmuch as I have need of utterance which make the thought within I seem as a pen - up fire , until I have shoot it forth , as it be , in arrowy word , each one hit its mark . therefore I pray for a listen spirit , which be a great mark of grace . nevertheless , my young friend , I be bind , as I 61   say , to warn you . the temptation that most beset those who have great natural gift , and be wise after the flesh , be pride and scorn , more particularly toward those weak thing of the world which have be choose to confound the thing which be mighty . the scornful nostril and the high head gather not the odor that lie on the track of truth . the mind that be too ready at contempt and reprobation be " 

 here the door open , and Mr. Lyon pause to look around , but see only Lyddy with the tea - tray , he go on 

 " be , I may say , as a clenched fist that can give blow , but be shut up from receive and hold aught that be precious though it be heaven - send manna . " 

 " I understand you , sir , " say Felix , good - humoredly , put out his hand to the little man , who have come close to he as he deliver the last sentence with sudden emphasis and slowness . " but I be not inclined to clench my fist at you . " 

 " well , well , " say Mr. Lyon , shake the proffered hand , " we shall see more of each other , and I trust shall have much profitable communing . you will stay and have a dish of tea with we : we take the meal late on Thursdays , because my daughter be detain by give a lesson in the french tongue . but she be doubtless return now , and will presently come and pour out tea for we . " 

 " thank you , I will stay , " say Felix , not from any curiosity to see the minister 's daughter , but from a liking for the society of the minister himself for his quaint look and way , and the transparency of his talk , which give a charm even to his weakness . the daughter be probably some prim Miss , neat , sensible , pious , but all in a small feminine way , in which Felix be no more interested than in Dorcas meeting , biography of devout woman , and that amount of ornamental knitting which be not inconsistent with non - conforming seriousness . 

 " I be perhaps a little too fond of bang and smash , " he go on : " a phrenologist at Glasgow tell I I have large veneration ; another man there , who know I , laugh out and say I be the most blasphemous iconoclast living . ' that , ' say my phrenologist , ' be because of his large ideality , which prevent he from find anything perfect enough to be venerate . ' of course I put my ear down and wag my tail at that stroking . " 

 " yes , yes ; I have have my own head explore with somewhat similar result . it be , I fear , but a vain show of fulfil the heathen precept , ' know thyself , ' and too often lead to a self - estimate which will subsist in the absence of that fruit by which alone the quality 62   of the tree be make evident . nevertheless Esther , my dear , this be Mr. Holt , whose acquaintance I have now be make with more than ordinary interest . he will take tea with we . " 

 Esther bow slightly as she walk across the room to fetch the candle and place it near her tray . Felix rise and bow , also with an air of indifference , which be perhaps exaggerate by the fact that he be inwardly surprised . the minister 's daughter be not the sort of person he expect . she be quite incongruous with his notion of minister ' daughter in general ; and though he have expect something nowise delightful , the incongruity repel he . a very delicate scent , the faint suggestion of a garden , be waft as she go . he would not observe she , but he have a sense of an elastic walk , the tread of small foot , a long neck and a high crown of shin brown plait and curl that float backward thing , in short , that suggest a fine lady to he , and determine he to notice she as little as possible . a fine lady be always a sort of spin - glass affair not natural , and with no beauty for he as art ; but a fine lady as the daughter of this rusty old Puritan be especially offensive . 

 " nevertheless , " continue Mr. Lyon , who rarely let drop any thread of discourse , " that phrenological science be not irreconcilable with the revealed dispensation . and it be undeniable that we have our vary native disposition which even grace will not obliterate . I myself , from my youth up , have be give to question too curiously concern the truth to examine and sift the medicine of the soul rather than to apply it . " 

 " if your truth happen to be such medicine as Holt 's Pills and Elixir , the less you swallow of it the well , " say Felix . " but truth - vendor and medicine - vendor usually recommend swallowing . when a man see his livelihood in a pill or a proposition , he like to have order for the dose , and not curious enquiry . " 

 this speech verge on rudeness , but it be deliver with a brusque openness that imply the absence of any personal intention . the minister 's daughter be now for the first time startle into look at Felix . but her survey of this unusual speaker be soon make , and she relieve her father from the need to reply by say 

 " the tea be pour out , father . " 

 that be the signal for Mr. Lyon to advance toward the table , raise his right hand , and ask a blessing at sufficient length for Esther to 63   glance at the visitor again . there seem to be no danger of his look at she : he be observe her father . she have time to remark that he be a peculiar look person , but not insignificant , which be the quality that most hopelessly consign a man to perdition . he be massively build . the striking point in his face be large clear gray eye and full lip . 

 " will you draw up to the table , Mr. Holt ? " say the minister . 

 in the act of rise , Felix push back his chair too suddenly against the rickety table close by he , and down go the blue - frille work - basket , fly open , and disperse on the floor reel , thimble , muslin - work , a small seal bottle of attar of rose , and something heavy than these a duodecimo volume which fall near he between the table and the fender . 

 " oh , my star ! " say Felix , " I beg your pardon . " Esther have already start up , and with wonderful quickness have pick up half the small rolling thing while Felix be lift the basket and the book . this last have open , and have its leaf crush in fall ; and , with the instinct of a bookish man , he see nothing more press to be do than to flatten the corner of the leaf . 

 " Byron 's Poems ! " he say , in a tone of disgust , while Esther be recover all the other article . " ' the Dream ' he would well have be asleep and snore . what ! do you stuff your memory with Byron , Miss Lyon ? " 

 Felix on his side , be lead at last to look straight at Esther , but it be with a strong denunciatory and pedagogic intention . of course he see more clearly than ever that she be a fine lady . 

 she redden , draw up her long neck , and say , as she retreat to her chair again 

 " I have a great admiration for Byron . " 

 Mr. Lyon have pause in the act of draw his chair to the tea table , and be look on at this scene , wrinkle the corner of his eye with a perplexed smile . Esther would not have wish he to know anything about the volume of Byron , but she be too proud to show any concern . 

 " he be a worldly and vain writer , I fear , " say Mr. Lyon . he know scarcely anything of the poet , whose book embody the faith and ritual of many young lady and gentleman . 

 " a misanthropic debauchee , " say Felix , lift a chair with one hand , and hold the book open in the other , " whose notion of a hero be 64   that he should disorder his stomach and despise mankind . his corsair and renegade , his Alps and Manfreds , be the most paltry puppet that be ever pull by the string of lust and pride . " 

 " hand the book to I , " say Mr. Lyon . 

 " let I beg of you to put it aside till after tea , father , " say Esther . " however objectionable Mr. Holt may find its page , they would certainly be make bad by be grease with bread - and - butter . " 

 " that be true , my dear , " say Mr. Lyon , lay down the book on the small table behind he . he see that his daughter be angry . 

 " Ho , ho ! " think Felix , " her father be frightened at she . how come he to have such a nice - step , long - neck peacock for his daughter ? but she shall see that I be not frightened . " then he say aloud , " I should like to know how you will justify your admiration for such a writer , Miss Lyon . " 

 " I should not attempt it with you , Mr. Holt , " say Esther . " you have such strong word at command that they make the small argument seem formidable . if I have ever meet the giant Cormoran , I should have make a point of agree with he in his literary opinion . " 

 Esther have that excellent thing in woman , a soft voice with clear fluent utterance . her sauciness be always charming because it be without emphasis , and be accompany with graceful little turn of the head . 

 Felix laugh at her thrust with young heartiness . 

 " my daughter be a critic of word , Mr. Holt , " say the minister , smile complacently , " and often correct mine on the ground of nicety , which I profess be as dark to I as if they be the report of a sixth sense which I possess not . I be an eager seeker for precision , and would fain find language subtle enough to follow the utmost intricacy of the soul 's pathway , but I see not why a round word that mean some object , make and bless by the Creator , should be brand and banish as a malefactor . " 

 " oh , your nicety I know what they be , " say Felix , in his usual fortissimo . " they will go on your system of make - believe . ' Rottenness ' may suggest what be unpleasant , so you would well say ' sugar - plum , ' or something else such a long way off the fact that nobody be oblige to think of it . those be your roundabout euphuism that dress up swindling till it look as well as honesty , and shoot with boil pea instead of bullet . I hate your gentlemanly speaker . " 

  65 

 " then you would not like Mr. Jermyn , I think , " say Esther . " that remind I , father , that to - day , when I be give Miss Louisa Jermyn her lesson , Mr. Jermyn come in and speak to I with grand politeness , and ask I at what time you be likely to be disengage , because he wish to make your well acquaintance , and consult you on matter of importance . he never take the least notice of I before . can you guess the reason of his sudden ceremoniousness ? " 

 " Nay , child , " say the minister , ponderingly . 

 " Politics , of course , " say Felix . " he be on some committee . an election be come . universal peace be declare , and the fox have a sincere interest in prolong the life of the poultry . eh , Mr. Lyon ? be not   that it ? " 

 " Nay , not so . he be the close ally of the Transome family , who be blind hereditary Tories like the Debarrys , and will drive their tenant to the poll as if they be sheep , and it have even be hint that the heir who be come from the East may be another Tory candidate , and coalesce with the young debarry . it be say that he have enormous wealth , and could purchase every vote in the county that have a price . " 

 " he be come , " say Esther . " I hear Miss Jermyn tell her sister that she have see he go out of her father 's room . " 

 " ' tis strange , " say Mr. Lyon . 

 " something extraordinary must have happen , " say Esther , " for Mr. Jermyn to intend court we . Miss Jermyn say to I only the other day that she could not think how I come to be so well educated and ladylike . she always think dissenter be ignorant , vulgar people . I say , so they be , usually , and Church people also in small town . she consider herself a judge of what be ladylike , and she be vulgarity personify with large foot , and the most odious scent on her handkerchief , and a bonnet that look like ' the Fashion ' print in capital letter . " 

 " one sort of fine - ladyism be as good as another , " say Felix . 

 " no , indeed . pardon I , " say Esther . " a real fine - lady do not wear clothe that flare in people 's eye , or use importunate scent , or make a noise as she move : she be something refined and graceful , and charming , and never obtrusive . " 

 " oh , yes , " say Felix , contemptuously . " and she read Byron also , and admire Childe Harold gentleman of unspeakable woe , who employ a hairdresser , and look seriously at themselves in the glass . " 

  66 

 Esther redden , and give a little toss . Felix go on triumphantly . " a fine - lady be a squirrel - head thing , with small air , and small notion , about as applicable to the business of life as a pair of tweezer to the clearing of a forest . ask your father what those old persecute emigrant Puritans would have do with fine - lady wife and daughter . " 

 " oh , there be no danger of such mťsalliance , " say Esther . " man who be unpleasant companion and make fright of themselves , be sure to get wife tasteless enough to suit they . " 

 " Esther , my dear , " say Mr. Lyon , " let not your playfulness betray you into disrespect toward those venerable pilgrim . they struggle and endure in order to cherish and plant anew the seed of a scriptural doctrine and of a pure discipline . " 

 " yes , I know , " say Esther , hastily , dread a discourse on the pilgrim father . 

 " oh , they be an ugly lot ! " Felix burst in , make Mr. Lyon start . " Miss Medora would not   have mind if they have all be put into the pillory and lose their ear . she would have say , ' their ear do stick out so . ' I should not   wonder if that be a bust of one of they . " here Felix , with sudden keenness of observation , nod at the black bust with the gauze over its colored face . 

 " no , " say Mr. Lyon , " that be the eminent George Whitfield , who , you well know , have a gift of oratory as of one on whom the tongue of flame have rest visibly . but Providence doubtless for wise end in relation to the inner man , for I would not enquire too closely into minutia which carry too many plausible interpretation for any one of they to be stable Providence , I say , ordain that the good man should squint ; and my daughter have not yet learn to bear with his infirmity . " 

 " she have put a veil over it . suppose you have squint yourself ? " say Felix , look at Esther . 

 " then , doubtless , you could have be more polite to I , Mr. Holt , " say Esther , rise and place herself at her work - table . " you seem to prefer what be unusual and ugly . " 

 " a peacock ! " think Felix . " I should like to come and scold she every day , and make her cry and cut her fine hair off . " 

 Felix rise to go , and say , " I will not take up any more of your valuable time , Mr. Lyon . I know that you have not many spare evening . " 

  67 

 " that be true , my young friend ; for I now go to Sproxton one evening in the week . I do not despair that we may some day need a chapel there , though the hearer do not multiply save among the woman , and there be no work as yet begin among the miner themselves . I shall be glad of your company in my walk thither to - morrow at five o'clock , if you would like to see how that population have grow of late year . " 

 " oh , I have   be to Sproxton already several time . I have a congregation of my own there last Sunday evening . " 

 " what ! do you preach ? " say Mr. Lyon , with brightened glance . 

 " not exactly . I go to the ale - house . " 

 Mr. Lyon start . " I trust you be put a riddle to I , young man , even as Samson do to his companion . from what you say but lately , it can not be that you be give to tipple and to tavern . " 

 " oh , I do not   drink much . I order a pint of beer , and I get into talk with the fellow over their pot and pipe . somebody must take a little knowledge and common - sense to they in this way , else how be they to get it ? I go for educate the non - elector , so I put myself in the way of my pupil my academy be the beer - house . I will walk with you to - morrow with pleasure . " 

 " do so , do so , " say Mr. Lyon , shake hand with his odd acquaintance . " we shall understand each other well by - and - by , I doubt not . " 

 " I wish you good - evening , Miss Lyon . " 

 Esther bow very slightly , without speak . 

 " that be a singular young man , Esther , " say the minister , walk about after Felix be go . " I discern in he a love for whatsoever thing be honest and true , which I would fain believe to be an earnest of further endowment with the wisdom that be from on high . it be true that , as the traveller in the desert be often lure , by a false vision of water and freshness , to turn aside from the track which lead to the try and establish fountain , so the Evil One will take advantage of a natural yearning toward the well , to delude the soul with a self - flattering belief in a visionary virtue , high than the ordinary fruit of the Spirit . but I trust it be not so here . I feel a great enlargement in this young man 's presence , notwithstanding a certain license in his language , which I shall use my effort to correct . " 

 " I think he be very coarse and rude , " say Esther , with a touch of temper in her voice . " but he speak well English than most of 68   our visitor . what be his occupation ? " 

 " watch and clock making , by which , together with a little teaching , as I understand , he hop to maintain his mother , not think it right that he should live by the sale of medicine whose virtue he distrust . it be no common scruple . " 

 " dear I , " say Esther , " I think he be something high than that . " she be disappoint . 

 Felix , on his side , as he stroll out in the evening air , say to himself : " now by what fine mesh of circumstance do that queer devout old man , with his awful creed , which make this world a vestibule with double door to hell , and a narrow stair on one side whereby the thin sort may mount to heaven by what subtle play of flesh and spirit do he come to have a daughter so little in his own likeness ? marry foolishly , I suppose . I will never marry , though I should have to live on raw turnip to subdue my flesh . I will never look back and say , ' I have a fine purpose once I mean to keep my hand clean and my soul upright , and to look truth in the face ; but pray excuse I , I have a wife and child I must lie and simper a little , else they will starve ' ; or ' my wife be nice , she must have her bread well butter , and her feeling will be hurt if she be not think genteel . ' that be the lot Miss Esther be prepare for some man or other . I could grind my tooth at such self - satisfy minx , who think they can tell everybody what be the correct thing , and the utmost stretch of their idea will not place they on a level with the intelligent flea . I should like to see if she could be make ashamed of herself . " 

 CHAPTER VI . 

 though she be dead , yet let I think she live , 
 and feed my mind , that die for want of she . 
  Marlowe : tamburlaine the great . 
 hardly any one in Treby who think at all of Mr. Lyon and his daughter have not feel the same sort of wonder about Esther as Felix feel . she be not much like by her father 's church and congregation . the less serious observe that she have too many air and grace and hold her head much too high ; the strict sort fear greatly that Mr. Lyon have not be sufficiently careful in place his daughter among God - fear people , and that , be lead astray by the melancholy vanity of give she exceptional accomplishment , he have send she to a french school , and allow she to take situation where she have contract notion not 69   only above her own rank , but of too worldly a kind to be safe in any rank . but no one know what sort of woman her mother have be , for Mr. Lyon never speak of his past domesticity . when he be choose as pastor at Treby in 1825 , it be understand that he have be a widower many year , and he have no companion but the tearful and much - exercise Lyddy , his daughter be still at school . it be only two year ago that Esther have come home to live permanently with her father , and take pupil in the town . within that time she have excite a passion in two young dissenting breast that be clothe in the good style of Treby waistcoat a garment which at that period display much design both in the stuff and the wearer ; and she have secure an astonished admiration of her cleverness from the girl of various age who be her pupil ; indeed , her knowledge of French be generally hold to give a distinction to Treby itself as compare with other market - town . but she have win little regard of any other kind . wise dissent matron be divide between fear lest their son should want to marry she and resentment that she should treat those " undeniable " young man with a distant scorn which be hardly to be tolerate in a minister 's daughter ; not only because that parentage appear to entail an obligation to show an exceptional degree of christian humility , but because , look at from a secular point of view , a poor minister must be below the substantial householder who keep he . for at that time the preacher who be pay under the Voluntary system be regard by his flock with feeling not less mixed than the spiritual person who still take his tithe - pig or his modus . his gift be admire , and tear be shed under good bonnet at his sermon ; but the weak tea be think good enough for he ; and even when he go to preach a charity sermon in a strange town , he be treat with home - make wine and the small bedroom . as the good Churchman 's reverence be often mix with growling , and be apt to be give chiefly to an abstract parson who be what a parson ought to be , so the good Dissenter sometimes mix his approval of ministerial gift with considerable criticism and cheapening of the human vessel which contain those treasure . Mrs. Muscat and Mrs. Nuttwood apply the principle of christian equality by remark that Mr. Lyon have his oddity , and that he ought not to allow his daughter to indulge in such unbecoming expenditure on her glove , shoe , and hosiery , even if she do pay for they out of her earning . as for the Church people who 70   engage Miss Lyon to give lesson in their family , their imagination be altogether prostrate by the incongruity between accomplishment and Dissent , between weekly prayer - meeting and a conversance with so lively and altogether worldly a language as the French . Esther 's own mind be not free from a sense of irreconcilableness between the object of her taste and the condition of her lot . she know that Dissenters be look down upon by those whom she regard as the most refined class ; her favorite companion , both in France and at an english school where she have be a junior teacher , have think it quite ridiculous to have a father who be a dissenting preacher ; and when an ardently admire school - fellow induce her parent to take Esther as a governess to the young child , all her native tendency toward luxury , fastidiousness , and scorn of mock gentility , be strengthen by witness the habit of a well - bear and wealthy family . yet the position of servitude be irksome to she , and she be glad at last to live at home with her father , for though , throughout her girlhood , she have wish to avoid this lot , a little experience have teach she to prefer its comparative independence . but she be not content with her life ; she seem to herself to be surround with ignoble , uninteresting condition , from which there be no issue ; for even if she have be unamiable enough to give her father pain deliberately , it would have be no satisfaction to she to go to Treby church , and visibly turn she back on Dissent . it be not religious difference , but social difference , that Esther be concern about , and her ambitious taste would have be no more gratified in the society of the Waces than in that of the Muscats . the Waces speak imperfect English and play whist ; the Muscats speak the same dialect and take in the " Evangelical Magazine . " Esther like neither of these amusement . she have one of those exceptional organization which be quick and sensitive without be in the least morbid ; she be alive to the fine shade of manner , to the nice distinction of tone and accent ; she have a little code of her own about scent and color , texture and behavior , by which she secretly condemn or sanction all thing and person . and she be well satisfied with herself for her fastidious taste , never doubt that her be the high standard . she be proud that the well - bear 71   and handsome girl at school have always say that she might be take for a bear lady . her own pretty instep , clothe in a silk stocking , her little heel , just rise from a kid slipper , her irreproachable nail and delicate wrist , be the object of delighted consciousness to she ; and she feel that it be her superiority which make she unable to use without disgust any but the fine cambric handkerchief and freshest glove . her money all go in the gratification of these nice taste , and she save nothing from her earning . I can not say that she have pang of conscience on this score ; for she feel sure that she be generous : she hat all meanness , would empty her purse impulsively on some sudden appeal to her pity , and if she find out that her father have a want , she would supply it with some pretty device of a surprise . but then the good man so seldom have a want except the perpetual desire , which she could never gratify , of see she under conviction , and fit to become a member of the church . 

 as for little Mr. Lyon , he love and admire this unregenerate child more , he fear , than be consistent with the due preponderance of impersonal and ministerial regard : he pray and plead for she with tear , humble himself for her spiritual deficiency in the privacy of his study ; and then come down stair to find himself in timorous subjection to her wish , lest , as he inwardly say , he should give his teaching an ill savor , by mingle it with outward crossing . there will be queen in spite of salic or other law of later date than Adam and Eve ; and here in this small dingy house of the minister in Malthouse Yard , there be a light - footed , sweet - voice Queen Esther . 

 the strong will always rule , say some , with an air of confidence which be like a lawyer 's flourish , forbid exception or addition . but what be strength ? be it blind wilfulness that see no terror , no many - link consequence , no bruise and wound of those whose cord it tighten ? be it the narrowness of a brain that conceive no need differ from its own , and look to no result beyond the bargain of to - day ; that tug with emphasis for every small purpose , and think it weakness to exercise the sublime power of resolve renunciation ? there be a sort of subjection which be the peculiar heritage of largeness and of love ; and strength be often only another name for willing bondage to irremediable weakness . 

 Esther have affection for her father : she recognize the purity of his character , and a quickness of intellect in he which respond to her 72   own liveliness , in spite of what seem a dreary piety , which select everything that be least interesting and romantic in life and history . but his old clothe have a smoky odor , and she do not like to walk with he , because , when people speak to he in the street , it be his will not , instead of remark on the weather and pass on , to pour forth in an absent manner some reflection that be occupy his mind about the trace of the divine government , or about a peculiar incident narrate in the life of the eminent Mr. Richard Baxter . Esther have a horror of appear ridiculous even in the eye of vulgar Trebians . she fancy that she should have love her mother well than she be able to love her father ; and she wish she could have remember that mother more thoroughly . 

 but she have no more than a broken vision of the time before she be five year old the time when the word oftenest on her lip be " Mamma " ; when a low voice speak caress french word to she , and she in her turn repeat the word to her rag doll ; when a very small white hand , different from any that come after , use to pat she , and stroke she , and tie on her frock and pinafore , and when at last there be nothing but sit with a doll on a bed where mamma be lie , till her father once carry she away . where distinct memory begin , there be no long the low caress voice and the small white hand . she know that her mother be a Frenchwoman , that she have be in want and distress , and that her maiden name be Annette Ledru . her father have tell she no more than this ; and once , he have say , " my Esther , until you be a woman , we will only think of your mother : when you be about to be marry and leave I , we will speak of she , and I will deliver to you her ring and all that be her ; but , without a great command lay upon I , I can not pierce my heart by speak of that which be and be not . " Esther have never forget these word , and the old she become , the more impossible she feel it that she should urge her father with question about the past . 

 his inability to speak of that past to she depend on manifold cause . partly it come from an initial concealment . he have not the courage to tell Esther that he be not really her father : he have not the courage to renounce that hold on her tenderness which the belief in his natural fatherhood must help to give he , or to incur any resentment that her quick spirit might feel at have be bring up under a false 73   supposition . but there be other thing yet more difficult for he to be quite open about deep sorrow of his life as a christian minister that be hardly to be tell to a girl . 

 twenty - two year ago , when Rufus Lyon be no more than thirty - six year old , he be the admired pastor of a large independent congregation in one of our southern seaport town . he be unmarried , and have meet all exhortation of friend who represent to he that a bishop , i.e. , the overseer of an independent church and congregation should be the husband of one wife , by say that St. Paul mean this particular as a limitation , and not as an injunction ; that a minister be permit to have one wife , but that he , Rufus Lyon , do not wish to avail himself of that permission , find his study and other labor of his vocation all - absorbing , and see that mother in Israel be sufficiently provide by those who have not be set apart for a more special work . his church and congregation be proud of he : he be put forward on platform , be make a " deputation , " and be request to preach anniversary sermon in far - off town . wherever noteworthy preacher be discuss , Rufus Lyon be almost sure to be mention as one who do honor to the Independent body ; his sermon be say to be full of fire ; and while he have more of human knowledge than many of his brother , he show in an eminent degree the mark of a true ministerial vocation . but on a sudden this burn and shin light seem to be quench : Mr. Lyon voluntarily resign his charge and withdraw from the town . 

 a terrible crisis have come upon he ; a moment in which religious doubt and newly - awaken passion have rush together in a common flood , and have paralyze his ministerial gift . his thirty - six year have be a story of purely religious and studious fervor ; his passion have be for doctrine , for argumentative conquest on the side of right ; the sin he have chiefly to pray against have be those of personal ambition   under such form as ambition take in the mind of a man who have choose the career of an independent preacher , and those of a too restless intellect , ceaselessly urge question concern the mystery of that which be assuredly reveal , and thus hinder the due nourishment of the soul on the substance of the truth deliver . even at that time of comparative youth , his unworldliness and simplicity in small matter   for he be keenly awake to the large affair of this world   give a certain oddity to his manner and appearance ; and though his sensitive face have much beauty , his person altogether seem so irrelevant to a fashionable view of thing , that well - dress lady and gentleman 74   usually laugh at he , as they probably do at Mr. John Milton after the Restoration and ribbon have come in , and still more at that apostle , of weak bodily presence , who preach in the back street of Ephesus and elsewhere , a new view of a religion that hardly anybody believe in . Rufus Lyon be the singular - look apostle of the Meeting in Skipper 's Lane . be it likely that any romance should befall such a man ? perhaps not ; but romance do befall he . 

 one winter 's evening in 1812 , Mr. Lyon be return from a village preaching . he walk at his usual rapid rate , with busy thought undisturbe by any sight more distinct than the bush and the hedgerow tree , black beneath a faint moonlight , until something suggest to he that he have perhaps omit to bring away with he a thin account - book in which he record certain subscription . he pause , unfasten his outer coat , and feel in all his pocket , then he take off his hat and look inside it . the book be not to be find , and he be about to walk on , when he be startle by hear a low , sweet voice , say , with a strong foreign accent 

 " have pity on I , sir . " 

 search with his short - sighted eye , he perceive some one on a side - bank ; and approach , he find a young woman with a baby on her lap . she speak again more faintly than before . 

 " Sir , I die with hunger ; in the name of God take the little one . " 

 there be no distrusting the pale face and the sweet low voice . without pause , Mr. Lyon take the baby in his arm and say , " can you walk by my side , young woman ? " 

 she rise , but seem tottering . " lean on I , " say Mr. Lyon , and so they walk slowly on , the minister for the first time in his life carry a baby . 

 nothing well occur to he than to take his charge to his own house ; it be the simple way of relieve the woman 's want , and find out how she could be help far ; and he think of no other possibility . she be too feeble for more word to be speak between they till she be seat by his fireside . his elderly servant be not easily amazed at anything her master do in the way of charity , and at once take the baby , while Mr. Lyon unfasten the mother 's damp bonnet and shawl , and give she something warm to drink . then , wait by she till it be time to offer she more , he have nothing to do but to notice 75   the loveliness of her face , which seem to he as that of an angel , with a benignity in its repose that carry a more assured sweetness than any smile . gradually she revive , lift up her delicate hand between her face and the firelight , and look at the baby which lie opposite to she on the old servant 's lap , take in spoonful with much content , and stretch out naked foot toward the warmth . then , as her consciousness of relief grow into contrast memory , she lift up her eye to Mr. Lyon , who stand close by she , and say , in her pretty broken way : 

 " I know you have a good heart when you take your hat off . you seem to I as the image of the bien - amiť Saint Jean . " 

 the grateful glance of those blue - gray eye , with their long shadow - make eyelash , be a new kind of good to Rufus Lyon ; it seem to he as if a woman have never really look at he before . yet this poor thing be apparently a blind french Catholic of delicate nurture , surely , judge from her hand . he be in a tremor ; he feel that it would be rude to question she , and he only urge she now to take a little food . she accept it with evident enjoyment , look at the child continually , and then , with a fresh burst of gratitude , lean forward to press the servant 's hand and say , " oh , you be good ! " then she look up at Mr. Lyon again and say , " be there in the world a pretty marmot ? " 

 the evening pass ; a bed be make up for the strange woman , and Mr. Lyon have not ask she so much as her name . he never go to bed himself that night . he spend it in misery , endure a horrible assault of Satan . he think a frenzy have seize he . wild vision of an impossible future thrust themselves upon he . he dread lest the woman have a husband ; he wish that he might call she his own , that he might worship her beauty , that she might love and caress he . and what to the mass of man would have be only one of many allowable folly a transient fascination , to be dispel by daylight and contact with those common fact of which common - sense be the reflex be to he a spiritual convulsion . he be as one who rave , and know that he rave . these mad wish be irreconcilable with what he be , and must be , as a christian minister , nay , penetrate his soul as tropic heat penetrate the frame , and change for it all aspect and all flavor , they be irreconcilable with that conception of the world which make his faith . all the busy 76   doubt which have before be mere impish shadow flit around a belief that be strong with the strength of an unswerve moral bias , have now gather blood and substance . the questioning spirit have become suddenly bold and blasphemous ; it no long insinuate scepticism it prompt defiance ; it no long express cool , inquisitive thought , but be the voice of a passionate mood . yet he never cease to regard it as the voice of the tempter : the conviction which have be the law of his well life remain within he as a conscience . 

 the struggle of that night be an abridgment of all the struggle that come after . quick soul have their intense life in the first anticipatory sketch of what may or will be , and the pursuit of their wish be the pursuit of that paradisiacal vision which only impel they , and be leave far and far behind , vanish forever even out of hope in the moment which be call success . 

 the next morning Mr. Lyon hear his guest 's history . she be the daughter of a french officer of considerable rank , who have fall in the russian campaign . she have escape from France to England with much difficulty in order to rejoin her husband , a young Englishman , to whom she have become attach during his detention as a prisoner of war on parole at Vesoul , where she be live under the charge of some relative , and to whom she have be marry without the consent of her family . her husband have serve in the hanoverian army , have obtain his discharge in order to visit England on some business , with the nature of which she be not acquaint , and have be take prisoner as a suspect spy . a short time after their marriage he and his fellow - prisoner have be move to a town nearer the coast , and she have remain in wretched uncertainty about he , until at last a letter have come from he tell she that an exchange of prisoner have occur , that he be in England , that she must use her utmost effort to follow he , and that on arrive on english ground she must send he word under a cover which he enclose , bear an address in London . fear the opposition of her friend , she start unknown to they , with a very small supply of money ; and after endure much discomfort and many fear in wait for a passage which she at last get in a small trading smack , she arrive at Southampton ill . before she be able to write , her baby be bear ; and before her husband 's answer come , she have be oblige to pawn some clothe and trinket . he desire she to travel to London where he would meet she at the Belle Sauvage , add that he be himself in distress , 77   and unable to come to she : when once she be in London they would take ship and quit the country . arrive at the Belle Sauvage , the poor thing wait three day in vain for her husband : on the fourth a letter come in a strange hand , say that in his last moment he have desire this letter to be write to inform she of his death , and recommend she to return to her friend . she could choose no other course , but she have soon be reduce to walk , that she might save her pence to buy bread with : and on the evening when she make her appeal to Mr. Lyon , she have pawn the last thing , over and above needful clothing , that she could persuade herself to part with . the thing she have not bear to part with be her marriage - ring , and a locket contain her husband 's hair , and bear his baptismal name . this locket , she say , exactly resemble one wear by her husband on his watch - chain , only that his bore the name Annette , and contain a lock of her hair . the precious trifle now hang round her neck by a cord , for she have sell the small gold chain which formerly hold it . 

 the only guarantee of this story , besides the exquisite candor of her face , be a small packet of paper which she carry in her pocket , consist of her husband 's few letter , the letter which announce his death , and her marriage certificate . it be not so probable a story as that of many an inventive vagrant ; but Mr. Lyon do not doubt it for a moment . it be impossible to he to suspect this angelic - faced woman , but he have strong suspicion concern her husband . he could not help be glad that she have not retain the address he have desire she to send to in London , as that remove any obvious mean of learn particular about he . but enquiry might have be make at Vesoul by letter , and her friend there might have be appeal to . a consciousness , not to be quite silence , tell Mr. Lyon that this be the course he ought to take , but it would have require an energetic self - conquest , and he be excuse from it by Annette 's own disinclination to return to her relative , if any other acceptable possibility could be find . 

 he dread , with a violence of feeling which surmount all struggle , lest anything should take she away , and place such barrier between they as would make it unlikely or impossible that she should ever love he well enough to become his wife . yet he see with perfect clearness that unless he tear up his mad passion by the root , his ministerial 78   usefulness would be frustrate , and the repose of his soul would be destroy . this woman be an unregenerate Catholic ; ten minute ' listen to her artless talk make that plain to he : even if her position have be less equivocal , to unite himself to such a woman be nothing less than a spiritual fall . it be already a fall that he have wish there be no high purpose to which he owe an allegiance that he have long to fly to some backwood where there be no church to reproach he , and where he might have this sweet woman to wife , and to know the joy of tenderness . those sensibility which in most life be diffuse equally through the youthful year , be arouse suddenly in Mr. Lyon , as some man have their special genius reveal to they by a tardy concurrence of condition . his love be the first love of a fresh young heart full of wonder and worship . but what to one man be the virtue which he have sink below the possibility of aspire to , be to another the backsliding by which he forfeit his spiritual crown . 

 the end be , that Annette remain in his house . he have strive against himself so far as to represent her position to some chief matron in his congregation , pray and yet dread that they would so take she by the hand as to impose on he that denial of his own longing not to let she go out of his sight , which he find it too hard to impose on himself . but they regard the case coldly ; the woman be , after all , a vagrant . Mr. Lyon be observe to be surprisingly weak on the subject his eagerness seem disproportionate and unbecoming ; and this young Frenchwoman , unable to express herself very clearly , be no more interesting to those matron and their husband than other pretty young woman suspiciously circumstance . they be willing to subscribe something to carry she on her way , or if she take some lodging they would give she a little sewing , and endeavor to convert she from Papistry . if , however , she be a respectable person , as she say , the only proper thing for she be to go back to her own country and friend . in spite of himself , Mr. Lyon exult . there seem a reason now that he should keep Annette under his own eye . he tell himself that no real object would be serve by his provide food and lodge for she elsewhere an expense which he could ill afford . and she be apparently so helpless , except as to the one task of attend to her baby , that it would have be folly to think of she exert herself for her own support . 

  79 

 but this course of his be severely disapprove by his church . there be various sign that the minister be under some evil influence : his preaching want its old fervor , he seem to shun the intercourse of his brother , and very mournful suspicion be entertain . a formal remonstrance be present to he , but he meet it as if he have already determine to act in anticipation of it . he admit that external circumstance , conjoin with a peculiar state of mind , be likely to hinder the fruitful exercise of his ministry , and he resign it . there be much sorrow , much expostulation , but he declare that for the present he be unable to unfold himself more fully ; he only wish to state solemnly that Annette Ledru , though blind in spiritual thing , be in a worldly sense a pure and virtuous woman . no more be to be say , and he depart to a distant town . here he maintain himself , Annette and the child , with the remainder of his stipend , and with the wage he earn as a printer 's reader . Annette be one of those angelic - faced helpless woman who take all thing as manna from heaven : the good image of the well - beloved Saint John wish she to stay with he , and there be nothing else that she wish for except the unattainable . yet for a whole year Mr. Lyon never dare to tell Annette that he love she : he tremble before this woman ; he see that the idea of his be her lover be too remote from her mind for she to have any idea that she ought not to live with he . she have never know , never ask the reason why he give up his ministry . she seem to entertain as little concern about the strange world in which she live as a bird in its nest : an avalanche have fall over the past , but she sit warm and uncrushe there be food for many morrow , and her baby flourish . she do not seem even to care about a priest , or about have her child baptize ; and on the subject of religion Mr. Lyon be as timid , and shrink as much from speak to she , as on the subject of his love . he dread anything that might cause she to feel a sudden repulsion toward he . he dread disturb her simple gratitude and content . in these day his religious faith be not slumber ; it be awake and achingly conscious of have fall in a struggle . he have have a great treasure commit to he , and have fling it away : he hold himself a backslider . his unbelieve thought never gain the full ear and consent of his soul . his prayer have be stifle by the sense that there be something he prefer 80   to complete obedience ; they have cease to be anything but intermittent cry and confession , and a submissive presentiment , rise at time even to an entreaty , that some great discipline might come , that the dull spiritual sense might be rouse to full vision and hearing as of old , and the supreme fact become again supreme in his soul . Mr. Lyon will perhaps seem a very simple personage , with pitiably narrow theory ; but none of our theory be quite large enough for all the disclosure of time , and to the end of man 's struggle a penalty will remain for those who sink from the rank of the hero into the crowd for whom the hero fight and die . 

 one day , however , Annette learn Mr. Lyon 's secret . the baby have a tooth come , and be large and strong now , be noisily fretful . Mr. Lyon , though he have be work extra hour and be much in need of repose , take the child from its mother immediately on enter the house and walk about with it , pat and talk soothingly to it . the strong grasp , the new sensation , be a successful anodyne , and baby go to sleep on his shoulder . but fearful lest any movement should disturb it , he sit down , and endure the bondage of hold it still against his shoulder . 

 " you do nurse baby well , " say Annette , approvingly . " yet you never nurse before I come ? " 

 " no , " say Mr. Lyon . " I have no brother and sister . " 

 " why be you not marry ? " Annette have never think of ask that question before . 

 " because I never love any woman till now . I think I should never marry . now I wish to marry . " 

 Annette start . she do not see at once that she be the woman he want to marry ; what have flash on her mind be , that there might be a great change in Mr. Lyon 's life . it be as if the lightning have enter into her dream and half awake she . 

 " do you think it foolish , Annette , that I should wish to marry ? " 

 " I do not expect it , " she say , doubtfully . " I do not know you think about it . " 

 " you know the woman I should like to marry ? " 

 " I know she ? " she say , interrogatively , blush deeply . 

 " it be you , Annette you whom I have love well than my duty . I forsook everything for you . " 

 Mr. Lyon pause : he be about to do what he feel would be ignoble to urge what seem like a claim . 

  81 

 " can you love I , Annette ? will you be my wife ? " Annette tremble and look miserable . 

 " do not speak forget it , " say Mr. Lyon , rise suddenly and speak with loud energy . " no , no I do not want it I do not wish it . " 

 the baby awake as he start up ; he give the child into Annette 's arm , and leave she . 

 his work take he away early the next morning and the next again . they do not need to speak much to each other . the third day Mr. Lyon be too ill to go to work . his frame have be overwrought ; he have be too poor to have sufficiently nourishing food , and under the shattering of his long defer hope his health have give away . they have no regular servant only occasional help from an old woman , who light the fire and put on the kettle . Annette be force to be the sick - nurse , and this sudden demand on she shake away some of her torpor . the illness be a serious one , and the medical man one day hear Mr. Lyon in his delirium raving with an astonishing fluency in biblical language , suddenly look round with increase curiosity at Annette , and ask if she be the sick man 's wife , or some other relative . 

 " no no relation , " say Annette , shake her head . " he have be good to I . " 

 " how long have you live with he ? " 

 " More than a year . " 

 " be he a preacher once ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " when do he leave off be a preacher ? " 

 " soon after he take care of I . " 

 " be that his child ? " 

 " Sir , " say Annette , color indignantly , " I be a widow . " 

 the doctor , she think , look at she oddly , but he ask no more question . 

 when the sick man be get well , and able to enjoy invalid 's food , he observe one day , while he be take some broth , that Annette be look at he ; he pause to look at she in return , and be strike with a new expression in her face , quite distinct from the merely passive sweetness which usually characterize it . she lay she little hand on his , which be now transparently thin , and say , " I be get very wise ; I have sell some of the book to make money the doctor tell I where ; and I have look into the shop where they sell cap and bonnet and pretty thing , and I can do all that , and get more money to keep we . and when you be well enough to get up , we will go out and be 82   married shall we not ? see ! and la petite "   the baby have never be name anything else   ' shall call you Papa and then we shall never part . " 

 Mr. Lyon tremble . this illness something else , perhaps have make a great change in Annette . a fortnight after that they be marry . the day before he have venture to ask she if she feel any difficulty about her religion , and if she would consent to have la petite baptize and bring up as a protestant . she shake her head and say very simply 

 " no : in France , in other day , I would have mind ; but all be change . I never be fond of religion , but I know it be right . J'aimais les fleur , le bal , la musique , et mon mari qui ťtait beau . but all that be go away . there be nothing of my religion in this country . but the good God must be here , for you be good ; I leave all to you . " 

 it be clear that Annette regard her present life as a sort of death to the world an existence on a remote island where she have be save from wreck . she be too indolent mentally , too little interested , to acquaint herself with any secret of the isle . the transient energy , the more vivid consciousness and sympathy which have be stir in she during Mr. Lyon 's illness , have soon subside into the old apathy to everything except her child . she wither like a plant in strange air , and the three year of life that remain be but a slow and gentle death . those three year be to Mr. Lyon a period of such self - suppression and life in another as few man know . strange ! that the passion for this woman , which he feel to have draw he aside from the right as much as if he have break the most solemn vow for that only be right to he which he hold the good and high the passion for a being who have no glimpse of his thought induce a more thorough renunciation than he have ever know in the time of his complete devotion to his ministerial career . he have no flattery now , either from himself or the world ; he know that he have fall , and his world have forget he , or shake their head at his memory . the only satisfaction he have be the satisfaction of his tenderness which mean untiring work , untire patience , untire wakefulness even to the dumb sign of feeling in a creature whom he alone care for . 

 the day of parting come , and he be leave with little Esther as the one visible sign of that four year ' break in his life . a year afterward he enter the ministry again , and live with the utmost sparingness that 83   Esther might be so educate as to be able to get her own bread in case of his death . her probable facility in acquire French naturally suggest his send she to a french school , which would give she a special advantage as a teacher . it be a protestant school , and french Protestantism have the high recommendation of be non - prelatical . it be understand that Esther would contract no papistical superstition ; and this be perfectly true ; but she contract , as we see , a good deal of non - papistical vanity . 

 Mr. Lyon 's reputation as a preacher and devoted pastor have revive ; but some dissatisfaction begin to be feel by his congregation at a certain laxity detect by they in his view as to the limit of salvation , which he have in one sermon even hint might extend to unconscious recipient of mercy , he have find it desirable seven year ago to quit this ten year ' pastorate and accept a call from the less important church in Malthouse Yard , Treby Magna . 

 this be Rufus Lyon 's history , at that time unknown in its fullness to any human being besides himself . we can perhaps guess what memory they be that relax the stringency of his doctrine on the point of salvation . in the deep of all sens his heart say 

 " though she be dead , yet let I think she live , 
 and feed my mind , that die for want of she . " 
 CHAPTER VII . 

 M.It be but yesterday you speak he well 
 you have   change your mind so soon ? 
 n. not I ' tis he 
 that , change to my thought , have change my mind . 
 no man put rotten apple in his pouch 
 because their upper side look fair to he . 
 Constancy in mistake be constant folly . 
 the news that the rich heir of the Transomes be actually come back , and have be see at Treby , be carry to some one else who have more reason for be interested in it than the Reverend Rufus Lyon be yet conscious of have . it be owe to this that at three o'clock , two day afterward , a carriage and pair , with coachman and footman in crimson and drab , pass through the lodge gate at Transome Court . inside there be a hale , good - natured - look man of sixty , whose hand rest on a knot stick hold between his knee ; and a blue - eye , well - feature lady , fat and middle - aged a mountain of satin , lace , and exquisite muslin embroidery . they be not person of a highly remarkable appearance , but to most Trebians they seem absolutely unique , and likely to be know anywhere . if you have look down upon 84   they from the box of Sampson 's coach , he would have say , after lift his hat , " Sir Maximus and his lady do you see ? " think it needless to add the surname . 

 " we shall find she greatly elated , doubtless , " Lady Debarry be say . " she have be in the shade so long . " 

 " ah , poor thing ! " say Sir Maximus . " a fine woman she be in her bloom . I remember the first county ball she attend we be all ready to fight for the sake of dance with she . I always like she from that time I never swallow the scandal about she myself . " 

 " if we be to be intimate with she , " say Lady Debarry , " I wish you would avoid make such allusion , Sir Maximus . I should not like Selina and Harriet to hear they . " 

 " my dear , I should have forget all about the scandal , only you remind I of it sometimes , " retort the baronet , smile and take out his snuff - box . 

 " these sudden turn of fortune be often dangerous to an excitable constitution , " say Lady Debarry , not choose to notice her husband 's epigram . " Poor Lady Alicia Methurst get heart - disease from a sudden piece of luck the death of her uncle , you know . if Mrs. Transome be wise she would go to town she can afford it now , and consult Dr. Truncheon . I should say myself he would order her digitali : I have often guess exactly what a prescription would be . but it certainly be one of her weak point to think she understand medicine well than other people . " 

 " she be a healthy woman enough , surely : see how upright she be , and she rid about like a girl of twenty . " 

 " she be so thin that she make I shudder . " 

 " Pooh ! she be slim and active ; woman be not bid for by the pound . " 

 " pray do not   be so coarse . " 

 Sir Maximus laugh and show his good tooth , which make his laughter very become . the carriage stop , and they be soon usher to Mrs. Transome 's sit - room , where she be work at her worsted embroidery . a little daily embroidery have be a constant element in Mrs. Transome 's life ; but that soothe occupation of take stitch to produce what neither she nor any one else want , be then the resource of many a well - bear and unhappy woman . 

 she receive much warm congratulation and pressure of her hand with perfect composure of manner ; but she become pale than usual , and her hand turn quite cold . the Debarrys do not yet know what Harold 's politic be . 

  85 

 " well , our lucky youngster be come in the nick of time , " say Sir Maximus : " if he will stand , he and Philip can run in harness together and keep out both the Whigs . " 

 " it be really quite a providential thing his return just now , " say Lady Debarry . " I could not   help think that something would occur to prevent Philip from have such a man as Peter Garstin for his colleague . " 

 " I call my friend Harold a youngster , " say Sir Maximus , " for , you know , I remember he only as he be when that portrait be take . " 

 " that be a long while ago , " say Mrs. Transome . " my son be much alter , as you may imagine . " 

 there be a confused sound of voice in the library while this talk be go on . Mrs. Transome choose to ignore that noise , but her face , from be pale , begin to flush a little . 

 " yes , yes , on the outside , I dare say . but he be a fine fellow I always like he . and if anybody should ask I what I should choose for the good of the country , I could not   have think of anything well than have a young Transome for a neighbor who will take an active part . the Transomes and the Debarrys be always on the right side together in old day . of course he will stand he have make up his mind to it ? " 

 the need for an answer to this embarrassing question be defer by the increase of inarticulate sound accompany by a bark from the library , and the sudden appearance at the tapestry - hang doorway of old Mr. Transome with a cord around his waist , play a very poor - pace horse for a black - man little boy about three year old , who be urge he on with loud encourage noise and occasional thump from a stick which he wield with difficulty . the old man pause with a vague smile at the doorway while the baronet get up to speak to he . Nimrod snuff at his master 's leg to ascertain that he be not hurt , and the little boy , find something new to be look at , let go the cord and come round in front of the company , drag his stick , and stand at a safe war - dancing distance as he fix his great black eye on Lady Debarry . 

 " dear I , what a splendid little boy , Mrs. Transome ! why it can not be can it be that you have the happiness to be a grandmamma ? " 

 " yes ; that be my son 's little boy . " 

 " indeed ! " say Lady Debarry , really amazed . " I never hear you speak of his marriage . he have bring you home a daughter - in - law , then ? " 

  86 

 " no , " say Mrs. Transome , coldly ; ' she be dead . " 

 " o o oh ! " say Lady Debarry , in a tone ludicrously undecide between condolence , satisfaction , and general mistiness . " how very singular I mean that we should not have hear of Mr. Harold 's marriage . but he be a charming little fellow : come to I , you round - cheek cherub . " 

 the black eye continue fix as if by a sort of fascination on Lady Debarry 's face , and her affable invitation be unheeded . at last , put his head forward and pout his lip , the cherub give forth with mark intention the sound , " Nau - o - oom , " many time repeat : apparently they sum up his opinion of Lady Debarry , and may perhaps have mean " naughty old woman , " but his speech be a broken lisping polyglot of hazardous interpretation . then he turn to pull at the Blenheim spaniel , which , be old and peevish , give a little snap . 

 " go , go , Harry ; let poor Puff alone he will bite you , " say Mrs. Transome , stoop to release her aged pet . 

 her word be too suggestive , for Harry immediately lay hold of her arm with his tooth , and bit with all his might . happily the stuff upon it be some protection , but the pain force Mrs. Transome to give a low cry ; and Sir Maximus , who have now turn to reseat himself , shake the little rascal off , whereupon he burst away and trot into the library again . 

 " I fear you be hurt , " say Lady Debarry , with sincere concern . " what a little savage ! do have your arm attend to , my dear I recommend fomentation do not   think of I . " 

 " oh , thank you , it be nothing , " say Mrs. Transome , bite her lip and smile alternately ; " it will soon go off . the pleasure of be a grandmamma , you perceive . the child have take a dislike to I ; but he make quite a new life for Mr. Transome ; they be playfellow at once . " 

 " bless my heart ! " say Sir Maximus , " it be odd to think of Harold have be a family man so long . I make up my mind he be a young bachelor . what an old stager I be , to be sure ! and whom have he marry ? I hope we shall soon have the pleasure of see Mrs. Harold Transome . " Sir Maximus , occupy with old Mr. Transome , have not overhear the previous conversation on that subject . 

 " she be no long live , " Lady Debarry hastily interpose ; " but now , my dear Sir Maximus , we must not hinder Mrs. Transome from attend to her arm . I be sure she be in pain . do not   say another word , my dear we shall see you again you and Mr. Harold will come and dine with we on 87   Thursday say yes , only yes . Sir Maximus be long to see he : and Philip will be down . " 

 " yes , yes ! " say Sir Maximus ; " he must lose no time in make Philip 's acquaintance . tell he Philip be a fine fellow carry everything before he at Oxford . and your son must be return along with he for North Loamshire . you say he mean to stand ? " 

 " I will write and let you know if Harold have any engagement for Thursday ; he would of course be happy otherwise , " say Mrs. Transome , evade the question . 

 " if not Thursday , the next day the very first day he can . " 

 the visitor leave , and Mrs. Transome be almost glad of the painful bite which have save she from be question far about Harold 's politic . " this be the last visit I shall receive from they , " she say to herself as the door close behind they , and she ring for Denner . 

 " that poor creature be not happy , Sir Maximus , " say Lady Debarry as they drive along . " something annoy she about her son . I hope there be nothing unpleasant in his character . either he keep his marriage a secret from she , or she be ashamed of it . he be thirty - four at least by this time . after live in the East so long he may have become a sort of person one would not care to be intimate with , and that savage boy he do not   look like a lady 's child . " 

 " Pooh , my dear , " say Sir Maximus , " woman think so much of those minutia . in the present state of the country it be our duty to look at a man 's position and politic . Philip and my brother be both of that opinion , and I think they know what be right , if any man do . we be bind to regard every man of our party as a public instrument , and to pull all together . the Transomes have always be a good Tory family , but it have be a cipher of late year . this young fellow come back with a fortune to give the family a head and a position be a clear gain to the county ; and with Philip he will get into the right hand of course he want guide , have be out of the country so long . all we have to ask be , whether a man 's a tory , and will make a stand for the good of the country ? that be the plain English of the matter . and I do beg of you , my dear , to set aside all these gossip nicety , and exert yourself , like a woman of sense and spirit as you be , to bring the right people together . " 

 here Sir Maximus give a deep cough , take out his snuff - box , and tap it : he have make a serious marital speech , an exertion to which he be 88   rarely urge by anything small than a matter of conscience . and this outline of the whole duty of a Tory be a matter of conscience with he ; though the Duffield Watchman have point expressly to Sir Maximus Debarry amongst other , in brand the co - operation of the Tories as a conscious selfishness and reckless immorality , which , however , would be defeat by the co - operation of all the friend of truth and liberty , who , the Watchman trust , would subordinate all non - political difference in order to return representative pledge to support the present government . 

 " I be sure , Sir Maximus , " Lady Debarry answer , " you could not have observe that anything be want in my manner to Mrs. Transome . " 

 " no , no , my dear ; but I say this by way of caution . never mind what be do at Smyrna , or whether Transome like to sit with his heel tuck up . we may surely wink at a few thing for the sake of the public interest , if God Almighty do ; and if he do not , I do not   know what would have become of the country Government could never have be carry on , and many a good battle would have be lose . that be the philosophy of the matter , and common - sense too . " 

 good Sir Maximus give a deep cough and tap his box again , inwardly remark , that if he have not be such a lazy fellow he might have make as good a figure as his son Philip . 

 but at this point the carriage , which be roll by a turn toward Treby Magna , pass a well - dress man , who raise his hat to Sir Maximus , and call to the coachman to stop . 

 " excuse I , Sir Maximus , " say this personage , standing uncover at the carriage - door , " but I have just learn something of importance at Treby , which I think you would like to know as soon as possible . " 

 " ah ! what be that ? something about Garstin or Clement ? " say Sir Maximus , see the other draw a poster from his pocket . 

 " no ; rather bad , I fear you will think . a new radical candidate . I get this by a stratagem from the printer 's boy . they be not post yet . " 

 " a Radical ! " say Sir Maximus , in a tone of incredulous disgust , as he take the fold bill . " what fool be he ? he will have no chance . " 

 " they say he be rich than Garstin . " 

 " Harold Transome ! " shout Sir Maximus , as he read the name in three - inch letter . " I do not   believe it it be a trick it be a squib : why why we have   just be to his place eh ? do 89   you know any more ? speak , sir speak ; do not   deal out your story like a damned mountebank , who want to keep people gap . " 

 " Sir Maximus , pray do not   give way so , " say Lady Debarry . 

 " I be afraid there be no doubt about it , sir , " say Christian . " after get the bill , I meet Mr. Labron 's clerk , and he say he have just have the whole story from Jermyn 's clerk . the Ram Inn be engage already , and a committee be be make up . he say Jermyn go like a steam engine , when he have a mind , although he make such long - wind speech . " 

 " Jermyn be hang for a two - faced rascal ! tell Mitchell to drive on . it be of no use to stay chatter here . jump up on the box and go home with we . I may want you . " 

 " you see I be right , Sir Maximus , " say the baronet 's wife . " I have an instinct that we should find he an unpleasant person . " 

 " Fudge ! if you have such a fine instinct , why do you let we go to Transome Court and make fool of ourselves ? " 

 " would you have listen to I ? but of course you will not have he to dine with you ? " 

 " Dine with I ? I should think not . I would soon he should dine off I . I see how it be clearly enough . he have become a regular beast among those Mahometans he be get neither religion nor moral leave . he can not   know any thing about english politic . he will go and cut his own nose off as a landholder , and never know . however , he will not   get in he will spend his money for nothing . " 

 " I fear he be a very licentious man , " say Lady Debarry . " we know now why his mother seem so uneasy . I should think she reflect a little , poor creature . " 

 " it be a confounded nuisance we do not   meet Christian on our way , instead of come back ; but well now than later . he be an uncommonly adroit , useful fellow , that factotum of Philip 's . I wish Phil would take my man and give I Christian . I would make he house - steward : he might reduce the account a little . " 

 perhaps Sir Maximus would not have be so sanguine as to Mr. Christian 's economical virtue if he have see that gentleman relax himself the same evening among the other distinguished dependent of the family and frequenter of the steward 's room . but a man of Sir Maximus 's rank be like those antediluvian animal whom the system of thing condemn to carry such a huge bulk that they really could not 90   inspect their bodily appurtenance , and have no conception of their own tail : their parasite doubtless have a merry time of it , and often do extremely well when the high - breed saurian himself be ill at ease . Treby Manor , measure from the front saloon to the remotest shed , be as large as a moderate - sized village , and there be certainly more light burn in it every evening , more wine , spirit , and ale drunk , more waste and more folly , than could be find in some large village . there be fast revelry in the steward 's room , and slow revelry in the Scotch bailiff 's room ; short whist , costume , and flirtation in the housekeeper 's room , and the same at a low price in the servant ' hall ; a select olympian feast in the private apartment of the cook , who be a much grander person than her ladyship , and wear gold and jewelry to a vast amount of suet ; a gambling group in the stable , and the coachman , perhaps the most innocent member of the establishment , tipple in majestic solitude by a fire in the harness - room . for Sir Maximus , as every one say , be a gentleman of the right sort , condescend to no mean enquiry , greet his head - servant with a " good - evening , gentleman , " when he meet they in the park , and only snarl in a subdue way when he look over the account , willing to endure some personal inconvenience in order to keep up the institution of the country , to maintain his hereditary establishment , and do his duty in that station of life the station of the long - tail saurian to which it have please Providence to call he . 

 the focus of brilliancy at Treby Manor that evening be in no way the dining - room , where Sir Maximus sip his port under some mental depression , as he discuss with his brother , the Reverend Augustus , the sad fact that one of the old name in the county be to be on the wrong side not in the drawing - room , where Miss Debarry and Miss Selina , quietly elegant in their dress and manner , be feel rather dull than otherwise , have finish Mr. Bulwer 's " Eugene Aram , " and be throw back on the last great prose work of Mr. Southey , while their mamma slumber a little on the sofa . no ; the centre of eager talk and enjoyment be the steward 's room , where Mr. Scales , house - steward and head - butler , a man most solicitous about his boot , wristband , the roll of his whisker , and other attribute of a gentleman , distribute cigar , cognac , and whiskey , to various colleague and guest who be discuss , with that freedom of conjecture which be one of our inalienable privilege as Britons , the probable amount of Harold 91   Transome 's fortune , concern which fame have already be busy long enough to have acquire vast magnifying power . 

 the chief part in this scene be undoubtedly Mr. Christian 's , although he have hitherto be comparatively silent ; but he occupy two chair with so much grace , throw his right leg over the seat of the second , and rest his right hand on the back ; he hold his cigar and display a splendid seal - ring with such become nonchalance , and have his gray hair arrange with so much taste , that experienced eye would at once have see even the great Scales himself to be but a secondary character . 

 " why , " say Mr. Crowder , an old respectable tenant , though much in arrear as to his rent , who condescend frequently to drink in the steward 's room for the sake of the conversation ; " why , I suppose they get money so fast in the East it be wonderful . why , " he go on , with a hesitating look toward Mr. Scales , " this Transome p'r'aps get a matter of a hundred thousand . " 

 " a hundred thousand , my dear sir ! fiddle - stick 's end of a hundred thousand , " say Mr. Scales , with a contempt very painful to be bear by a modest man . 

 " well , " say Mr. Crowder , give way under torture , as the all - know butler puff and star at he , " perhaps not so much as that . " 

 " not so much , sir ! I tell you that a hundred thousand pound be a bagatelle . " 

 " well , I know it be a big sum , " say Mr. Crowder , deprecatingly . 

 here there be a general laugh . all the other intellect present be more cultivated than Mr. Crowder 's . 

 " Bagatelle be the French for trifle , my friend , " say Mr. Christian . " do not   talk over people 's head so , Scales . I shall have hard work to understand you myself soon . " 

 " come , that be a good one , " say the head - gardener , who be a ready admirer ; " I should like to hear the thing you do not   understand , Christian . " 

 " he be a first - rate hand at sneer , " say Mr. Scales , rather nettled . 

 " do not   be waspie , man . I will ring the bell for lemon , and make some punch . that be the thing for put people up to the unknown tongue , " say Mr. Christian , start up and slap Scales 's shoulder as he pass he . 

 " what I mean , Mr. Crowder , be this . " here Mr. Scales pause to puff , 92   and pull down his waistcoat in a gentlemanly manner , and drink . he be will not in this way to give his hearer time for meditation . 

 " come , then , speak English ; I be not against be teach , " say the reasonable Crowder . 

 " what I mean be , that in a large way of trade a man turn his capital over almost as soon as he can turn himself . bless your soul ! I know something about these matter , eh , Brent ? " 

 " to be sure you do few man more , " say the gardener , who be the person appeal to . 

 " not that I have   have anything to do with commercial family myself . I have   those feeling that I look to other thing besides lucre . but I can not   say that I have   not be intimate with party who have be less nice than I be myself ; and know what I know , I should not   wonder if Transome have as much as five hundred thousand . bless your soul , sir ! people who get their money out of land be as long scrap five pound together as your trading man be in turn five pound into a hundred . " 

 " that be a wicked thing , though , " say Mr. Crowder , meditatively . " however , " he go on , retreat from this difficult ground , " trade or no trade , the Transomes have be poor enough this many a long year . I have   a brother a tenant on their estate I ought to know a little bit about that . " 

 " they have   keep up no establishment at all , " say Mr. Scales , with disgust . " they have   even let their kitchen garden . I suppose it be the son 's gambling . I have   see something of that . a man who have always live in first - rate family be likely to know a thing or two on that subject . " 

 " ah , but it be not   gambling do the first mischief , " say Mr. Crowder , with a slight smile , feel that it be his turn to have some superiority . " new - comer do not   know what happen in this country twenty and thirty year ago . I be turn fifty myself , and my father live under Sir Maximus 's father . but if anybody from London can tell I more than I know about this country - side , I be willing to listen . " 

 " what be it , then , if it be not   gamble ? " say Mr. Scales , with some impatience . " I do not   pretend to know . " 

 " it be law law that be what it be . not but what the Transomes always win . " 

 " and always lose , " say the too - ready Scales . " yes , yes ; I think we all know the nature of law . " 

 " there be the last suit of all make the most noise , as I understand , " continue Mr. Crowder ; " but it be not   try hereabout . they say there be a deal o ' false swearing . some young man pretend to be the true 93   heir let I see I can not   justly remember the name he would get two . he swear he be one man , and they swear he be another . however Lawyer Jermyn win it they say he would win a game against the Old One himself and the young fellow turn out to be a scamp . stop a bit his name be Scaddon Henry Scaddon . " 

 Mr. Christian here let a lemon slip from his hand into the punch - bowl with a splash which send some of the nectar into the company 's face . 

 " Hallo ! what a bungler I be ! " he say , look as if he be quite jarred by this unusual awkwardness of his . " go on with your tale , Mr. Crowder a scamp name Henry Scaddon . " 

 " well , that be the tale , " say Mr. Crowder . " he be never see nothing of anymore . it be a deal talk of at the time and I have   sit by ; and my father use to shake his head ; and always when this Mrs. Transome be talk of , he use to shake his head , and say she carry thing with a high hand once . but , Lord ! it be before the battle of Waterloo , and I be a poor hand at tale ; I do not   see much good in them myself but if anybody'll tell I a cure for the sheep - rot , I will thank he . " 

 here Mr. Crowder relapse into smoking and silence , a little discomfited that the knowledge of which he have be deliver have turn out rather a shapeless and insignificant birth . 

 " well , well , bygone should be bygone ; there be secret in most good family , " say Mr. Scales , wink , " and this young Transome , come back with a fortune to keep up the establishment , and have thing do in a decent and gentlemanly way it would all have be right if he would not be this sort of Radical madman . but now he be do for himself . I hear Sir Maximus say at dinner that he would be excommunicate ; and that be a pretty strong word , I take it . " 

 " what do it mean , Scales ? " say Mr. Christian , who love tormenting . 

 " ay , what be the meaning ? " insist Mr. Crowder , encourage by find that even Christian be in the dark . 

 " well , it be a law term speak in a figurative sort of way mean that a Radical be no gentleman . " 

 " perhaps it be partly account for by his get his money so fast , and in foreign country , " say Mr. Crowder , tentatively . " it be reasonable to think he would be against the land and this country eh , Sircome ? " 

  94 

 Sircome be an eminent miller who have considerable business transaction at the Manor , and appreciate Mr. Scales 's merit at a handsome percentage on the yearly account . he be a highly honorable tradesman , but in this and in other matter submit to the institution of his country ; for great house , as he observe , must have great butler . he reply to his friend Crowder sententiously . 

 " I say nothing . before I bring word to market , I should like to see them a bit scarcer . there be the land and there be trade I hold with both . I swim with the stream . " 

 " hey - day , Mr. Sircome ! that be a radical maxim , " say Mr. Christian , who know that Mr. Sircome 's last sentence be his favorite formula . " I advise you to give it up , else it will injure the quality of your flour . " 

 " a radical maxim ! " say Mr. Sircome , in a tone of angry astonishment . " I should like to hear you prove that . it be as old as my grandfather , anyhow . " 

 " I will prove it in one minute , " say the glib Christian . " reform have set in by the will of the majority that be the rabble , you know ; and the respectability and good sense of the country , which be in the minority , be afraid of Reform run on too fast . so the stream must be run toward Reform and Radicalism ; and if you swim with it , Mr. Sircome , you be a Reformer and a Radical , and your flour be objectionable , and not full weight and be try by Scales , will be find want . " 

 there be a roar of laughter . this pun upon Scales be highly appreciated by every one except the miller and butler . the latter pull down his waistcoat , and puff and star in rather an excited manner . Mr. Christian 's wit , in general , seem to he a poor kind of quibble . 

 " what a fellow you be for fence , Christian , " say the gardener . " hang I , if I do not   think you be up to everything . " 

 " that be a compliment you might pay Old Nick , if you come to that , " say Mr. Sircome , who be in the painful position of a man deprive of his formula . 

 " yes , yes , " say Mr. Scales ; " I be no fool myself , and could parry a thrust if I like , but I should not   like it to be say of I that I be up to everything . I will keep a little principle if you please . " 

 " to be sure , " say Christian , ladle out the punch . " what would justice be without scale ? " 

 the laughter be not quite so full - throated as before . such excessive cleverness be a little satanic . 

  95 

 " a joke 's a joke among gentleman , " say the butler , get exasperate ; " I think there have be quite liberty enough take with my name . but if you must talk about name , I have   hear of a party before now call himself a Christian , and be anything but it . " 

 " come , that be beyond a joke , " say the surgeon 's assistant , a fast man , whose chief scene of dissipation be the manor . " let it drop , Scales . " 

 " yes , I dare say it be beyond a joke . I be not a harlequin to talk nothing but joke . I leave that to other Christians , who be up to everything , and have be everywhere to the hulk , for what I know ; and more than that , they come from nobody know where , and try to worm themselves into gentleman 's confidence , to the prejudice of their better . " 

 there be a strict sequence in Mr. Scales 's angry eloquence than be apparent some chief link be confine to his own breast , as be often the case in energetic discourse . the company be in a state of expectation . there be something behind worth know , and something before they worth see . in the general decay of other fine british pugnacious sport , a quarrel between gentleman be all the more exciting , and though no one would himself have like to turn on Scales , no one be sorry for the chance of see he put down . but the amazing Christian be unmove . he have take out his handkerchief and be rub his lip carefully . after a slight pause , he speak with perfect coolness . 

 " I do not   intend to quarrel with you , Scales . such talk as this be not profitable to either of we . it make you purple in the face you be apoplectic , you know and it spoil good company . well tell a few fib about I behind my back it will heat you less , and do I more harm . I will leave you to it ; I shall go and have a game of whist with the lady . " 

 as the door close behind the questionable Christian , Mr. Scales be in a state of frustration that prevent speech . every one be rather embarrassed . 

 " that be an uncommon sort o ' fellow , " say Mr. Crowder , in an undertone , to his next neighbor , the gardener . " why , Mr. Philip pick he up in foreign part , do not   he ? " 

 " he be a courier , " say the gardener . " he be have a deal of experience . and I believe , by what I can make out for he be be pretty free with I sometimes there be a time when he be in that rank of life that he fight a duel . " 

 " ah ! that make he such a cool chap , " say Mr. Crowder . 

 " he be what I call an overbearing fellow , " say Mr. Sircome , also sotto voce , to his next neighbor , Mr. Filmore , the surgeon 's assistant . 96   " he run you down with a sort of talk that be neither here nor there . he be get a deal too many sample in his pocket for I . " 

 " all I know be , he be a wonderful hand at card , " say Mr. Filmore , whose whisker and shirt - pin be quite above the average . " I wish I could play ťcartť as he do ; it be beautiful to see he ; he can make a man look pretty blue ; he will empty his pocket for he in no time . " 

 " that be none to his credit , " say Mr. Sircome . 

 the conversation have in this way break up into tete - a - tete , and the hilarity of the evening might be consider a failure . still the punch be drunk , the account be duly swell , and , notwithstanding the innovate spirit of the time , Sir Maximus Debarry 's establishment be keep up in sound hereditary british manner . 

 CHAPTER VIII . 

 " Rumor doth double like the voice and echo . " 
  Shakespeare . 
 the mind of a man be as a country which be once open to squatter , who have breed and multiply and become master of the land . but then happeneth a time when new and hungry comer dispute the land ; and there be trial of strength , and the strong win . nevertheless the first squatter be they who have prepare the ground , and the crop to the end will be sequent   though chiefly on the nature of the soil , as of light sand , mixed loam , or heavy clay , yet   somewhat on the primal labor and sowing . 

 that talkative maiden , Rumor , though in the interest of art she be figure as a youthful , wing beauty with flow garment , soar above the head of man , and breathe world - thrill news through a gracefully - curve trumpet , be in fact a very old maid , who pucker her silly face by the fireside , and really do no more than chirp a wrong guess or a lame story into the ear of a fellow gossip ; all the rest of the work attribute to she be do by the ordinary working of those passion against which man pray in the Litany , with the help of a plentiful stupidity against which we have never yet have any authorized form of prayer . 

 when Mr. Scales 's strong need to make an impressive figure in conversation , together with his very slight need of any other premise than his own sense of his wide general knowledge and probable infallibility , lead he to specify five hundred thousand as the low admissible amount of Harold Transome 's commercially - acquire fortune , it be not fair to put this down to poor old Miss Rumor , who have only tell Scales that the fortune be considerable . and again , when the curt Mr. Sircome find occasion at Treby to mention the five hundred thousand 97   as a fact that folk seem pretty sure about , this expansion of the butler into " folk " be entirely due to Mr. Sircome 's habitual preference for word which could not be lay hold of or give people a handle over he . it be in this simple way that the report of Harold Transome 's fortune spread and be magnify , add much lustre to his opinion in the eye of Liberals , and compelling even man of the opposite party to admit that it increase his eligibility as a member for North Loamshire . it be observe by a sound thinker in these part that property be ballast ; and when once the aptness of that metaphor have be perceive , it follow that a man be not fit to navigate the sea of politic without a great deal of such ballast ; and that , rightly understand , whatever increase the expense of election , inasmuch as it virtually raise the property qualification , be an unspeakable boon to the country . 

 meanwhile the fortune that be get large in the imagination of constituent be shrink a little in the imagination of its owner . it be hardly more than a hundred and fifty thousand ; and there be not only the heavy mortgage to be pay off , but also a large amount of capital be need in order to repair the farm - building all over the estate , to carry out extensive drainage , and make allowance to in - come tenant , which might remove the difficulty of newly let the farm in a time of agricultural depression . the farm actually tenant be hold by man who have beg hard to succeed their father in get a little poor every year , on land which be also get poor , where the high rate of increase be in the arrear of rent , and where the master , in crushed hat and corduroy , look pitiably lean and care - wear by the side of pauper laborer , who show that superior assimilate power often observe to attend nourishment by the public money . Mr. Goffe , of Rabbit 's end , have never have it explain to he that , accord to the true theory of rent , land must inevitably be give up when it would not yield a profit equal to the ordinary rate of interest ; so that from want of know what be inevitable , and not from a titanic spirit of opposition , he keep on his land . he often say to himself , with a melancholy wipe of his sleeve across his brow , that he " do not   know which - a - way to turn " ; and he would have be still more at a loss on the subject if he have quit Rabbit 's end with a wagonful of furniture and utensil , a file of receipt , a wife with five child , and a shepherd dog in low spirit . 

  98 

 it take no long time for Harold Transome to discover this state of thing , and to see , moreover , that , except on the demesne immediately around the house , the timber have be mismanage . the wood have be recklessly thin , and there have be insufficient planting . he have not yet thoroughly investigate the various account keep by his mother , by Jermyn , and by bank the bailiff ; but what have be do with the large sum which have be receive for timber be a suspicious mystery to he . he observe that the farm hold by Jermyn be in first - rate order , that a good deal have be spend on the building , and that the rent have stand unpaid . Mrs. Transome have take an opportunity of say that Jermyn have have some of the mortgage deed transfer to he , and that his rent be set against so much interest . Harold have only say , in his careless yet decisive way , " oh , Jermyn be hang ! it seem to I if Durfey have not   die and make room for I , Jermyn would have end by come to live here , and you would have have to keep the lodge and open the gate for his carriage . but I shall pay he off mortgage and all by - and - by . I will owe he nothing not even a curse ! " Mrs. Transome say no more . Harold do not care to enter fully into the subject with his mother . the fact that she have be active in the management of the estate have ride about it continually , have busy herself with account , have be head - bailiff of the vacant farm , and have yet allow thing to go wrong be set down by he simply to the general futility of woman 's attempt to transact man 's business . he do not want to say anything to annoy she : he be only determined to let she understand , as quietly as possible , that she have well cease all interference . 

 Mrs. Transome do understand this ; and it be very little that she dare to say on business , though there be a fierce struggle of her anger and pride with a dread which be nevertheless supreme . as to the old tenant , she only observe , on hear Harold burst forth about their wretched condition , " that with the estate so burden , the yearly loss by arrear could well be bear than the outlay and sacrifice necessary in order to let the farm anew . " 

 " I be really capable of calculate , Harold , " she end , with a touch of bitterness . " it seem easy to deal with farmer and their affair when you only see they in print , I dare say ; but it be not quite so easy when you live among they . you have only to look at Sir Maximus 's estate : you will see plenty of the same thing . the time have be dreadful 99   and old family like to keep their old tenant . but I dare say that be Toryism . " 

 " it be a hash of odd and end , if that be Toryism , my dear mother . however , I wish you have keep three more old tenant ; for then I should have have three more fifty - pound voter . and , in a hard run , one may be beat by a head . but , " Harold add , smile and hand she a ball of worst which have fall , " a woman ought to be a tory , and graceful , and handsome , like you . I should hate a woman who take up my opinion and talk for I . I be an oriental , you know . I say , mother , shall we have this room furnish with rose - color ? I notice that it suit your bright gray hair . " 

 Harold think it be only natural that his mother should have be in a sort of subjection to Jermyn throughout the awkward circumstance of the family . it be the way of woman , and all weak mind , to think that what they have be use to be unalterable , and any quarrel with a man who manage private affair be necessarily a formidable thing . he himself be proceed very cautiously , and prefer not even to know too much just at present , lest a certain personal antipathy he be conscious of toward Jermyn , and an occasional liability to exasperation , should get the well of a calm and clear - sighted resolve not to quarrel with the man while he could be of use . Harold would have be disgust with himself if he have help to frustrate his own purpose . and his strong purpose now be to get return for Parliament , to make a figure there as a liberal member , and to become on all ground a personage of weight in North Loamshire . 

 how Howard Transome come to be a Liberal in opposition to all the tradition of his family , be a more subtle enquiry than he have ever care to follow out . the newspaper undertake to explain it . the North Loamshire Herald witness with a grief and disgust certain to be share by all person who be actuate by wholesome british feeling , an example of defection in the inheritor of a family name which in time past have be associate with attachment to right principle , and with the maintenance of our constitution in Church and State ; and point to it as an additional proof that man who have pass any large portion of their life beyond the limit of our favored country , usually contract not only a laxity of feel toward Protestantism , nay , toward religion itself a latitudinarian spirit hardly distinguishable from atheism but also a levity of disposition , induce they to tamper with those institution by which alone Great Britain have rise to her pre - eminence among the nation . such man , infect with outlandish 100   habit , intoxicate with vanity , grasp at momentary power by flattery of the multitude , fearless because godless , Liberal because un - English , be ready to pull one stone from under another in the national edifice , till the great structure totter to its fall . on the other hand , the Duffield Watchman see in this signal instance of self - liberation from the trammel of prejudice , a decisive guarantee of intellectual pre - eminence , unite with a generous sensibility to the claim of man as man , which have burst asunder , and cast off , by a spontaneous exertion of energy , the cramping out - wear shell of hereditary bias and class interest . 

 but these large - minded guide of public opinion argue from wide datum than could be furnish by any knowledge of the particular case concern . Harold Transome be neither the dissolute cosmopolitan so vigorously sketch by the Tory Herald , nor the intellectual giant and moral lobster suggest by the liberal imagination of the Watchman . twenty year ago he have be a bright , active , good - temper lad , with sharp eye and a good aim ; he delight in success and in predominance ; but he do not long for an impossible predominance , and become sour and sulky because it be impossible . he play at the game he be clever in , and usually win ; all other game he let alone , and think they of little worth . at home and at Eton he have be side by side with his stupid eld brother Durfey , whom he despise ; and he very early begin to reflect that since this Caliban in miniature be old than himself , he must carve out his own fortune . that be a nuisance ; and on the whole the world seem rather ill - arrange , at Eton especially , where there be many reason why Harold make no great figure . he be not sorry the money be want to send he to Oxford ; he do not see the good of Oxford ; he have be surround by many thing during his short life , of which he have distinctly say to himself that he do not see the good , and he be not dispose to venerate on the strength of any good that other see . he turn his back on home very cheerfully , though he be rather fond of his mother , and very fond of Transome Court , and the river where he have be use to fish ; but he say to himself as he pass the lodge - gate , " I will get rich somehow , and have an estate of my own , and do what I like with it . " this determine aim at something not easy but clearly possible , mark the direction in which Harold 's nature be strong ; he have the energetic will and muscle , the 101   self - confidence , the quick perception , and the narrow imagination which make what be admiringly call the practical mind . 

 since then his character have be ripen by a various experience , and also by much knowledge which he have set himself deliberately to gain . but the man be no more than the boy writ large , with an extensive commentary . the year have nourish an inclination to as much opposition as would enable he to assert his own independence and power without throw himself into that tabooed condition which rob power of its triumph . and this inclination have help his shrewdness in form judgment which be at once innovate and moderate . he be addict at once to rebellion and to conformity , and only an intimate personal knowledge could enable any one to predict where his conformity would begin . the limit be not define by theory , but be draw in an irregular zigzag by early disposition and association ; and his resolution , of which he have never lose hold , to be a thorough Englishman again some day , have keep up the habit of consider all his conclusion with reference to english politic and english social condition . he mean to stand up for every change that the economical condition of the country require , and he have an angry contempt for man with coronet on their coach , but too small a share of brain to see when they have well make a virtue of necessity . his respect be rather for man who have no coronet , but who achieve a just influence by further all measure which the common - sense of the country , and the increase self - assertion of the majority , peremptorily demand . he could be such a man himself . 

 in fact Harold Transome be a clever , frank , good - natured egoist ; not stringently consistent , but without any disposition to falsity ; but with a pride that be mould in an individual rather than an hereditary form ; unspeculative , unsentimental , unsympathetic ; fond of sensual pleasure , but disinclined to all vice , and attach as a healthy , clear - sighted person , to all conventional morality , construe with a certain freedom , like doctrinal article to which the public order may require subscription . a character be apt to look but indifferently , write out in this way . reduce to a map , our premise seem insignificant , but they make , nevertheless , a very pretty freehold to live in and walk over ; and so , if Harold Transome have be among your acquaintance , and you have observe his quality through the medium of his agreeable person , bright smile , and a certain easy charm which 102   accompany sensuousness when unsullie by coarseness through the medium also of the many opportunity in which he would have make himself useful or pleasant to you you would have think he a good fellow , highly acceptable as a guest , a colleague , or a brother - in - law . whether all mother would have like he as a son be another question . 

 it be a fact perhaps keep a little too much in the background , that mother have a self large than their maternity , and that when their son have become tall than themselves , and be go from they to college or into the world , there be wide space of their time which be not fill with pray for their boy , read old letter , and envy yet bless those who be attend to their shirt - button . Mrs. Transome be certainly not one of those bland , adoring , and gently tearful woman . after share the common dream that when a beautiful man - child be bear to she , her cup of happiness would be full , she have travel through long year apart from that child to find herself at last in the presence of a son of whom she be afraid , who be utterly unmanageable by she , and to whose sentiment in any give case she possess no key . yet Harold be a kind son : he kiss his mother 's brow , offer she his arm , let she choose what she like for the house and garden , ask she whether she would have bay or gray for her new carriage , and be bent on see she make as good a figure in the neighborhood as any other woman of her rank . she tremble under this kindness : it be not enough to satisfy she ; still , if it should ever cease and give place to something else she be too uncertain about Harold 's feeling to imagine clearly what that something would be . the fine thread , such as no eye see , if bind cunningly about the sensitive flesh , so that the movement to break they would bring torture , may make a bad bondage than any fetter . Mrs. Transome feel the fatal thread about she , and the bitterness of this helpless bondage mingle itself with the new elegancie of the dining and drawing - room , and all the household change which Harold have order to be bring about with magical quickness . nothing be as she have once expect it would be . if Harold have show the least care to have her stay in the room with he if he have really care for her opinion if he have be what she have dream he would be in the eye of those people who have make her world if all the past could be dissolve , and leave 103   no solid trace of itself mighty if that be all impossible she would have taste some joy ; but now she begin to look back with regret to the day when she sit in loneliness among the old drapery , and still long for something that might happen . yet , save in a bitter little speech , or in a deep sigh , hear by no one besides Denner , she keep all these thing hide in her heart , and go out in the autumn sunshine to overlook the alteration in the pleasure - ground very much as a happy woman might have do . one day , however , when she be occupy in this way , an occasion come on which she choose to express indirectly a part of her inward care . 

 she be stand on the broad gravel in the afternoon ; the long shadow lie on the grass ; the light seem the more glorious because of the reddened and golden tree . the gardener be busy at their pleasant work ; the newly - turn soil give out an agreeable fragrance ; and little Harry be play with Nimrod round old Mr. Transome , who sit placidly on a low garden - chair . the scene would have make a charming picture of english domestic life , and the handsome , majestic , gray - haired woman   obviously grandmamma   would have be especially admire . but the artist would have feel it requisite to turn her face toward her husband and little grandson , and to have give she an elderly amiability of expression which would have divide remark with his exquisite rendering of her indian shawl . Mrs. Transome 's face be turn the other way , and for this reason she only hear an approach step , and do not see whose it be ; yet it startle she : it be not quick enough to be her son 's step , and besides , Harold be away at Duffield . it be Mr. Jermyn 's . 

 CHAPTER IX . 

 " a woman naturally bear to fear . " King John . 
  " Methinks , 
 some unborn sorrow , ripe in fortune 's womb , 
 be come toward I ; and my inward soul 
 with nothing tremble . " King Richard II . 
 Matthew Jermyn approach Mrs. Transome take off his hat and smile . she do not smile , but say 

 " you know Harold be not at home ? " 

 " yes ; I come to see you , to know if you have any wish that I could far , since I have not have an opportunity of consult you since he come home . " 

  104 

 " let we walk toward the Rookery , then . " 

 they turn together , Mr. Jermyn still keep his hat off and hold it behind he ; the air be so soft and agreeable that Mrs. Transome have nothing but a large veil over her head . 

 they walk for a little while in silence till they be out of sight , under tall tree , and treading noiselessly on fall leaf . what Jermyn be really most anxious about , be to learn from Mrs. Transome whether anything have transpire that be significant of Harold 's disposition toward he , which he suspect to be very far from friendly . Jermyn be not naturally flinty - hearted : at five - and - twenty he have write verse , and have get himself wet through in order not to disappoint a dark - eyed woman whom he be proud to believe in love with he ; but a family man with grow up son and daughter , a man with a professional position and complicated affair that make it hard to ascertain the exact relation between property and liability , necessarily think of himself and what may be impend . 

 " Harold be remarkably acute and clever , " he begin at last , since Mrs. Transome do not speak . " if he get into Parliament , I have no doubt he will distinguish himself . he have a quick eye for business of all kind . " 

 " that be no comfort to I , " say Mrs. Transome . to - day she be more conscious than usual of that bitterness which be always in her mind in Jermyn 's presence , but which be carefully suppress : suppress because she could not endure that the degradation she inwardly feel should ever become visible or audible in act or word of her own should ever be reflect in any word or look of his . for year there have be a deep silence about the past between they ; on her side because she remember ; on his , because he more and more forgot . 

 " I trust he be not unkind to you in any way . I know his opinion pain you ; but I trust you find he in everything else disposed to be a good son . " 

 " oh , to be sure good as man be dispose to be to woman , give they cushion and carriage , and recommend they to enjoy themselves , and then expect they to be content under contempt and neglect . I have no power over he remember that none . " 

 Jermyn turn to look in Mrs. Transome 's face : it be long since he have hear she speak to he as if she be lose her self - command . 

  105 

 " have he show any unpleasant feeling about your management of affair ? " 

 " my management ! " Mrs. Transome say , with concentrated rage , flash a fierce look at Jermyn . she check herself : she feel as if she be light a torch to flare on her own past folly and misery . it be a resolve which have become a habit , that she would never quarrel with this man never tell he what she see he to be . she have keep her woman 's pride and sensibility intact : through all her life there have vibrate the maiden need to have her hand kiss and be the object of chivalry . and so she sink into silence again , tremble . 

 Jermyn feel annoyed nothing more . there be nothing in his mind correspond to the intricate mesh of sensitiveness in Mrs. Transome 's . he be anything but stupid ; yet he always blunder when he want to be delicate or magnanimous ; he constantly seek to soothe other by praise himself . moral vulgarity cleave to he like an hereditary odor . he blunder now . 

 " my dear Mrs. Transome , " he say , in a tone of bland kindness , " you be agitated you appear angry with I . yet I think , if you consider , you will see that you have nothing to complain of in I , unless you will complain of the inevitable course of man 's life . I have always meet your wish both in happy circumstance and in unhappy one . I should be ready to do so now , if it be possible . " 

 every sentence be as pleasant to she as if it have be cut in her bared arm . some man 's kindness and love - making be more exasperating , more humiliating than other ' derision ; but the pitiable woman who have once make herself secretly dependent on a man who be beneath she in feeling , must bear that humiliation for fear of bad . coarse kindness be at least well than coarse anger ; and in all private quarrel the dull nature be triumphant by reason of its dullness . Mrs. Transome know in her inmost soul that those relation which have seal her lip on Jermyn 's conduct in business matter , have be with he a ground for presume that he should have impunity in any lax deal into which circumstance have lead he . she know that she herself have endure all the more privation because of his dishonest selfishness . and now , Harold 's long - defer heirship , and his return with startlingly unexpected penetration , activity , and assertion of mastery , have place they both in the full presence of a difficulty which have be prepare by the year of vague uncertainty as to issue . in this position , with a great dread 106   hang over she , which Jermyn know , and ought to have feel that he have cause she , she be inclined to lash he with indignation , to scorch he with the word that be just the fit name for his doing incline all the more when he speak with an insolent blandness , ignore all that be truly in her heart . but no soon do the word " you have bring it on I " rise within she than she hear within also the retort , " you bring it on yourself . " not for all the world beside could she bear to hear that retort utter from without . what do she do ? with strange sequence to all that rapid tumult , after a few moment ' silence she say 

 " let I take your arm . " 

 he give it immediately , put on his hat and wonder . for more than twenty year Mrs. Transome have never choose to take his arm . 

 " I have but one thing to ask . make I a promise . " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " that you will never quarrel with Harold . " 

 " you must know that it be my wish not to quarrel with he . " 

 " but make a vow fix it in your mind as a thing not to be do . bear anything from he rather than quarrel with he . " 

 " a man can not   make a vow not to quarrel , " say Jermyn , who be already a little irritated by the implication that Harold might be dispose to use he roughly . " a man 's temper may get the well of he at any moment . I be not prepared to bear anything . " 

 " Good God ! " say Mrs. Transome , take her hand from his arm , " be it possible you do not   feel how horrible it would be ? " 

 as she take away her hand , Jermyn let his arm fall , put both his hand in his pocket , and shrug his shoulder say , " I shall use he as he use I . " 

 Jermyn have turn round his savage side , and the blandness be out of sight . it be this that have always frighten Mrs. Transome : there be a possibility of fierce insolence in this man who be to pass with those near to she as her indebted servant , but whose brand she secretly bore . she be as powerless with he as she be with her own son . 

 this woman , who love rule , dare not speak another word of attempt persuasion . they be both silent , take the near way into the sunshine again . there be a half - form wish in both their mind even in the mother 's that Harold Transome have never be bear . 

 " we be work hard for the election , " say Jermyn , recover 107   himself , as they turn into the sunshine again . " I think we shall get he return , and in that case he will be in high good - humor . everything will be more propitious than you be apt to think . you must persuade yourself , " he add , smile at she , " that it be well for a man of his position to be in Parliament on the wrong side than not to be in at all . " 

 " never , " say Mrs. Transome . " I be too old to learn to call bitter sweet and sweet bitter . but what I may think or feel be of no consequence now . I be as unnecessary as a chimney ornament . " 

 and in this way they part on the gravel , in that pretty scene where they have meet . Mrs. Transome shiver as she stand alone : all around she , where there have once be brightness and warmth , there be white ash , and the sunshine look dreary as it fall on they . 

 Mr. Jermyn 's heavy reflection in rid homeward turn on the possibility of incident between himself and Harold Transome which would have disagreeable result , require he to raise money , and perhaps cause scandal , which in its way might also help to create a monetary deficit . a man of sixty , with a wife whose Duffield connection be of the high respectability , with a family of tall daughter , an expensive establishment , and a large professional business , owe a great deal more to himself as the mainstay of all those solidity , than to feeling and idea which be quite unsubstantial . there be many unfortunate coincidence which place Mr. Jermyn in an uncomfortable position just now ; he have not be much to blame , he consider ; if it have not be for a sudden turn of affair no one would have complain . he defy any man to say that he have intend to wrong people ; he be able to refund , to make reprisal , if they could be fairly demand . only he would certainly have prefer that they should not be demand . 

 a german poet be entrust with a particularly fine sausage , which he be to convey to the donor 's friend at Paris . in the course of a long journey he smell the sausage ; he get hungry , and desire to taste it ; he par a morsel off , then another , and another , in successive moment of temptation , till at last the sausage be , humanly speak , at an end . the offence have not be premeditate . the poet have never love meanness , but he love sausage ; and the result be undeniably awkward . 

 so it be with Matthew Jermyn . he be far from like that ugly 108   abstraction rascality , but he have like other thing which have suggest nibble . he have to do many thing in law and in daily life which , in the abstract , he would have condemn ; and indeed he have never be tempt by they in the abstract . here , in fact , be the inconvenience : he have sin for the sake of particular concrete thing , and particular concrete consequence be likely to follow . 

 but he be a man of resolution , who , have make out what be the good course to take under a difficulty , go straight to his work . the election must be win : that would put Harold in good - humor , give he something to do , and leave himself more time to prepare for any crisis . 

 he be in anything but low spirit that evening . it be his eld daughter 's birthday , and the young people have a dance . Papa be delightful stand up for a quadrille and a country - dance , tell story at supper , and make humorous quotation from his early reading : if these be Latin , he apologize , and translate to the lady ; so that a deaf lady - visitor from Duffield keep she trumpet up continually , lest she should lose any of Mr. Jermyn 's conversation , and wish that her niece Maria have be present , who be young and have a good memory . 

 still the party be small than usual , for some family in Treby refuse to visit Jermyn , now that he be concern for a radical candidate . 

 CHAPTER X. 

 " he make love neither with rose , nor with apple , nor with lock of hair . " Theocritus . 

 one Sunday afternoon Felix Holt rap at the door of Mr. Lyon 's house , although he could hear the voice of the minister preach in the chapel . he stand with a book under his arm , apparently confident that there be someone in the house to open the door for he . in fact , Esther never go to chapel in the afternoon : that " exercise " make her head ache . 

 in these September week Felix have get rather intimate with Mr. Lyon . they share the same political sympathy ; and though , to Liberals who have neither freehold nor copyhold nor leasehold , the share in a county election consist chiefly of that prescriptive amusement of the majority know as " look on , " there be still something to be say on the occasion , if not to be do . perhaps the most delightful friendship be those in which there be much agreement , much disputation , and yet more personal liking ; and the advent of the public - spirit , 109   contradictory , yet affectionate Felix , into Treby life , have make a welcome epoch to the minister . to talk with this young man , who , though hopeful , have a singularity which some might at once have pronounce heresy , but which Mr. Lyon persist in regard as orthodoxy " in the making , " be like a good bite to strong tooth after a too plentiful allowance of spoon meat . to cultivate his society with a view to check his erratic tendency be a laudable purpose ; but perhaps if Felix have be rapidly subdue and reduce to conformity , little Mr. Lyon would have find the conversation much flat . 

 Esther have not see so much of their new acquaintance as her father have . but she have begin to find he amusing , and also rather irritate to her woman 's love of conquest . he always oppose and criticise she ; and besides that , he look at she as if he never see a single detail about her person quite as if she be a middle - aged woman in a cap . she do not believe that he have ever admire her hand , or her long neck , or her graceful movement , which have make all the girl at school call her Calypso   doubtless from their familiarity with " Telťmaque " . Felix ought properly to have be a little in love with she never mention it , of course , because that would have be disagreeable , and his be a regular lover be out of the question . but it be quite clear that , instead of feel any disadvantage on his own side , he hold himself to be immeasurably her superior : and , what be bad , Esther have a secret consciousness that he be her superior . she be all the more vexed at the suspicion that he think slightly of she ; and wish in her vexation that she could have find more fault with he that she have not be oblige to admire more and more the vary expression of his open face and his deliciously good - humor laugh , always loud at a joke against himself . besides , she could not help have her curiosity rouse by the unusual combination both in his mind and in his outward position , and she have surprise herself as well as her father one day by suddenly start up and propose to walk with he when he be go to pay an afternoon visit to Mrs. Holt , to try and soothe she concern Felix . " what a mother he have ! " she say to herself when they come away again ; " but , rude and queer as he be , I can not say there be anything vulgar about he . yet I do not   know if I see he by the side of a finished gentleman . " Esther wish that finish gentleman be among 110   her acquaintance : he would certainly admire she , and make she aware of Felix 's inferiority . 

 on this particular Sunday afternoon , when she hear the knock at the door , she be seat in the kitchen corner between the fire and the window reading " Rťnť . " certainly in her well - fitting light - blue dress she almost always wear some shade of blue with her delicate sandale slipper stretch toward the fire , her little gold watch , which have cost she nearly a quarter 's earning , visible at her side , her slender finger play with a shower of brown curl , and a coronet of shin plait , at the summit of her head , she be a remarkable Cinderella . when the rap come , she color , and be go to shut her book and put it out of the way on the window ledge behind she ; but she desist with a little toss , lay it open on the table beside she , and walk to the outer door , which open into the kitchen . there be rather a mischievous gleam in her face : the rap be not a small one ; it come probably from a large personage with a vigorous arm . 

 " good afternoon , Miss Lyon , " say Felix , take off his cloth cap : he resolutely decline the expensive ugliness of a hat , and in a poked cap and without a cravat , make a figure at which his mother cry every Sunday , and think of with a slow shake of the head at several passage in the minister 's prayer . 

 " dear I , it be you , Mr. Holt ! I fear you will have to wait some time before you can see my father . the sermon be not end yet , and there will be the hymn and the prayer , and perhaps other thing to detain he . " 

 " well , will you let I sit down in the kitchen ? I do not   want to be a bore . " 

 " oh , no , " say Esther , with her pretty light laugh , " I always give you credit for not mean it . pray come in , if you do not   mind wait . I be sit in the kitchen : the kettle be sing quite prettily . it be much nice than the parlor not half so ugly . " 

 " there I agree with you . " 

 " how very extraordinary ! but if you prefer the kitchen , and do not   want to sit with I , I can go into the parlor . " 

 " I come on purpose to sit with you , " say Felix , in his blunt way , " but I think it likely you might be vex at see I . I want to talk to you , but I have   get nothing pleasant to say . as your father would have it , I be not give to prophesy smooth thing to prophesy deceit . " 

 " I understand , " say Esther , sit down . " pray be seat . you think I have no afternoon sermon , so you come to give I one . " 111 

 " yes , " say Felix , seat himself sideways in a chair not far off she , and lean over the back to look at she with his large , clear , gray eye , " and my text be something you say the other day . you say you do not   mind about people have right opinion so that they have good taste . now I want you to see what shallow stuff that be . " 

 " oh , I do not   doubt it if you say so . I know you be a person of right opinion . " 

 " but by opinion you mean man 's thought about great subject , and by taste you mean their thought about small one : dress , behavior , amusement , ornament . " 

 " well yes or rather , their sensibility about those thing . " 

 " it come to the same thing ; thought , opinion , knowledge , be only a sensibility to fact and idea . if I understand a geometrical problem , it be because I have a sensibility to the way in which line and figure be relate to each other ; and I want you to see that the creature who have the sensibility that you call taste , and not the sensibility that you call opinion , be simply a low , pettier sort of thing an insect that notice the shaking of the table , but never notice the thunder . " 

 " very well , I be an insect ; yet I notice that you be thunder at I . " 

 " no , you be not an insect . that be what exasperate I at your make a boast of littleness . you have enough understanding to make it wicked that you should add one more to the woman who hinder man 's life from have any nobleness in they . " 

 Esther color deeply : she resent this speech , yet she dislike it less than many Felix have address to she . 

 " what be my horrible guilt ? " she say , rise and stand , as she be will not , with one foot on the fender , and look at the fire . if it have be any one but Felix who be near she , it might have occur to she that this attitude show she to advantage ; but she have only a mortified sense that he be quite indifferent to what other praise she for . 

 " why do you read this mawkish stuff on a Sunday , for example ? " he say , snatch up " Rťnť , " and run his eye over the page . 

 " why do not   you always go to chapel , Mr. Holt , and read Howe 's ' Living Temple , ' and join the church ? " 

  112 

 " there be just the difference between we I know why I do not   do those thing . I distinctly see that I can do something well . I have other principle , and should sink myself by do what I do not   recognize as the good . " 

 " I understand , " say Esther , as lightly as she could , to conceal her bitterness . " I be a low kind of be , and could not so easily sink myself . " 

 " not by enter into your father 's idea . if a woman really believe herself to be a low kind of be , she should place herself in subjection : she should be rule by the thought of her father or husband . if not , let she show her power of choose something well . you must know that your father 's principle be great and worthy than what guide your life . you have no reason but idle fancy and selfish inclination for shirk his teaching and give your soul up to trifle . " 

 " you be kind enough to say so . but I be not aware that I have ever confide my reason to you . " 

 " why , what worth call a reason could make any mortal hang over this trash ? idiotic immorality dress up to look fine , with a little bit of doctrine tack to it , like a hare 's foot on a dish , to make believe the mess be not cat 's flesh . look here ! ' Est - ce ma faute , si je trouve partout les borne , si ce qui est fini n'a pour moi aucune valeur ? ' yes , sir , distinctly your fault , because you be an ass . your dunce who can not   do his sum always have a taste for the infinite . Sir , do you know what a rhomboid be ? oh , no , I do not   value these thing with limit . ' Cependant , j'aime la monotonie des sentimen de la vie , et si j'avais encore la folie de croire au bonheur ' " 

 " oh , pray , Mr. Holt , do not   go on read with that dreadful accent ; it set one 's tooth on edge . " Esther , smart helplessly under the previous lash , be relieve by this diversion of criticism . 

 " there it be ! " say Felix , throw the book on the table , and get up to walk about . " you be only happy when you can spy a tag or a tassel loose to turn the talk , and get rid of any judgment that must carry grave action after it . " 

 " I think I have bear a great deal of talk without turn it . " 

 " not enough , Miss Lyon not all that I come to say . I want you to change . of course I be a brute to say so . I ought to say you be perfect . another man would , perhaps . but I say I want you to change . " 

  113 

 " how be I to oblige you ? by join the Church ? " 

 " no ; but by ask yourself whether life be not as solemn a thing as your father take it to be in which you may be either a blessing or a curse to many . you know you have never do that . you do not   care to be well than a bird trim its feather , and peck about after what please it . you be discontent with the world because you can not   get just the small thing that suit your pleasure , not because it be a world where myriad of man and woman be grind by wrong and misery , and taint with pollution . " 

 Esther feel her heart swell with mingled indignation at this liberty , wound pride at this depreciation , and acute consciousness that she could not contradict what Felix say . he be outrageously ill - bred ; but she feel that she should be lower herself by tell he so , and manifest her anger ; in that way she would be confirm his accusation of a littleness that shrink from severe truth ; and , besides , through all her mortification there pierce a sense that this exasperation of Felix against she be more complimentary than anything in his previous behavior . she have self - command enough to speak with her usual silvery voice . 

 " pray go on , Mr. Holt . relieve yourself of these burn truth . I be sure they must be troublesome to carry unuttered . " 

 " yes , they be , " say Felix , pausing , and stand not far off she . " I can not   bear to see you go the way of the foolish woman who spoil man 's life . man can not   help love they , and so they make themselves slave to the petty desire of petty creature . that be the way those who might do well spend their life for nought get check in every great effort toil with brain and limb for thing that have no more to do with a manly life than tart and confectionery . that be what make woman a curse ; and life be stunt to suit their littleness . that be why I will never love , if I can help it ; and if I love , I will bear it , and never marry . " 

 the tumult of feeling in Esther 's mind mortification , anger , the sense of a terrible power over she that Felix seem to have as his angry word vibrate through she be get almost too much for her self - control . she feel her lip quiver ; but her pride , which fear nothing so much as the betrayal of her emotion , help she to a desperate effort . she pinch her own hand hard to overcome her tremor , and say , in a tone of scorn 

 " I ought to be very much oblige to you for give I your confidence so freely . " 

  114 

 " ah ! now you be offend with I , and disgust with I . I expect it would be so . a woman do not   like a man who tell she the truth . " 

 " I think you boast a little too much of your truth - telling , Mr. Holt , " say Esther , flash out at last . " that virtue be apt to be easy to people when they only wound other and not themselves . tell the truth often mean no more than take a liberty . " 

 " yes , I suppose I should have be take a liberty if I have try to drag you back by the skirt when I see you run into a pit . " 

 " you should really find a sect . preach be your vocation . it be a pity you should ever have an audience of only one . " 

 " I see I have make a fool of myself . I think you have a more generous mind that you might be kindle to a well ambition . but I have   set your vanity aflame nothing else . I be go . good - bye . " 

 " good - bye , " say Esther , not look at he . he do not open the door immediately . he seem to be adjust his cap and pull it down . Esther long to be able to throw a lasso round he and compel he to stay , that she might say what she choose to he ; her very anger make this departure irritate , especially as he have the last word , and that a very bitter one . but soon the latch be lift and the door close behind he . she run up to her bedroom and burst into tear . poor maiden ! there be a strange contradiction of impulse in her mind in those first moment . she could not bear that Felix should not respect she , yet she could not bear that he should see she bend before his denunciation . she revolt against his assumption of superiority , yet she feel herself in a new kind of subjection to he . he be ill - bred , he be rude , he have take an unwarrantable liberty ; yet his indignant word be a tribute to she : he think she be worth more pain than the woman of whom he take no notice . it be excessively impertinent in he to tell she of his resolving not to love not to marry as if she care about that ; as if he think himself likely to inspire an affection that would incline any woman to marry he after such eccentric step as he have take . have he ever for a moment imagine that she have think of he in the light of a man who would make love to she ? but do he love she one little bit , and be that the reason why he want she to change ? Esther feel less angry at that form of freedom ; though she be quite sure that she do 115   not love he , and that she could never love any one who be so much of a pedagogue and master , to say nothing of his oddity . but he want she to change . for the first time in her life Esther feel herself seriously shake in her self - contentment . she know there be a mind to which she appear trivial , narrow , selfish . every word Felix have say to she seem to have burn itself into her memory . she feel as if she should forevermore be haunt by self - criticism , and never do anything to satisfy those fancy on which she have simply pique herself before without be dog by inward question . her father 's desire for her conversion have never move she ; she see that he adore she all the while , and he never check her unregenerate act as if they degrade she on earth , but only mourn over they as unfit she for heaven . Unfitness for heaven   speak of as " Jerusalem " and " glory " , the prayer of a good little father , whose thought and motif seem to she like the " life of Dr. Doddridge , " which she be content to leave unread , do not attack her self - respect and self - satisfaction . but now she have be sting sting even into a new consciousness concern her father . be it true that his life be so much worthy than her own ? she could not change for anything Felix say , but she tell herself he be mistaken if he suppose she incapable of generous thought . 

 she hear her father come into the house . she dry her tear , try to recover herself hurriedly , and go down to he . 

 " you want your tea , father ; how your forehead burn ! " she say gently , kiss his brow , and then put she cool hand on it . 

 Mr. Lyon feel a little surprise ; such spontaneous tenderness be not quite common with she ; it remind he of her mother . 

 " my sweet child , " he say gratefully , think with wonder of the treasure still leave in our fallen nature . 

 CHAPTER XI . 

 truth be the precious harvest of the earth . 
 but once , when harvest wave upon a land , 
 the noisome cankerworm and caterpillar , 
 locust , and all the swarm foul - bear brood , 
 fasten upon it with swift , greedy jaw , 
 and turn the harvest into pestilence , 
 until man say , what profit it to sow ? 
 Felix be go to Sproxton that Sunday afternoon . he always enjoy his walk to that outlying hamlet ; it take he   by a short cut   through 116   a corner of Sir Maximus Debarry 's park ; then across a piece of common , break here and there into red ridge below dark mass of furze ; and for the rest of the way alongside of the canal , where the Sunday peacefulness that seem to rest on the border meadow and pasture be hardly break if a horse pull into sight along the towing - path , and a boat , with a little curl of blue smoke issue from its tin chimney , come slowly glide behind . Felix retain something of his boyish impression that the day in a canal - boat be all like Sundays ; but the horse , if it have be put to he , would probably have prefer a more Judaic or Scotch rigor with regard to canal - boat , or at least that the Sunday towing should be do by ass , as a low order . 

 this canal be only a branch of the grand trunk , and end among the coal - pit , where Felix , cross a network of black tram - road , soon come to his destination that public institute of Sproxton , know to its frequenter chiefly as Chubb 's , but less familiarly as the Sugar Loaf , or the New pit ; this last be the name for the more modern and lively nucleus of the Sproxton hamlet . the other nucleus , know as the Old Pits , also support its " public , " but it have something of the forlorn air of an abandon capital ; and the company at the blue cow be of an inferior kind equal , of course , in the fundamental attribute of humanity , such as desire for beer , but not equal in ability to pay for it . 

 when Felix arrive , the great Chubb be stand at the door . Mr. Chubb be a remarkable publican ; none of your stock Bonifaces , red , bloated , jolly , and joke . he be thin and sallow , and be never , as his constant guest observe , see to be the bad   or the well   for liquor ; indeed , as among soldier an eminent general be hold to have a charmed life , Chubb be hold by the member of the Benefit Club to have a charmed sobriety , a vigilance over his own interest that resist all narcotic . his very dream , as state by himself , have a method in they beyond the wake thought of other man . Pharaoh 's dream , he observe , be nothing to they ; and , as lie so much out of ordinary experience , they be hold particularly suitable for narration on Sunday evening , when the listening collier , well wash and in their good coat , shake their head with a sense of peculiar edification which belong to the inexplicable . Mr. Chubb 's reason for become landlord of the Sugar Loaf , be found on the severe calculation . have an active mind , and be averse to bodily labor , he have thoroughly consider what 117   calling would yield he the good livelihood with the least possible exertion , and in that sort of line he have see that a " public " amongst miner who earn high wage be a fine opening . he have prosper accord to the merit of such judicious calculation , be already a forty - shilling freeholder , and be conscious of a vote for the county . he be not one of those mean - spirited man who find the franchise embarrassing , and would rather have be without it : he regard his vote as part of his investment , and mean to make the good of it . he call himself a straight - forward man , and at suitable moment express his view freely ; in fact , he be know to have one fundamental division for all opinion " my idee " and " humbug . " 

 when Felix approach , Mr. Chubb be stand , as usual , with his hand nervously busy in his pocket , his eye glance around with a detective expression at the black landscape , and his lipless mouth compress , yet in constant movement . on a superficial view it might be suppose that so eager - seem a personality be unsuited to the publican 's business ; but in fact , it be a great provocative to drink . like the shrill bite talk of a vixenish wife , it would have compel you to " take a little something " by way of dull your sensibility . 

 Hitherto , notwithstanding Felix drink so little ale , the publican treat he with high civility . the come election be a great opportunity for apply his political " idee , " which be , that society exist for the sake of the individual , and that the name of that individual be Chubb . now , for a conjunction of absurd circumstance inconsistent with that idea , it happen that Sproxton hereto have be somewhat neglect in the canvass . the head member of the company that work the mine be Mr. Peter Garstin , and the same company receive the rent from the Sugar Loaf . hence , as the person who have the most power of annoy Mr. Chubb , and be of detriment to he , Mr. Garstin be naturally the candidate for whom he have reserve his vote . but where there be this intention of ultimately gratify a gentleman by vote for he in an open british manner on the day of the poll , a man , whether Publican or Pharisee   Mr. Chubb use this generic classification of mankind as one that be sanction by scripture , be all the free in his relation with those delude person who take he for what he be not , and imagine he to be a waverer . but for some time opportunity have seem barren . there be but three dubious vote besides Mr. Chubb 's 118   in the small district of which the Sugar Loaf could be regard as the centre of intelligence and inspiration : the collier , of course , have no vote , and do not need political conversion ; consequently , the interest of Sproxton have only be tacitly cherish in the breast of candidate . but ever since it have be know that a radical candidate be in the field , that in consequence of this Mr. Debarry have coalesce with Mr. Garstin , and that Sir James Clement , the poor baronet , have retire , Mr. Chubb have be occupy with the most ingenious mental combination in order to ascertain what possibility of profit to the Sugar Loaf might lie in this altered state of the canvass . 

 he have a cousin in another county , also a publican , but in a large way , and resident in a borough , and from he Mr. Chubb have gather more detailed political information than he could find in the Loamshire newspaper . he be now enlighten enough to know that there be a way of use voteless miner and navvy at nomination and election . he approve of that ; it enter into his political " idee " ; and indeed he would have be for extend the franchise to this class at least in Sproxton . if any one have observe that you must draw a line somewhere , Mr. Chubb would have concur at once , and would have give permission to draw it at a radius of two mile from his own tap . 

 from the first Sunday evening when Felix have appear at the Sugar Loaf , Mr. Chubb have make up his mind that this ' cute man who keep himself sober be an electioneering agent . that he be hire for some purpose or other there be not a doubt ; a man do not   come and drink nothing without a good reason . in proportion as Felix 's purpose be not obvious to Chubb 's mind , it must be deep ; and this grow conviction have even lead the publican on the last Sunday evening privately to urge his mysterious visitor to let a little ale be chalk up for he it be of no consequence . Felix know his man , and have take care not to betray too soon that his real object be so to win the ear of the good fellow about he as to induce they to meet he on a Saturday evening in the room where Mr. Lyon , or one of his deacon , habitually hold his Wednesday preaching . only woman and child , three old man , a journeyman tailor , and a consumptive youth , attend those preaching ; not a collier have be win from the strong ale of the Sugar Loaf , not even a navvy from the muddy drink of the blue cow . Felix be sanguine ; he see some pleasant face among the miner when they be wash 119   on Sundays ; they might be teach to spend their wage well . at all event , he be go to try : he have great confidence in his power of appeal , and it be quite true that he never speak without arrest attention . there be nothing well than a dame school in the hamlet ; he think that if he could move the father , whose blacken week - day person and flannel cap , ornament with tallow candle by way of plume , be a badge of hard labor , for which he have a more sympathetic fibre than for any ribbon in the buttonhole if he could move these man to save something from their drink and pay a school - master for their boy , a great service would be do they than if Mr. Garstin and his company be persuade to establish a school . 

 " I will lay hold of they by their fatherhood , " say Felix ; " I will take one of their little fellow and set he in the midst . till they can show there be something they love well than swill themselves with ale , extension of the suffrage can never mean anything for they but extension of boozing . one must begin somewhere : I will begin at what be under my nose . I will begin at Sproxton . that be what a man would do if he have a red - hot superstition . can not   one work for sober truth as hard as for megrim ? " 

 Felix Holt have his illusion , like other young man , though they be not of a fashionable sort ; refer neither to the impression his costume and horsemanship might make on beholder , nor to the ease with which he would pay the Jews when he give a loose to his talent and apply himself to work . he have fix his choice on a certain Mike Brindle   not that Brindle be his real name each colly have his sobriquet   as the man whom he would induce to walk part of the way home with he this very evening , and get to invite some of his comrade for the next Saturday . Brindle be one of the head miner : he have a bright good - natured face , and have give especial attention to certain performance with a magnet which Felix carry in his pocket . 

 Mr. Chubb , who have also his illusion , smile graciously as the enigmatic customer come up to the door - step . 

 " well , sir , Sunday seem to be your day : I begin to look for you on a Sunday now . " 

 " yes , I be a workingman ; Sunday be my holiday , " say Felix , pause at the door since the host seem to expect this . 

 " ah , sir , there be many way of work . I look at it you be one of those as work with your brain . that be what I do myself . " 

  120 

 " one may do a good deal of that and work with one 's hand too . " 

 " ah , sir , " say Mr. Chubb , with a certain bitterness in his smile , " I have   that sort of head that I have   often wish I be stupider . I use thing up , sir ; I see into thing a deal too quick . I eat my dinner , as you may say , at breakfast - time . that be why I hardly ever smoke a pipe . no soon do I stick a pipe in my mouth than I puff and puff till it be go before other folk ' be well light ; and then , where be I ? I might as well have let it alone . in this world it be well not to be too quick . but you know what it be , sir . " 

 " not I , " say Felix , rub the back of his head , with a grimace . " I generally feel myself rather a blockhead . the world 's a largish place , and I have not   turn everything inside out yet . " 

 " ah , that be your deepness . I think we understand one another . and about this here election , I lie two to one we should agree if we be to come to talk about it . " 

 " ah ! " say Felix , with an air of caution . 

 " you be none of a Tory , eh , sir ? you will not   go to vote for debarry ? that be what I say at the very first go - off . say I , he be no Tory . I think I be right , sir eh ? " 

 " certainly ; I be no tory . " 

 " no , no , you do not   catch I wrong in a hurry . well , between you and I , I care no more for the Debarrys than I care for Johnny Groats . I live on none o ' their land , and not a pot's - worth do they ever send to the Sugar Loaf . I be not frightened at the Debarrys : there be no man more independent than I . I will plump or I will split for they as treat I the handsome and be the most of what I call gentleman ; that be my idee . and in the way of hatch for any man , they be fool that do not   employ I . " 

 we mortal sometimes cut a pitiable figure in our attempt at display . we may be sure of our own merit , yet fatally ignorant of the point of view from which we be regard by our neighbor . our fine pattern in tattooing may be far from throw he into a swoon of admiration , though we turn ourselves all round to show they . thus it be with Mr. Chubb . 

 " yes , " say Felix , dryly ; " I should think there be some sort of work for which you be just fit . " 

 " ah , you see that ? well , we understand one another . you be no tory ; no more be I. and if I would get four hand to show at a nomination , the Debarrys should not   have one of them . my idee be , there be a deal too much of their scutchin and their moniment in Treby Church . what be their 121   scutchin mean ? they be a sign with little liquor behind them ; that be how I take it . there be nobody can give account of them as I ever hear . " 

 Mr. Chubb be hinder from far explain his view as to the historical element in society by the arrival of new guest , who approach in two group . the foremost group consist of well - know collier , in their good Sunday beaver and colored handkerchief serve as cravat , with the long end float . the second group be a more unusual one , and cause Mr. Chubb to compress his mouth and agitate the muscle about it in rather an excited manner . 

 first come a smartly - dress personage on horseback , with a conspicuous expansive shirt - front and figured satin stock . he be a stout man , and give a strong sense of broadcloth . a wild idea shoot through Mr. Chubb 's brain ; could this grand visitor be Harold Transome ? excuse he : he have be give to understand by his cousin from the distant borough that a radical candidate in the condescension of canvassing have even go the length of eat bread - and - treacle with the child of an honest freeman , and declare his preference for that simple fare . Mr. Chubb 's notion of a Radical be that he be a new and agreeable kind of lick - spittle who fawn on the poor instead of on the rich , and so be likely to send customer to a " public " ; so that he argue well enough from the premise at his command . 

 the mount man of broadcloth have follower : several shabby - look man , and Sproxton boy of all size , whose curiosity have be stimulate by unexpected largesse . a stranger on horseback scatter half - pence on a Sunday be so unprecedented that there be no knowing what he might do next ; and the small hindmost fellow in sealskin cap be not without hope that an entirely new order of thing have set in . 

 everyone wait outside for the stranger to dismount , and Mr. Chubb advance to take the bridle . 

 " well , Mr. Chubb , " be the first word when the great man be safely out of the saddle , " I have   often hear of your fine tap , and I be come to taste it . " 

 " walk in , sir pray walk in , " say Mr. Chubb , give the horse to the stable - boy . " I shall be proud to draw for you . if anybody be be praise I , I think my ale will back he . " 

 all enter in the rear of the stranger except the boy , who peep in at the window . 

  122 

 " will not   you please to walk into the parlor , sir , " say Mr. Chubb , obsequiously . 

 " no , no , I will sit down here . this be what I like to see , " say the strange , look round at the collier , who eye he rather shyly " a bright hearth where workingmen can enjoy themselves . however , I will step into the other room for three minute , just to speak half a dozen word with you . " 

 Mr. Chubb throw open the parlor door , and then step back , take the opportunity of say , in a low tone , to Felix , " do you know this gentleman ? " 

 " not I ; no . " 

 Mr. Chubb 's opinion of Felix Holt sink from that moment . the parlor door be close , but no one sit down or order beer . 

 " I say , master , " say Mike Brindle , go up to Felix , " do not   you think that be one o ' the ' lection man ? " 

 " very likely . " 

 " I hear a chap say they be up and down everywhere , " say Brindle ; " and now be the time , they say , when a man can get beer for nothing . " 

 " ay , that be sin ' the reform , " say a big , red - whisker man , call Dredge . " that be bring the ' lection and the drink into these part ; for afore that , it be all kep ' up the Lord know wheer . " 

 " well , but the Reform 's niver come anigh Sprox'on , " say a gray - haired but stalwart man call Old Sleck . " I do not   believe nothing about'n , I do not . " 

 " do not   you ? " say Brindle , with some contempt . " well , I do . there 's folk will not   believe beyond the end o ' their own pickax . you can not   drive nothing into them , not if you split their skull . I know for certain sure , from a chap in the cartin ' way , as he be get money and drink too , only for holler . eh , master , what do you say ? " Brindle end , turn with some deference to Felix . 

 " should you like to know all about the reform ? " say Felix , use his opportunity . " if you would , I can tell you . " 

 " ay , ay tell 's ; you know I will be bind , " say several voice at once . 

 " ah , but it will take some little time . and we must be quiet . the cleverest of you those who be look up to in the Club must come and meet I at Peggy Button 's cottage next Saturday , at seven o'clock , after dark . and , Brindle , you must bring that little yellow - haired lad of your . and anybody that be get a little boy a very little fellow , who will not   understand what be say may bring   123   he . but you must keep it close , you know . we do not   want fool there . but everybody who hear I may come . I shall be at Peggy Button 's . " 

 " why , that be where the Wednesday preachin ' be , " say Dredge . " I have   be aforced to give my wife a black eye to hinder she from go to the preachin ' . Lors - a - massy , she think she know well nor I , and I can not   make head nor tail of her talk . " 

 " why can not   you let the woman alone ? " say Brindle , with some disgust . " I would be ashamed to beat a poor crawling thing 'cause she like preach . " 

 " no more I do beat she afore , not if she scrat ' I , " say Dredge , in vindication ; " but if she jabber at I , I can not   abide it . Howsomever , I will bring my Jack to Peggy 's o ' Saturday . his mother shall wash he . he be but four year old , and he will swear and square at I a good un , if I set he on . " 

 " there you go blatherin ' , " say Brindle , intend a mild rebuke . 

 this dialogue , which be in danger of become too personal , be interrupt by the reopening of the parlor door , and the reappearance of the impressive stranger with Mr. Chubb , whose countenance seem unusually radiant . 

 " sit you down here , Mr. Johnson , " say Chubb , move an arm - chair . " this gentleman be kind enough to treat the company , " he add , look round , " and what be more , he will take a cup with them ; and I think there be no man but what will say that be a honor . " 

 the company have nothing equivalent to a " hear , hear , " at command , but they perhaps feel the more , as they seat themselves with an expectation unvente by utterance . there be a general satisfactory sense that the hitherto shadowy Reform have at length come to Sproxton in a good round shape , with broadcloth and pocket . Felix do not intend to accept the treating , but he choose to stay and hear , take his pint as usual . 

 " Capital ale , capital ale , " say Mr. Johnson , as he set down his glass , speak in a quick , smooth treble . " now , " he go on , with a certain pathos in his voice , look at Mr. Chubb , who sit opposite , " there be some satisfaction to I in find an establishment like this at the pit . for what would high wage do for the workingman if he could not   get a good article for his money ? why , gentleman " here he look round " I have   be into ale - house where I have   see a fine fellow 124   of a miner or a stone - cutter come in and have to lay down money for beer that I should be sorry to give to my pig ! " here Mr. Johnson lean forward with square elbow , hand place on his knee , and a defiant shake of the head . 

 " aw , like at the blue cow , " fall in the irrepressible Dredge , in a deep bass ; but he be rebuke by a severe nudge from Brindle . 

 " yes , yes , you know what it be , my friend , " say Mr. Johnson , look at Dredge , and restore his self - satisfaction . " but it will not   last much long , that be one good thing . bad liquor will be sweep away with other bad article . trade will prosper and what be trade now without steam ? and what be steam without coal ? and mark you this , gentleman there be no man and no government can make coal . " 

 a loud " haw , haw , " show that this fact be appreciate . 

 " nor freeston ' , nayther , " say a wide - mouthed wiry man call Gills , who wish for an exhaustive treatment of the subject , be a stone - cutter . 

 " nor freestone , as you say ; else , I think , if coal could be make above - ground , honest fellow who be the pith of our population would not have to bend their back and sweat in a pit six day out of the seven . no , no ; I say , as this country prosper it have more and more need of you , sir . it can do without a pack of lazy lord and lady , but it can never do without brave collier . and the country will prosper . I pledge you my word , sir , this country will rise to the tiptop of everything , and there be not   a man in it but what shall have his joint in the pot , and his spare money jingle in his pocket , if we only exert ourselves to send the right man to Parliament man who will speak up for the collier , and the stone - cutter , and the navvy "   Mr. Johnson wave his hand liberally , " and will stand no nonsense . this be a crisis , and we must exert ourselves . we have   get reform , gentleman , but now the thing be to make reform work . it be a crisis I pledge you my word it be a crisis . " 

 Mr. Johnson throw himself back as if from the concussion of that great noun . he do not suppose that one of his audience know what a crisis mean ; but he have large experience in the effect of uncomprehende word ; and in this case the collier be throw into a state of conviction concern they do not know what , which be a fine preparation for " hit out , " or any other act carry a due sequence to such a conviction . 

  125 

 Felix feel himself in danger of get into a rage . there be hardly any mental misery bad than that of have our own serious phrase , our own rooted belief , caricature by a charlatan or a hireling . he begin to feel the sharp low edge of his tin pint - measure , and to think it a tempting missile . 

 Mr. Johnson certainly have some qualification as an orator . after this impressive pause he lean forward again , and say , in a lowered tone , look round 

 " I think you all know the good news . " 

 there be a movement of shoe - sol on the quarried floor , and a scrape of some chair leg , but no other answer . 

 " the good news I mean be , that a first - rate man , Mr. Transome , of Transome Court , have offer himself to represent you in Parliament , sir . I say you in particular , for what he have at heart be the welfare of the workingman of the brave fellow that wield the pickaxe , and the saw , and the hammer . he be rich have more money than Garstin but he do not   want to keep it to himself . what he want be , to make a good use of it , gentleman . he be come back from foreign part with his pocket full of gold . he could buy up the Debarrys , if they be worth buy , but he be get something well to do with his money . he mean to use it for the good of the workingman in these part . I know there be some man who put up for Parliament and talk a little too big . they may say they want to befriend the collier , for example . but I should like to put a question to they . I should like to ask they , ' what collier ? ' there be collier up at Newcastle , and there be collier down in Wales . will it do any good to honest Tom , who be hungry in Sproxton , to hear that Jack at Newcastle have his belly full of beef and pudding ? " 

 " it ought to do he good , " Felix burst in , with his loud , abrupt voice , in odd contrast with glib Mr. Johnson 's . " if he know it be a bad thing to be hungry and not have enough to eat , he ought to be glad that another fellow , who be not idle , be not suffer in the same way . " 

 every one be startle . the audience be much impressed with the grandeur , the knowledge , and the power of Mr. Johnson . his brilliant promise confirm the impression that Reform have at length reach the New pit ; and reform , if it be good for anything , must at last resolve itself into spare money mean ' sport " and drink , and keep away from work for several day in the week . these " brave " man of Sproxton like Felix as one of themselves , only much more knowing as a 126   workingman who have see many distant part , but who must be very poor , since he never drink more than a pint or so . they be quite inclined to hear what he have get to say on another occasion , but they be rather irritated by his interruption at the present moment . Mr. Johnson be annoy , but he speak with the same glib quietness as before , though with an expression of contempt . 

 " I call it a poor - spirited thing to take up a man 's straight - forward word and twist they . what I mean to say be plain enough that no man can be save from starve by look on while other eat . I think that be common - sense , eh , sir ? " 

 there be again an approve " Haw , haw . " to hear anything say , and understand it , be a stimulus that have the effect of wit . Mr. Chubb cast a suspicious and viperous glance at Felix , who feel that he have be a simpleton for his pain . 

 " well , then , " continue Mr. Johnson , " I suppose I may go on . but if there be any one here well able to inform the company than I be , I give way I give way . " 

 " Sir , " say Mr. Chubb , magisterially , " no man shall take the word out of your mouth in this house . and , " he add , look pointedly at Felix , " company that be get no more order to give , and want to turn up rusty to they that have , have well be make room than fill it . love an ' ' armony 's the word on our Club 's flag , an ' love an ' ' armony be the meaning of ' the Sugar Loaf , William Chubb . ' folk of a different mind have well seek another house of call . " 

 " very good , " say Felix , lay down his money and take his cap . " I be go . " he see clearly enough that if he say more , there would be a disturbance which could have no desirable end . 

 when the door have close behind he , Mr. Johnson say , " what be that person 's name ? " 

 " do anybody know it ? " say Mr. Chubb . 

 a few no be hear . 

 " I have   hear he speak like a downright Reformer , else I should have look a little sharp after he . but you may see he be nothing partic'lar . " 

 " it look rather bad that no one know his name , " say Mr. Johnson . " he be most likely a Tory in disguise a Tory spy . you must be careful , sir , of man who come to you and say they be Radicals , and yet do nothing for you . they will stuff you with word no lack of word but word be wind . now , a man like Transome come forward and say to the workingman of this country : ' here I be , ready to serve you and speak 127   for you in Parliament , and to get the law make all right for you ; and in the meanwhile , if there be any of you who be my neighbor who want a day 's holiday , or a cup to drink with friend , or a copy of the King 's likeness why , I be your man . I be not a paper handbill all word and no substance nor a man with land and nothing else ; I have   get bag of gold as well as land . ' I think you know what I mean by the King 's likeness . " 

 here Mr. Johnson take a half - crown out of his pocket and hold the head toward the company . 

 " well , sir , there be some man who like to keep this pretty picture a great deal too much to themselves . I do not   know whether I be right , but I think I have   hear of such a one not a hundred mile from here . I think his name be Spratt , and he manage some company 's coal - pit . " 

 " haw , haw ! Spratt Spratt 's his name , " be roll forth to an accompaniment of scrap shoe - sol . 

 " a screwing fellow , by what I understand a domineering fellow who would expect man to do as he like without pay they for it . I think there be not an honest man would not   like to disappoint such an upstart . " 

 there be a murmur which be interpret by Mr. Chubb . " I will answer for them , sir . " 

 " now , listen to I . here be Garstin : he be one of the company you work under . what be Garstin to you ? who see he ? and when they do see he they see a thin miserly fellow who keep his pocket button . he call himself a Whig , yet he will split vote with a Tory he will drive with the Debarrys . now , gentleman , if I say I would get a vote , and anybody ask I what I should do with it , I should say , ' I will plump for Transome . ' you have   get no vote , and that be a shame . but you will have some day , if such man as Transome be return ; and then you will be on a level with the first gentleman in the land , and if he want to sit in Parliament , he must take off his hat and ask your leave . but though you have not   get a vote you can give a cheer for the right man , and Transome be not a man like Garstin ; if you lose a day 's wage by give a cheer for Transome , he will make you amend . that be the way a man who have no vote can serve himself and his country ; he can lift up his hand and shout ' Transome forever ! ' ' hurray for Transome ! ' let the workingman let the collier and navvy and stone - cutter , who between you and I have a good deal too much the bad of it , as thing   128   be now let they join together and give their hand and voice for the right man , and they will make the great people shake in their shoe a little ; and when you shout for Transome , remember you shout for more wage , and more of your right , and you shout to get rid of rat and sprat and such small animal , who be the tool the rich make use of to squeeze the blood out of the poor man . " 

 " I wish there would be a row I would pommel he , " say Dredge , who be generally feel to be speak to the question . 

 " no , no , my friend there you be a little wrong . no pommel no striking first . there you have the law and the constable against you . a little rolling in the dust and knock hat off , a little pelt with soft thing that will stick and not bruise all that do not   spoil the fun . if a man be to speak when you do not   like to hear he , it be but fair you should give he something he do not   like in return . and the same if he be get a vote and do not   use it for the good of the country ; I see no harm in split his coat in a quiet way . a man must be teach what be right if he do not   know it . but no kick , no knock down , no pommelling . " 

 " it ' ud be good fun , though , if so - be , " say Old Sleck , allow himself an imaginative pleasure . 

 " well , well , if a Spratt want you to say Garstin , it be some pleasure to think you can say Transome . now , my notion be this . you be man who can put two and two together I do not   know a more solid lot of fellow than you be ; and what I say be , let the honest man in this country who have   get no vote show themselves in a body when they have get the chance . why , sir , for every Tory sneak that be get a vote , there be fifty - five fellow who must stand by and be expect to hold their tongue . but I say let them hiss the sneak , let them groan at the sneak , and the sneak will be ashamed of themselves . the man who have   get vote do not   know how to use they . there be many a fool with a vote , who be not sure in his mind whether he shall poll , say for Debarry , or Garstin , or Transome whether he will plump or whether he will split ; a straw will turn he . let he know your mind if he do not   know his own . what be the reason debarry get return ? because people be frightened at the Debarrys . what be that to you ? you do not   care for the Debarrys . if people be frighten at the Tories , we will turn round and frighten they . you know what a tory be one who want to drive the workingman as he would drive cattle . that be what a tory be ; and a Whig be no well , if he be 129   like Garstin . a Whig want to knock the Tory down and get the whip , that be all . but Transome be neither Whig nor Tory ; he be the workingman 's friend , the collier 's friend , the friend of the honest navvy . and if he get into Parliament , let I tell you it will be well for you . I do not   say it will be the well for overlooker and screw , and rat and sprat ; but it will be the well for every good fellow who take his pot at the Sugar Loaf . " 

 Mr. Johnson 's exertion for the political education of the Sproxton man do not stop here , which be the more disinterested in he as he do not expect to see they again , and could only set on foot an organization by which their instruction could be continue without he . in this he be quite successful . a man know among the " butty " as Pack , who have already be mention by Mr. Chubb , presently join the party , and have a private audience of Mr. Johnson , that he might be institute as the ' shepherd " of this new flock . 

 " that be a right down genelman , " say Pack , as he take the seat vacate by the orator , who have ride away . 

 " what be his trade , think you ? " say Gills , the wiry stone - cutter . 

 " Trade ? " say Mr. Chubb . " he one of the top sawyer of the country . he work with his head , you may see that . " 

 " let us have our pipe , then , " say Old Sleck ; " I be pretty well tired o ' jaw . " 

 " so be I , " say Dredge . " it be wriggle work like follere a stoat . it make a man dry . I would as lief hear preach , on'y there be naught to be get by't . I should not   know which end I stand on if it be not   for the ticket and the treatin ' . " 

 CHAPTER XII . 

 " oh , sir , ' twa that mixture of spite and over - feed merriment which pass for humor with the vulgar . in their fun , they have much resemblance to a turkey - cock . it have a cruel beak , and a silly iteration of ugly sound ; it spread its tail in self - glorification , but show you the wrong side of the ornament liking admiration , but know not what be admirable . " 

 this Sunday evening , which promise to be so memorable in the experience of the Sproxton miner , have its drama also for those unsatisfactory object to Mr. Johnson 's moral sense , the Debarrys . certain incident occur at Treby Manor cause an excitement there which spread from the dining - room to the stable ; but no one undergo such agitate transition of feeling as Mr. Scales . at six o'clock that superior 130   butler be chuckle in triumph at have play a fine and original practical joke on his rival , Mr. Christian . some two hour after that time he be frightened , sorry , and even meek ; he be on the brink of a humiliating confession ; his cheek be almost livid ; his hair be flatten for want of due attention from his finger ; and the fine roll of his whisker , which be too firm to give way , seem only a sad reminiscence of past splendor and felicity . his sorrow come about in this wise . 

 after service on that Sunday morning , Mr. Philip Debarry have leave the rest of the family to go home in the carriage , and have remain at the rectory to lunch with his uncle Augustus , that he might consult he touch some letter of importance . he have return the letter to his pocket - book but have not return the book to his pocket , and he finally walk away leave the enclosure of private paper and bank - note on his uncle 's escritoire . after his arrival at home he be remind of his omission , and immediately dispatch Christian with a note beg his uncle to seal up the pocket - book and send it by the bearer . this commission , which be give between three and four o'clock , happen to be very unwelcome to the courier . the fact be that Mr. Christian , who have be remarkable through life for that power of adapt himself to circumstance which enable a man to fall safely on all - four in the most hurried expulsion and escape , be not exempt from bodily suffer a circumstance to which there be no known way of adapt one 's self so as to be perfectly comfortable under it , or to push it off on to other people 's shoulder . he do what he could : he take dos of opium when he have an access of nervous pain , and he console himself as to future possibility by think that if the pain ever become intolerably frequent , a considerable increase in the dose might put an end to they altogether . he be neither Cato nor Hamlet , and though he have learn their soliloquy at his first boarding - school , he would probably have increase his dose without recite those master - piece . next to the pain itself he dislike that any one should know of it : defective health diminish a man 's market value ; he do not like to be the object of the sort of pity he himself give to a poor devil who be force to make a wry face or " give in " altogether . 

 he have feel it expedient to take a slight dose this afternoon , and still he be not altogether relieve at the time he set off for the rectory . on return with the valuable case safely deposit in his hind 131   pocket , he feel increase bodily uneasiness , and take another dose . think it likely that he look rather pitiable , he choose not to proceed to the house by the carriage - road . the servant often walk in the park on a Sunday , and he wish to avoid any meeting . he would make a circuit , get into the house privately , and after deliver his packet to Mr. Debarry , shut himself up till the ringing of the half - hour bell . but when he reach an elbowed seat under some sycamore , he feel so ill at ease that he yield to the temptation of throw himself on it to rest a little . he look at his watch : it be but five ; he have do his errand quickly hitherto , and Mr. Debarry have not urge haste . but in less than ten minute he be in a sound sleep . certain condition of his system have determine a strong effect than usual from the opium . 

 as he have expect , there be servant stroll in the park , but they do not all choose the most frequented part . Mr. Scales , in pursuit of a light flirtation with the young lady 's maid , have prefer a more sequester walk in the company of that agreeable nymph . and it happen to be this pair , of all other , who alight on the sleep Christian a sight which at the very first moment cause Mr. Scales a vague pleasure as at an incident that must lead to something clever on his part . to play a trick , and make some one or other look foolish , be hold the most pointed form of wit throughout the back region of the Manor , and serve as a constant substitute for theatrical entertainment : what the farce want in costume or " make up " it gain in the reality of the mortification which excite the general laughter . and lo ! here be the offensive , the exasperatingly cool and superior Christian , catch comparatively helpless , with his head hang on his shoulder , and one coat - tail hang out heavily below the elbow of the rustic seat . it be this coat - tail which serve as a suggestion to Mr. Scales 's genius . put his finger up in warning to Mrs. Cherry , and say , " hush be quiet I see a fine bit of fun " he take a knife from his pocket , step behind the unconscious Christian , and quickly cut off the pendent coat - tail . scale know nothing of the errand to the rectory ; and as he notice that there be something in the pocket , think it be probably a large cigar - case . so much the well he have no time to pause . he throw the coat - tail as far as he could , and notice that it fall among the elm under which they have be walk . then , beckon to Mrs Cherry , he hurry away with 132   she toward the more open part of the park , not dare to explode in laughter until it be safe from the chance of wake the sleeper . and then the vision of the graceful , well - appoint Mr. Christian , who sneer at Scales about his " get up , " have to walk back to the house with only one tail to his coat , be a source of so much enjoyment to the butler , that the fair Cherry begin to be quite jealous of the joke . still she admit that it really be funny , titter intermittently , and pledge herself to secrecy . Mr. Scales explain to she that Christian would try to creep in unobserved , but that this must be make impossible ; and he request she to imagine the figure this interlope fellow would cut when everybody be ask what have happen . " Hallo , Christian ! where be your coat tail ? " would become a proverb at the Manor , where joke keep remarkably well without the aid of salt ; and Mr. Christian 's comb would be cut so effectually that it would take a long time to grow again . exit Scales , laughing , and present a fine example of dramatic irony to any one in the secret of Fate . 

 when Christian awake , he be shocked to find himself in the twilight . he start up , shake himself , miss something , and soon become aware what it be he miss . he do not doubt that he have be rob , and he at once foresaw that the consequence would be highly unpleasant . in no way could the cause of the accident be so represent to Mr. Philip Debarry as to prevent he from view his hitherto unimpeachable factotum in a new and unfavorable light . and though Mr. Christian do not regard his present position as brilliant , he do not see his way to anything well . a man nearly fifty who be not always quite well be seldom ardently hopeful : he be aware that this be a world in which merit be often overlook . with the idea of robbery in full possession of his mind , to peer about and search in the dimness , even if it have occur to he , would have seem a preposterous waste of time and energy . he know it be likely that Mr. Debarry 's pocket - book have important and valuable content , and that he should deepen his offence by defer his announcement of the unfortunate fact . he hasten back to the house , relieve by the obscurity from that mortification of his vanity on which the butler have count . indeed , to Scales himself the affair have already begin to appear less thoroughly jocose than he have anticipate . for he observe that Christian 's non - appearance before dinner have cause Mr. Debarry some consternation ; and he have gather that the courier have 133   be send on a commission to the rectory . " my uncle must have detain he for some reason or other , " he hear Mr. Philip say ; " but it be odd . if he be less trusty about commission , or have ever seem to drink too much , I should be uneasy . " altogether the affair be not take the turn Mr. Scales have intend . at last , when dinner have be remove , and the butler 's chief duty be at an end , it be understand that Christian have enter without his coat tail , look serious and even agitated ; that he have ask leave at once to speak to Mr. Debarry , and that he be even then in parley with the gentleman in the dining - room . Scales be in alarm ; it must have be some property of Mr. Debarry 's that have weight the pocket . he take a lantern , get a groom to accompany he with another lantern , and with the utmost practical speed reach the fatal spot in the park . he search under the elm he be certain that the pocket have fall there and he find the pocket ; but he find it empty , and , in spite of further search , do not find the content , though he have first console himself with think that they have fall out , and would be lie not far off . he return with the lantern and the coat tail and a most uncomfortable consciousness in that great seat of a butler 's emotion , the stomach . he have no soon re - enter than he be meet by Mrs. Cherry , pale and anxious , who draw he aside to say that if he do not   tell everything she would ; that the constable be to be send for ; that there have be no end of bank - note and letter and thing in Mr. Debarry 's pocket - book , which Christian be carry in that very pocket Scales have cut off ; that the rector be send for , the constable be come , and they should all be hang . Mr. Scales 's own intellect be anything but clear as to the possible issue . Crest - fall , and with the coat - tail in his hand as an attestation that he be innocent of anything more than a joke , he go and make his confession . his story relieve Christian a little , but do not relieve Mr. Debarry , who be more annoyed at the loss of the letter , and the chance of their get into hand that might make use of they , than at the loss of the bank - note . nothing could be do for the present , but that the rector , who be a magistrate , should instruct the constable , and that the spot in the park indicate by scale should again be carefully search . this be do , but in vain ; and many of the family at the Manor have disturb sleep that night . 

  134 

 CHAPTER xiii . 

 " give sorrow leave awhile , to tutor I 
 to this submission . " Richard II . 
 meanwhile Felix Holt have be make his way back from Sproxton to Treby in some irritation and bitterness of spirit . for a little while he walk slowly along the direct road , hop that Mr. Johnson would overtake he , in which case he would have the pleasure of quarrel with he , and tell he what he think of his intention in come to can not at the Sugar Loaf . but he presently check himself in this folly and turn off again toward the canal , that he might avoid the temptation of get into a passion to no purpose . 

 " where be the good , " he think , " of pull at such a tangled skein as this electioneer trickery ? as long as three - fourth of the man in this country see nothing in an election but self - interest , and nothing in self - interest but some form of greed , one might as well try to purify the proceeding of the fish , and say to a hungry cod - fish ' my good friend , abstain ; do not   goggle your eye so , or show such a stupid gluttonous mouth , or think the little fish be worth nothing except in relation to your own inside . ' he would be open to no argument short of crimp he . I should get into a rage with this fellow , and perhaps end by thrash he . there be some reason in I as long as I keep my temper , but my rash humor be drunkenness without wine . I should not   wonder if he upset all my plan with these collier . of course he be go to treat they for the sake of get up a posse at the nomination and speechifying . they will drink double , and never come near I on a Saturday evening . I do not   know what sort of man Transome really be . it be no use my speaking to anybody else , but if I could get at he , he might put a veto on this thing . though , when once the man have be promise and set a - going , the mischief be likely to be past mending . hang the liberal cod - fish ! I should not   have mind so much if he have be a tory ! " 

 Felix go along in the twilight struggle in this way with the intricacy of life , which would certainly be greatly simplify if corrupt practice be the invariable mark of wrong opinion . when he have cross the common and have enter the park , the overshadow tree deepen the gray gloom of the evening ; it be useless to try and keep the blind path , and he could only be careful that his step should be bent in the direction of the park gate . he be stride along rapidly now , whistle " bannockburn " in a subdue way as an accompaniment to 135   his inward discussion , when something smooth and soft on which his foot alight arrest he with an unpleasant startling sensation , and make he stoop to examine the object he be treading on . he find it to be a large leather pocket - book swell by its content , and fasten with a seal ribbon as well as a clasp . in stoop he see about a yard off something whitish and square lie on the dark grass . this be an ornamental note - book of pale leather stamp with gold . apparently it have burst open in fall , and out of the pocket form by the cover , there protrude a small gold chain about four inch long , with various seal and other trifle attach to it by a ring at the end . Felix thrust the chain back , and find that the clasp of the note - book be break , he close it and thrust it into his side - pocket , walk along under some annoyance that fortune have make he the finder of article belong most probably to one of the family at Treby Manor . he be much too proud a man to like any contact with the aristocracy , and he could still less endure come within speech of their servant . some plan must be devise by which he could avoid carry these thing up to the Manor himself : he think at first of leave they at the lodge , but he have a scruple against place property , of which the ownership be after all uncertain , in the hand of person unknown to he . it be possible that the large pocket - book contain paper of high importance , and that it do not belong to any of the Debarry family . he resolve at last to carry his finding to Mr. Lyon , who would perhaps be good - natured enough to save he from the necessary transaction with the people at the Manor by undertake those transaction himself . with this determination he walk straight to Malthouse Yard , and wait outside the chapel until the congregation be disperse , when he pass along the aisle to the vestry in order to speak to the minister in private . 

 but Mr. Lyon be not alone when Felix enter . Mr. Nuttwood , the grocer , who be one of the deacon , be complain to he about the obstinate demeanor of the singer , who have decline to change the tune in accordance with a change in the selection of hymn , and have stretch short metre into long out of pure wilfulness and defiance , irreverently adapt the most sacred monosyllable to a multitude of quaver , arrange , it be to be fear , by some musician who be inspire by conceit rather than by the true spirit of psalmody . 

  136 

 " come in , my friend , " say Mr. Lyon , smile at Felix , and then continue in a faint voice , while he wipe the perspiration from his brow and bald crown , " Brother Nuttwood , we must be content to carry a thorn in our side while the necessity of our imperfect state demand that there should be a body set apart and call a choir , whose special office it be to lead the singing , not because they be more disposed to the devout uplifting of praise , but because they be endow with well vocal organ , and have attain more of the musician 's art . for all office , unless it be accompany by peculiar grace , become , as it be , a diseased organ , seek to make itself too much of a centre . singer , specially so call , be , it must be confess , an anomaly among we who seek to reduce the Church to its primitive simplicity , and to cast away all that may obstruct the direct communion of spirit with spirit . " 

 " they be so headstrong , " say Mr. Nuttwood , in a tone of sad perplexity , " that if we deal not warily with they they might end in divide the church , even now that we have have the chapel enlarge . Brother Kemp would side with they , and draw the half part of the member after he . I can not but think it a snare when a professing Christian have a bass voice like Brother Kemp 's . it make he desire to be hear of man ; but the weak song of the humble may have more power in the ear of God . " 

 " do you think it any well vanity to flatter yourself that God like to hear you , though man do not ? " say Felix , with unwarrantable bluntness . 

 the civil grocer be prepared to be scandalize by anything that come from Felix . in common with many hearer in Malthouse Yard , he already feel an objection to a young man who be notorious for have interfere in a question of wholesale and retail , which should have be leave to Providence . old Mr. Holt , be a church member , have probably have " leading " which be more to be rely on than his son 's boasted knowledge . in any case , a little visceral disturbance and inward chastisement to the consumer of questionable medicine would tend less to obscure the divine glory than a show of punctilious morality in one who be not a " professor . " besides , how be it to be know that the medicine would not be bless , if take with due trust in a high influence ? a Christian must consider not the medicine alone in their relation to our frail body   which be dust , but the medicine with Omnipotence behind they . hence a pious vendor will look for 137   " leading , " and he be likely to find they in the cessation of demand and the disproportion of expense and return . the grocer be thus on his guard against the presumptuous disputant . 

 " Mr. Lyon may understand you , sir , " he reply . " he seem to be fond of your conversation . but you have too much of the pride of human learning for I . I follow no new light . " 

 " then follow an old one , " say Felix , mischievously dispose toward a sleek tradesman . " follow the light of the old - fashioned Presbyterians that I have   hear se at Glasgow . the preacher give out the psalm , and then everybody sing a different tune , as it happen to turn up in their throat . it be a domineering thing to set a tune and expect everybody else to follow it . it be a denial of private judgment . " 

 " hush , hush , my young friend , " say Mr. Lyon , hurt by this levity , which glance at himself as well as at the deacon . " play not with paradox . that caustic which you handle in order to scorch other , may happen to sear your own finger and make they dead to the quality of thing . ' tis difficult enough to see our way and keep our torch steady in this dim labyrinth : to whirl the torch and dazzle the eye of our fellow - seeker be a poor daring , and may end in total darkness . you yourself be a lover of freedom , and a bold rebel against usurping authority . but the right to rebellion be the right to seek a high rule , and not to wander in mere lawlessness . wherefore , I beseech you , seem not to say that liberty be license . and I apprehend though I be not endow with an ear to seize those earthly harmony , which to some devout soul have seem , as it be , the broken echo of the heavenly choir I apprehend that there be a law in music , disobedience whereunto would bring we in our singing to the level of shriek maniacs or howl beast : so that herein we be well instruct how true liberty can be nought but the transfer of obedience from the will of one or of a few man to that will which be the norm or rule for all man . and though the transfer may sometimes be but an erroneous direction of search , yet be the search good and necessary to the ultimate finding . and even as in music , where all obey and concur to one end , so that each have the joy of contribute to a whole whereby he be ravish and lift up into the court of heaven , so will it be in that crown time of the millennial reign , when our daily prayer will be fulfil , and one law shall be write on all heart , and be the very structure of all thought , and be the principle of all action . " 

  138 

 Tired , even exhaust , as the minister have be when Felix Holt enter , the gathering excitement of speech give more and more energy to his voice and manner ; he walk away from the vestry table , he pause , and come back to it ; he walk away again , then come back , and end with his deep toned largo , keep his hand clasp behind he , while his brown eye be bright with the last youthfulness of enthusiastic thought and love . but to any one who have no share in the energy that be thrill his little body , he would have look queer enough . no soon have he finish his eager speech , than he hold out his hand to the deacon , and say , in his former faint tone of fatigue 

 " God be with you , brother . we shall meet to - morrow , and we will see what can be do to subdue these refractory spirit . " 

 when the deacon be go , Felix say , " forgive I , Mr. Lyon ; I be wrong , and you be right . " 

 " yes , yes , my friend , you have that mark of grace within you , that you be ready to acknowledge the justice of a rebuke . sit down ; you have something to say some packet there . " 

 they sit down at a corner of the small table , and Felix draw the note - book from his pocket to lay it down with the pocket - book , say 

 " I have   have the ill - luck to be the finder of these thing in the Debarrys ' park . most likely they belong to one of the family at the Manor , or to some grandee who be stay there . I hate have anything to do with such people . they will think I a poor rascal , and offer I money . you be a know man , and I think you would be kind enough to relieve I by take charge of these thing , and write to debarry , not mention I , and ask he to send some one for they , I find they on the grass in the park this evening about half - past seven , in the corner we cross go to Sproxton . " 

 " stay , " say Mr. Lyon , " this little book be open ; we may venture to look in it for some sign of ownership . there be other who possess property , and might be cross that end of the park , besides the Debarrys . " 

 as he lift the note - book close to his eye , the chain again slip out . he arrest it and hold it in his hand , while he examine some writing , which appear to be a name on the inner leather . he look long , as if he be try to decipher something that be partly rub out ; and his hand begin to tremble noticeably . he make a movement in an agitated manner , as if he be go to examine the chain and seal , which he hold in his hand . but he check himself , close his hand 139   again , and rest it on the table , while with the other hand he press the side of the note - book together . 

 Felix observe his agitation , and be much surprised ; but with a delicacy of which he be capable under all his abruptness , he say , " you be overcome with fatigue , sir . I be thoughtless to tease you with these matter at the end of Sunday , when you have be preach three sermon . " 

 Mr. Lyon do not speak for a few moment , but at last he say 

 " it be true . I be overcome . it be a name I see a name that call up a past sorrow . fear not ; I will do what be needful with these thing . you may trust they to I . " 

 with tremble finger he replace the chain , and tie both the large pocket - book and the note - book in his handkerchief . he be evidently make a great effort over himself . but when he have gather the knot of the handkerchief in his hand he say 

 " give I your arm to the door , my friend . I feel ill . Doubtless I be over - weary . " 

 the door be already open , and Lyddy be watch for her master 's return . Felix therefore say good - night and pass on , sure that this be what Mr. Lyon would prefer . the minister 's supper of warm porridge be ready by the kitchen - fire , where he always take it on a Sunday evening , and afterward smoke his weekly pipe up the broad chimney the one great relaxation he allow himself . smoking , he consider , be a recreation of the travaille spirit , which , if indulge in , might endear this world to we by the ignoble bond of mere sensuous ease . daily smoking might be lawful , but it be not expedient . and in this Esther concur with a doctrinal eagerness that be unusual in she . it be her habit to go to her own room , professedly to bed , very early on Sundays immediately on her return from chapel that she might avoid her father 's pipe . but this evening she have remain at home , under a true plea of not feel well ; and when she hear he enter , she run out of the parlor to meet he . 

 " Father , you be ill , " she say , as he totter to the wicker - bottom arm - chair , while Lyddy stand by , shake her head . 

 " no , my dear , " he answer feebly , as she take off his hat and look in his face enquiringly ; " I be weary . " 

  140 

 " let I lay these thing down for you , " say Esther , touch the bundle in the handkerchief . 

 " no ; they be matter which I have to examine , " he say , lay they on the table , and put his arm across they . " go you to bed , Lyddy . " 

 " not I , sir . if ever a man look as if he be strike with death , it be you , this very night as here be . " 

 " Nonsense , Lyddy , " say Esther , angrily . " go to bed when my father desire it . I will stay with he . " 

 Lyddy be electrify by surprise at this new behavior of Miss Esther 's . she take her candle silently and go . 

 " go you too , my dear , " say Mr. Lyon , tenderly , give his hand to Esther , when Lyddy be go . " it be your will not to go early . why be you up ? " 

 " let I lift your porridge from before the fire , and stay with you , father . you think I be so naughty that I do not   like do anything for you , " say Esther , smile rather sadly at he . 

 " child , what have happen ? you have become the image of your mother to - night , " say the minister , in a loud whisper . the tear come and relieve he while Esther , who have stoop to lift the porridge from the fender , pause on one knee and look up at he . 

 " she be very good to you ? " ask Esther , softly . 

 " yes , dear . she do not reject my affection . she think not scorn of my love . she would have forgive I , if I have err against she , from very tenderness . could you forgive I , child ? " 

 " Father , I have not be good to you ; but I will be , I will be , " say Esther , lay her head on his knee . 

 he kiss her head . " go to bed , dear ; I would be alone . " 

 when Esther be lie down that night , she feel as if the little incident between herself and her father on this Sunday have make it an epoch . very slight word and deed may have a sacramental efficacy , if we can cast our self - love behind we , in order to say or do they . and it have be well believe through many age that the beginning of compunction be the beginning of a new life ; that the mind which see itself blameless may be call dead in trespass in trespass on the love of other , in trespass on their weakness , in trespass on all those great claim which be the image of our own need . 

 but Esther persist in assure herself that she be not bend to any criticism from Felix . she be full of resentment against his rudeness , 141   and yet more against his too harsh conception of her character . she be determined to keep as much at a distance from he as possible . 

 CHAPTER XIV . 

 this man 's metallic ; at a sudden blow 
 his soul ring hard . I can not lay my palm , 
 tremble with life , upon that joint brass . 
 I shudder at the cold unanswere touch ; 
 but if it press I in response , I be bruise . 
 the next morning , when the Debarrys , include the rector , who have ride over to the Manor early , be still seat at breakfast , Christian come in with a letter , say that it have be bring by a man employ at the chapel in Malthouse Yard , who have be order by the minister to use all speed and care in the delivery . 

 the letter be address to Sir Maximus . 

 " stay , Christian , it may possibly refer to the lost pocket - book , " say Philip Debarry , who be begin to feel rather sorry for his factotum , as a reaction from previous suspicion and indignation . 

 Sir Maximus open the letter and feel for his glass , but then say , " here , you read it , Phil : the man write a hand like small print . " 

 Philip cast his eye over it , and then read aloud in a tone of satisfaction : 

 Sir , I send this letter to apprise you that I have now in my possession certain article , which , last evening , at about half - past seven o'clock , be find lie on the grass at the western extremity of your park . the article be 1 , a well - fill pocket - book , of brown leather , fasten with a black ribbon and with a seal of red wax ; 2 , a small note - book , cover with gild vellum , whereof the clasp be burst , and from out whereof have partly escape a small chain , with seal and a locket attach , the locket bearing on the back a device , and round the face a female name . 

 Whereof I request that you will further my effort to place these article in the right hand , by ascertain whether any person within your wall claim they as his property , and by send that person to I   if such be find ; for I will on no account let they pass from my care save into that of one who , declare himself to be the owner , can state to I what be the impression on the seal , and what the device and name upon the locket . 

 I be , sir , your to command in all right dealing , 

 Malthouse Yard . Oct. 3 , 1832 . 

 Rufus Lyon . 

 " well do , old Lyon , " say the rector ; " I do not   think that any composition of his would ever give I so much pleasure . " 

 " what an old fox it be ! " say Sir Maximus . " why could not   he send 142   the thing to I at once along with the letter ? " 

 " no , no , Max ; he use a justifiable caution , " say the rector , a refined and rather severe likeness of his brother , with a ring of fearlessness and decision in his voice which startle all flaccid man and unruly boy . " what be you go to do , Phil ? " he add , see his nephew rise . 

 " to write , of course . those other matter be your , I suppose ? " say Mr. Debarry , look at Christian . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " I shall send you with a letter to the preacher . you can describe your own property . and the seal , uncle be it your coat - of - arm ? " 

 " no , it be this head of Achilles . here , I can take it off the ring , and you can carry it , Christian . but do not   lose that , for I have   have it ever since eighteen hundred . I should like to send my compliment with it , " the rector go on , look at his brother , " and beg that since he have so much wise caution at command , he would exercise a little in more public matter , instead of make himself a firebrand in my parish , and teaching huckster and tape - weaver that it be their business to dictate to statesman . " 

 " how do dissenter , and Methodists , and Quakers , and people of that sort first come up , uncle ? " say Miss Selina , a radiant girl of twenty , who have give much time to the harp . 

 " dear I , Selina , " say her eld sister , Harriet , whose forte be general knowledge , " do not   you remember ' woodstock ' ? they be in Cromwell 's time . " 

 " oh ! Holdenough , and those people ? yes ; but they preach in the church ; they have no chapel . tell I , uncle Gus ; I like to be wise , " say Selina , look up at the face which be smile down on she with a sort of severe benignity . " Phil say I be an ignorant puss . " 

 " the seed of Nonconformity be sow at the Reformation , my dear , when some obstinate man make scruple about surplice and the place of the communion - table , and other trifle of that sort . but the Quakers come up about Cromwell 's time , and the Methodists only in the last century . the first Methodists be regular clergyman , the more be the pity . " 

 " but all those wrong thing , why do not   government put they down ? " 

 " ah , to be sure , " fall in Sir Maximus , in a cordial tone of corroboration . 

  143 

 " because error be often strong , and government be often weak , my dear . well , Phil , have you finish your letter ? " 

 " yes , I will read it to you , " say Philip , turn and lean over the back of his chair with the letter in his hand . 

 there be a portrait of Mr. Philip Debarry still to be see at Treby Manor , and a very fine bust of he at Rome , where he die fifteen year later , a convert to Catholicism . his face would have be plain but for the exquisite setting of his hazel eye , which fascinate even the dog of the household . the other feature , though slight and irregular , be redeem from triviality by the stamp of gravity and intellectual preoccupation in his face and bear . as he read aloud , his voice be what his uncle 's might have be if it have be modulate by delicate health and a visitation of self - doubt . 

 Sir , in reply to the letter with which you have favor I this morning , I beg to state that the article you describe be lose from the pocket of my servant , who be the bearer of this letter to you , and be the claimant of the vellum note - book and the gold chain . the large leathern pocket - book be my own property and the impression on the wax , a helmeted head of Achilles , be make by my uncle , the Reverend Augustus Debarry , who allow I to forward this seal to you in proof that I be not make a mistaken claim . 

 I feel myself under deep obligation to you , sir , for the care and trouble you have take in order to restore to its right owner a piece of property which happen to be of particular importance to I . and I shall consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time you can point out to I some method by which I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I be now feel , in that full and speedy relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate conduct . 

 I remain , sir , your obliged and faithful servant , 

 Philip Debarry . 

 " you know well , Phil , of course , " say Sir Maximus , push his plate from he , by way of interjection . " but it seem to I you exaggerate preposterously every little service a man happen to do for you . why should you make a general offer of that sort ? how do you know what he will be ask you to do ? stuff and nonsense ! tell Willis to send he a few head of game . you should think twice before you give a blank check of that sort to one of these quibbling , meddlesome Radicals . " 

 " you be afraid of my commit myself to ' the bottomless perjury of an et cetera , ' " say Philip , smile , as he turn to fold his letter . " but I think I be not do any mischief ; at all event I could not be content to say less . and I have a notion that he would regard a present of game just now as an insult . I should , in his place . " 

  144 

 " yes , yes , you ; but you do not   make yourself a measure of dissent preacher , I hope , " say Sir Maximus , rather wrathfully . " what do you say , Gus ? " 

 " Phil be right , " say the rector , in an absolute tone . " I would not deal with a Dissenter , or put profit into the pocket of a Radical which I might put into the pocket of a good Churchman and a quiet subject . but if the great scoundrel in the world make way for I , or pick my hat up , I would thank he . so would you , Max . " 

 " Pooh ! I do not   mean that one should not   behave like a gentleman , " say Sir Maximus , in some vexation . he have great pride in his son 's superiority even to himself ; but he do not quite trust the dim vision open by Phil 's new word and new notion . he could only submit in silence while the letter be deliver to Christian , with the order to start for Malthouse Yard immediately . 

 meanwhile , in that somewhat dim locality the possible claimant of the note - book and the chain be think of and expect with palpitate agitation . Mr. Lyon be seat in his study , look haggard and already aged from a sleepless night . he be so afraid lest his emotion should deprive he of the presence of mind necessary to the due attention to particular in the come interview , that he continue to occupy his sight and touch with the object which have stir the depth , not only of memory , but of dread . once again he unlock a small box which stand beside his desk , and take from it a little oval locket , and compare this with one which hang with the seal on the stray gold chain . there be the same device in enamel on the back of both : clasp hand surround with blue flower . both have round the face a name in gold italic on a blue ground : the name on the locket take from the drawer be Maurice ; the name on the locket which hang with the seal be Annette , and within the circle of this name there be a lover 's knot of light brown hair , which match a curl that lie in the box . the hair in the locket which bear the name of Maurice be of a very dark brown , and before return it to the drawer Mr. Lyon note the color and quality of this hair more carefully than ever . then he recur to the note - book : undoubtedly there have be something , probably a third name , beyond the name Maurice Christian , which have themselves be rub and slightly smear as if by accident ; and from the very first examination in the vestry , Mr. Lyon could not prevent himself from transfer the mental image of the third name in faint line to the 145   rub leather . the leaf of the note - book seem to have be recently insert ; they be of fresh white paper , and only bear some abbreviation in pencil with a notation of small sum . nothing could be gather from the comparison of the writing in the book with that of the yellow letter which lie in the box ; the smeared name have be carefully print , and so bear no resemblance to the signature of those letter ; and the pencil abbreviation and figure have be make too hurriedly to bear any decisive witness . " I will ask he to write to write a description of the locket , " have be one of Mr. Lyon 's thought ; but he falter in that intention . his power of fulfil it must depend on what he see in this visitor , of whose come he have a horrible dread , at the very time he be write to demand it . in that demand he be obey the voice of his rigid conscience , which have never leave he perfectly at rest under his one act of deception the concealment from Esther that he be not her natural father , the assertion of a false claim upon she . " let my path be henceforth simple , " he have say to himself in the anguish of that night ; " let I seek to know what be , and if possible to declare it . " if he be really go to find himself face to face with the man who have be Annette 's husband , and who be Esther 's father if that wandering of his from the light have bring the punishment of a blind sacrilege as the issue of a conscious transgression , he pray that he might be able to accept all consequence of pain to himself . but he see other possibility concern the claimant of the book and chain . his ignorance and suspicion as to the history and character of Annette 's husband make it credible that he have lay a plan for convince she of his death as a means of free himself from a burdensome tie ; but it seem equally probable that he be really dead , and that these article of property have be a bequest , or a payment , or even a sale , to their present owner . indeed , in all these year there be no knowing into how many hand such pretty trifle might have pass . and the claimant might , after all , have no connection with the Debarrys ; he might not come on this day or the next . there might be more time leave for reflection and prayer . 

 all these possibility , which would remove the press need for difficult action , Mr. Lyon represent to himself , but he have no effective belief in they ; his belief go with his strong feeling , and in these moment his strong feeling be dead . he tremble 146   under the weight that seem already add to his own sin ; he feel himself already confront by Annette 's husband and Esther 's father . perhaps the father be a gentleman on a visit to the Debarrys . there be no hindering the pang with which the old man say to himself 

 " the child will not be sorry to leave this poor home , and I shall be guilty in her sight . " 

 he be walk about among the row of book when there come a loud rap at the outer door . the rap shake he so that he sink into his chair , feel almost powerless . Lyddy present herself . 

 " here be ever such a fine man from the Manor want to see you , sir . dear heart , dear heart ! shall I tell he you be too bad to see he ? " 

 " show he up , " say Mr. Lyon , make an effort to rally . when Christian appear , the minister half rise , lean on an arm of his chair , and say , " be seat , sir , " see nothing but that a tall man be enter . 

 " I have   bring you a letter from Mr. Debarry , " say Christian , in an off - hand manner . the rusty little man , in his dismal chamber , seem to the Ulysses of the steward 's room a pitiable sort of human curiosity , to whom a man of the world would speak rather loudly , in accommodation to an eccentricity which be likely to be accompany with deafness . one can not be eminent in everything ; and if Mr. Christian have disperse his faculty in study that would have enable he to share unconventional point of view , he might have wear a mistaken kind of boot , and be less competent to win at ťcartť , or at bet , or in any other contest suitable to a person of figure . 

 as he seat himself , Mr. Lyon open the letter , and hold it close to his eye , so that his face be hide . but at the word ' servant " he could not avoid start , and look off the letter toward the bearer . Christian , know what be in the letter , conjecture that the old man be amazed to learn that so distinguish - look a personage be a servant ; he lean forward with his elbow on his knee , balance his cane on his finger , and begin a whisper whistle . the minister check himself , finish the reading of the letter , and then slowly and nervously put on his spectacle to survey this man , between whose fate and his own there might be a terrible collision . the word ' servant " have be a fresh caution to he . he must do nothing rashly . Esther 's lot be deeply concerned . 

  147 

 " here be the seal mention in the letter , " say Christian . 

 Mr. Lyon draw the pocket - book from his desk , and after compare the seal with the impression , say , " it be right , sir : I deliver the pocket - book to you . " 

 he hold it out with the seal , and Christian rise to take they , say carelessly , " the other thing the chain and the little book be mine . " 

 " your name then be " 

 " Maurice Christian . " 

 a spasm shoot through Mr. Lyon . it have seem possible that he might hear another name , and be free from the bad half of his anxiety . his next word be not wisely choose , but escape he impulsively . 

 " and you have no other name ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " say Christian , sharply . 

 " be so good as to reseat yourself . " 

 Christian do not comply . " I be rather in a hurry , sir , " he say , recover his coolness . " if it suit you to restore to I those small article of mine , I shall be glad ; but I would rather leave they behind than be detain . " he have reflect that the minister be simply a punctilious old bore . the question mean nothing else . but Mr. Lyon have work himself up to the task of find out , then and there , if possible , whether or not this be Annette 's husband . how could he lay himself and his sin before God if he wilfully decline to learn the truth ? " Nay , sir , I will not detain you unreasonably , " he say , in a firm tone than before . " how long have these article be your property ? " 

 " oh , for more than twenty year , " say Christian , carelessly . 

 he be not altogether easy under the minister 's persistence , but for that very reason he show no more impatience . 

 " you have be in France and in Germany ? " 

 " I have be in most country on the continent . " 

 " be so good as to write I your name , " say Mr. Lyon , dip a pen in ink , and hold it out with a piece of paper . 

 Christian be much surprised , but not now greatly alarmed . in his rapid conjecture as to the explanation of the minister 's curiosity , he have alight on one which might carry advantage rather than inconvenience . but he be not go to commit himself . 

  148 

 " before I oblige you there , sir , " he say , lay down the pen , and look straight at Mr. Lyon , " I must know exactly the reason you have for put these question to I . you be a stranger to I an excellent person , I dare say but I have no concern about you far than to get from you those small article . do you still doubt that they be mine ? you wish , I think , that I should tell you what the locket be like . it have a pair of hand and blue flower on one side and the name Annette round the hair on the other side . that be all I have to say . if you wish for anything more from I , you will be good enough to tell I why you wish it . now then , sir , what be your concern with I ? " 

 the cool stare , the hard challenging voice , with which these word be utter , make they fall like the beating cut chill of heavy hail on Mr. Lyon . he sink back in his chair in utter irresolution and helplessness . how be it possible to lay bare the sad and sacred past in answer to such a call as this ? the dread with which he have think of this man 's come , the strongly - confirm suspicion that he be really Annette 's husband , intensify the antipathy create by his gesture and glance . the sensitive little minister know instinctively that word which would cost he effort as painful as the obedient footstep of a wound bleeding hound that will a foreseen throe , would fall on this man as the pressure of tender finger fall on a brazen glove . and Esther if this man be her father , every additional word might help to bring down irrevocable , perhaps cruel consequence on she . a thick mist seem to have fall where Mr. Lyon be look for the track of duty : the difficult question , how far he be to care for consequence in seek and avow the truth , seem anew obscure . all these thing , like the vision of a come calamity , be compress into a moment of consciousness . nothing could be do to - day ; everything must be defer . he answer Christian in a low apologetic tone . 

 " it be true , sir ; you have tell I all I can demand . I have no sufficient reason for detain your property far . " 

 he hand the note - book and chain to Christian , who have be observe he narrowly , and now say , in a tone of indifference , as he pocket the article 

 " very good , sir . I wish you a good - morning . " 

 " good - morning , " say Mr. Lyon , feel , while the door close behind his guest , that mixture of uneasiness and relief which all procrastination of difficulty produce in mind capable of strong forecast . the work 149   be still to be do . he have still before he the task of learn everything that could be learn about this man 's relation to himself and Esther . 

 Christian , as he make his way back along Malthouse Lane , be think , " this old fellow have get some secret in his head . it be not likely he can know anything about I : it must be about Bycliffe . but Bycliffe be a gentleman : how should he ever have have anything to do with such a seedy old ranter as that ? " 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 and doubt shall be as lead upon the foot 
 of thy most anxious will . 
 Mr. Lyon be careful to look in at Felix as soon as possible after Christian 's departure , to tell he that his trust be discharge . during the rest of the day he be somewhat relieved from agitate reflection by the necessity of attend to his ministerial duty , the rebuke of rebellious singer be one of they ; and on his return from the Monday evening prayer - meeting he be so overcome with weariness that he go to bed without take note of any object in his study . but when he rise the next morning , his mind , once more eagerly active , be arrest by Philip Debarry 's letter , which still lie open on his desk , and be arrest by precisely that portion which have be unheede the day before : " I shall consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time you can point out to I some method by which I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I be now feel , in that full and speedy relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate conduct . " 

 to understand how these word could carry the suggestion they actually have for the minister in a crisis of peculiar personal anxiety and struggle , we must bear in mind that for many year he have walk through life with the sense of have for a space be unfaithful to what he esteem the high trust ever commit to man the ministerial vocation . in a mind of any nobleness , a lapse into transgression against an object still regard as supreme , issue in a new and purer devotedness , chastise by humility and watch over by a passionate regret . so it be with that ardent spirit which animate the little body of Rufus Lyon . once in his life he have be blind , defeat , hurry along by rebellious impulse ; he have go astray after his own desire , and have let the fire die out on the altar ; and as the true penitent , 150   hat his self - besotte error , ask from all come life duty instead of joy , and service instead of ease , so Rufus be perpetually on the watch lest he should ever again postpone to some private affection a great public opportunity which to he be equivalent to a command . 

 now here be an opportunity bring by a combination of that unexpected incalculable kind which might be regard as the divine emphasis invoke especial attention to trivial event an opportunity of secure what Rufus Lyon have often wish for as a means of honor truth , and exhibit error in the character of a stammering , halting , short - breathe usurper of office and dignity . what be more exasperating to a zealous preacher , with whom copious speech be not a difficulty but a relief who never lack argument , but only combatant and listener than to reflect that there be thousand on thousand of pulpit in this kingdom , supply with handsome sounding - board , and occupy an advantageous position in building far large than the chapel in Malthouse Yard building sure to be place of resort , even as the market be , if only from habit and interest ; and that these pulpit be fill , or rather make vacuous , by man whose privileged education in the ancient centre of instruction issue in twenty minute ' formal reading of tepid exhortation or probably infirm deduction from premise base on rotten scaffolding ? and it be in the nature of exasperation gradually to concentrate itself . the sincere antipathy of a dog toward cat in general , necessarily take the form of indignant barking at the neighbor 's black cat which make daily trespass ; the bark at imagined cat , though a frequent exercise of the canine mind , be yet comparatively feeble . Mr. Lyon 's sarcasm be not without an edge when he dilate in general on an elaborate education for teacher which issue in the minimum of teaching , but it find a whetstone in the particular example of that bad system know as the rector of Treby Magna . there be nothing positive to be say against the Rev. Augustus Debarry ; his life could not be pronounce blameworthy except for its negative . and the good Rufus be too pure - minded not to be glad of that . he have no delight in vice as discredit wicked opponent ; he shrink from dwell on the image of cruelty or grossness , and his indignation be habitually inspire only by those moral and intellectual mistake which darken the soul but do not injure or degrade the temple of the body . if the rector have be a less respectable man , Rufus would have more reluctantly make he an object of antagonism ; but as an incarnation of soul - destroy error , 151   dissociate from those base sin which have no good repute even with the worldly , it would be an argumentative luxury to get into close quarter with he , and fight with a dialectic short - sword in the eye of the Treby world   send also a write account thereof to the chief organ of dissenting opinion . Vice be essentially stupid a deaf and eyeless monster , insusceptible to demonstration : the Spirit might work on it by unseen way , and the unstudied sally of sermon be often as the arrow which pierce and awaken the brutified conscience ; but illuminate thought , finely divide speech , be the choicer weapon of the Divine armory , which whoso could wield must be careful not to leave idle . 

 here , then , be the long - for opportunity . here be an engagement an expression of a strong wish on the part of Philip Debarry , if it be in his power , to procure a satisfaction to Rufus Lyon . how have that man of God and exemplary Independent minister , Mr. Ainsworth , of persecute sanctity , conduct himself when a similar occasion have befall he at Amsterdam ? he have think of nothing but the glory of the high cause , and have convert the offer of recompense into a public debate with a Jew on the chief mystery of the faith . here be a model : the case be nothing short of a heavenly indication , and he , Rufus Lyon , would seize the occasion to demand a public debate with the rector on the constitution of the true Church . 

 what if he be inwardly tear by doubt and anxiety concern his own private relation and the fact of his past life ? that danger of absorption within the narrow bound of self only urge he the more toward action which have a wide bearing , and might tell on the welfare of England at large . it be decide . before the minister go down to breakfast that morning he have write the following letter to Mr. Philip Debarry : 

 Sir , refer to your letter of yesterday , I find the following word : " I shall consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time you can point out to I some method by which I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I be now feel , in that full and speedy relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate conduct . " 

 I be not unaware , sir , that , in the usage of the world , there be word of courtesy   so call   which be understand , by those amongst whom they be current , to have no precise meaning , and to constitute no bond of obligation . I will not now insist that this be an abuse of language , wherein our fallible nature require the 152   strictest safeguard against laxity and misapplication , for I do not apprehend that in write the word I have above quote , you be open to the reproach of use phrase which , while seem to carry a specific meaning , be really no more than what be call a polite form . I believe , sir , that you use these word advisedly , sincerely , and with an honorable intention of act on they as a pledge , should such action be demand . no other supposition on my part would correspond to the character you bear as a young man who aspire   albeit mistakenly   to engraft the fine fruit of public virtue on a creed and institution , whereof the sap be compose rather of human self - seeking than of everlasting truth . 

 wherefore I act on this my belief in the integrity of your write word ; I beg you to procure for I   as it be doubtless in your power   that I may be allow a public discussion with your near relative , the rector of this parish , the Reverend Augustus Debarry , to be hold in the large room of the Free School , or in the Assembly Room of the Marquis of Granby , these be the large cover space at our command . for I presume he would neither allow I to speak within his church , nor would consent himself to speak within my chapel ; and the probable inclemency of the approach season forbid an assured expectation that we could discourse in the open air . the subject I desire to discuss be first , the Constitution of the true Church ; and secondly , the bearing thereupon of the English Reformation . confidently expect that you will comply with this request , which be the sequence of your express desire , I remain , sir , your , with the respect offer to a sincere withstander , 

 Rufus Lyon , 

 Malthouse Yard . 

 after write this letter , the good Rufus feel that serenity and elevation of mind which be infallibly bring by a preoccupation with the wide relation of thing . already he be begin to sketch the course his argument might most judiciously take in the come debate ; his thought be run into sentence , and mark off careful exception in parenthesis ; and he have come down and seat himself at the breakfast - table quite automatically , without expectation of toast or coffee , when Esther 's voice and touch recall to he an inward debate of another kind , in which he feel himself much weak . again there arise before he the image of that cool , hard - eye , worldly man , who might be this dear child 's father , and one against whose right he have himself grievously offend . always as the image recur to he Mr. Lyon 's heart send forth a prayer for guidance , but no definite guidance have yet make itself visible for he . it could not be guidance it be a temptation that say , " let the matter rest : seek to know no more ; know only what be thrust upon you . " the remembrance that in his time of wander he have wilfully remain in ignorance of fact which he might have enquire after , deepen the impression that it be now an imperative duty to seek the full attainable knowledge . and the 153   enquiry might possibly issue in a blessed repose , by put a negative on all his suspicion . but the more vividly all the circumstance become present to he , the more unfit he feel himself to set about any investigation concern this man who call himself Maurice Christian . he could seek no confidant or helper among " the brother " ; he be oblige to admit to himself that the member of his church , with whom he hop to go to heaven , be not easy to converse with on earth touch the deep secret of his experience , and be still less able to advise he as to the wise procedure in a case of high delicacy , with a worldling who have a carefully - trim whisker and a fashionable costume . for the first time in his life it occur to the minister that he should be glad of an adviser who have more worldly than spiritual experience , and that it might not be inconsistent with his principle to seek some light from one who have study human law . but it be a thought to be pause upon , and not follow out rashly ; some other guidance might intervene . 

 Esther notice that her father be in a fit of abstraction , that he seem to swallow his coffee and toast quite unconsciously , and that he vent from time to time a low guttural interjection , which be habitual with he when he be absorb by an inward discussion . she do not disturb he by remark , and only wonder whether anything unusual have occur on Sunday evening . but at last she think it needful to say , " you recollect what I tell you yesterday , father ? " 

 " Nay , child ; what ? " say Mr. Lyon , rouse himself . 

 " that Mr. Jermyn ask I if you would probably be at home this morning before one o'clock . " 

 Esther be surprised to see her father start and change color as if he have be shake by some sudden collision before he answer 

 " assuredly ; I do not intend to move from my study after I have once be out to hand this letter to Zachary . " 

 " shall I tell Lyddy to take he up at once to your study if he come ? if not , I shall have to stay in my own room , because I shall be at home all this morning , and it be rather cold now to sit without a fire . " 

 " yes , my dear , let he come up to I ; unless , indeed , he should bring a second person , which might happen , see that in all likelihood he be come , as hitherto , on electioneer business . and I could not well accommodate two visitor up - stair . " 

  154 

 when Mr. Lyon go out to Zachary , the pew - opener , to give he a second time the commission of carry a letter to Treby Manor , Esther give her injunction to Lyddy that if one gentleman come he be to be show up - stair if two , they be to be show into the parlor . but she have to resolve several question before Lyddy clearly see what be before she as that , " if it be the gentleman as come on Thursday in the pepper - and - salt coat , be he to be show up - stair ? and the gentleman from the Manor yesterday as go out whistle have Miss Esther hear about he ? there seem no end of these great folk come to Malthouse Yard since there be talk of the election ; but they might be poor lose creature the most of them . " Whereupon Lyddy shake her head and groan , under an edify despair as to the future lot of gentleman caller . 

 Esther always avoid ask question of Lyddy , who find an answer as she find a key , by pour out a pocketful of miscellany . but she have remark so many indication that something have happen to cause her father unusual excitement and mental preoccupation , that she could not help connect with they the fact of this visit from the Manor , which he have not mention to she . 

 she sit down in the dull parlor and take up her netting ; for since Sunday she have feel unable to read when she be alone , be oblige , in spite of herself , to think of Felix Holt to imagine what he would like she to be , and what sort of view he take of life so as to make it seem valuable in the absence of all elegance , luxury , gayety , or romance . have he yet reflect that he have behave very rudely to she on Sunday ? perhaps not . perhaps he have dismiss she from his mind with contempt . and at that thought Esther 's eye smart unpleasantly . she be fond of netting , because it show to advantage both her hand and her foot ; and across this image of Felix Holt 's indifference and contempt there pass the vague image of a possible somebody who would admire her hand and foot , and delight in look at their beauty , and long , yet not dare , to kiss they . life would be much easy in the presence of such a love . but it be precisely this longing after her own satisfaction that Felix have reproach she with . do he want she to be heroic ? that seem impossible without some great occasion . her life be a heap of fragment , and so be her thought : some great energy be need to bind they together . Esther be begin to lose her complacency at her own wit and criticism ; to lose the sense of superiority in an 155   awakening need of reliance on one whose vision be wide , whose nature be purer and strong than her own . but then , she say to herself , that " one " must be tender to she , not rude and predominate in his manner . a man with any chivalry in he could never adopt a scold tone toward a woman that be , toward a charming woman . but Felix have no chivalry in he . he love lecturing and opinion too well ever to love any woman . 

 in this way Esther strive to see that Felix be thoroughly in the wrong at least , if he do not come again expressly to show that he be sorry . 

 CHAPTER XVI . 

 trueblue . these man have no vote . why should I court they ? 

 Grayfox . no vote , but power . 

 trueblue . what ! over charity ? 

 Grayfox . no , over brain : which disturb the canvass . in a natural state of thing the average price of a vote at Paddlebrook be nine - and - sixpence , throw the fifty pound tenant , who cost nothing , into the divisor . but these talk man cause an artificial rise of price . 

 the expect important knock at the door come about twelve o'clock , and Esther could hear that there be two visitor . immediately the parlor door be open and the shaggy - haired , cravatless image of Felix Holt , which be just then full in the mirror of Esther 's mind , be displace by the highly - contrast appearance of a personage whose name she guess before Mr. Jermyn have announce it . the perfect morning costume of that day differ much from our present ideal : it be essential that a gentleman 's chin should be well prop , that his collar should have a voluminous roll , that his waistcoat should imply much discrimination , and that his button should be arrange in a manner which would now expose he to general contempt . and it must not be forget that at the distant period when Treby Magna first know the excitement of an election , there exist many other anomaly now obsolete , besides short - waiste coat and broad stiffener . 

 but we have some notion of beauty and fitness which withstand the century ; and quite irrespective of date , it would be pronounce that at the age of thirty - four Harold Transome be a striking and handsome man . he be one of those people , as Denner remark , to whose presence in the room you could not be indifferent ; if you do not hate or dread they , you must find the touch of their hand , nay , their very shadow , agreeable . 

  156 

 Esther feel a pleasure quite new to she as she see his finely - embrown face and full bright eye turn toward she with an air of deference by which gallantry must commend itself to a refined woman who be not absolutely free from vanity . Harold Transome regard woman as slight thing , but he be fond of slight thing in the interval of business ; and he hold it among the chief art of life to keep these pleasant diversion within such bound that they should never interfere with the course of his serious ambition . Esther be perfectly aware , as he take a chair near she , that he be under some admiring surprise at her appearance and manner . how could it be otherwise ? she believe that in the eye of a well - breed man no young lady in Treby could equal she : she feel a glow of delight at the sense that she be be look at . 

 " my father expect you , " she say to Mr. Jermyn . " I deliver your letter to he yesterday . he will be down immediately . " 

 she disentangle her foot from her netting and wound it up . 

 " I hope you be not go to let we disturb you , " say Harold , notice her action . " we come to discuss election affair , and we particularly desire to interest the lady . " 

 " I have no interest with any one who be not already on the right side , " say Esther smile . 

 " I be happy to see at least that you wear the liberal color . " 

 " I fear I must confess that it be more from love of blue than from love of Liberalism . yellow opinion could only have brunette on their side . " Esther speak with her usual pretty fluency , but she have no soon utter the word than she think how angry they would have make Felix . 

 " if my cause be to be recommend by the becomingness of my color , then I be sure you be act in my interest by wear they . " 

 Esther rise to leave the room . 

 " must you really go ? " say Harold , prepare to open the door for she . 

 " yes , I have an engagement a lesson at half past twelve , " say Esther , bow and float out like a blue - rob Naiad , but not without a suffuse blush as she pass through the doorway . 

 it be a pity the room be so small , Harold Transome think : this girl ought to walk in a house where there be hall and corridor . but he 157   have soon dismiss this chance preoccupation with Esther ; for before the door be close again Mr. Lyon have enter , and Harold be entirely bent on what have be the object of his visit . the minister , though no elector himself , have considerable influence over liberal elector , and it be the part of wisdom in a candidate to cement all political adhesion by a little personal regard , if possible . Garstin be a harsh and wiry fellow ; he seem to suggest that sour whey , which some say be the original meaning of Whig in the Scottish , and it might suggest the theoretic advantage of Radicalism if it could be associate with a more generous presence . what would conciliate the personal regard of old Mr. Lyon become a curious problem to Harold , now the little man make his appearance . but canvass make a gentleman acquaint with many strange animal ; together with the way of catch and tame they ; and thus the knowledge of natural history advance amongst the aristocracy and wealthy commoner of our land . 

 " I be very glad to have secure this opportunity of make your personal acquaintance , Mr. Lyon , " say Harold , put out his hand to the minister when Jermyn have mention his name . " I be to address the elector here , in the Market - Place , to - morrow ; and I should have be sorry to do so without first pay my respect privately to my chief friend , as there may be point on which they particularly wish I to explain myself . " 

 " you speak civilly , sir , and reasonably , " say Mr. Lyon , with a vague short - sighted gaze , in which a candidate 's appearance evidently go for nothing . " pray be seat , gentleman . it be my habit to stand . " 

 he place himself at a right angle with his visitor , his worn look of intellectual eagerness , slight frame , and rusty attire , make an odd contrast with their flourish person , unblemished costume , and comfortable freedom from excitement . the group be fairly typical of the difference between the man who be animate by idea and the man who be expect to apply they . then he draw forth his spectacle , and begin to rub they with the thin end of his coat tail . he be inwardly exercise great self - mastery suppress the thought of his personal need , which Jermyn 's presence tend to suggest , in order that he might be equal to the large duty of this occasion . 

 " I be aware Mr. Jermyn have tell I , " say Harold , " what good service you have do I already , Mr. Lyon . the fact be , a man of intellect 158   like you be especially need in my case . the race I be run be really against Garstin only , who call himself a Liberal , though he care for nothing , and understand nothing , except the interest of the wealthy trader . and you have be able to explain the difference between Liberal and Liberal , which , as you and I know , be something like the difference between fish and fish . " 

 " your comparison be not unapt , sir , " say Mr. Lyon , still hold his spectacle in his hand , " at this epoch , when the mind of the nation have be strain on the passing of one measure . where a great weight have to be move , we require not so much select instrument as abundant horse - power . but it be an unavoidable evil of these massive achievement that they encourage a coarse undiscriminatingness obstructive of more nicely - wrought result , and an exaggerated expectation inconsistent with the intricacy of our fall and struggle condition . I say not that compromise be unnecessary , but it be an evil attendant on our imperfection ; and I would pray every one to mark that , where compromise broaden , intellect and conscience be thrust into narrow room . wherefore it have be my object to show our people that there be many who have help to draw the car of Reform , whose end be but partial , and who forsake not the ungodly principle of selfish alliance , but would only substitute Syria for Egypt think chiefly of their own share in peacock , gold and ivory . " 

 " just so , " say Harold , who be quick at new language , and still quick at translate other man 's generality into his own special and immediate purpose , " man who will be satisfied if they can only bring in a plutocracy , buy up the land , and stick the old crest on their new gateway . now the practical point to secure against these false liberal at present be , that our elector should not divide their vote . as it appear that many who vote for Debarry be likely to split their vote in favor of Garstin , it be of the first consequence that my voter should give I plumper . if they divide their vote they can not   keep out Debarry , and they may help to keep out I . I feel some confidence in ask you to use your influence in this direction , Mr. Lyon . we candidate have to praise ourselves more than be graceful ; but you be aware that , while I belong by my birth to the class that have their root in tradition and all the old loyalty , my experience have lain chiefly among those who make their own career , and depend on the new rather than the old . I have have the advantage of consider the 159   national welfare under varied light : I have wide view than those of a mere cotton lord . on question connect with religious liberty I would stop short at no measure that be not thorough . " 

 " I hope not , sir I hope not , " say Mr. Lyon , gravely ; finally put on his spectacle and examine the face of the candidate , whom he be prepare to turn into a catechuman . for the good Rufus , conscious of his political importance as an organ of persuasion , feel it his duty to catechise a little , and also to do his part toward impress a probable legislator with a sense of his responsibility . but the latter branch of duty somewhat obstruct the catechising , for his mind be so urge by consideration which he hold in danger of be overlook , that the question and answer bore a very slender proportion to his exposition . it be impossible to leave the question of church - rate without note the ground of their injustice , and without a brief enumeration of reason why Mr. Lyon , for his own part , would not present that passive resistance to a legal imposition which have be adopt by the Friends   whose heroism in this regard be nevertheless worthy of all honor . 

 comprehensive talker be apt to be tiresome when we be not athirst for information , but , to be quite fair , we must admit that superior reticence be a good deal due to the lack of matter . Speech be often barren ; but silence also do not necessarily brood over a full nest . your still fowl , blink at you without remark , may all the while be sit on one addled nest - egg ; and when it take to cackling , will have nothing to announce but that addled delusion . 

 Harold Transome be not at all a patient man , but in matter of business he be quite awake to his cue , and in this case it be perhaps easy to listen than to answer question . but Jermyn , who have plenty of work on his hand , take an opportunity of rise , and say , as he look at his watch 

 " I must really be at the office in five minute . you will find I there , Mr. Transome ; you have probably still many thing to say to Mr. Lyon . " 

 " I beseech you , sir , " say the minister , change color , and by a quick movement lay his hand on Jermyn 's arm " I beseech you to favor I with an interview on some private business this evening , if it be possible . " 

 Mr. Lyon , like other who be habitually occupy with impersonal subject , be liable to this impulsive sort of action . he snatch at the detail of life as if they be dart past he as if they 160   be like the ribbon at his knee , which would never be tie all day if they be not tie on the instant . through these spasmodic leap out of his abstraction into real life , it constantly happen that he suddenly take a course which have be the subject of too much doubt with he ever to have be determine on by continuous thought . and if Jermyn have not startle he by threaten to vanish just when he be plunge in politic , he might never have make up his mind to confide in a worldly attorney . 

  " an odd man , " as Mrs. Muscat observe , " to have such a gift in the pulpit . but there be one know well than we do " which , in a lady who rarely feel her judgment at a loss , be a concession that show much piety . 

 Jermyn be surprised at the little man 's eagerness . " by all mean , " he answer , quite cordially . " could you come to my office at eight o'clock ? " 

 " for several reason , I must beg you to come to I . " 

 " oh , very good . I will walk out and see you this evening , if possible . I shall have much pleasure in being of any use to you . " Jermyn feel that in the eye of Harold he be appear all the more valuable when his service be thus in request . he go out , and Mr. Lyon easily relapse into politic , for he have be on the brink of a favorite subject on which he be at issue with his fellow - Liberals . 

 at that time , when faith in the efficacy of political change be at fever - heat in ardent Reformers , many measure which man be still discuss with little confidence on either side , be then talk about and dispose of like property in near reversion . crying abuse " bloated pauper , " " bloated pluralist , " and other corruption hinder man from be wise and happy have to be fight against and slain . such a time be a time of hope . afterward when the corps of those monster have be hold up to the public wonder and abhorrence , and yet wisdom and happiness do not follow , but rather a more abundant breeding of the foolish and unhappy , come a time of doubt and despondency . but in the great reform - year Hope be mighty : the prospect of Reform have even serve the voter instead of drink ; and in one place , at least , there have be " a dry election . " and now the speaker at Reform banquet be exuberant in congratulation and promise : liberal clergyman of the Establishment toast liberal Catholic clergyman without any allusion to scarlet , and catholic clergyman reply with a like tender reserve . some dwelt on the abolition of all 161   abuse , and on millennial blessedness generally ; other , whose imagination be less suffuse with exhalation of the dawn insist chiefly on the ballot - box . 

 now on this question of the ballot the minister strongly take the negative side . our pet opinion be usually those which place we in a minority of a minority amongst our own party : very happily , else those poor opinion , bear with no silver spoon in their mouth how would they get nourish and feed ? so it be with Mr. Lyon and his objection to the ballot . but he have throw out a remark on the subject which be not quite clear to his hearer , who interpret it accord to his good calculation of probability . 

 " I have no objection to the ballot , " say Harold , " but I think that be not the sort of thing we have to work at just now . we should not   get it . and other question be imminent . " 

 " then , sir , you would vote for the ballot ? " say Mr. Lyon , stroke his chin . 

 " certainly , if the point come up . I have too much respect for the freedom of the voter to oppose anything which offer a chance of make that freedom more complete . " 

 Mr. Lyon look at the speaker with a pitying smile and a subdued " h'm m m , " which Harold take for a sign of satisfaction . he be soon undeceived . 

 " you grieve I , sir ; you grieve I much . and I pray you to reconsider this question , for it will take you to the root , as I think , of political morality . I engage to show to any impartial mind , duly furnish with the principle of public and private rectitude , that the ballot would be pernicious , and that if it be not pernicious , it would still be futile . I will show , first , that it would be futile as a preservative from bribery and illegitimate influence ; and , secondly , that it would be in the bad kind pernicious , as shut the door against those influence whereby the soul of a man and the character of a citizen be duly educate for their great function . be not alarmed if I detain you , sir . it be well worth the while . " 

 " confound this old man , " think Harold . " I will never make a canvassing call on a preacher again , unless he have lose his voice from a cold . " he be go to excuse himself as prudently as he could , by defer the subject till the morrow , and invite Mr. Lyon to come to he in the committee - room before the time appoint for his public speech ; but he be relieve by the opening of the door , Lyddy put in her head to say 

  162 

 " if you please , sir , here be Mr. Holt want to know if he may come in and speak to the gentleman . he beg your pardon , but you be to say ' no ' if you do not   like he to come . " 

 " Nay , show he in at once , Lyddy . a young man , " Mr. Lyon go on , speak to Harold , " whom a representative ought to know no voter , but a man of idea and study . " 

 " he be thoroughly welcome , " say Harold , truthfully enough , though he feel little interest in the voteless man of idea except as a diversion from the subject of the ballot . he have be stand for the last minute or two , feel less of a victim in that attitude , and more able to calculate on mean of escape . 

 " Mr. Holt , sir , " say the minister , as Felix enter , " be a young friend of mine , whose opinion on some point I hope to see alter , but who have a zeal for public justice which I trust he will never lose . " 

 " I be glad to see Mr. Holt , " say Harold , bow . he perceive from the way in which Felix bow to he and turn to the most distant spot in the room , that the candidate 's shake of the hand would not be welcome here . " a formidable fellow , " he think , " capable of mount a cart in the market - place to - morrow and cross - examine I , if I say anything that do not   please he . " 

 " Mr. Lyon , " say Felix , " I have take a liberty with you in ask to see Mr. Transome when he be engage with you . but I have to speak to he on a matter which I should not   care to make public at present , and it be one on which I be sure you will back I . I hear that Mr. Transome be here , so I venture to come . I hope you will both excuse I , as my business refer to some electioneer measure which be be take by Mr. Transome 's agent . " 

 " pray go on , " say Harold , expect something unpleasant . 

 " I be not go to speak against treat voter , " say Felix ; " I suppose buttered ale , and grease of that sort to make the wheel go , belong to the necessary humbug of representation . but I wish to ask you , Mr. Transome , whether it be with your knowledge that agent of yours be bribe rough fellow who be no voter the collier and navvy at Sproxton with the chance of extra drunkenness , that they may make a posse on your side at the nomination and polling ? " 

 " certainly not , " say Harold . " you be aware , my dear sir , that a candidate be very much at the mercy of his agent as to the mean by which he be return , especially when many year ' absence have make he a stranger to the man actually conduct business . but be you sure of your fact ? " 

  163 

 " as sure as my sens can make I , " say Felix , who then briefly describe what have happen on Sunday . " I believe that you be ignorant of all this , Mr. Transome , " he end , " and that be why I think some good might be do by speak to you . if not , I should be tempt to expose the whole affair as a disgrace to the Radical party . I be a Radical myself , and mean to work all my life long against privilege , monopoly , and oppression . but I would rather be a livery - servant proud of my master 's title , than I would seem to make common cause with scoundrel who turn the good hope of man into by - word for can not and dishonesty . " 

 " your energetic protest be needless here , sir , " say Harold , offend at what sound like a threat , and be certainly premature enough to be in bad taste . in fact , this error of behavior in Felix proceed from a repulsion which be mutual . it be a constant source of irritation to he that the public man on his side be , on the whole , not conspicuously well than the public man on the other side ; that the spirit of innovation , which with he be a part of religion , be in many of its mouthpiece no more of a religion than the faith in rotten borough ; and he be thus predispose to distrust Harold Transome . Harold , in his turn , dislike impracticable notion of loftiness and purity dislike all enthusiasm ; and he think he see a very troublesome , vigorous incorporation of that nonsense in Felix . but it would be foolish to exasperate he in any way . 

 " if you choose to accompany I to Jermyn 's office , " he go on , " the matter shall be enquire into in your presence . I think you will agree with I , Mr. Lyon , that this will be the most satisfactory course . " 

 " Doubtless , " say the minister , who like the candidate very well , and believe that he would be amenable to argument ; " and I would caution my young friend against a too great hastiness of word and action . David 's cause against Saul be a righteous one ; nevertheless not all who clave unto David be righteous man . " 

 " the more be the pity , sir , " say Felix . " especially if he wink at their malpractice . " 

 Mr. Lyon smile , shake his head , and stroke his favorite 's arm deprecatingly . 

 " it be rather too much for any man to keep the conscience of all his party , " say Harold . " if you have live in the East , as I have , you 164   would be more tolerant , for example , of an active industrious selfishness , such as we have here , though it may not always be quite scrupulous : you would see how much well it be than an idle selfishness . I have hear it say , a bridge be a good thing worth help to make , though half the man who work at it be rogue . " 

 " oh , yes ! " say Felix , scornfully , " give I a handful of generality and analogy , and I will undertake to justify Burke and Hare , and prove they benefactor of their specie . I will tolerate no nuisance but such as I can not   help ; and the question now be , not whether we can do away with all the nuisance in the world , but with a particular nuisance under our nose . " 

 " then we have well cut the matter short , as I propose , by go at once to Jermyn 's , " say Harold . " in that case , I must bid you good - morning , Mr. Lyon . " 

 " I would fain , " say the minister , look uneasy " I would fain have have a further opportunity of consider that question of the ballot with you . the reason against it need not be urge lengthily ; they only require complete enumeration to prevent any seeming hiatus , where an oppose fallacy might trust itself in . " 

 " never fear , sir , " say Harold , shake Mr. Lyon 's hand cordially , " there will be opportunity . shall I not see you in the committee - room to - morrow ? " 

 " I think not , " say Mr. Lyon , rub his brow , with a sad remembrance of his personal anxiety . " but I will send you , if you will permit I , a brief writing , on which you can meditate at your leisure . " 

 " I shall be delighted . good - bye . " 

 Harold and Felix go out together ; and the minister , go up to his dull study , ask himself whether , under the pressure of conflict experience , he have faithfully discharge the duty of the past interview ? 

 if a cynical sprite be present , rid on one of the mote in that dusty room , he may have make himself merry at the illusion of the little minister who bring so much conscience to - bear on the production of so slight an effect . I confess to smile myself , be sceptical as to the effect of ardent appeal and nice distinction on gentleman who be get up , both inside and out , as candidate in the style of the period ; but I never smile at Mr. Lyon 's trustful energy without fall to penitence and veneration immediately after . for what we call illusion be often , in truth , a wide vision of past and recent 165   reality a willing movement of a man 's soul with the large sweep of the world 's force a movement toward a more assured end than the chance of a single life . we see human heroism break into unit and say , this unit do little might as well not have be . but in this way we might break up a great army into unit ; in this way we might break the sunlight into fragment , and think that this and the other might be cheaply part with . let we rather raise a monument to the soldier whose brave heart only keep the rank unbroken and meet death a monument to the faithful who be not famous , and who be precious as the continuity of the sunbeam be precious , though some of they fall unseen and on barrenness . 

 at present , look back on that day at Treby , it seem to I that the sad illusion lie with Harold Transome , who be trust in his own skill to shape the success of his own morrow , ignorant of what many yesterday have determine for he beforehand . 

 CHAPTER XVII . 

 it be a good and soothfast saw ; 
 half - roasted never will be raw ; 
 no dough be dry once more to meal , 
 no crock new - shapen by the wheel ; 
 you can not   turn curd to milk again , 
 nor now , by wish , back to then ; 
 and have taste steal honey , 
 you can not   buy innocence for money . 
 Jermyn be not particularly pleased that some chance have apparently hinder Harold Transome from make other canvassing visit immediately after leave Mr. Lyon , and so have send he back to the office early than he have be expect to come . the inconvenient chance he guess at once to be represent by Felix Holt , whom he know very well by Trebian report to be a young man with so little of the ordinary christian motif as to make an appearance and get on in the world , that he present no handle to any judicious and respectable person who might be willing to make use of he . 

 Harold Transome , on his side , be a great deal annoy at be worry by Felix in an enquiry about electioneer detail . the real dignity and honesty there be in he make he shrink from this necessity of satisfy a man with a troublesome tongue ; it be as if he be to show indignation at the discovery of one barrel with a false bottom , when he have invest his money in a manufactory where a large or small 166   number of such barrel have always be make . a practical man must seek a good end by the only possible mean ; that be to say , if he be to get into Parliament he must not be too particular . it be not disgraceful to be neither a Quixote nor a theorist , aim to correct the moral rule of the world : but whatever actually be , or might prove to be , disgraceful , Harold hold in detestation . in this mood he push on unceremoniously to the inner office without wait to ask question ; and when he perceive that Jermyn be not alone he say , with haughty quickness 

 " a question about the electioneering at Sproxton . can you give your attention to it at once ? here be Mr. Holt , who have come to I about the business . " 

 " a yes a certainly , " say Jermyn , who , as usual , be the more cool and deliberate because he be vex . he be stand , and , as he turn round , his broad figure conceal the person who be seat writing at the bureau . " Mr. Holt a will doubtless a make a point of save a busy man 's time . you can speak at once . this gentleman " here Jermyn make a slight backward movement of the head " be one of ourselves ; he be a true - blue . " 

 " I have simply to complain , " say Felix , " that one of your agent have be send on a bribe expedition to Sproxton with what purpose you , sir , may know well than I do . Mr. Transome , it appear , be ignorant of the affair , and do not approve it . " 

 Jermyn , look gravely and steadily at Felix while he be speak , at the same time draw forth a small sheaf of paper from his side pocket , and then , as he turn his eye slowly on Harold , feel in his waistcoat - pocket for his pencil - case . 

 " I do not   approve of it at all , " say Harold , who hat Jermyn 's calculated slowness and conceit in his own impenetrability . " be good enough to put a stop to it , will you ? " 

 " Mr. Holt , I know , be an excellent liberal , " say Jermyn , just incline his head to Harold , and then alternately look at Felix and docket his bill ; " but he be perhaps too inexperienced to be aware that no canvass a can be conduct without the action of able man , who must a be trust , and not interfere with . and as to any possibility of promise to put a stop a to any procedure a that depend . if he have ever hold the coachman 's ribbon in his hand , as I have in my young day a he would know that stopping be not always easy . " 

 " I know very little about hold ribbon , " say Felix ; 167   " but I see clearly enough at once that more mischief have be do than could be well mend . though I believe , if it be heartily try , the treatment might be reduce and something might be do to hinder the man from turn out in a body to make a noise , which might end in bad . " 

 " they might be hinder from make a noise on our side , " say Jermyn , smile . " that be perfectly true . but if they make a noise on the other would your purpose be answer well , sir ? " 

 Harold be move about in an irritated manner while Felix and Jermyn be speak . he prefer leave the talk to the attorney , of whose talk he himself like to keep as clear as possible . 

 " I can only say , " answer Felix , " that if you make use of those heavy fellow when the drink be in they , I should not   like your responsibility . you might as well drive bull to roar on our side as bribe a set of collier and navvy to shout and groan . " 

 " a lawyer may well envy your command of language , Mr. Holt , " say Jermyn , pocket his bill again , and shut up his pencil ; " but he would not be satisfied with the accuracy a of your term . you must permit I to check your use of the word ' bribery . ' the essence of bribery be , that it should be legally prove ; there be not such a thing a in rerum natura a as unprove bribery . there have be no such thing as bribery at Sproxton , I will answer for it . the presence of a body of stalwart fellow on a the liberal side will tend to preserve order ; for we know that the benefit club from the Pitchley district will show for Debarry . indeed , the gentleman who have conduct the canvass at Sproxton be experience in parliamentary affair , and would not exceed a the necessary measure that a rational judgment would dictate . " 

 " what ! you mean the man who call himself Johnson ? " say Felix , in a tone of disgust . 

 before Jermyn choose to answer , Harold break in , say , quickly and peremptorily , " the long and short of it be this , Mr. Holt : I shall desire and insist that whatever can be do by way of remedy shall be do . will that satisfy you ? you see now some of the candidate 's difficulty ? " say Harold , break into his most agreeable smile . " I hope you will have some pity for I . " 

 " I suppose I must be content , " say Felix , not thoroughly propitiate . " I bid you good - morning , gentleman . " 

  168 

 when he be go out , and have close the door behind he , Harold , turn round and flash , in spite of himself , an angry look at Jermyn , say 

 " and who be Johnson ? an alias , I suppose . it seem you be fond of the name . " 

 Jermyn turn perceptibly pale , but disagreeable of this sort between himself and Harold have be too much in his anticipation of late for he to be take by surprise . he turn quietly round and just touch the shoulder of the person seat at the bureau , who now rise . 

 " on the contrary , " Jermyn answer , " the Johnson in question be this gentleman , whom I have the pleasure of introduce to you as one of my most active helpmate in electioneer business Mr. Johnson , of Bedford Row , London . I be comparatively a novice a in these matter . but he be engage with James Putty in two hardly - contest election , and there could scarcely be a well initiation . Putty be one of the first man of the country as an agent a on the liberal side a eh , Johnson ? I think Makepiece be a not altogether a match for he , not quite of the same calibre a haud consimili ingenio a in tactic a and in experience ? " 

 " Makepiece be a wonderful man , and so be Putty , " say the glib Johnson , too vain not to be pleased with an opportunity of speak , even when the situation be rather awkward . " Makepiece for scheme , but Putty for management . Putty know man , sir , " he go on , turn to Harold : " it be a thousand pity that you have not have his talent employ in your service . he be beyond any man for save a candidate 's money do half the work with his tongue . he will talk of anything , from the Areopagus , and that sort of thing , down to the joke about ' where be you go , Paddy ? ' you know what I mean , sir ! ' back again , say Paddy ' an excellent electioneering joke . Putty understand these thing . he have say to I , ' Johnson , bear in mind there be two way of speak an audience will always like : one be to tell they what they do not   understand ; and the other be , to tell they what they be use to . ' I shall never be the man to deny that I owe a great deal to Putty . I always say it be a most providential thing in the Mugham election last year that Putty be not on the Tory side . he manage the woman ; and , if you will believe I , sir , one - fourth of the man would never have vote if their wife have not   drive they to it for the good of their family . and as for speak it be currently report in our London circle 169   that Putty write regularly for the Times . he have that kind of language ; and I need not   tell you , Mr. Transome , that it be the apex , which , I take it , mean the tiptop and nobody can get high than that , I think . I have   belong to a political debating society myself ; I have   hear a little language in my time ; but when Mr. Jermyn first speak to I about have the honor to assist in your canvass of North Loamshire " here Johnson play with his watch - seal and balance himself a moment on his toe " the very first thing I say be , ' and there be Garstin have get Putty ! no Whig could stand against a Whig , ' I say , ' who have Putty on his side : I hope Mr. Transome go in for something of a deep color . ' I do not   say that , as a general rule , opinion go for much in a return , Mr. Transome ; it depend on who be in the field before you , and on the skill of your agent . but as a Radical , and a moneyed Radical , you be in a fine position , sir ; and with care and judgment with care and judgment " 

 it have be impossible to interrupt Johnson before , without the most impolitic rudeness . Jermyn be not sorry that he should talk , even if he make a fool of himself ; for in that solid shape , exhibit the average amount of human foible , he seem less of the alias which Harold have insinuate he to be , and have all the additional plausibility of a lie with a circumstance . 

 Harold have throw himself with contemptuous resignation into a chair , have draw off one of his buff glove , and be look at his hand . but when Johnson give his iteration with a slightly slacken pace , Harold look up at he and break in 

 " well then , Mr. Johnson , I shall be glad if you will use your care and judgment in put an end , as well as you can , to this Sproxton affair ; else it may turn out an ugly business . " 

 " excuse I , sir ; I must beg you to look at the matter a little more closely . you will see that it be impossible to take a single step backward at Sproxton . it be a matter of necessity to get the Sproxton man ; else I know to a certainty the other side would have lay hold of they first , and now I have   undermine Garstin 's people . they will use their authority , and give a little shabby treating , but I have   take all the wind out of their sail . but if , by your order , I or Mr. Jermyn here be to break promise with the honest fellow , and offend Chubb the publican , what would come of it ? Chubb would leave no stone unturned against you , sir ; he would egg on his customer against you ; the 170   collier and navvy would be at the nomination and the election all the same , or rather not all the same , for they would be there against we ; and instead of hustle people good - humoredly by way of a joke , and counterbalance Debarry 's cheer , they would help to kick the cheering and vote out of our man , and instead of be , let we say , half - a - dozen ahead of Garstin , you would be half - a - dozen behind he , that be all . I speak plain english to you , Mr. Transome , though I have   the high respect for you as a gentleman of first - rate talent and position . but , sir , to judge of these thing a man must know the english voter and the english publican ; and it would be a poor tale indeed " here Mr. Johnson 's mouth take an expression at once bitter and pathetic " that a gentleman like you , to say nothing of the good of the country , should have go to the expense and trouble of a canvass for nothing but to find himself out of Parliament at the end of it . I have   see it again and again ; it look bad in the cleverest man to have to sing small . " 

 Mr. Johnson 's argument be not the less stringent because his idiom be vulgar . it require a conviction and resolution amount to heroism not to wince at phrase that class our foreshadow endurance among those common and ignominious trouble which the world be more likely to sneer at than to pity . Harold remain a few minute in angry silence look at the floor , with one hand on his knee and the other on his hat , as if he be prepare to start up . 

 " as to undo anything that be be do down there , " say Johnson , throw in this observation as something into the bargain , " I must wash my hand of it , sir . I could not   work knowingly against your interest . and that young man who be just go out , you do not   believe that he need be listen to , I hope ? Chubb , the publican , hat he . Chubb would guess he be at the bottom of your have the treating stop , and he would set half - a - dozen of the collier to duck he in the canal , or break his head by mistake . I be an experienced man , sir . I hope I have   put it clear enough . " 

 " certainly , the exposition befit the subject , " say Harold , scornfully , his dislike of the man Johnson 's personality be stimulate by cause which Jermyn more than conjecture . " it be a damned , unpleasant , ravel business that you and Mr. Jermyn have knit up between you . I have   no more to say . " 

 " then , sir , if you have   no more command , I do not   wish to intrude . I shall wish you good - morning , sir , " say Johnson , pass out quickly . 

  171 

 Harold know that he be indulge his temper , and he would probably have restrain it as a foolish move if he have think there be great danger in it . but he be begin to drop much of his caution and self - mastery where Jermyn be concern , under the grow conviction that the attorney have very strong reason for be afraid of he ; reason which would only be reinforce by any action hostile to the Transome interest . as for a sneak like this Johnson , a gentleman have to pay he , not to please he . Harold have smile at command in the right place , but he be not go to smile when it be neither necessary nor agreeable . he be one of those good - humor , yet energetic man , who have the gift of anger , hatred , and scorn upon occasion , though they be too healthy and self - content for such feeling to get generate in they without external occasion . and in relation to Jermyn the gift be come into fine exercise . 

 " a pardon I , Mr. Harold , " say Jermyn , speak as soon as Johnson go out , " but I be sorry a you should behave disobligingly to a man who have it in his power to do much service who , in fact , hold many thread in his hand . I admit that a nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit , as we say a " 

 " speak for yourself , " say Harold . " I do not   talk in tag of Latin , which might be learn by a school - master 's foot - boy . I find the King 's English express my meaning well . " 

 " in the King 's English , then , " say Jermyn , who could be idiomatic enough when he be sting , " a candidate should keep his kick till he be a member . " 

 " oh , I suppose Johnson will bear a kick if you bid he . you be his principal , I believe . " 

 " certainly , thus far a he be my London agent . but he be a man of substance , and " 

 " I shall know what he be if it be necessary , I dare say . but I must jump into the carriage again . I have   no time to lose ; I must go to Hawkins at the factory . will you go ? " 

 when Harold be go , Jermyn 's handsome face gather blackness . he hardly ever wear his bad expression in the presence of other , and but seldom when he be alone , for he be not give to believe that any game would ultimately go against he . his luck have be good . new condition might always turn up to give he new chance ; and if affair threaten to come to an extremity between Harold and himself , he trust to find some sure resource . 

 " he mean to see to the bottom of everything if he can , that be quite plain , " say Jermyn to himself . " I believe he have be get another 172   opinion ; he have some new light about those annuity on the estate that be hold in Johnson 's name . he have inherit a deuced faculty for business there be no deny that . but I shall beg leave to tell he that I have   prop up the family . I do not   know where they would have be without I ; and if it come to balance , I know into which scale the gratitude ought to go . not that he be likely to feel any but he can feel something else ; and if he make sign of set the dog on I , I shall make he feel it . the people name Transome owe I a good deal more than I owe they . " 

 in this way Mr. Jermyn inwardly appeal against an unjust construction which he foresee that his old acquaintance the law might put on certain item in his history . 

 I have know person who have be suspect of under - valuing gratitude , and exclude it from the list of virtue ; but on close observation it have be see that , if they have never feel grateful , it have be for want of an opportunity ; and that , far from despise gratitude , they regard it as the virtue most of all incumbent on other toward they . 

 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 the little , nameless , unremembered act 
 of kindness and of love . 
  Wordsworth : Tintern Abbey . 
 Jermyn do not forget to pay his visit to the minister in Malthouse Yard that evening . the mingled irritation , dread and defiance which he be feel toward Harold Transome in the middle of the day depend on too many and far - stretch cause to be dissipate by eight o'clock ; but when he leave Mr. Lyon 's house he be in a state of comparative triumph in the belief that he , and he alone , be now in possession of fact which , once group together , make a secret that give he new power over Harold . 

 Mr. Lyon , in his need for help from one who have that wisdom of the serpent which , he argue , be not forbid , but be only of hard acquirement to dovelike innocence , have be gradually lead to pour out to the attorney all the reason which make he desire to know the truth about the man who call himself Maurice Christian : he have show all the precious relic , the locket , the letter , and the marriage certificate . and Jermyn have comfort he by confidently promising to ascertain , without scandal or premature betrayal , whether this man be really 173   Annette 's husband , or Maurice Christian Bycliffe . 

 Jermyn be not rash in make this promise , since he have excellent reason for believe that he have already come to a true conclusion on the subject . but he wish both to know a little more of this man himself , and to keep Mr. Lyon in ignorance not a difficult precaution in an affair which it cost the minister so much pain to speak of . an easy opportunity of get an interview with Christian be sure to offer itself before long might even offer itself to - morrow . Jermyn have see he more than once , though hitherto without any reason for observe he with interest ; he have hear that Philip Debarry 's courier be often busy in the town , and it seem specially likely that he would be see there when the market be to be agitate by politic , and the new candidate be to show his pace . 

 the world of which Treby Magna be the centre be , naturally , curious to see the young Transome , who have come from the East , be as rich as a Jew , and call himself a Radical characteristic all equally vague in the mind of various excellent ratepayer , who drive to market in their tax cart or in their hereditary gig . place at convenient window have be secure beforehand for a few good bonnet ; but , in general , a radical candidate excite no ardent feminine partisanship , even among the Dissenters in Treby , if they be of the prosperous and long - resident class . some chapel - go lady be fond of remember that " their family have be church " ; other object to politic altogether as have spoil old neighborliness , and sunder friend who have kindre view as to cowslip wine and Michaelmas cleaning ; other , of the melancholy sort , say it would be well if people would think less of reform Parliament and more of please God . irreproachable dissent matron , like Mrs. Muscat , whose youth have be pass in a short - waiste bodice and tight skirt , have never be animate by the struggle for liberty , and have a timid suspicion that religion be desecrate by be apply to the thing of this world . since Mr. Lyon have be in Malthouse Yard there have be far too much mix up of politic with religion ; but , at any rate , these lady have never yet be to hear speechify in the market - place , and they be not go to begin that practice . 

 Esther , however , have hear some of her feminine acquaintance say that they intend to sit at the druggist 's upper window , and she be 174   incline to ask her father if he could think of a suitable place where she also might see and hear . two inconsistent motif urge she . she know that Felix care earnestly for public question , and she suppose that he hold it one of her deficiency not to care about they : well , she would try to learn the secret of this ardor , which be so strong in he that it animate what she think the dull form of life . she be not too stupid to find it out . but this self - correct motive be presently displace by a motive of a different sort . it have be a pleasant variety in her monotonous day to see a man like Harold Transome , with a distinguished appearance and polished manner , and she would like to see he again : he suggest to she that bright and more luxurious life on which her imagination dwelt without the painful effort it require to conceive the mental condition which would place she in complete sympathy with Felix Holt . it be this less unaccustomed prompting of which she be chiefly conscious when she await her father 's come down to breakfast . why , indeed , should she trouble herself so much about Felix ? 

 Mr. Lyon , more serene now that he have unbosomed his anxiety and obtain a promise of help , be already swim so happily in the deep water of polemic in expectation of Philip Debarry 's answer to his challenge , that , in the occupation of make a few note lest certain felicitous inspiration should be waste , he have forget to come down to breakfast . Esther , suspect his abstraction , go up to his study , and find he at his desk look up with wonder at her interruption . 

 " come , father , you have forget your breakfast . " 

 " it be true , child , I will come , " he say , linger to make some final stroke . 

 " oh , you naughty father ! " say Esther , as he get up from his chair , " your coat - collar be twist , your waistcoat be button all wrong , and you have not brush your hair . sit down and let I brush it again as I do yesterday . " 

 he sit down obediently , while Esther take a towel , which she throw over his shoulder , and then brush the thick , long fringe of soft auburn hair . this very trifling act , which she have bring herself to for the first time yesterday , mean a great deal in Esther 's little history . it have be her habit to leave the mending of her father 's clothe to Lyddy ; she have not like even to touch his cloth garment ; still less have it seem a thing she would willingly undertake to correct his 175   toilette , and use a brush for he . but have once do this , under her new sense of faulty omission , the affectionateness that be in she flow so pleasantly , as she see how much her father be move by what he think a great act of tenderness , that she quite long to repeat it . this morning , as he sit under her hand , his face have such a calm delight in it that she could not help kiss the top of his bald head ; and afterward , when they be seat at breakfast , she say , merrily 

 " Father , I shall make a petit ma tre of you by - and - by ; your hair look so pretty and silken when it be well brush . " 

 " Nay , child , I trust that while I would willingly depart from my evil habit of a somewhat slovenly forgetfulness in my attire , I shall never arrive at the opposite extreme . for though there be that in apparel which please the eye , and I deny not that your neat gown and the color thereof which be that of certain little flower that spread themselves in the hedgerow , and make a blueness there as of the sky when it be deepen in the water I deny not , I say , that these minor striving after a perfection which be , as it be , an irrecoverable yet haunt memory , be a good in their proportion . nevertheless , the brevity of our life , and the hurry and crush of the great battle with error and sin , often oblige we to an advise neglect of what be less momentous . this , I conceive , be the principle on which my friend Felix Holt act ; and I can not but think the light come from the true fount , though it shin through obstruction . " 

 " you have not see Mr. Holt since Sunday , have you , father ? " 

 " yes , he be here yesterday . he seek Mr. Transome , have a matter of some importance to speak upon with he . and I see he afterward in the street , when he agree that I should call for he this morning before I go into the market - place . he will have it , " Mr. Lyon go on , smile , " that I must not walk about in the crowd without he to act as my special constable . " 

 Esther feel vex with herself that her heart be suddenly beat with unusual quickness , and that her last resolution not to trouble herself about what Felix think have transform itself with magic swiftness into mortification that he evidently avoid come to the house when she be there , though he use to come on the slight occasion . he know that she be always at home until the afternoon on market - day : that be the reason why he would not call for her father . of course it be 176   because he attribute such littleness to she that he suppose she would retain nothing else than a feeling of offence toward he for what he have say to she . such distrust of any good in other , such arrogance of immeasurable superiority , be extremely ungenerous . but presently she say 

 " I should have like to hear Mr. Transome speak , but I suppose it be too late to get a place now . " 

 " I be not sure , I would fain have you go if you desire it , my dear , " say Mr. Lyon , who could not bear to deny Esther any lawful wish . " walk with I to Mrs. Holt 's , and we will learn from Felix , who will doubtless already have be out , whether or not he could lead you in safety to Friend Lambert 's . " 

 Esther be glad of the proposal , because , if it answer no other purpose , it would be an easy way of oblige Felix to see she , and of show he that it be not she who cherish offence . but when , later in the morning , she be walk toward Mrs. Holt 's with her father , they meet Mr. Jermyn , who stop they to ask , in his most affable manner , whether Miss Lyon intend to hear the candidate , and whether she have secure a suitable place . and he end by insist that his daughter , who be presently come in an open carriage , should call for she if she would permit they . it be impossible to refuse this civility , and Esther turn back to await the carriage , pleased with the certainty of hear and seeing , yet sorry to miss Felix . there be another day for she to think of he with unsatisfie resentment , mix with some longing for a well understanding : and in our spring - time every day have its hidden growth in the mind , as it have in the earth when the little fold blade be get ready to pierce the ground . 

 CHAPTER XIX . 

 Consistency ? I never change my mind , 
 which be , and always be , to live at ease . 
 it be only in the time of summer fair that the market - place have ever look more animated than it do under that autumn midday sun . there be plenty of blue cockade and streamer , face at all the window , and a crush buzzing crowd , urge each other backward and forward round the small husting in front of the Ram Inn , which show its more plebeian sign at right angle with the venerable Marquis of Granby . sometimes there be scornful shout , sometimes a rolling cascade of 177   cheer , sometimes the shriek of a penny whistle ; but above all these fitful and feeble sound , the fine old church - tower , which look down from above the tree on the other side of the narrow stream , send vibrating , at every quarter , the sonorous tone of its great bell , the Good Queen Bess . 

 two carriage , with blue ribbon on the harness , be conspicuous near the husting . one be Jermyn 's , fill with the brilliantly - attire daughter , accompany by Esther , whose quieter dress help to mark she out for attention as the most striking of the group . the other be Harold Transome 's ; but in this there be no lady only the olive - skin Dominic , whose acute yet mild face be brighten by the occupation of amusing little Harry and rescue from his tyranny a King Charles puppy , with big eye , much after the pattern of the boy 's . 

 this Trebian crowd do not count for much in the political force of the nation , but it be not the less determined as to lend or not lend its ear . no man be permit to speak from the platform except Harold and his uncle Lingon , though , in the interval of expectation , several Liberals have come forward . among these ill - advise person the one whose attempt meet the most emphatic resistance be Rufus Lyon . this might have be take for resentment at the unreasonableness of the cloth , that , not content with pulpit , from whence to tyrannize over the ear of man , wish to have the large share of the platform ; but it be not so , for Mr. Lingon be hear with much cheering , and would have be welcome again . 

 the rector of Little Treby have be a favorite in the neighborhood since the beginning of the century . a clergyman thoroughly unclerical in his habit have a piquancy about he which make he a sort of practical joke . he have always be call Jack Lingon , or Parson Jack sometimes , in old and less serious day , even " cock - fighting Jack . " he swear a little when the point of a joke seem to demand it , and be fond of wear a colored bandana tie loosely over his cravat , together with large brown leather legging ; he speak in a pithy familiar way that people could understand , and have none of that frigid mincingness call dignity , which some have think a peculiar clerical disease . in fact , he be " a charicter " something cheerful to think of , not entirely out of connection with Sunday and sermon . and it seem in keep that he should have turn sharp round in politic , his opinion be only 178   part of the excellent joke call Parson Jack . when his red eagle face and white hair be see on the platform , the dissenter hardly cheer this questionable Radical ; but to make amend , all the Tory farmer give he a friendly " hurray . " " let us hear what old Jack will say for himself , " be the predominant feeling among they ; " he will have something funny to say , I will bet a penny . " 

 it be only Lawyer Labron 's young clerk and their hanger - on who be sufficiently dead to trebian tradition to assail the parson with various sharp - edge interjection , such as broken shell , and cry of " Cock - a - doodle - doo . " 

 " come now , my lad , " he begin , in his full , pompous , yet jovial tone , thrust his hand into the stuff - out pocket of his greatcoat , " I will tell you what ; I be a parson you know ; I ought to return good for evil . so here be some good nut for you to crack in return for your shell . " 

 there be a roar of laughter and cheer as he throw handfuls of nut and filbert among the crowd . 

 " come now , you will say I use to be a tory ; and some of you , whose face I know as well as I know the head of my own crab - stick , will say that be why I be a good fellow . but now I will tell you something else . it be for that very reason that I use to be a tory , and be a good fellow that I go along with my nephew here , who be a thorough - go liberal . for will anybody here come forward and say , ' a good fellow have no need to tack about and change his road ? ' no , there be not one of you such a Tom - noddy . what be good for one time be bad for another . if anybody contradict that , ask he to eat pickle pork when he be thirsty , and to bathe in the Lapp there when the spike of ice be shoot . and that be the reason why the man who be the good liberal now be the very man who use to be the good Tories . there be not   a nasty horse than your horse that will jib and back and turn round when there be but one road for he to go , and that be the road before he . 

 " and my nephew here he come of a Tory breed , you know I will answer for the lingon . in the old Tory time there be never a pup belong to a Lingon but would howl if a Whig come near he . the Lingon blood be good , rich old Tory blood like good rich milk and that be why , when the right time come , it throw up a liberal cream . the good sort of Tory turn to the good sort of Radical . there be plenty of radical scum I say , beware of the scum , and look but for the cream . and here be my nephew some 179   of the cream , if there be any : none of your whig , none of your paint water that look as if it run , and it be stand still all the while ; none of your spinning - jenny fellow . a gentleman ; but up to all sort of business . I be no fool myself ; I be force to wink a good deal , for fear of see too much , for a neighborly man must let himself be cheat a little . but though I have   never be out of my own country , I know less about it than my nephew do . you may tell what he be , and only look at he . there be one sort of fellow see nothing but the end of his own nose , and another sort that see nothing but the hinder side of the moon ; but my nephew Harold be of another sort ; he see everything that be at hit distance , and he be not one to miss his mark . a good - look man in his prime ! not a greenhorn ; not a shrivelled old fellow , who will come to speak to you and find he be leave his tooth at home by mistake . Harold Transome will do you credit ; if anybody say the Radicals be a set of sneak , Brummagem half - penny , scamp who want to play pitch - and - toss with the property of the country , you can say , ' look at the member for North Loamshire ! ' and mind what you will hear he say ; he will go in for make everything right poor - law and Charities and Church he want to reform them all . perhaps you will say , ' there be that Parson Lingon talk about Church Reform why , he belong to the Church himself he want reform too . ' well , well , wait a bit , and you will hear by - and - by that old Parson Lingon be reform shoot no more , crack his joke no more , have drink his last bottle : the dog , the old pointer , will be sorry ; but you will hear that the Parson at Little Treby be a new man . that be what Church Reform be sure to come to before long . so now here be some more nuts for you , lad , and I leave you to listen to your candidate . here he be give he a good hurray ; wave your hat , and I will begin . hurray ! " 

 Harold have not be quite confident beforehand as to the good effect of his uncle 's introduction ; but he be soon reassure . there be no acrid partisanship among the old - fashioned Tories who muster strong about the Marquis of Granby , and Parson Jack have put they in a good humor . Harold 's only interruption come from his own party . the oratorical clerk at the Factory , act as the tribune of the dissenting interest , and feel bound to put question , might have be troublesome ; but his voice be unpleasantly sharp , while Harold 's be full and penetrate , the questioning be cry down . Harold 's speech " do " : it be not of the glib - nonsensical sort , not ponderous , 180   not hesitate which be as much as to say , that it be remarkable among british speech . read in print the next day , perhaps it would be neither pregnant nor conclusive , which be say no more than that its excellence be not of an abnormal kind , but such as be usually find in the good effort of eloquent candidate . accordingly , the applause drown the opposition , and content predominate . 

 but , perhaps , the moment of most diffusive pleasure from public speaking be that in which the speech cease and the audience can turn to comment on it . the one speech , sometimes utter under great responsibility as to missile and other consequence , have give a text to twenty speaker who be under no responsibility . even in the day of duel a man be not challenge for be a bore , nor do this quality apparently hinder he from be much invite to dinner , which be the great index of social responsibility in a less barbarous age . 

 certainly the crowd in the market - place seem to experience this culminate enjoyment when the speaking on the platform in front of the Ram have cease , and there be no less than three orator hold forth from the elevation of chance vehicle , not at all to the prejudice of the talking among those who be on a level with their neighbor . there be little ill - humor among the listener , for Queen Bess be strike the last quarter before two , and a savory smell from the inn kitchen inspire they with an agreeable consciousness that the speaker be help to trifle away the brief time before dinner . 

 two or three of Harold 's committee have linger talk to each other on the platform , instead of re - enter ; and Jermyn , after come out to speak to one of they , have turn to the corner near which the carriage be stand , that he might tell the Transome 's coachman to drive round to the side door and signal to his own coachman to follow . but a dialogue which be go on below induce he to pause , and instead of give the order , to assume the air of a careless gazer . Christian , whom the attorney have already observe look out of a window at the Marquis of Granby , be talk to Dominic . the meeting appear to be one of new recognition , for Christian be say : 

 " you have   not get gray , as I have , Mr. Lenoni ; you be not a day old for the sixteen year . but no wonder you do not   know I ; I be bleach like a dry bone . " 

  181 

 " not so . it be true I be confuse a meenute I could put your face nowhere ; but , after that , Naples come behind it , and I say , Mr. Creesstian . and so you reside at the Manor , and I be at Transome Court . " 

 " ah ! it be a thousand pity you be not on our side , else we might have din together at the Marquis , " say Christian . " eh , could you manage it ? " he add , languidly , know there be no chance of a yes . 

 " no much oblige could not   leave the leetle boy . Ahi ! Arry , Arry , pinch not poor Moro . " 

 while Dominic be answer , Christian have star about he , as his manner be when he be be speak to , and have have his eye arrest by Esther , who be lean forward to look at Mr. Harold Transome 's extraordinary little gypsy of a son . but , happen to meet Christian 's stare , she feel annoyed , draw back , and turn away her head , color . 

 " who be those lady ? " say Christian , in a low tone , to Dominic , as if he have be startle into a sudden wish for this information . 

 " they be Meester Jermyn 's daughter , " say Dominic , who know nothing either of the lawyer 's family or of Esther . 

 Christian look puzzle a moment or two , and be silent . 

 " oh , well au revoir , " he say , kiss the tip of his finger as the coachman , have have Jermyn 's order , begin to urge on the horse . 

 " do he see some likeness in the girl ? " think Jermyn , as he turn away . " I wish I have not   invite she to come in the carriage , as it happen . " 

 CHAPTER XX . 

 " good earthenware pitcher , sir ! of an excellent quaint pattern and sober color . " 

 the market dinner at " the Marquis " be in high repute in Treby and its neighborhood . the frequenter of this three - and - sixpenny ordinary like to allude to it , as man allude to anything which imply that they move in good society , and habitually converse with those who be in the secret of the high affair . the guest be not only such rural resident as have drive to market , but some of the most substantial townsman , who have always assure their wife that business require this weekly sacrifice of domestic pleasure . the poor farmer , who put up at the Ram or the Seven Stars , where there be no fish , feel their disadvantage , bear it modestly or bitterly , as the case might be ; 182   and although the Marquis be a Tory house , devote to Debarry , it be too much to expect that such tenant of the Transomes as have always be use to dine there , should consent to eat a bad dinner , and sit with bad company , because they suddenly find themselves under a radical landlord , oppose to the political party know as Sir Maxim 's . hence the recent political division have not reduce the handsome length of the table at the Marquis ; and the many gradation of dignity from Mr. Wace , the brewer , to the rich butcher from Leek Malton , who always modestly take the low seat , though without the reward of be ask to come up higher have not be abbreviate by any secession . 

 to - day there be an extra table spread for expect supernumerary , and it be at this that Christian take his place with some of the young farmer , who have almost a sense of dissipation in talk to a man of his questionable station and unknown experience . the provision be especially liberal , and on the whole the presence of a minority destine to vote for Transome be a ground for joking , which add to the good humor of the chief talker . a respectable old acquaintance turn Radical rather against his will , be rally with even great gusto than if his wife have have twin twice over . the good Trebian Tories be far too sweet - blooded to turn against such old friend , and to make no distinction between they and the Radical , Dissenting , Papistical , Deistical set with whom they never din , and probably never see except in their imagination . but the talk be necessarily in abeyance until the more serious business of dinner be end , and the wine , spirit , and tobacco raise mere satisfaction into beatitude . 

 among the frequent though not regular guest , whom every one be glad to see , be Mr. Nolan , the retire London hosier , a wiry old gentleman past seventy , whose square , tight forehead , with its rigid hedge of gray hair , whose bushy eyebrow , sharp dark eye , and remarkable hooked nose , give a handsome distinction to his face in the midst of rural physiognomy . he have marry a Miss Pendrell early in life , when he be a poor young Londoner , and the match have be think as bad as ruin by her family ; but fifteen year ago he have have the satisfaction of bring his wife to settle amongst her own friend , and of be receive with pride as a brother - in - law , retire from business , possess of unknown thousand , and of a most agreeable talent for anecdote and conversation generally . no question have ever be raise 183   as to Mr. Nolan 's extraction on the strength of his hooked nose , or of his name be baruch . hebrew name " run " in the good Saxon family ; the Bible account for they ; and no one among the upland and hedgerow of that district be suspect of have an oriental origin unless he carry a peddler 's jewel - box . certainly , whatever genealogical research might have discover , the worthy Baruch Nolan be so free from any distinctive mark of religious persuasion he go to church with so ordinary an irregularity , and so often grumble at the sermon that there be no ground for class he otherwise than with good Trebian Churchmen . he be generally regard as a good - look old gentleman , and a certain thin eagerness in his aspect be attribute to the life of the metropolis , where narrow space have the same sort of effect on man as on thickly - plant tree . Mr. Nolan always order his pint of port , which , after he have sip it a little , be will not to animate his recollection of the Royal Family , and the various ministry which have be contemporary with the successive stage of his prosperity . he be always listen to with interest : a man who have be bear in the year when good old King George come to the throne who have be acquaint with the nude leg of the Prince Regent , and hint at private reason for believe that the Princess Charlotte ought not to have die have conversational matter as special to his auditor as Marco Polo could have have on his return from his asiatic travel . 

 " my good sir , " he say to Mr. Wace , as he cross his knee and spread his silk handkerchief over they , " Transome may be return , or he may not be return that be a question for North Loamshire ; but it make little difference to the kingdom . I do not   want to say thing which may put young man out of spirit , but I believe this country have see it be good day I do , indeed . " 

 " I be sorry to hear it from one of your experience , Mr. Nolan , " say the brewer , a large , happy - look man . " I would make a good fight myself before I would leave a bad world for my boy than I have   find for myself . there be not   a great pleasure than do a bit of planting and improve one 's building , and invest one 's money in some pretty acre of land , and when it turn up here and there land you have   know from a boy . it be a nasty thought that these Radicals be to turn thing round so as one can calculate on nothing . one do not   like it for one 's self , and one do not   like it for one 's neighbor . but somehow , I believe it will not   184   do : if we can not   trust the Government just now , there be Providence and the good sense of the country ; and there be a right in thing that be what I have   always say there be a right in thing . the heavy end will get downmost . and if Church and King , and every man be sure of his own , be thing good for this country , there be a God above will take care of them . " 

 " it will not   do , my dear sir , " say Mr. Nolan " it will not   do . when Peel and the Duke turn round about the Catholics in ' 29 , I see it be all over with we . we could never trust minister any more . it be to keep off a rebellion , they say ; but I say it be to keep their place . they be monstrously fond of place , both of they that I know . " here Mr. Nolan change the crossing of his leg , and give a deep cough , conscious of have make a point . then he go on " what we want be a king with a good will of his own . if we have have that , we should not   have hear what we have   hear to - day ; Reform would never have come to this pass . when our good old King George III . hear his minister talk about Catholic Emancipation , he box their ear all round . ah , poor soul ! he do indeed , gentleman , " end Mr. Nolan , shake by a deep laugh of admiration . 

 " well , now , that be something like a king , " say Mr. Crowder , who be an eager listener . 

 " it be uncivil , though . how do they take it ? " say Mr. Timothy Rose , a " gentleman farmer " from Leek Malton , against whose independent position nature have provide the safeguard of a spontaneous servility . his large porcine cheek , round twinkle eye , and thumb habitually twirl , express a concentrated effort not to get into trouble , and to speak everybody fair except when they be safely out of hearing . 

 " take it ! they would be oblige to take it , " say the impetuous young Joyce , a farmer of superior information . " have you ever hear of the king 's prerogative ? " 

 " I do not   say but what I have , " say Rose , retreat . " I have   nothing against it nothing at all . " 

 " no , but the Radicals have , " say young Joyce , wink . " the prerogative be what they want to clip close . they want we to be govern by delegate from the trade - union , who be to dictate to everybody , and make everything square to their mastery . " 

 " they be a pretty set , now , these delegate , " say Mr. Wace , with disgust . " I once hear two of them spout away . they be a sort of 185   fellow I would never employ in my brewery , or anywhere else . I have   see it again and again . if a man take to tongue - work it be all over with he . ' everything 's wrong , ' say he . that be a big text . but do he want to make everything right ? not he . he would lose his text . ' we want every man 's good , ' say they . why , they never know yet what a man 's good be . how should they ? it be work for his victual not get a slice of other people 's . " 

 " ay , ay , " say young Joyce , cordially . " I should just have like all the delegate in the country muster for our yeomanry to go into that be all . they would see where the strength of Old England lie then . you may tell what it be for a country to trust to trade when it breed such spindle fellow as those . " 

 " that be not   the fault of trade , my good sir , " say Mr. Nolan , who be often a little pained by the defect of provincial culture . " trade , properly conduct , be good for a man 's constitution . I could have show you , in my time , weaver past seventy , with all their faculty as sharp as a pen - knife , do without spectacle . it be the new system of trade that be to blame : a country can not   have too much trade if it be properly manage . plenty of sound Tories have make their fortune by trade . you have   hear of Calibut    Co. everybody have hear of Calibut . well , sir , I know old Mr. Calibut as well as I know you . he be once a crony of mine in a city warehouse ; and now , I will answer for it , he have a large rent roll than Lord Wyvern . bless your soul ! his subscription to charity would make a fine income for a nobleman . and he be as good a Tory as I be . and as for his town establishment why , how much butter do you think be consume there annually ? " 

 Mr. Nolan pause , and then his face glow with triumph as he answer his own question . " why , gentleman , not less than two thousand pound of butter during the few month the family be in town ! trade make property , my good sir , and property be conservative , as they say now . Calibut 's son - in - law be Lord Fortinbras . he pay I a large debt on his marriage . it be all one web , sir . the prosperity of the country be one web . " 

 " to be sure , " say Christian , who , smoke his cigar with his chair turn away from the table , be willing to make himself agreeable in the conversation . " we can not   do without nobility . look at France . when they get rid of the old noble they be oblige to make new . " 

  186 

 " true , very true , " say Mr. Nolan , who think Christian a little too wise for his position , but could not resist the rare gift of an instance in point . " it be the French Revolution that have do we harm here . it be the same at the end of the last century , but the war keep it off Mr. Pitt save we . I know Mr. Pitt . I have a particular interview with he once . he joke I about get the length of his foot . ' Mr. Nolan , ' say he , ' there be those on the other side of the water whose name begin with N. who would be glad to know what you know . ' I be recommend to send an account of that to the newspaper after his death , poor man ! but I be not fond of that kind of show myself . " Mr. Nolan swing his upper leg a little , and pinch his lip between his thumb and finger , naturally pleased with his own moderation . 

 " no , no very right , " say Mr. Wace , cordially . " but you never say a truer word than that about property . if a man 's get a bit of property , a stake in the country , he will want to keep thing square . where Jack be not   safe , Tom 's in danger . but that be what make it such an uncommonly nasty thing that a man like Transome should take up with these Radicals . it be my belief he do it only to get into Parliament ; he will turn round when he get there . come , Dibbs , there be something to put you in spirit , " add Mr. Wace , raise his voice a little and look at a guest lower down . " you have   get to vote for a Radical with one side of your mouth , and make a wry face with the other ; but he will turn round by - and - by . as Parson Jack say , he be get the right sort of blood in he . " 

 " I do not   care two straw who I vote for , " say Dibbs , sturdily . " I be not go to make a wry face . it stand to reason a man should vote for his landlord . my farm 's in good condition , and I have   get the good pasture on the estate . the rot be never come nigh I . let they grumble as be on the wrong side of the hedge . " 

 " I wonder if Jermyn'll bring he in , though , " say Mr. Sircome , the great miller . " he be an uncommon fellow for carry thing through . I know he bring I through that suit about my weir ; it cost a pretty penny , but he bring I through . " 

 " it be a bit of a pill for he , too , have to turn Radical , " say Mr. Wace . " they say he count on make friend with Sir Maximus , by this young one come home and join with Mr. Philip . " 

 " but I will bet a penny he bring Transome in , " say Mr. Sircome . " folk say he have not   get many vote hereabout ; but toward Duffield , and all 187   there , where the Radicals be , everybody be for he . eh , Mr. Christian ? come you be at the fountain - head what do they say about it now at the Manor ? " 

 when general attention be call to Christian young Joyce look down at his own leg and touch the curve of his own hair , as if measure his own approximation to that correct copy of a gentleman . Mr. Wace turn his head to listen for Christian 's answer with that tolerance of inferiority which become man in place of public resort . 

 " they think it will be a hard run between Transome and Garstin , " say Christian . " it depend on Transome 's get plumper . " 

 " well , I know I shall not split for Garstin , " say Mr. Wace . " it be nonsense for Debarry 's voter to split for a Whig . a man 's either a Tory or not a tory . " 

 " it seem reasonable there should be one of each side , " say Mr. Timothy Rose . " I do not   like show favor either way . if one side can not   lower the poor 's rate and take off the tithe , let the other try . " 

 " but there be this in it , Wace , " say Mr. Sircome . " I be not altogether against the whig . for they do not   want to go so far as the Radicals do , and when they find they have   slip a bit too far they will hold on all the tight . and the whig have get the upper hand now , and it be no use fight with the current . I run with the " 

 Mr. Sircome check himself , look furtively at Christian , and , to divert criticism , end with " eh , Mr. Nolan ? " 

 " there have be eminent whig , sir . Mr. Fox be a Whig , " say Mr. Nolan . " Mr. Fox be a great orator . he be very intimate with the Prince of Wales . I have   see he , and the Duke of York too , go home by daylight with their hat crush . Mr. Fox be a great leader of Opposition : government require an Opposition . the Whigs should always be in opposition , and the Tories on the ministerial side . that be what the country use to like . ' the Whigs for salt and mustard , the Tories for meat , ' Mr. Gottlib , the banker , use to say to I . Mr. Gottlib be a worthy man . when there be a great run on Mr. Gottlib 's bank in ' 16 , I see a gentleman come in with bag of gold , and say , ' tell Mr. Gottlib there be plenty more where that come from . ' it stop the run , gentleman it do indeed . " 

 this anecodote be receive with great admiration , but Mr. Sircome return to the previous question . 

  188 

 " there now , you see , Wace it be right there should be whig as well as Tories Pitt and Fox I have   always hear they go together . " 

 " well , I do not   like Garstin , " say the brewer . " I do not   like his conduct about the Canal Company . of the two , I like Transome well . if a nag be to throw I , I say , let he have some blood . " 

 " as for blood , Wace , " say Mr. Salt , the wool - factor , a bilious man , who only speak when there be a good opportunity of contradict , " ask my brother - in - law , Labron , a little about that . these Transomes be not the old blood . " 

 " well , they be the old that be forthcoming , I suppose , " say Mr. Wace , laugh . " unless you believe in mad old Tommy Trounsem . I wonder where that old poach fellow be now . " 

 " I see he half - drunk the other day , " say young Joyce . " he would get a flag - basket with handbill in it over his shoulder . " 

 " I think the old fellow be dead , " say Mr. Wace . " hey ! why , Jermyn , " he go on merrily , as he turn round and see the attorney enter ; " you radical ! how dare you show yourself in this Tory house ? Come , this be go a bit too far . we do not   mind Old Harry manage our law for we that be his proper business from time immemorial ; but " 

 " but a " say Jermyn , smile , always ready to carry on a joke , to which his slow manner give the piquancy of surprise , " if he meddle with politic he must be a tory . " 

 Jermyn be not afraid to show himself anywhere in Treby . he know many people be not exactly fond of he , but a man can do without that , if he be prosperous . a provincial lawyer in those old - fashioned day be as independent of personal esteem as if he have be a Lord Chancellor . 

 there be a good - humor laugh at this upper end of the room as Jermyn seat himself at about an equal angle between Mr. Wace and Christian . 

 " we be talk about old Tommy Trounsem ; you remember he ? they say he be turn up again , " say Mr. Wace . 

 " ah ? " say Jermyn , indifferently . " but a Wace I be very busy to - day but I want to see you about that bit of land of yours at the corner of Pod 's End . I have   have a handsome offer for you I be not at liberty to say from whom but an offer that ought to tempt you . " 

 " it will not   tempt I , " say Mr. Wace , peremptorily , " if I have   get a bit of land , I will keep it . it be hard enough to get hereabouts . " 189 

 " then I be to understand that you refuse all negotiation ? " say Jermyn , who have order a glass of sherry , and be look around slowly as he sip it , till his eye seem to rest for the first time on Christian , though he have see he at once on enter the room . 

 " unless one of the confound railway should come . but then I will stand out and make them bleed for it . " 

 there be a murmur of approbation ; the railway be a public wrong much denunciate in Treby . 

 " a Mr. Philip Debarry at the Manor now ? " say Jermyn , suddenly question Christian , in a haughty tone of superiority which he often choose to use . 

 " no , " say Christian , " he be expect to - morrow morning . " 

 " ah ! - " Jermyn pause a moment or two , and then say , " you be sufficiently in his confidence , I think , to carry a message to he with a small document ? " 

 " Mr. Debarry have often trust I so far , " say Christian , with much coolness ; " but if the business be your , you can probably find some one you know well . " 

 there be a little winking and grimace among those of the company who hear this answer . 

 " a true a , " say Jermyn , not show any offence ; " if you decline . but I think , if you will do I the favor to step round to my residence on your way back , and learn the business , you will prefer carry it yourself . at my residence , if you please not my office . " 

 " oh , very well , " say Christian . " I shall be very happy . " Christian never allow himself to be treat as a servant by anyone but his master , and his master treat a servant more deferentially than an equal . 

 " will it be five o'clock ? what hour shall we say ? " say Jermyn . 

 Christian look at his watch and say , " about five I can be there . " 

 " very good , " say Jermyn , finish his sherry . 

 " well a Wace a so you will hear nothing about Pod 's end ? " 

 " not i. " 

 " a mere pocket - handkerchief , not enough to swear by - a " here Jermyn 's face break into a smile " without a magnifying - glass . " 

  190 

 " never mind . it be mine into the bowel of the earth and up to the sky . I can build the Tower of Babel on it if I like eh , Mr. Nolan ? " 

 " a bad investment , my good sir , " say Mr. Nolan , who enjoy a certain flavor of infidelity in this smart reply , and laugh much at it in his inward way . 

 " see now , how blind you Tories be , " say Jermyn , rise ; " if I have be your lawyer , I would have have you make another forty - shilling freeholder with that land , and all in time for this election . but a the verbum sapientibus come a little too late now . " 

 Jermyn be move away as he finish speak , but Mr. Wace call out after he , " we be not so badly off for vote as you be good sound vote , that will stand the Revising Barrister . debarry at the top of the poll ! " 

 the lawyer be already out of the doorway . 

 CHAPTER XXI . 

 ' tis grievous that with all amplification of travel both by sea and land , a man can never separate himself from his past history . 

 Mr. Jermyn 's handsome house stand a little way out of the town , surround by garden and lawn and plantation of hopeful tree . as Christian approach it he be in a perfectly easy state of mind : the business he be go on be none of his , otherwise than as he be well satisfied with any opportunity of make himself valuable to Mr. Philip Debarry . as he look at Jermyn 's length of wall and iron railing , he say to himself , " these lawyer be the fellow for get on in the world with the least expense of civility . with this cursed conjuring secret of theirs call Law , they think everybody be frightened at they . my Lord Jermyn seem to have his insolence as ready as his soft sawder . he be as sleek as a rat , and have as vicious a tooth . I know the sort of vermin well enough . I have   help to fatten one or two . " 

 in this mood of conscious , contemptuous penetration , Christian be show by the footman into Jermyn 's private room , where the attorney sit surround with massive oaken bookcase , and other furniture to correspond , from the thick - legged library - table to the calendar frame and card - rack . it be the sort of a room a man prepare for himself when he feel sure of a long and respectable future . he be lean back in his leather chair , against the broad window opening on the lawn , and have just take off his spectacle and let the newspaper fall on his knee , in despair of reading by the fade light . 191 

 when the footman open the door and say , " Mr. Christian , " Jermyn say , " good evening , Mr. Christian . be seat , " point to a chair opposite himself and the window . " light the candle on the shelf , John , but leave the blind alone . " 

 he do not speak again till the man be go out , but appear to be refer to a document which lie on the bureau before he . when the door be close he draw himself up again , begin to rub his hand , and turn toward his visitor , who seem perfectly indifferent to the fact that the attorney be in shadow , and that the light fall on himself . 

 " a your name a be Henry Scaddon . " 

 there be a start through Christian 's frame which he be quick enough , almost simultaneously , to try and disguise as a change of position . he uncross his leg and unbutton his coat . but before he have time to say anything , Jermyn go on with slow emphasis . 

 " you be bear on the sixteenth of December , 1782 , at Blackheath . your father be a cloth - merchant in London : he die when you be barely of age , leave an extensive business : before you be five - and - twenty you have run through the great part of the property , and have compromise your safety by an attempt to defraud your creditor . subsequently you forge a check on your father 's eld brother , who have intend to make you his heir . " 

 here Jermyn pause a moment and refer to the document . Christian be silent . 

 " in 1808 you find it expedient to leave this country in a military disguise , and be take prisoner by the French . on the occasion of an exchange of prisoner you have the opportunity of return to your own country , and to the bosom of your own family . you be generous enough to sacrifice that prospect in favor of a fellow - prisoner , of about your own age and figure , who have more pressing reason than yourself for wish to be on this side of the water . you exchange dress , luggage , and name with he , and he pass to England instead of you as Henry Scaddon . almost immediately afterward you escape from your imprisonment , after feign an illness which prevent your exchange of name from be discover ; and it be report that you that be , you under the name of your fellow - prisoner be drown in an open boat , try to reach a Neapolitan vessel bind for Malta . nevertheless I have to congratulate you on the falsehood of that report , and on the certainty that you be now , after the lapse of more than twenty year , seat here in perfect safety . " 

 Jermyn pause so long that he be evidently await some answer . at last Christian reply in a dogged tone 

 " well , sir , I have   hear much long story than that tell quite as solemnly , when there be not a word of truth in they . suppose I deny the very peg you hang your statement on . suppose I say I be not Henry Scaddon . " 

 " a in that case a , " say Jermyn , with wooden indifference , " you would lose the advantage which a may attach to your possession of Henry Scaddon 's knowledge . and at the same time , if it be in the least a inconvenient to you that you should be recognize as Henry Scaddon , your denial would not prevent I from hold the knowledge and evidence which I possess on that point ; it would only prevent we from pursue the present conversation . " 

 " well , sir , suppose we admit , for the sake of the conversation , that your account of the matter be the true one : what advantage have you to offer the man name Henry Scaddon ? " 

 " the advantage a be problematical ; but it may be considerable . it might , in fact , release you from the necessity of act as courier , or a valet , or whatever other office you may occupy which prevent you from be your own master . on the other hand , my acquaintance with your secret be not necessarily a disadvantage to you . to put the matter in a nutshell , I be not incline a gratuitously to do you any harm , and I may be able to do you a considerable service . " 

 " which you want I to earn somehow ? " say Christian . " you offer I a turn in a lottery ? " 

 " precisely . the matter in question be of no earthly interest to you , except a as it may yield you a prize . we lawyer have to do with complicated question , and a legal subtlety , which be never a fully know even to the party immediately interested , still less to the witness . shall we agree , then , that you continue to retain two - third of the name which you gain by exchange , and that you oblige I by answer certain question as to the experience of Henry Scaddon ? " 

 " very good . go on . " 

 " what article of property once belong to your fellow - prisoner , Maurice Christian Bycliffe , do you still retain ? " 

  193 

 " this ring , " say Christian , twirl round the fine seal - ring on his finger , " his watch , and the little matter that hang with it , and a case of paper . I get rid of a gold snuff - box once when I be hard up . the clothe be all go , of course . we exchange everything ; it be all do in a hurry . Bycliffe think we should meet again in England before long , and he be mad to get there . but that be impossible I mean that we should meet soon after . I do not   know what be become of he , else I would give he up his paper and the watch , and so on though , you know , it be I who do he the service , and he feel that . " 

 " you be at Vesoul together before be move to Verdun ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " what else do you know about Bycliffe ? " 

 " oh , nothing very particular , " say Christian pausing , and rap his boot with his cane . " he have be in the hanoverian army a high - spirited fellow , take nothing easily ; not over - strong in health . he make a fool of himself with marry at Vesoul ; and there be the devil to pay with the girl 's relation ; and then , when the prisoner be order off , they have to part . whether they ever get together again I do not   know . " 

 " be the marriage all right then ? " 

 " oh , all on the square civil marriage , church everything . Bycliffe be a fool a good - natured , proud , headstrong fellow . " 

 " how long do the marriage take place before you leave Vesoul ? " 

 " about three month . I be witness to the marriage . " 

 " and you know no more about the wife ? " 

 " not afterward . I know she very well before pretty Annette Annette Ledru be her name . she be of a good family , and they have make up a fine match for she . but she be one of your meek little diablesse , who have a will of their own once in their life the will to choose their own master . " 

 " Bycliffe be not open to you about his other affair ? " 

 " oh , no a fellow you would not   dare to ask a question of . People tell he everything , but he tell nothing in return . if Madame Annette ever find he again , she find her lord and master with a vengeance ; but she be a regular lapdog . however , her family shut she up make a prisoner of she to prevent she run away . " 

  194 

 " ah good . much of what you have be so obliging as to say be irrelevant to any possible purpose of mine , which , in fact , have only to do with a mouldy law - case that might be air some day . you will doubtless , on your own account , maintain perfect silence on what have pass between we , and with that condition duly preserve a it be possible that a the lottery you have put into as you observe may turn up a prize . " 

 " this , then , be all the business you have with I ? " say Christian , rise . 

 " All . you will , of course , preserve carefully all the paper and other article which have so many a recollection a attach to they ? " 

 " oh , yes . if there be any chance of Bycliffe turn up again , I shall be sorry to have part with the snuff - box ; but I be hard - up at Naples . in fact , as you see , I be oblige at last to turn courier . " 

 " an exceedingly agreeable life for a man of some a accomplishment and a no income , " say Jermyn , rise , and reach a candle , which he place against his desk . 

 Christian know this be a sign that he be expect to go , but he linger stand , with one hand on the back of his chair . at last , he say rather sulkily 

 " I think you be too clever , Mr. Jermyn , not to perceive that I be not a man to be make a fool of . " 

 " well a it may perhaps be a still well guarantee for you , " say Jermyn , smile , " that I see no use in attempt that a metamorphosis . " 

 " the old gentleman , who ought never to have feel himself injure , be dead now , and I be not afraid of creditor after more than twenty year . " 

 " certainly not ; a there may indeed be claim which can not   assert themselves a legally , which yet be molest to a man of some reputation . but you may perhaps be happily free from such fear . " 

 Jermyn draw round his chair toward the bureau , and Christian , too acute to persevere uselessly , say , " good - day , " and leave the room . 

 after lean back in his chair to reflect a few minute , Jermyn write the following letter : 

 Dear Johnson , I learn from your letter , receive this morning , that you intend return to town on Saturday . 

 while you be there , be so good as to see Medwin , who use to be with Batt    Cowley , and ascertain from he indirectly , and in the course of conversation on other topic , whether in that old business in 195   1810 - 11 , Scaddon alias Bycliffe , or Bycliffe alias Scaddon , before his imprisonment , give Batt    Cowley any reason to believe that he be marry and expect to have a child . the question , as you know , be of no practical importance ; but I wish to draw up an abstract of the Bycliffe case , and the exact position in which it stand before the suit be close by the death of the plaintiff , in order that , if Mr. Harold Transome desire it , he may see how the failure of the last claim have secure the Durfey - Transome title , and whether there be a hair 's breadth of chance that another claim should be set up . 

 of course there be not a shadow of such a chance . for even if Batt    Cowley be to suppose that they have alight on a survive representative of the Bycliffes , it would not enter their head to set up a new claim , since they bring evidence that the last life which suspend the Bycliffe remainder be extinct before the case be close , a good twenty year ago . 

 still I want to show the present heir of the Durfey - Transomes the exact condition of the family title to the estate . so get I an answer from Medwin on the above mention point . 

 I shall meet you at Duffield next week . we must get Transome return . never mind his have be a little rough the other day , but go on do what you know be necessary for his interest . his interest be mine , which I need not say be John Johnson 's . 

 your faithfully , Matthew Jermyn . 

 when the attorney have seal this letter and lean back in his chair again , he be inwardly say 

 " now , Mr. Harold , I shall shut up this affair in a private drawer till you choose to take any extreme measure which will force I to bring it out . I have the matter entirely in my own power . no one but old Lyon know about the girl 's birth . no one but Scaddon can clench the evidence about Bycliffe , and I have   get Scaddon under my thumb . no soul except myself and Johnson , who be a limb of myself , know that there be one half - dead life which may presently leave the girl a new claim to the Bycliffe heirship . I shall learn through Methurst whether Batt    Cowley know , through Bycliffe , of this woman have come to England . I shall hold all the thread between my thumb and finger . I can use the evidence or I can nullify it . 

 " and so , if Mr. Harold push I to extremity , and threaten I with chancery and ruin , I have an oppose threat , which will either save I or turn into a punishment for he . " 

 he rise , put out his candle , and stand with his back to the fire , look out on the dim lawn , with its black twilight fringe of shrub , still meditate . quick thought be gleam over five - and - thirty year fill with device more or less clever , more or less desirable to be avow . those which might be avow with impunity be not always to be distinguish as innocent by comparison with those which it be 196   advisable to conceal . in a profession where much that be noxious may be do without disgrace , be a conscience likely to be without balm when circumstance have urge a man to overstep the line where his good technical information make he aware that   with discovery   disgrace be likely to begin ? 

 with regard to the Transome affair , the family have be in press need of money , and it have lain with he to get it for they : be it to be expect that he would not consider his own advantage where he have render service such as be never fully pay ? if it come to a question of right and wrong instead of law , the least justifiable thing he have ever do have be do on behalf of the Transomes . it have be a deucedly unpleasant thing for he to get Bycliffe arrest and throw into prison as Henry Scaddon perhaps hasten the man 's death in that way . but if it have not be do by dint of his   Jermyn 's   exertion and tact , he would like to know where the Durfey - Transomes might have be by this time . as for right or wrong , if the truth be know , the very possession of the estate by the Durfey - Transomes be owe to law - trick that take place nearly a century ago , when the original old Durfey get his base fee . 

 but inward argument of this sort now , as always , be merge in anger , in exasperation , that Harold , precisely Harold Transome , should have turn out to be the probable instrument of a visitation which would be bad luck , not justice ; for be there any justice where ninety - nine out of every hundred escape ? he feel himself begin to hate Harold as he have never 

 just then Jermyn 's third daughter , a tall slim girl , wrap in a white woollen shawl , which she have hang over her blanket - wise , skip across the lawn toward the greenhouse to get a flower . Jermyn be startle , and do not identify the figure , or rather he identify it falsely with another tall white - wrap figure which have sometimes set his heart beat quickly more than thirty year before . for a moment he be fully back in those distant year when he and another bright - eyed person have see no reason why they should not indulge their passion and their vanity , and determine for themselves how their life should be make delightful in spite of unalterable external condition . the reason have be unfold themselves gradually ever since through all the year which have convert the handsome , soft - eye , slim young Jermyn   with a touch of sentiment   into a portly lawyer of sixty , for whom life have 197   resolve itself into the mean of keep up his head among his professional brother and maintain an establishment into a gray - haired husband and father , whose third affectionate and expensive daughter now rap at the window and call to he , " Papa , papa , get ready for dinner ; do not   you remember that the Lukyns be come ? " 

 CHAPTER XXII . 

 her gentle look shoot arrow , pierce he 
 as god be pierce , with poison of sweet pity . 
 the evening of the market - day have pass , and Felix have not look in at Malthouse Yard to talk over the public event with Mr. Lyon . when Esther be dress the next morning , she have reach a point of irritated anxiety to see Felix , at which she find herself devise little scheme for attain that end in some way that would be so elaborate as to seem perfectly natural . her watch have a long - stand ailment of losing ; possibly it want cleaning ; Felix would tell she if it merely want regulate , whereas Mr. Prowd might detain it unnecessarily , and cause her useless inconvenience . or could she not get a valuable hint from Mrs. Holt about the home - make bread , which be something as ' sad " as Lyddy herself ? or , if she come home that way at twelve o'clock , Felix might be go out , she might meet he , and not be oblige to call . or but it would be very much beneath she to take any step of this sort . her watch have be lose for the last two month why should it not go on lose a little long ? she could think of no device that be not so transparent as to be undignifie . all the more undignified because Felix choose to live in a way that would prevent any one from class he accord to his education and mental refinement " which certainly be very high , " say Esther , inwardly , color , as if in answer to some contrary allegation , " else I should not think his opinion of any consequence . " but she come to the conclusion that she could not possibly call at Mrs. Holt 's . 

 it follow that , up to a few minute past twelve , when she reach the turning toward Mrs. Holt 's , she believe that she should go home the other way ; but at the last moment there be always a reason not exist before namely , the impossibility of further vacillation . Esther turn the corner without any visible pause , and in another minute be knock at Mrs. Holt 's door , not without an inward flutter , which she be bent on disguise . 

  198 

 " it be never you , Miss Lyon ! who would have think of see you at this time ? be the minister ill ? I think he look creechy . if you want help , I will put my bonnet on . " 

 " do not   keep Miss Lyon at the door , mother ; ask she to come in , " say the ring voice of Felix , surmount various small shuffling and babble voice within . 

 " it be my wish for she to come in , I be sure , " say Mrs. Holt , make way ; " but what be there for she to come in to ? a floor bad than any public . but step in , pray , if you be so inclined . when I have   be force to take my bit of carpet up , and have bench , I do not   see why I need mind nothing no more . " 

 " I only come to ask Mr. Holt if he would look at my watch for I , " say Esther , enter , and blush a general rose - color . 

 " he will do that fast enough , " say Mrs. Holt , with emphasis ; " that be one of the thing he will do . " 

 " excuse my rise , Miss Lyon , " say Felix ; " I be bind up Job 's finger . " 

 Job be a small fellow about five , with a germinal nose , large round blue eye , and red hair that curl close to his head like the wool on the back of an infantine lamb . he have evidently be cry , and the corner of his mouth be still dolorous . Felix hold he on his knee as he bind and tie up very cleverly a tiny forefinger . there be a table in front of Felix and against the window , cover with his watchmaking implement and some open book . two bench stand at right angle on the sanded floor , and six or seven boy of various age up to twelve be get their cap and prepare to go home . they huddle themselves together and stand still when Esther enter . Felix could not look up till he have finish his surgery , but he go on speak . 

 " this be a hero , Miss Lyon . this be Job Tudge , a bold Briton whose finger hurt he , but who do not   mean to cry . good - morning , boy . do not   lose your time . get out into the air . " 

 Esther seat herself on the end of the bench near Felix , much relieve that Job be the immediate object of attention ; and the other boy rush out behind she with a brief chant of " good - morning ! " 

 " do you ever see , " say Mrs. Holt , stand to look on , " how wonderful Felix be at that small work with his large finger ? and that be because he learn doctor . it be not   for want of cleverness he look like a poor man , Miss Lyon . I have   leave off speak , else I should say it be a sin and a shame . " 


 Felix Holt and Job Tudge . 
  199 

 " Mother , " say Felix , who often amuse himself and keep good - humor by give his mother answer that be unintelligible to she , " you have an astonishing readiness in the ciceronian antiphrasis , consider you have never study oratory . there , Job thou patient man sit still if thou wilt ; and now we can look at Miss Lyon . " 

 Esther have take off her watch and be hold it in her hand . but he look at her face , or rather at her eye , as he say , " you want I to doctor your watch ? " 

 Esther 's expression be appeal and timid , as it have never be before in Felix 's presence ; but when she see the perfect calmness , which to she seem coldness , of his clear gray eye , as if he see no reason for attach any emphasis to this first meeting , a pang swift as an electric shock dart through she . she have be very foolish to think so much of it . it seem to she as if her inferiority to Felix make a gulf between they . she could not at once rally her pride and self - command , but let her glance fall on her watch , and say , rather tremulously , " it lose . it be very troublesome . it have be lose a long while . " 

 Felix take the watch from her hand ; then , look round and see that his mother be go out of the room , he say , very gently 

 " you look distressed , Miss Lyon . I hope there be no trouble at home "   Felix be think of the minister 's agitation on the previous Sunday . " but I ought perhaps to beg your pardon for say so much . " 

 Poor Esther be quite helpless . the mortification which have come like a bruise to all the sensibility that have be in keen activity , insist on some relief . her eye fill instantly , and a great tear roll down while she say in a loud sort of whisper , as involuntary as her tear 

 " I want to tell you that I be not offend that I be not ungenerous I think you might think but you have not think of it . " 

 be there ever more awkward speaking ? or any behavior less like that of the graceful , self - possess Miss Lyon , whose phrase be usually so well turn , and whose repartee be so ready ? 

 for a moment there be silence . Esther have her two little delicately - glove hand clasp on the table . the next moment she feel one hand of Felix cover they both and press they firmly ; but he do not speak . the tear be both on her cheek now , and she could look up at he . his eye have an expression of sadness in they , quite new to 200   she . suddenly little Job , who have his mental exercise on the occasion , call out , impatiently 

 " she be tut her finger ! " 

 Felix and Esther laugh , and draw their hand away ; and as Esther take her handkerchief to wipe the tear from her cheek she say 

 " you see , Job , I be a naughty coward . I can not   help cry when I have   hurt myself . " 

 " Zoo soodn't   kuy , " say Job energetically , be much impressed with a moral doctrine which have come to he after a sufficient transgression of it . 

 " Job be like I , " say Felix , " fonder of preach than of practice . but let we look at this same watch , " he go on , open and examine it . " these little Geneva toy be cleverly construct to go always a little wrong . but if you wind they up and set they regularly every night , you may know at least that it be not noon when the hand point there . " 

 Felix chat , that Esther might recover herself ; but now Mrs. Holt come back and apologize . 

 " you will excuse my go away , I know , Miss Lyon . but there be the dumpling to see to , and what little I have   get leave on my hand now I like to do well . not but what I have   more cleaning to do than ever I have in my life before , as you may tell soon enough if you look at this floor . but when you have   be use to do thing , and they have   be take away from you , it be as if your hand have be cut off , and you feel the finger as be of no use to you . " 

 " that be a great image , mother , " say Felix , as he snap the watch together and hand it to Esther ; " I never hear you use such an image before . " 

 " yes , I know you have   always some fault to find with what your mother say . but if ever there be a woman could talk with the open Bible before she , and not be afraid , it be I . I never do tell story , and I never will though I know it be do , Miss Lyon , and by church member too , when they have candle to sell , as I could bring you to the proof . but I never be one of them , let Felix say what he will about the printing on the ticket . his father believe it be gospel truth , and it be presumptuous to say it be not . for as for cure , how can anybody know ? there be no physic'll cure without a blessing , and with a blessing I know I have   see a mustard plaister work when there be no more smell nor strength in the mustard than so much flour . and reason 201   good for the mustard have lie in paper nobody know how long so I will leave you to guess . " 

 Mrs. Holt look hard out of the window and give a slight , inarticulate sound of scorn . 

 Felix have lean back in his chair with a resign smile , and be pinch Job 's ear . 

 Esther say , " I think I have well go now , " not know what else to say , yet not wish to go immediately , lest she should seem to be run away from Mrs. Holt . she feel keenly how much endurance there must be for Felix . and she have often be discontent with her father , and call he tiresome ! 

 " where do Job Tudge live ? " she say , still sit and look at the droll little figure , set off by a ragged jacket with a tail about two inch deep stick out above the funniest of corduroy . 

 " Job have two mansion , " say Felix . " he live here chiefly ; but he have another home , where his grandfather , Mr. Tudge , the stone - breaker , life . my mother be very good to Job , Miss Lyon . she have make he a little bed in a cupboard , and she give he sweeten porridge . " 

 the exquisite goodness imply in these word of Felix impress Esther the more , because in her hear his talk have usually be pungent and denunciatory . look at Mrs. Holt , she see that her eye have lose their bleak north - easterly expression , and be shin with some mildness on little Job , who have turn round toward she , prop his head against Felix . 

 " well , why should not   I be motherly to the child , Miss Lyon ? " say Mrs. Holt , whose strong power of argument require the file of an imagined contradiction , if there be no real one at hand . " I never be hard - hearted , and I never will be . it be Felix pick the child up and take to he , you may be sure , for there be nobody else master where he be ; but I be not   go to beat the orphan child and abuse he because of that , and he as straight as an arrow when he be strip , and I so fond of child , and only have one of my own to live . I have three baby , Miss Lyon , but the blessed Lord only spar Felix , and he the masterful and brownest of them all . but I do my duty by he , and I say , he will have more schooling than his father , and he will grow up a doctor , and marry a woman with money to furnish as I be myself , spoon and everything and I shall have the grandchild to look up to I , and be drive out in the gig sometimes , like old Mrs. Lukyn . and you see what 202   it be all come to , Miss Lyon : here 's Felix make a common man of himself , and say he will never be marry which be the most unreasonable thing , and he never easy but when he be get the child on his lap , or when " 

 " stop , stop , mother , " Felix burst in ; " pray do not   use that limping argument again that a man should marry because he be fond of child . that be a reason for not marry . a bachelor 's child be always young : they be immortal child always lisp , waddle , helpless , and with a chance of turn out good . " 

 " the Lord above may know what you mean ! and have not   other folk 's child a chance of turn out good ? " 

 " oh , they grow out of it very fast . here 's Job Tudge now , " say Felix , turn the little one round on his knee , and hold his head by the back " Job 's limb will get lanky ; this little fist that look like a puff - ball and can hide nothing big than a gooseberry , will get large and bony , and perhaps want to clutch more than its share ; these wide blue eye that tell I more truth than Job know , will narrow and narrow and try to hide truth that Job would be well without know ; this little negative nose will become long and self - assert ; and this little tongue put out thy tongue , Job " Job , awe - strike under this ceremony , put out a little red tongue very timidly " this tongue , hardly big than a rose - leaf , will get large and thick , wag out of season , do mischief , brag and can not for gain or vanity , and cut as cruelly , for all its clumsiness , as if it be a sharp - edge blade . Big Job will perhaps be naughty " as Felix , speak with the loud emphatic distinctness habitual to he , bring out this terribly familiar word , Job 's sense of mystification become too painful : he hang his lip and begin to cry . 

 " see here , " say Mrs. Holt , " you be frightening the innocent child with such talk and it be enough to frighten they that think themselves the safe . " 

 " look here , Job , my man , " say Felix , set the boy down and turn he toward Esther ; " go to Miss Lyon , ask she to smile at you , and that will dry up your tear like the sunshine . " 

 Job put his two brown fist on Esther 's lap , and she stoop to kiss he . then hold his face between her hand she say , " tell Mr. Holt we do not   mean to be naughty , Job . he should believe in we more . but now I must really go home . " 

  203 

 Esther rise and hold out her hand to Mrs. Holt , who keep it while she say , a little to Esther 's confusion 

 " I be very glad it be take your fancy to come here sometimes , Miss Lyon . I know you be think to hold your head high , but I speak of people as I find them . and I be sure anybody have need be humble that come where there be a floor like this for I have   put by my good tea - tray , they be so out of all character I must look above for comfort now ; but I do not   say I be not worthy to be call on for all that . " 

 Felix have rise and move toward the door that he might open it and shield Esther from more last word on his mother 's part . 

 " good - bye , Mr. Holt . " 

 " will Mr. Lyon like for I to sit with he an hour this evening , do you think ? " 

 " why not ? he always like to see you . " 

 " then I will come . good - bye . " 

 " she be a very straight figure , " say Mrs. Holt . " how she carry herself ! but I doubt there be some truth in what our people say . if she will not   look at young Muscat , it be the well for he . he would need have a big fortune that marry she . " 

 " that be true , mother , " say Felix , sit down , snatch up little Job , and find a vent for some unspeakable feeling in the pretence of worry he . 

 Esther be rather melancholy as she go home , yet happy withal than she have be for many day before . she think , " I need not mind have show so much anxiety about his opinion . he be too clear - sighted to mistake our mutual position ; he be quite above put a false interpretation on what I have do . besides , he have not think of I at all I see that plainly enough . yet he be very kind . there be something great and well in he than I have imagine . his behavior to - day to his mother and I too I should call it the high gentlemanliness , only it seem in he to be something deep . but he have choose an intolerable life ; though I suppose , if I have a mind equal to his , and if he love I very dearly , I should choose the same life . " 

 Esther feel that she have prefix an impossible " if " to that result . but now she have know Felix her conception of what a happy love must be have become like a dissolve view , in which the once - dear image be gradually melt into new form and new color . the favorite byronic hero be begin to look like last night 's decoration see in the sober dawn . so fast do a little leaven spread within we so incalculable be one personality on another . behind all Esther 's 204   thought , like an unacknowledged yet constrain presence , there be the sense , that if Felix Holt be to love she , her life would be exalt into something quite new into a sort of difficult blessedness , such as one may imagine in being who be conscious of painfully grow into possession of high power . 

 it be quite true that Felix have not think the more of Esther because of that Sunday afternoon 's interview which have shake her mind to the very root . he have avoid intruding on Mr. Lyon without special reason , because he believe the minister to be preoccupy with some private care . he have think a great deal of Esther with a mixture of strong disapproval and strong liking , which both together make a feeling the reverse of indifference ; but he be not go to let she have any influence on his life . even if his determination have not be fix , he would have believe that she would utterly scorn he in any other light than that of an acquaintance , and the emotion she have show to - day do not change that belief . but he be deeply touch by this manifestation of her well quality , and feel that there be a new tie of friendship between they . that be the brief history Felix would have give of his relation to Esther . and he be accustom to observe himself . but very close and diligent look at living creature , even through the good microscope , will leave room for new and contradictory discovery . 

 Felix find Mr. Lyon particularly glad to talk to he . the minister have never yet disburden himself about his letter to Mr. Philip Debarry concern the public conference ; and as by this time he have all the head of his discussion thoroughly in his mind , it be agreeable to recite they , as well as to express his regret that time have be lose by Mr. Debarry 's absence from the Manor , which have prevent the immediate fulfillment of his pledge . 

 " I do not   see how he can fulfill it if the rector refuse , " say Felix , think it well to moderate the little man 's confidence . 

 " the rector be of a spirit that will not incur earthly impeachment , and he can not refuse what be necessary to his nephew 's honorable discharge of an obligation , " say Mr. Lyon . " my young friend , it be a case wherein the prearranged condition tend by such a beautiful fitness to the issue I have seek , that I should have forever hold myself a traitor to my charge have I neglect the indication . " 

  205 

 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 " I will not excuse you ; you shall not be excuse ; excuse shall not be admit ; there be no excuse shall serve ; you shall not be excuse . " Henry IV . 

 when Philip Debarry have come home that morning and read the letter which have not be forward to he , he laugh so heartily at Mr. Lyon 's that he congratulate himself on be in his private room . otherwise his laughter would have awaken the curiosity of Sir Maximus , and Philip do not wish to tell any one the content of the letter until he have show they to his uncle . he determine to ride over to the rectory to lunch ; for as Lady Mary be away , he and his uncle might be tete - š - tete . 

 the rectory be on the other side of the river , close to the church of which it be the fitting companion : a fine old brick - and - stone house , with a great bow - window opening from the library on to the deep - turfed lawn , one fat dog sleep on the door - stone , another fat dog waddle on the gravel , the autumn leave duly sweep away , the linger chrysanthemum cherish , tall tree stoop or soar in the most picturesque variety , and a virginian creeper turn a little rustic hut into a scarlet pavilion . it be one of those rectory which be among the bulwark of our venerable institution which arrest disintegrating doubt , serve as a double embankment against Popery and Dissent , and rally feminine instinct and affection to reinforce the decision of masculine thought . 

 " what make you look so merry , Phil ? " say the rector , as his nephew enter the pleasant library . 

 " something that concern you , " say Philip , take out the letter . " a clerical challenge . here be an opportunity for you to emulate the divine of the sixteenth century and have a theological duel . read this letter . " 

 " what answer have you send the crazy little fellow ? " say the rector , keep the letter in his hand and run over it again and again , with brow knit , but eye gleam without any malignity . 

 " oh , I send no answer . I await your . " 

 " mine ! " say the rector , throw down the letter on the table . " you do not   suppose I be go to hold a public debate with a schismatic of that sort ? I should have an infidel shoemaker next expect I to answer blasphemy deliver in bad grammar . " 

 " but you see how he put it , " say Philip . with all his gravity of nature he could not resist a slightly mischievous prompting , though he 206   have a serious feeling that he should not like to be regard as fail to fulfill his pledge . " I think if you refuse , I shall be oblige to offer myself . " 

 " nonsense ! tell he he be himself act a dishonorable part in interpret your word as a pledge to do any preposterous thing that suit his fancy . suppose he have ask you to give he land to build a chapel on ; doubtless that would have give he a ' lively satisfaction . ' a man who put a non - natural , strained sense on a promise be no well than a robber . " 

 " but he have not ask for land . I dare say he think you will not   object to his proposal . I confess there be a simplicity and quaintness about the letter that rather please I . " 

 " let I tell you , Phil , he be a crazy little firefly , that do a great deal of harm in my parish . he inflame the dissenter ' mind on politic . there be no end to the mischief do by these busy , prate man . they make the ignorant multitude the judge of the large question , both political and religious , till we shall soon have no institution leave that be not on a level with the comprehension of a huckster or a drayman . there can be nothing more retrograde lose all the result of civilization , all the lesson of Providence let the windlass run down after man have be turn at it painfully for generation . if the instruct be not to judge for the uninstructed , why , let we set Dick Stubbs to make our almanac , and have a President of the Royal Society elect by universal suffrage . " 

 the rector have rise , place himself with his back to the fire , and thrust his hand in his pocket , ready to insist far on this wide argument . Philip sit nursing one leg , listen respectfully , as he always do , though often listen to the sonorous echo of his own statement , which suit his uncle 's need so exactly that he do not distinguish they from his own impression . 

 " true , " say Philip ; " but in special case we have to do with special condition . you know I defend the casuist . and it may happen that , for the honor of the church in Treby , and a little also for my honor , circumstance may demand a concession even to some notion of a dissent preacher . " 

 " not at all . I should be make a figure which my brother clergy might well take as an affront to themselves . the character of the Establishment have suffer enough already through the Evangelicals , with their extempore incoherence and their pipe - smoking piety . look at Wimple , the man who be vicar of Shuttleton without his gown and 207   band anybody would take he for a grocer in mourning . " 

 " well , I shall cut a still bad figure , and so will you , in the dissent magazine and newspaper . it will go the round of the kingdom . there will be a paragraph head , ' Tory Falsehood and Clerical Cowardice , ' or else , ' the Meanness of the Aristocracy and the Incompetence of the Beneficed Clergy . ' " 

 " there would be a bad paragraph if I be to consent to the debate . of course it would be say that I be beat hollow , and , that now the question have be clear up at Treba Magna , the Church have not a sound leg to stand on . besides , " the rector go on , frown and smile , " it be all very well for you to talk , Phil ; but this debating be not so easy when a man 's close upon sixty . what one write or say must be something good and scholarly ; and , after all have be do , this little Lyon would buzz about one like a wasp , and cross - question and rejoin . let I tell you , a plain truth may be so worried and maul by fallacy as to get the bad of it . there be no such thing as tire a talk - machine like Lyon . " 

 " then you absolutely refuse ? " 

 " yes , I do . " 

 " you remember that when I write my letter of thank to Lyon you approve my offer to serve he if possible . " 

 " certainly I remember it . but suppose he have ask you to vote for civil marriage , or to go and hear he preach every Sunday ? " 

 " but he have not ask that . " 

 " something as unreasonable , though . " 

 " well , " say Philip , take up Mr. Lyon 's letter and look graver look even vex , " it be rather an unpleasant business for I . I really feel oblige to he . I think there be a sort of worth in the man beyond his class . whatever may be the reason of the case , I shall disappoint he instead of do he the service I offer . " 

 " well , that be a misfortune ; we can not   help it . " 

 " the bad of it be , I should be insult he to say , ' I will do anything else , but not just this that you want . ' he evidently feel himself in company with Luther and Zwingle and Calvin , and consider our letter part of the history of Protestantism . " 

 " yes , yes . I know it be rather an unpleasant thing , Phil . you be aware that I would have do anything in reason to prevent you from become 208   unpopular here . I consider your character a possession to all of we . " 

 " I think I must call on he forthwith and explain and apologize . " 

 " no , sit still ; I have   think of something , " say the rector , with a sudden revival of spirit . " I have   just see Sherlock come in . he be to lunch with I to - day . it would do no harm for he to hold the debate a curate and a young man he will gain by it ; and it would release you from any awkwardness , Phil . Sherlock be not go to stay here long , you know ; he will soon have his title . I will put the thing to he . he will not   object if I wish it . it be a capital idea . it will do Sherlock good . he be a clever fellow , but he want confidence . " 

 Philip have not time to object before Mr. Sherlock appear a young divine of good birth and figure , of sallow complexion and bashful address . 

 " Sherlock , you have come in most opportunely , " say the rector . " a case have turn up in the parish in which you can be of eminent use . I know that be what you have desire ever since you have be with I . but I be about so much myself that there really have not be sphere enough for you . you be a studious man , I know ; I dare say you have all the necessary matter prepare at your finger - end , if not on paper . " 

 Mr. Sherlock smile with rather a trembling lip , willing to distinguish himself , but hop that the rector only allude to a dialogue on Baptism by Aspersion , or some other pamphlet suit to the purpose of the Christian Knowledge Society . but as the rector proceed to unfold the circumstance under which his eminent service be to be render , he grow more and more nervous . 

 " you will oblige I very much , Sherlock , " the rector end , " by go into this thing zealously . can you guess what time you will require ? because it will rest with we to fix the day . " 

 " I should be rejoice to oblige you , Mr. Debarry , but I really think I be not competent to " 

 " that be your modesty , Sherlock . do not   let I hear any more of that . I know Filmore of Corpus say you might be a first - rate man if your diffidence do not   do you injustice . and you can refer anything to I , you know . come , you will set about the thing at once . but , Phil , you must tell the preacher to send a scheme of the debate all the different head and he must agree to keep rigidly within the scheme . there , sit down at my desk and write the letter now ; Thomas shall carry it . " 

  209 

 Philip sit down to write , and the rector , with his firm ring voice , go on at his ease , give " indication " to his agitated curate . 

 " but you can begin at once prepare a good , cogent , clear statement , and consider the probable point of assault . you can look into Jewel , Hall , Hooker , Whitgift , and the rest : you will find they all here . my library want nothing in english divinity . sketch the low ground take by Usher and those man , but bring all your force to bear on mark out the true high - church doctrine . expose the wretched cavil of the Noncomformists , and the noisy futility that belong to schismatic generally . I will give you a telling passage from Burke on the Dissenters , and some good quotation which I bring together in two sermon of my own on the Position of the English Church in Christendom . how long do you think it will take you to bring your thought together ? you can throw they afterward into the form of an essay ; we will have the thing print ; it will do you good with the Bishop . " 

 with all Mr. Sherlock 's timidity , there be fascination for he in this distinction . he reflect that he could take coffee and sit up late , and perhaps produce something rather fine . it might be a first step toward that eminence which it be no more than his duty to aspire to . even a polemical fame like that of a Philpotts must have have a beginning . Mr. Sherlock be not insensible to the pleasure of turn sentence successfully , and it be a pleasure not always unconnected with preferment . a diffident man like the idea of do something remarkable , which will create belief in he without any immediate display of brilliancy . celebrity may blush and be silent , and win a grace the more . thus Mr. Sherlock be constrain , tremble all the while , and much wish that his essay be already in print . 

 " I think I could hardly be ready under a fortnight . " 

 " very good . just write that , Phil , and tell he to fix the precise day and place . and then we will go to lunch . " 

 the rector be quite satisfied . he have talk himself into think that he should like to give Sherlock a few useful hint , look up his own early sermon , and benefit the curate by his criticism , when the argument have be get into shape . he be a healthy - natured man , but that be not at all a reason why he should not have those sensibility to the odor of authorship which belong to almost everybody who be not expect to be a writer and especially to that form of authorship which be call suggestion , and consist in tell another man that 210   he might do a great deal with a give subject , by bring a sufficient amount of knowledge , reasoning , and wit to bear upon it . 

 Philip would have have some twinge of conscience about the curate , if he have not guess that the honor thrust upon he be not altogether disagreeable . the Church might perhaps have have a strong supporter ; but for himself , he have do what he be bind to do : he have do his good toward fulfil Mr. Lyon 's desire . 

 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 if he come not , the play be mar . Midsummer Night 's Dream . 

 Rufus Lyon be very happy on that mild November morning appoint for the great conference in the large room at the Free School , between himself and the Reverend Theodore Sherlock , B.A. the disappointment of not contend with the rector in person , which have at first be bitter , have be gradually lose sight of in the positive enjoyment of an opportunity for debate on any term . Mr. Lyon have two grand element of pleasure on such occasion : confidence in the strength of his case , and confidence in his own power of advocacy . not to use his own phrase not that " he glorify himself herein ; " for speech and exposition be so easy to he , that if he argue forcibly , he believe it to be simply because the truth be forcible . he be not proud of move easily in his native medium . a pant man think of himself as a clever swimmer ; but a fish swim much well , and take his performance as a matter of course . 

 whether Mr. Sherlock be that panting , self - gratulating man , remain a secret . Philip Debarry , much occupy with his electioneer affair , have only once have an opportunity of ask his uncle how Sherlock get on , and the rector have say , curtly , " I think he will do . I have   supply he well with reference . I advise he to read only , and decline everything else as out of order . Lyon will speak to a point , and then Sherlock will read : it will be all the more telling . it will give variety . " but on this particular morning peremptory business connect with the magistracy call the rector away . 

 due notice have be give , and the feminine world of Treby Magna be much more agitated by the prospect than by that of any candidate 's speech . Mrs. Pendrell at the Bank , Mrs. Tiliot , and the Church lady generally feel bind to hear the curate , who be know , apparently by an intuition concern the nature of curate , to be a very clever young 211   man ; and he would show they what learning have to say on the right side . one or two dissenting lady be not without emotion at the thought that , seat on the front bench , they should be bring near to old Church friend , and have a long greeting than have take place since the Catholic Emancipation . Mrs. Muscat , who have be a beauty , and be as nice in her millinery as any Trebian lady belong to the establishment , reflect that she should put on her well embroider collar , and that she should ask Mrs. Tiliot where it be in Duffield that she once get she bed - hang dye so beautifully . when Mrs. Tiliot be Mary Salt , the two lady have be bosom friend ; but Mr. Tiliot look high and high since his gin have become so famous ; and in the year ' 29 he have , in Mr. Muscat 's hearing , speak of Dissenters as sneak a personality which could not be overlook . 

 the debate be to begin at eleven , for the rector would not allow the evening to be choose , when low man and boy might want to be admit out of mere mischief . this be one reason why the female part of the audience outnumber the male . but some chief Trebians be there , even man whose mean make they as independent of theory as Mr. Pendrell and Mr. Wace ; encourage by reflect that they be not in a place of worship , and would not be oblige to stay long than they choose . there be a muster of all Dissenters who could spare the morning time , and on the back bench be all the aged churchwoman who share the remnant of the sacrament wine , and who be humbly anxious to neglect nothing ecclesiastical or connect with " go to a well place . " 

 at eleven the arrival of listener seem to have cease . Mr. Lyon be seat on the school tribune or dais at his particular round table ; another round table , with a chair , await the curate , with whose superior position it be quite in keep that he should not be the first on the ground . a couple of extra chair be place far back , and more than one important personage have be request to act as chairman ; but no Churchman would place himself in a position so equivocal as to dignity of aspect , and so unequivocal as to the obligation of sit out the discussion ; and the rector have beforehand put a veto on any dissent chairman . 

 Mr. Lyon sit patiently absorb in his thought , with his note in minute handwriting lie before he , seem to look at the audience , 212   but not see they . every one else be content that there should be an interval in which there could be a little neighborly talk . 

 Esther be particularly happy , seat on a side - bench near her father 's side of the tribune , with Felix close behind she , so that she could turn her head and talk to he . he have be very kind ever since that morning when she have call at his home , more disposed to listen indulgently to what she have to say , and less blind to her look and movement . if he have never rail at she or ignore she , she would have be less sensitive to the attention he give she ; but as it be , the prospect of see he seem to light up her life , and to disperse the old dullness . she look unusually charming to - day , from the very fact that she be not vividly conscious of anything but of have a mind near she that ask she to be something well than she actually be . the consciousness of her own superiority amongst the people around she be supersede , and even a few brief week have give a softened expression to her eye , a more feminine beseechingness and self - doubt to her manner . perhaps , however , a little new defiance be rise in place of the old contempt defiance of the trebian view about Felix Holt . 

 " what a very nice - look young woman your minister 's daughter be ? " say Mrs. Tiliot in an undertone to Mrs. Muscat , who , as she have hop , have find a seat next her quondam friend " quite the lady . " 

 " rather too much so , consider , " say Mrs. Muscat . " she be think proud , and that be not pretty in a girl , even if there be anything to back it up . but now she seem to be encourage that young Holt , who scoff at everything , as you may judge by his appearance . she have despise his better before now ; but I leave you to judge whether a young man who have take to low way of get a living can pay for fine cambric handkerchief and light kid glove . " 

 Mrs. Muscat lower her blonde eyelash and sway her neat head just perceptibly from side to side , with a sincere desire to be moderate in her expression , notwithstanding any shock that fact might have give she . 

 " dear , dear , " say Mrs. Tiliot . " what ! that be young Holt lean forward now without a cravat ? I have   never see he before to notice he , but I have   hear Tiliot talk about he . they say he be a dangerous character , and go stir up the workingmen at Sproxton . and well , to be sure , such great eye and such a great head of hair it be enough to frighten one . what can she see in he ? quite below she . " 213 

 " yes , and bring up a governess , " say Mrs. Muscat ; " you would have think she would know well how to choose . but the minister have let she get the upper hand sadly too much . it be a pity in a man of God . I do not   deny he be that . " 

 " well , I be sorry , " say Mrs. Tiliot , " for I mean she to give my girl lesson when they come from school . " 

 Mr. Wace and Mr. Pendrell meanwhile be stand up and look round at the audience , nod to their fellow - townspeople with the affability due from man in their position . 

 " it be time he come now , " say Mr. Wace , look at his watch and compare it with the schoolroom clock . " this debating be a new - fangle sort of thing ; but the rector would never have give in to it if there have not   be good reason . Nolan say he would not   come . he say this debating be an atheistical sort of thing ; the Atheists be very fond of it . Theirs be a bad book to take a leaf out of . however , we shall hear nothing but what be good from Mr. Sherlock . he preach a capital sermon for such a young man . " 

 " well , it be our duty to support he not to leave he alone among the dissenter , " say Mr. Pendrell . " you see everybody have not   feel that . Labron might have show himself , if not Lukyn . I could have allege business myself if I have think proper . " 

 " here he come , I think , " say Mr. Wace , turn round on hear a movement near the small door on a level with the platform . " by George ! it be Mr. Debarry . come now , this be handsome . " 

 Mr. Wace and Mr. Pendrell clap their hand , and the example be follow even by most of the Dissenters . Philip be aware that he be do a popular thing , of a kind that Treby be not use to from the elder Debarrys ; but his appearance have not be long premeditate . he be drive through the town toward an engagement at some distance , but on call at Labron 's office he have find that the affair which demand his presence have be defer , and so have drive round to the Free School . Christian come in behind he . 

 Mr. Lyon be now rouse from his abstraction , and , step from his slight elevation , beg Mr. Debarry to act as moderator or president on the occasion . 

 " with all my heart , " say Philip . " but Mr. Sherlock have not arrive , apparently ? " 

  214 

 " he tarry somewhat unduly , " say Mr. Lyon . " nevertheless there may be a reason of which we know not . shall I collect the thought of the assembly by a brief introductory address in the interval ? " 

 " no , no , no , " say Mr. Wace , who see a limit to his power of endurance . " Mr. Sherlock be sure to be here in a minute or two . " 

 " Christian , " say Philip Debarry , who feel a slight misgiving , " just be so good but stay , I will go myself . excuse I , gentleman : I will drive round to Mr. Sherlock 's lodging . he may be under a little mistake as to the time . studious man be sometimes rather absent - minded . you need not   come with I , Christian . " 

 as Mr. Debarry go out , Rufus Lyon step on to the tribune again in rather an uneasy state of mind . a few idea have occur to he , eminently fit to engage the audience profitably , and so to wrest some edification out of an unforeseen delay . but his native delicacy make he feel that in this assembly the Church people might fairly decline any " deliverance " on his part which exceed the programme , and Mr. Wace 's negative have be energetic . but the little man suffer from imprison idea , and be as restless as a racer hold in . he could not sit down again , but walk backward and forward , stroke his chin , emit his low guttural interjection under the pressure of clause and sentence which he long to utter aloud , as he would have do in his own study . there be a low buzz in the room which help to deepen the minister 's sense that the thought within he be as divine messenger unheede or reject by a trivial generation . many of the audience be stand ; all , except the old Churchwomen on the back seat , and a few devout Dissenters who keep their eye shut and give their body a gentle oscillate motion , be interested in chat . 

 " your father be uneasy , " say Felix to Esther . 

 " yes ; and now , I think , he be feel for his spectacle . I hope he have not leave they at home : he will not be able to see anything two yard before he without they ; and it make he so unconscious of what people expect or want . " 

 " I will go and ask he whether he have they , " say Felix , stride over the form in front of he , and approach Mr. Lyon , whose face show a gleam of pleasure at this relief from his abstract isolation . 

 " Miss Lyon be afraid that you be at a loss for your spectacle , sir , " say Felix . 

  215 

 " my dear young friend , " say Mr. Lyon , lay his hand on Felix Holt 's fore - arm , which be about on a level with the minister 's shoulder , " it be a very glorious truth , albeit make somewhat painful to I by the circumstance of the present moment , that as a counterpoise to the brevity of our mortal life   wherein , as I apprehend , our power be be train not only for the transmission of an improved heritage , as I have hear you insist , but also for our own entrance into a high initiation in the Divine scheme   it be , I say , a very glorious truth , that even in what be call the waste minute of our time , like those of expectation , the soul may soar and range , as in some of our dream which be brief as a broken rainbow in duration , yet seem to comprise a long history of terror or joy . and again , each moment may be a beginning of a new spiritual energy ; and our pulse would doubtless be a coarse and clumsy notation of the passage from that which be not to that which be , even in the fine process of the material world and how much more " 

 Esther be watch her father and Felix , and though she be not within hearing of what be be say , she guess the actual state of the case that the enquiry about the spectacle have be unheede , and that her father be lose himself and embarrass Felix in the intricacy of a dissertation . there be not the stillness around she that would have make a movement on her part seem conspicuous , and she be impel by her anxiety to step on the tribune and walk up to her father , who pause a little startled . 

 " pray see whether you have forget your spectacle , father . if so , I will go home at once and look for they . " 

 Mr. Lyon be automatically obedient to Esther , and he begin immediately to feel in his pocket . 

 " how be it that Miss Jermyn be so friendly with the Dissenting parson ? " say Christian to Quorlen , the Tory printer , who be an intimate of his . " those grand Jermyns be not dissenter surely ? " 

 " what Miss Jermyn ? " 

 " why do not   you see ? that fine girl who be talk to he . " 

 " Miss Jermyn ! why , that be the little parson 's daughter . " 

 " his daughter ! " Christian give a low brief whistle , which seem a natural expression of surprise that " the rusty old ranter " should have a daughter of such distinguished appearance . 

 meanwhile the search for the spectacle have prove vain . " ' tis a grievous fault in I , my dear , " say the little man , humbly ; " I 216   become thereby sadly burdensome to you . " 

 " I will go at once , " say Esther , refuse to let Felix go instead of she . but she have scarcely step off the tribune when Mr. Debarry re - enter , and there be a commotion which make she wait . after a low - toned conversation with Mr. Pendrell and Mr. Wace , Philip Debarry step on to the tribune with his hat in his hand and say , with an air of much concern and annoyance 

 " I be sorry to have to tell you , lady and gentleman , that doubtless owe to some accidental cause which I trust will soon be explain as nothing serious Mr. Sherlock be absent from his residence and be not to be find . he go out early , his landlady inform I , to refresh himself by a walk on this agreeable morning , as be his habit , she tell I , when he have be keep up late by study ; and he have not return . do not let we be too anxious . I shall cause enquiry to be make in the direction of his walk . it be easy to imagine many accident , not of a grave character , by which he might nevertheless be absolutely detain against his will . under these circumstance , Mr. Lyon , " continue Philip , turn to the minister , " I presume that the debate must be adjourn . " 

 " the debate , doubtless , " begin Mr. Lyon ; but his farth speech be drown by a general rise of the Church people from their seat , many of they feel that , even if the cause be lamentable , the adjournment be not altogether disagreeable . 

 " good gracious I ! " say Mrs. Tiliot , as she take her husband 's arm , " I hope the poor young man have not   fall into the river or break his leg . " 

 but some of the more acrid Dissenters , whose temper be not control by the habit of retail business , have begin to hiss , imply that in their interpretation the curate 's absence have not depend on any injury to life or limb . 

 " he be turn tail , sure enough , " say Mr. Muscat to the neighbor behind he , lift his eyebrow and shoulder , and laugh in a way that show that , deacon as he be , he look at the affair in an entirely secular light . 

 but Mrs. Muscat think it would be nothing but right to have all the water drag , agree in this with the majority of the Church lady . 

 " I regret sincerely , Mr. Lyon , " say Philip Debarry , address the minister with politeness , " that I must say good - morning to you , with the sense that I have not be able at present to contribute to your 217   satisfaction as I have wish . " 

 " speak not of it in the way of apology , sir , " say Mr. Lyon , in a tone of depression . " I doubt not that you yourself have act in good faith . nor will I open any door of egress to construction such as anger often deem ingenious , but which the disclosure of the simple truth may expose as erroneous and uncharitable fabrication . I wish you good - morning , sir . " 

 when the room be clear of the Church people , Mr. Lyon wish to soothe his own spirit and that of his flock by a few reflection introductory to a parting prayer . but there be a general resistance to this effort . the man muster round the minister and declare their opinion that the whole thing be disgraceful to the Church . some say that the curate 's absence have be contrive from the first . other more than hint that it have be a folly in Mr. Lyon to set on foot any procedure in common with Tories and clergyman , who , if they ever ape civility to dissenter , would never do anything but laugh at they in their sleeve . Brother Kemp urge in his heavy bass that Mr. Lyon should lose no time in send an account of the affair to the Patriot ; and brother Hawkins , in his high tenor , observe that it be an occasion on which some sting thing might be say with all the extra effect of an apropos . 

 the position of receive a many - voice lecture from the member of his church be familiar to Mr. Lyon ; but now he feel weary , frustrated , and doubtful of his own temper . Felix , who stand by and see that this man of sensitive fibre be suffer from talker whose noisy superficiality cost they nothing , get exasperate . " it seem to I , sir , " he burst in , with his predominant voice , " that Mr. Lyon have hitherto have the hard part of the business , while you of his congregation have have the easy one . punish the Church clergy , if you like they can take care of themselves . but do not   punish your own minister . it be no business of mine , perhaps , except so far as fair - play be everybody 's business ; but it seem to I the time to ask Mr. Lyon to take a little rest , instead of set on he like so many wasp . " 

 by this speech Felix raise a displeasure which fall on the minister as well as on himself ; but he gain his immediate end . the talker drop off after a slight show of persistence , and Mr. Lyon quit the field of no combat with a small group of his less imperious friend , to whom he confide his intention of commit his argument fully to paper , 218   and forward it to a discriminating editor . 

 " but regard personality , " he add , " I have not the same clear showing . for , say that this young man be pusillanimous I be but ill - provide with argument if I take my stand even for a moment on so poor an irrelevancy as that because one curate be ill furnish therefore Episcopacy be false . if I hold up any one to just obloquy , it would be the well - designate Incumbent of this parish , who , call himself one of the Church militant , send a young and weak - kneed substitute to take his place in the fight . " 

 Mr. Philip Debarry do not neglect to make industrious enquiry concern the accident which have detain the Reverend Theodore Sherlock on his morning walk . that well - intentione young divine be see no more in Treby Magna . but the river be not drag , for by the evening coach the rector receive an explanatory letter . the Reverend Theodore 's agitation have increase so much during his walk , that the pass coach have be a means of deliverance not to be resist ; and , literally at the eleventh hour , he have hail and mount the cheerful Tally - ho ! and carry away his portion of the debate in his pocket . 

 but the rector have subsequently the satisfaction of receive Mr. Sherlock 's painstaking production in print , with a dedication to the Reverend Augustus Debarry , a motto from St. Chrysostom , and other addition , the fruit of ripen leisure . he be ' sorry for poor Sherlock , who want confidence " ; but he be convince that for his own part he have take the course which under the circumstance be the least compromising to the Church . Sir Maximus , however , observe to his son and brother that he have be right and they have be wrong as to the danger of vague , enormous expression of gratitude to a dissent preacher , and on any difference of opinion seldom fail to remind they of that precedent . 

 CHAPTER XXV . 

 your fellow - man ? divide the epithet : 
 say rather , you be the fellow , he the man . 
 when Christian quit the Free School with the discovery that the young lady whose appearance have first startle he with an indefinable impression in the market - place be the daughter of the old Dissenting preacher who have show so much agitated curiosity about his name , he 219   feel very much like an uninitiated chess - player , who see that the piece be in a peculiar position on the board , and might open the way for he to give checkmate , if he only know how . ever since his interview with Jermyn , his mind have be occupy with the charade it offer to his ingenuity . what be the real meaning of the lawyer 's interest in he , and in his relation with Maurice Christian Bycliffe ? here be a secret ; and secret be often a source of profit , of that agreeable kind which involve little labor . Jermyn have hint at profit which might possibly come through he ; but Christian say inwardly , with well - satisfy self - esteem , that he be not so pitiable a nincompoop as to trust Jermyn . on the contrary , the only problem before he be to find out by what combination of independent knowledge he could outwit Jermyn , elude any purchase the attorney have on he through his past history , and get a handsome bonus , by which a somewhat shattered man of pleasure might live well without a master . Christian , have early exhaust the more impulsive delight of life , have become a sober calculator ; and he have make up his mind that , for a man who have long ago run through his own money , servitude in a great family be the good kind of retirement after that of a pensioner ; but if a well chance offer , a person of talent must not let it slip through his finger . he hold various end of thread , but there be danger of pull at they too impatiently . he have not forget the surprise which have make he drop the punch - ladle , when Mr. Crowder , talk in the steward 's room , have say that a scamp name Henry Scaddon have be concern in a lawsuit about the Transome estate . again , Jermyn be the family lawyer of the Transomes ; he know of the exchange of name between Scaddon and Bycliffe ; he clearly want to know as much as he could about Bycliffe 's history . the conclusion be not remote that Bycliffe have have some claim on the Transome property , and that a difficulty have arise from his being confound with Henry Scaddon . but hitherto the other incident which have be apparently connect with the interchange of name Mr. Lyon 's demand that he should write down the name Maurice Christian , accompany with the question whether that be his whole name have have no visible link with the inference arrive at through Crowder and Jermyn . 

 the discovery make this morning at the Free School that Esther be the daughter of the dissent preacher at last suggest a possible link . until then , Christian have not know why Esther 's face have impress 220   he so peculiarly ; but the minister 's chief association for he be with Bycliffe , and that association serve as a flash to show he that Esther 's feature and expression , and still more her bearing , now she stand and walk , revive Bycliffe 's image . daughter ? there be various way of be a daughter . suppose this be a case of adoption ; suppose Bycliffe be know to be dead , or think to be dead . " Begad , if the old parson have fancy the original father be come to life again , it be enough to frighten he a little . slow and steady , " Christian say to himself ; " I will get some talk with the old man again . he be safe enough : one can handle he without cut one 's self . I will tell he I know Bycliffe , and be his fellow - prisoner . I will worm out the truth about this daughter . could pretty Annette have marry again , and marry this little scare - crow ? there be no knowing what a woman will not do . " 

 Christian could see no distinct result for himself from his industry ; but if there be to be any such result , it must be reach by follow out every clue ; and to the non - legal mind there be dim possibility in law and heirship which prevent any issue from seem too miraculous . 

 the consequence of these meditation be , that Christian hang about Treby more than usual in his leisure time , and that on the first opportunity he accost Mr. Lyon in the street with suitable civility , state that since the occasion which have bring they together some week before he have often wish to renew their conversation , and , with Mr. Lyon 's permission , would now ask to do so . after be assure , as he have be by Jermyn , that this courier , who have happen by some accident to possess the memorable locket and pocket - book , be certainly not Annette 's husband , and be ignorant whether Maurice Christian Bycliffe be live or dead , the minister 's mind have become easy again ; his habitual lack of interest in personal detail render he gradually oblivious of Jermyn 's precautionary statement that he be pursue enquiry , and that if anything of interest turn up , Mr. Lyon should be make acquainted with it . hence , when Christian address he , the minister , take by surprise and shake by the recollection of former anxiety , say , helplessly 

 " if it be business , sir , you would perhaps do well to address yourself to Mr. Jermyn . " 

 he could not have say anything that be a more valuable hint to Christian . he infer that the minister have make a confidant of Jermyn , and it be needful to be wary . 

  221 

 " on the contrary , sir , " he answer , " it may be of the utmost importance to you that what pass between we should not be know to Mr. Jermyn . " 

 Mr. Lyon be perplexed , and feel at once that he be no more in clear daylight concern Jermyn than concern Christian . he dare not neglect the possible duty of hear what this man have to say , and he invite he to proceed to Malthouse Yard , where they could converse in private . 

 once in Mr. Lyon 's study , Christian open the dialogue by say that since he be in this room before it have occur to he that the anxiety he have observe in Mr. Lyon might be owe to some acquaintance with Maurice Christian Bycliffe a fellow - prisoner in France , whom he , Christian , have assist in get free from his imprisonment , and who , in fact , have be the owner of the trifle which Mr. Lyon have recently have in his possession and have restore . Christian hasten to say that he know nothing of Bycliffe 's history since they have part in France , but that he know of his marriage with Annette Ledru , and have be acquaint with Annette herself . he would be very glad to know what become of Bycliffe , if he could , for he like he uncommonly . 

 here Christian pause ; but Mr. Lyon only sit change color and trembling . this man 's bearing and tone of mind be make repulsive to he by be bring in contact with keenly - feel memory , and he could not readily summon the courage to give answer or ask question . 

 " may I ask if you know my friend Bycliffe ? " say Christian , try a more direct method . 

 " no , sir ; I never see he . " 

 " ah ! well you have see a very striking likeness of he . it be wonderful unaccountable ; but when I see Miss Lyon at the Free School the other day , I could have swear she be Bycliffe 's daughter . " 

 " Sir ! " say Mr. Lyon , in his deep tone , half rise , and hold by the arm of his chair , " these subject touch I with too sharp a point for you to be justify in thrust they on I out of mere levity . be there any good you seek or any injury you fear in relation to they ? " 

 " precisely , sir . we shall come to an understanding . suppose I believe that the young lady who go by the name of Miss Lyon be the daughter of Bycliffe ? " 

 Mr. Lyon move his lip silently . 

 " and suppose I have reason to suspect that there would be some great advantage for she if the law know who be her father ? " 222 

 " Sir ! " say Mr. Lyon , shake out of all reticence . " I would not conceal it . she believe herself to be my daughter . but I will bear all thing rather than deprive she of a right . nevertheless I appeal to the pity of any fellow - man , not to thrust himself between she and I , but to let I disclose the truth to her myself . " 

 " all in good time , " say Christian . " we must do nothing rash . then Miss Lyon be Annette 's child ? " 

 the minister shiver as if the edge of a knife have be draw across his hand . but the tone of this question , by the fact that it intensify his antipathy to Christian , enable he to collect himself for what must be simply the endurance of a painful operation . after a moment or two he say more coolly , " it be true , sir . her mother become my wife . proceed with any statement which may concern my duty . " 

 " I have no more to say than this : if there be a prize that the law might hand over to Bycliffe 's daughter , I be much mistaken if there be not   a lawyer who will take precious good care to keep the law hoodwink . and that lawyer be Mat Jermyn . why , my good sir , if you have   be take Jermyn into your confidence , you have   be set the fox to keep off the weasel . it strike I that when you be make a little anxious about those article of poor Bycliffe 's , you put Jermyn on make enquiry of I . eh ? I think I be right ? " 

 " I do not deny it . " 

 " ah ! it be very well you do , for by that mean I have   find that he be get hold of some secret about Bycliffe which he mean to stifle . now , sir , if you desire any justice for your daughter step - daughter , I should say do not   so much as wink to yourself before Jermyn ; and if you have   get any paper or thing of that sort that may come in evidence , as these confound rascal the lawyer call it , clutch they tight , for if they get into Jermyn 's hand they may soon fly up the chimney . have I say enough ? " 

 " I have not purpose any further communication with Mr. Jermyn , sir ; indeed , I have nothing further to communicate . except that one fact concern my daughter 's birth , which I have err in conceal from she , I neither seek disclosure nor do I tremble before they . " 

 " then I have your word that you will be silent about this conversation between we ? it be for your daughter 's interest , mind . " 

 " Sir , I shall be silent , " say Mr. Lyon , with cold gravity . " unless , " he add , with an acuman as to possibility rather disturbing to 223   Christian 's confident contempt for the old man " unless I be call upon by some tribunal to declare the whole truth in this relation ; in which case I should submit myself to that authority of investigation which be a requisite of social order . " 

 Christian depart , feel satisfied that he have get the utmost to be obtain at present out of the dissent preacher , whom he have not dare to question more closely . he must look out for chance light , and perhaps , too , he might catch a stray hint by stir the sediment of Mr. Crowder 's memory . but he must not venture on enquiry that might be notice . 

 when Mr. Lyon be alone he pace up and down among his book , and think aloud , in order to relieve himself after the constraint of this interview . " I will not wait for the urgency of necessity , " he say more than once . " I will tell the child without compulsion . and then I shall fear nothing . and an unwonted spirit of tenderness have fill she of late . she will forgive I . " 

 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 consideration like an angel come 
 and whip the offend Adam out of she ; 
 leave her body as a paradise 
 to envelope and contain celestial spirit . 
  Shakespeare : Henry V. 
 the next morning , after much prayer for the needful strength and wisdom , Mr. Lyon come down stair with the resolution that another day should not pass without the fulfillment of the task he have lay on himself : but what hour he should choose for this solemn disclosure to Esther must depend on their mutual occupation . perhaps he must defer it till they sit up alone together , after Lyddy be go to bed . but at breakfast Esther say 

 " to - day be a holiday , father . my pupil be all go to Duffield to see the wild beast . what have you get to do to - day ? come , you be eat no breakfast . oh , Lyddy , Lyddy , the egg be hard again . I wish you would not read Alleyne 's ' Alarm ' before breakfast ; it make you cry and forget the egg . " 

 " they be hard , and that be the truth ; but there be heart as be hard , Miss Esther , " say Lyddy . 

 " I think not , " say Esther . " this be leathery enough for the heart of the most obdurate Jew . pray give it little Zachary for a football . " 

  224 

 " dear , dear , do not   you be so light , miss . we may all be dead before night . " 

 " you speak out of season , my good Lyddy , " say Mr. Lyon , wearily ; " depart into the kitchen . " 

 " what have you get to do to - day , father ? " persist Esther . " I have a holiday . " 

 Mr. Lyon feel as if this be a fresh summon not to delay . " I have something of great moment to do , my dear ; and since you be not otherwise demand , I will ask you to come and sit with I up - stair . " 

 Esther wonder what there could be on her father 's mind more pressing than his morning study . 

 soon she know . motionless , but mentally stir as she have never be before , Esther listen to her mother 's story , and to the outpouring of her step - father 's long - pen - up experience . the ray of the morning sun which fall athwart the book , the sense of the beginning day have deepen the solemnity more than night would have do . all knowledge which alter our life penetrate we more when it come in the early morning : the day that have to be travel with something new and perhaps forever sad in its light , be an image of the life that spread beyond . but at night the time of rest be near . 

 Mr. Lyon regard his narrative as a confession as a revelation to this beloved child of his own miserable weakness and error . but to she it seem a revelation of another sort : her mind seem suddenly enlarge by a vision of passion and struggle , of delight and renunciation , in the lot of being who have hitherto be a dull enigma to she . and in the act of unfold to she that he be not her real father , but have only strive to cherish she as a father , have only long to be love as a father , the odd , way - wear , unworldly man become the object of a new sympathy in which Esther exult . perhaps this knowledge would have be less powerful within she , but for the mental preparation that have come during the last two month from her acquaintance with Felix Holt , which have teach she to doubt the infallibility of her own standard , and raise a presentiment of moral depth that be hide from she . 

 Esther have take her place opposite to her father , and have not move even her clasped hand while he be speak . but after the long outpouring in which he seem to lose the sense of everything but the memory he be give utterance to , he pause a little while , and then say timidly 

 " this be a late retrieval of a long error , Esther . I make not excuse for myself , for we ought to strive that our affection be root in 225   the truth . nevertheless you " 

 Esther have rise , and have glide on to the wooden stool on a level with her father 's chair , where he be accustom to lie book . she want to speak , but the flood - gate could not be open for word alone . she throw her arm round the old man 's neck and sob out with a passionate cry , " Father , father ! forgive I if I have not love you enough . I will I will ! " 

 the old man 's little delicate frame be shake by a surprise and joy that be almost painful in their intensity . he have be go to ask forgiveness of she who ask it for herself . in that moment of supreme complex emotion one ray of the minister 's joy be the thought , " surely the work of grace be begin in she surely here be a heart that the Lord hath touch . " 

 they sit so , enclaspe in silence , while Esther relieve her full heart . when she raise her head , she sit quite still for a minute or two look fixedly before she , and keep one little hand in the minister 's . presently she look at he and say 

 " then you live like a workingman , father ; you be very , very poor . yet my mother have be use to luxury , she be well bear she be a lady ? " 

 " it be true , my dear ; it be a poor life that I could give she . " 

 Mr. Lyon answer in utter dimness as to the course Esther 's mind be take . he have anticipate before his disclosure , from his long - stand discernment of tendency in she which be often the cause of silent grief to he , that the discovery likely to have the keen interest for she would be that her parent have a high rank than that of the poor dissent preacher ; but she have show that other and well sensibility be predominant . he rebuke himself now for a hasty and shallow judgment concern the child 's inner life , and wait for new clearness . 

 " but that must be the good life , father , " say Esther , suddenly rise , with a flush across her paleness , and stand with her head throw a little backward , as if some illumination have give she a new decision . " that must be the good life . " 

 " what life , my dear child ? " 

 " why , that where one bear and do everything because of some great and strong feeling so that this and that in one 's circumstance do not   signify . " 

  226 

 " yea , verily ; but the feeling that should be thus supreme be devotedness to the Divine Will . " 

 Esther do not speak ; her father 's word do not fit on to the impression work in she by what he have tell she . she sit down again , and say , more quietly 

 " Mamma do not speak much of my first father ? " 

 " not much , dear . she say he be beautiful to the eye , and good and generous ; and that his family be of those who have be long privileged among their fellow . but now I will deliver to you the letter , which , together with the ring and locket , be the only visible memorial she retain of he . " 

 Mr. Lyon reach and deliver to Esther the box contain the relic . " take they , and examine they in privacy , my dear . and that I may no more err by concealment , I will tell you some late occurrence that bear on these memorial , though to my present apprehension doubtfully and confusedly . " 

 he then narrate to Esther all that have pass between himself and Christian . the possibility to which Mr. Lyon 's alarm have point that her real father might still be live , be a new shock . she could not speak about it to her present father , but it be register in silence as a painful addition to the uncertainty which she suddenly see hang over her life . 

 " I have little confidence in this man 's allegation , " Mr. Lyon end . " I confess his presence and speech be to I as the jarring of metal . he bear the stamp of one who have never conceive aught of more sanctity than the lust of the eye and the pride of life . he hint at some possible inheritance for you , and denounce mysteriously the device of Mr. Jermyn . all this may or may not have a true foundation . but it be not my part to move in this matter save on a clear showing . " 

 " certainly not , father , " say Esther , eagerly . a little while ago , these problematic prospect might have set her dream pleasantly ; but now , for some reason that she could not have put distinctly into word , they affect she with dread . 

 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 to hear with eye be part of love 's rare wit . 
  Shakespeare : sonnet . 
 Custom call I to't ; 
 what custom will , in all thing should we do't . 
 the dust on antique time would lie unswept , 
 and mountainous error be too highly heaped 
 for truth to over - peer . Coriolanus . 
 in the afternoon Mr. Lyon go out to see the sick amongst his flock , and Esther , who have be pass the morning in dwelling on the 227   memory and the few remain relic of her parent , be leave alone in the parlor amidst the linger odor of the early dinner , not easily get rid of in that small house . rich people , who know nothing of these vulgar detail , can hardly imagine their significance in the history of multitude of human life in which the sensibility be never adjust to the external condition . Esther always feel so much discomfort from those odor that she usually seize any possibility of escape from they , and to - day they oppress she the more because she be weary with long - continue agitation . why do she not put on her bonnet as usual and get out into the open air ? it be one of those pleasant November afternoon pleasant in the wide country when the sunshine be on the cling brown leaf of the young oak , and the last yellow leaf of the elm flutter down in the fresh but not eager breeze . but Esther sit still on the sofa pale and with reddened eyelid , her curl all push back carelessly , and her elbow rest on the ridgy black horsehair , which usually almost set her tooth on edge if she press it even through her sleeve while her eye rest blankly on the dull street . Lyddy have say , " Miss , you look sadly ; if you can not   take a walk , go and lie down . " she have never see the curl in such disorder , and she reflect that there have be a death from typhus recently . but the obstinate Miss only shake her head . 

 Esther be wait for the sake of not a probability , but a mere possibility , which make the brothy odor endurable . apparently , in less than half an hour , the possibility come to pass , for she change her attitude , almost start from her seat , sit down again , and listen eagerly . if Lyddy should send he away , could she herself rush out and call he back ? why not ? such thing be permissible where it be understand , from the necessity of the case , that there be only friendship . but Lyddy open the door and say , " here 's Mr. Holt , Miss , want to know if you will give he leave to come in . I tell he you be sadly . " 

 " oh , yes , Lyddy , beg he to come in . " 

 " I should not have persevere , " say Felix , as they shake hand , " only I know Lyddy 's dismal way . but you do look ill , " he go on , as he seat himself at the other end of the sofa . " or rather for that be a false way of put it you look as if you have be very much distressed . do you mind about my taking notice of it ? " 

  228 

 he speak very kindly , and look at she more persistently than he have ever do before , when her hair be perfect . 

 " you be quite right . I be not at all ill . but I have be very much agitated this morning . my father have be tell I thing I never hear before about my mother , and give I thing that belong to she . she die when I be a very little creature . " 

 " then it be no new pain or trouble for you and Mr. Lyon ? I could not help be anxious to know that . " 

 Esther pass her hand over her brow before she answer . " I hardly know whether it be pain , or something well than pleasure . it have make I see thing I be blind to before depth in my father 's nature . " 

 as she say this , she look at Felix , and their eye meet very gravely . 

 " it be such a beautiful day , " he say , " it would do you good to go into the air . let I take you along the river toward Little Treby , will you ? " 

 " I will put my bonnet on , " say Esther , unhesitatingly , though they have never walk out together before . 

 it be true that to get into the field they have to pass through the street ; and when Esther see some acquaintance , she reflect that her walk alone with Felix might be a subject of remark all the more because of his cap , patched boot , no cravat , and thick stick . Esther be a little amazed herself at what she have come to . so our life glide on : the river end we do not   know where , and the sea begin , and there be no more jump ashore . 

 when they be in the street Esther hardly speak . Felix talk with his usual readiness , as easily as if he be not do it solely to divert her thought , first about Job Tudge 's delicate chest , and the probability that the little white - faced monkey would not live long ; and then about a miserable beginning of a night - school , which be all he could get together at Sproxton , and the dismalness of that hamlet , which be a sort of lip to the coalpit on one side and the " public " on the other and yet a paradise compare with the wynd of Glasgow , where there be little more than a chink of daylight to show the hatred in woman 's face . 

 but soon they get into the field , where there be a right of way toward Little Treby , now follow the course of the river , now cross toward a lane , and now turn into a cart - track through a plantation . 

 " here we be ! " say Felix , when they have cross the wooden bridge , and be treading on the slanting shadow make by the elm - trunk . " I 229   think this be delicious . I never feel less unhappy than in these late autumn afternoon when they be sunny . " 

 " less unhappy ! there now ! " say Esther , smile at he with some of her habitual sauciness , " I have catch you in self - contradiction . I have hear you quite furious against pule , melancholy people . if I have say what you have just say , you would have give I a long lecture , and tell I to go home and interest myself in the reason of the rule - of - three . " 

 " very likely , " say Felix , beat the weed , accord to the foible of our common humanity when it have a stick in its hand . " but I do not   think myself a fine fellow because I be melancholy . I do not   measure my force by the negation in I , and think my soul must be a mighty one because it be more give to idle suffering than to beneficent activity . that be what your favorite gentleman do , of the byronic - bilious style . " 

 " I do not   admit that those be my favorite gentleman . " 

 " I have   hear you defend they gentleman like your Rťnťs , who have no particular talent for the finite , but a general sense that the infinite be the right thing for they . they might as well boast of nausea as a proof of a strong inside . " 

 " stop , stop ! you run on in that way to get out of my reach . I convict you of confess that you be melancholy . " 

 " yes , " say Felix , thrust his left hand into his pocket , with a shrug ; " as I could confess to a great many other thing I be not proud of . the fact be , there be not many easy lot to be draw in the world at present ; and such as they be I be not envious of they . I do not   say life be not worth have to a man who have some spark of sense and feeling and bravery in he . and the fine fellow of all would be the one who could be glad to have live because the world be chiefly miserable , and his life have come to help some one who need it . he would be the man who have the most power and the few selfish want . but I be not up to the level of what I see to be good . I be often a hungry discontent fellow . " 

 " why have you make your life so hard then ? " say Esther , rather frighten as she ask the question . " it seem to I you have try to find just the most difficult task . " 

 " not at all , " say Felix , with curt decision . " my course be a very simple one . it be point out to I by condition that I see as clearly as I see the bar of this stile . it be a difficult stile too , " add 230   Felix , stride over . " shall I help you , or will you be leave to yourself ? " 

 " I can do without help , thank you . " 

 " it be simple enough , " continue Felix , as they walk on . " if I mean to put a stop to the sale of those drug , I must keep my mother , and of course at her age she would not leave the place she have be use to . and I have make up my mind against what they call genteel business . " 

 " but suppose every one do as you do ? please to forgive I for say so ; but I can not see why you could not have live as honorably with some employment that presuppose education and refinement . " 

 " because you can not   see my history or my nature , " say Felix , bluntly . " I have to determine for myself , and not for other man . I do not   blame they , or think I be well than they ; their circumstance be different . I would never choose to withdraw myself from the labor and common burden of the world ; but I do choose to withdraw myself from the push and the scramble for money and position . any man be at liberty to call I a fool , and say that mankind be benefit by the push and the scramble in the long - run . but I care for the people who live now and will not be live when the long - run come . as it be , I prefer go share with the unlucky . " 

 Esther do not speak , and there be silence between they for a minute or two , till they pass through a gate into a plantation where there be no large timber , but only thin - stem tree and underwood , so that the sunlight fall on the mossy space which lie open here and there . 

 " see how beautiful those stoop birch - stem be with the light on they ! " say Felix . " here be an old felled trunk they have not think worth carry away . shall we sit down a little while ? " 

 " yes ; the mossy ground with the dry leaf sprinkle over it be delightful to one 's foot . " Esther sit down and take off her bonnet , that the light breeze might fall on her head . Felix , too , throw down his cap and stick , lie on the ground with his back against the felled trunk . 

 " I wish I feel more as you do , " she say , look at the point of her foot , which be play with a tuft of moss . " I can not   help care very much what happen to I . and you seem to care so little about yourself . " 

 " you be thoroughly mistaken , " say Felix . " it be just because I be a very ambitious fellow , with very hungry passion , want a great deal to satisfy I , that I have choose to give up what people call worldly 231   good . at least that have be one determine reason . it all depend on what a man get into his consciousness what life thrust into his mind , so that it become present to he as remorse be present to the guilty , or a mechanical problem to an inventive genius . there be two thing I have   get present in that way : one of they be the picture of what I should hate to be . I be determined never to go about make my face simper or solemn , and tell professional lie for profit ; or to get tangle in affair where I must wink at dishonesty and pocket the proceed , and justify that knavery as part of a system that I can not   alter . if I once go into that sort of struggle for success I should want to win I should defend the wrong that I have once identify myself with . I should become everything that I see now beforehand to be detestable . and what be more , I should do this , as man be do it every day , for a ridiculously small prize perhaps for none at all perhaps for the sake of two parlor , a rank eligible for the churchwardenship , a discontent wife , and several unhopeful child . " 

 Esther feel a terrible pressure on her heart the certainty of her remoteness from Felix the sense that she be utterly trivial to he . 

 " the other thing that be get into my mind like a splinter , " say Felix , after a pause , " be the life of the miserable the spawn life of vice and hunger . I will never be one of the sleek dog . the old Catholics be right , with their high rule and their low . some be call to subject themselves to a hard discipline , and renounce thing voluntarily which be lawful for other . it be the old word ' necessity ' be lay upon I . 

 " it seem to I you be strict than my father be . " 

 " no ; I quarrel with no delight that be not base or cruel , but one must sometimes accommodate one 's self to a small share . that be the lot of the majority . I would wish the minority joy , only they do not   want my wish . " 

 again there be silence . Esther 's cheek be hot in spite of the breeze that send her hair float backward . she feel an inward strain , a demand on she to see thing in a light that be not easy or soothing . when Felix have ask she to walk he seem so kind , so alive to what might be her feeling , that she have think herself near to he than she have ever be before ; but since they have come out he have appear to forget all that . and yet she be conscious that this impatience of hers be very petty . battle in this way with her own little impulse , and 232   look at the birch - stem opposite till her gaze be too wide for she to see anything distinctly , she be unaware how long they have remain without speak . she do not know that Felix have change his attitude a little , and be rest his elbow on the tree - trunk , while he support his head , which be turn toward she . suddenly he say , in a low tone than be habitual to he : 

 " you be very beautiful . " 

 she start and look round at he , to see whether his face would give some help to the interpretation of this novel speech . he be look up at she quite calmly , very much as a reverential protestant might look at a picture of the Virgin , with a devoutness suggest by the type rather than by the image . Esther 's vanity be not in the least gratify : she feel that , somehow or other , Felix be go to reproach she . 

 " I wonder , " he go on , still look at she , " whether the subtle measuring of force will ever come to measure the force there would be in one beautiful woman whose mind be as noble as her face be beautiful who make a man 's passion for her rush in one current with all the great aim of his life . " 

 Esther 's eye get hot and smarting . it be no use try to be dignify . she have turn away her head , and now say , rather bitterly , " it be difficult for a woman ever to try to be anything good when she be not believe in when it be always suppose that she must be contemptible . " 

 " no , dear Esther " it be the first time Felix have be prompt to call she by her christian name , and as he do so he lay his large hand on her two little hand , which be clasp on her knee . " you do not   believe that I think you contemptible . when I first see you " 

 " I know , I know , " say Esther , interrupt he impetuously , but still look away . " you mean you do think I contemptible then . but it be very narrow of you to judge I in that way , when my life have be so different from your . I have great fault . I know I be selfish , and think too much of my own small taste and too little of what affect other . but I be not stupid . I be not unfeele . I can see what be well . " 

 " but I have not do you injustice since I know more of you , " say Felix , gently . 

 " yes , you have , " say Esther , turn and smile at he through her tear . " you talk to I like an angry pedagogue . be you always wise ? remember the time when you be foolish or naughty . " 

  233 

 " that be not far off , " say Felix , curtly , take away his hand , and clasp it with the other at the back of his head . the talk , which seem to be introduce a mutual understanding , such as have not exist before , seem to have undergo some check . 

 " shall we get up and walk back now ? " say Esther , after a few moment . 

 " no , " say Felix , entreatingly . " do not   move yet . I dare say we shall never walk together or sit here again . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because I be a man who be warn by vision . those old story of vision and dream guide man have their truth ; we be save by make the future present to ourselves . " 

 " I wish I could get vision , then , " say Esther , smile at he , with an effort of playfulness , in resistance to something vaguely mournful within she . 

 " that be what I want , " say Felix , look at she very earnestly . " do not   turn your head . do look at I , and then I shall know if I may go on speak . I do believe in you ; but I want you to have such a vision of the future that you may never lose your good self . some charm or other may be fling about you some of your attar - of - rose fascination and nothing but a good strong terrible vision will save you . and if it do save you , you might be that woman I be think of a little while ago when I look at your face : the woman whose beauty make a great task easy to man instead of turn they away from it . I be not likely to see such fine issue ; but they may come where a woman 's spirit be finely touch . I should like to be sure they would come to you . " 

 " why be you not likely to know what become of I ? " say Esther , turn away her eye in spite of his command . " why should you not always be my father 's friend and mine ? " 

 " oh , I shall go away as soon as I can to some large town , " say Felix , in his more usual tone ' some ugly , wicked , miserable place . I want to be a demagogue of a new sort ; an honest one , if possible , who will tell the people they be blind and foolish , and neither flatter they nor fatten on they . I have my heritage an order I belong to . I have the blood of a line of handicraftsman in my vein , and I want to stand up for the lot of the handicraftsman as a good lot , in which a man may be well train to all the good function of his nature than if he belong to the grimacing set who have visit - card , and be proud 234   to be think rich than their neighbor . " 

 " would nothing ever make it seem right to you to change your mind ? " say Esther   she have rapidly weave some possibility out of the new uncertainty in her own lot , though she would not for the world have have Felix know of her weaving . " suppose , by some mean or other , a fortune might come to you honorably by marriage , or in any other unexpected way would you see no change in your course ? " 

 " no , " say Felix , peremptorily ; " I will never be rich . I do not   count that as any peculiar virtue . some man do well to accept rich , but that be not my inward vocation : I have no fellow - feeling with the rich as a class ; the habit of their life be odious to I . thousand of man have wed poverty because they expect to go to heaven for it ; I do not   expect to go to heaven for it , but I we d it because it enable I to do what I most want to do on earth . whatever the hope for the world may be whether great or small I be a man of this generation ; I will try to make life less bitter for a few within my reach . it be hold reasonable enough to toil for the fortune of a family , though it may turn to imbecility in the third generation . I choose a family with more chance in it . " 

 Esther look before her dreamily till she say , " that seem a hard lot ; yet it be a great one . " she rise to walk back . 

 " then you do not   think I be a fool , " say Felix , loudly , start to his foot , and then stoop to gather up his cap and stick . 

 " of course you suspect I of that stupidity . " 

 " well woman , unless they be Saint Theresas or Elizabeth Frys , generally think this sort of thing madness , unless when they read of it in the Bible . " 

 " a woman can hardly ever choose in that way ; she be dependent on what happen to she . she must take mean thing , because only mean thing be within her reach . " 

 " why , can you imagine yourself choose hardship as the well lot ? " say Felix , look at she with a sudden question in his eye . 

 " yes , I can , " she say , flush over neck and brow . 

 their word be charge with a meaning dependent entirely on the secret consciousness of each . nothing have be say which be necessarily personal . they walk a few yard along the road by which they have come , without further speech , till Felix say gently , " take my arm . " she take it , and they walk home so , entirely without conversation . Felix be 235   struggle as a firm man struggle with a temptation , see beyond it and disbelieve its lie promise . Esther be struggle as a woman struggle with the yearning for some expression of love , and with vexation under that subjection to a yearning which be not likely to be satisfied . each be conscious of a silence which each be unable to break , till they enter Malthouse Lane , and be within a few yard of the minister 's door . 

 " it be get dusk , " Felix then say ; " will Mr. Lyon be anxious about you ? " 

 " no , I think not . Lyddy would tell he that I go out with you , and that you carry a large stick , " say Esther , with a light laugh . 

 Felix go in with Esther to take tea , but the conversation be entirely between he and Mr. Lyon about the trick of canvassing , the foolish personality of the placard , and the probability of Transome 's return , as to which Felix declare himself to have become indifferent . this scepticism make the minister uneasy : he have great belief in the old political watchword , have preach that universal suffrage and no ballot be agreeable to the will of God , and like to believe that a visible " instrument " be forthcoming in the radical candidate who have pronounce emphatically against Whig finality . Felix , be in a perverse mood , contend that universal suffrage would be equally agreeable to the devil ; that he would change his politic a little , have a large traffic , and see himself more fully represent in Parliament . 

 " Nay , my friend , " say the minister , " you be again sport with paradox ; for you will not deny that you glory in the name of Radical , or Root - and - branch man , as they say in the great time when Nonconformity be in its giant youth . " 

 " a radical yes ; but I want to go to some root a good deal lower down than the franchise . " 

 " truly there be a work within which can not be dispense with ; but it be our preliminary work to free man from the stifle life of political nullity , and bring they into what Milton call ' the liberal air , ' wherein alone can be work the final triumph of the Spirit . " 

 " with all my heart . but while Caliban be caliban , though you multiply he by a million , he will worship every Trinculo that carry a bottle . I forget , though you do not   read Shakespeare , Mr. Lyon . " 

 " I be bind to confess that I have so far look into a volume of Esther 's as to conceive your meaning ; but the fantasy therein be 236   so little to be reconcile with a steady contemplation of that divine economy which be hide from sense and reveal to faith , that I forbear the reading , as likely to perturb my ministration . " 

 Esther sit by in unusual silence . the conviction that Felix will her exclusion from his life be make it plain that something more than friendship between they be not so thoroughly out of the question as she have always inwardly assert . in her pain that his choice lie aloof from she , she be compel frankly to admit to herself the longing that it have be otherwise , and that he have entreat she to share his difficult life . he be like no one else to she : he have seem to bring at once a law , and the love that give strength to obey the law . yet the next moment , sting by his independence of she , she deny that she love he ; she have only long for a moral support under the negation of her life . if she be not to have that support , all effort seem useless . 

 Esther have be so long use to hear the formula of her father 's belief without feel or understand they , that they have lose all power to touch she . the first religious experience of her life the first self - questioning , the first voluntary subjection , the first longing to acquire the strength of great motif and obey the more strenuous rule have come to she through Felix Holt . no wonder that she feel as if the loss of he be inevitable backslide . 

 but be it certain that she should lose he ? she do not believe that he be really indifferent to she . 

 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 Titus . but what say Jupiter , I ask thee ? 
 Clown . alas , sir , I know not Jupiter : 
  I never drink with he in all my life . 
  Titus Andronicus 
 the multiplication of uncomplimentary placard notice by Mr. Lyon and Felix Holt be one of several sign that the day of nomination and election be approach . the presence of the Revising Barrister in Treby be not only an opportunity for all person not otherwise busy to show their zeal for the purification of the voting - list , but also to reconcile private ease and public duty by stand about the street and lounge at door . 

 it be no light business for Trebians to form an opinion ; the mere fact of a public functionary with an unfamiliar title be enough to give 237   they pause , as a premise that be not to be quickly start from . to Mr. Pink , the saddler , for example , until some distinct injury or benefit have accrue to he , the existence of the Revising Barrister be like the existence of the young giraffe which Wombwell have lately bring into those part it be to be contemplate , and not criticise . Mr. Pink profess a deep - dye Toryism ; but he regard all fault - finding as radical and somewhat impious , as disturbing to trade , and likely to offend the gentry , or the servant through whom their harness be order : there be a Nemesis in thing which make objection unsafe , and even the Reform Bill be a sort of electric eel which a thrive tradesman have well leave alone . it be only the " Papists " who live far enough off to be speak of uncivilly . 

 but Mr. Pink be fond of news , which he collect and retail with perfect impartiality , note fact and reject comment . hence he be well pleased to have his shop so constant a place of resort for lounger , that to many Trebians there be a strong association between the pleasure of gossip and the smell of leather . he have the satisfaction of chalking and cutting , and of keep his journeyman close at work , at the very time that he learn from his visitor who be those whose vote have be call in question before his Honor , how Lawyer Jermyn have be too much for Lawyer Labron about Todd 's cottage , and how , in the opinion of some townsman , this look into the value of people 's property , and swear it down below a certain sum , be a nasty inquisitorial kind of thing ; while other observe that be nice to a few pound be all nonsense they should put the figure high enough , and then never mind if a voter 's qualification be thereabout . but , say Mr. Sims , the auctioneer , everything be do for the sake of the lawyer . Mr. Pink suggest impartially that lawyer must live ; but Mr. Sims , have a ready auctioneering wit , do not see that so many of they need live , or that baby be bear lawyer . Mr. Pink feel that this speculation be complicate by the ordering of side - saddle for lawyer ' daughter , and , return to the firm ground of fact , state that it be get dusk . 

 the dusk seem deepen the next moment by a tall figure obstruct the doorway , at sight of whom Mr. Pink rub his hand and smile and bow more than once , with evident solicitude to show honor where honor be due , while he say : 

 " Mr. Christian , sir , how do you do , sir ? " 

  238 

 Christian answer with the condescend familiarity of a superior . " very badly , I can tell you , with these confound brace that you be to make such a fine job of . see , old fellow , they have   burst out again . " 

 " very sorry , sir . can you leave they with I ? " 

 " oh , yes , I will leave they . what be the news , eh ? " say Christian , half seat himself on a high stool , and beat his boot with a hand - whip . 

 " well , sir , we look to you to tell we that , " say Mr. Pink , with a knowing smile . " you be at headquarters eh , sir ? that be what I say to Mr. Scales the other day . he come up for some strap , Mr. Scales do , and he ask that question in pretty near the same term that you have   do , sir , and I answer he , as I may say , ditto . not mean any disrespect to you , sir , but a way of speak . " 

 " come , that be gammon , Pink , " say Christian . " you know everything . you can tell I if you will , who be the fellow employ to paste up Transome 's handbill ? " 

 " what do you say , Mr. Sims ? " say Pink , look at the auctioneer . 

 " why , you know and I know well enough . it be Tommy Trounsem an old , crippling , half - mad fellow . Most people know Tommy . I have   employ he myself for charity . " 

 " where shall I find he ? " say Christian . 

 " at the Cross - Keys , in Pollard 's end , most likely , " say Mr. Sims . " I do not   know where he put himself when he be not   at the public . " 

 " he be a stoutish fellow fifteen year ago , when he carry pot , " say Mr. Pink . 

 " ay , and have snare many a hare in his time , " say Mr. Sims . " but he be always a little cracked . Lord bless you ! he use to swear he have a right to the Transome estate . " 

 " why , what put that notion into his head ? " say Christian , who have learn more than he expect . 

 " the lawing , sir nothing but the lawing about the estate . there be a deal of it twenty year ago , " say Mr. Pink . " Tommy happen to turn up hereabout at that time ; a big , lungeous fellow , who would speak disrespectfully of hanybody . " 

 " oh , he mean no harm , " say Mr. Sims . " he be fond of a drop to drink , and not quite right in the upper story , and he could hear no difference between Trounsem and Transome . it be an odd way of speak they have in that part where he be bear a little north'ard . you will hear it in his tongue now , if you talk to he . " 

  239 

 " at the Cross - Keys I shall find he , eh ? " say Christian , get off his stool . " good - day , pink good - day . " 

 Christian go straight from the saddler 's to Quorlen 's , the Tory printer 's , with whom he have contrive a political spree . Quorlen be a new man in Treby , who have so reduce the trade of Dow , the old hereditary printer , that Dow have lapse to Whiggery and Radicalism and opinion in general , so far as they be content to express themselves in a small stock of type . Quorlen have bring his Duffield wit with he , and insist that religion and joking be the handmaid of politic ; on which principle he and Christian undertake the joking , and leave the religion to the rector . the joke at present in question be a practical one . Christian , turn into the shop , merely say , " I have   find he out give I the placard " ; and , tuck a thickish flat bundle , wrap in a black glaze cotton bag , under his arm , walk out into the dusk again . 

 " suppose now , " he say to himself , as he stride along ' suppose there should be some secret to be get out of this old scamp , or some notion that be as good as a secret to those who know how to use it ? that would be virtue reward . but I be afraid the old tosspot be not likely to be good for much . there 's truth in wine , and there may be some in gin and muddy beer ; but whether it be truth worth my knowing , be another question . I have   get plenty of truth , but never any that be worth a sixpence to I . " 

 the Cross - Keys be a very old - fashioned " public " ; its bar be a big ramble kitchen , with an undulating brick floor ; the small - pan window throw an interesting obscurity over the far - off dresser , garnish with pewter and tin , and with large dish that seem to speak of well time ; the two settle be half push under the wide - mouthed chimney ; and the grate with its brick hob , massive iron crane , and various pothook , suggest a generous plenty possibly existent in all mood and tense except the indicative present . one way of get an idea of our fellow - countryman 's misery be to go and look at their pleasure . the Cross - Keys have a fungous - feature landlord and a yellow sickly landlady , with a large white kerchief bind round her cap , as if her head have recently require surgery ; it have doctor ale , an odor of bad tobacco , and remarkably strong cheese . it be not what Astraa , when come back , might be expect to approve as the scene of ecstatic enjoyment for the being whose special prerogative it be to lift their sublime face toward heaven . still , there be ample 240   space on the hearth accommodation for narrative bagman or boxmen room for a man to stretch his leg ; his brain be not press upon by a white wall within a yard of he , and the light do not stare in mercilessly on bare ugliness , turn the fire to ash . compare with some beerhouse of this more advanced period , the Cross - key of that day present a high standard of pleasure . 

 but though this venerable " public " have not fail to share in the recent political excitement of drinking , the pleasure it offer be not at this hour of the evening seek by a numerous company . there be only three or four pipe be smoke by the firelight , but it be enough for Christian when he find that one of these be be smoke by the bill - sticker , whose large flat basket , stuff with placard , lean near he against the settle . so splendid an apparition as Christian be not a little startling at the Cross - Keys , and be gaze at in expectant silence ; but he be a stranger in Pollard 's end , and be take for the high style of traveller when he declare that he be deucedly thirsty , order sixpenny worth of gin and a large jug of water , and , put a few drop of the spirit into his own glass , invite Tommy Trounsem , who sit next he , to help himself . Tommy be not slow than a shake hand oblige he to be in accept this invitation . he be a tall , broad - shoulder old fellow , who have once be good - looking ; but his cheek and chest be both hollow now , and his limb be shrink . 

 " you have   get some bill there , master , eh ? " say Christian , point to the basket . " be there an auction come on ? " 

 " Auction ? no , " say Tommy , with a gruff hoarseness , which be the remnant of a jovial bass , and with an accent which differ from the Trebian fitfully , as an early habit be will not to reassert itself . " I have   nought to do wi ' auction ; I be a pol'tical charicter . it be I be get Trounsem into Parl'ment . " 

 " Trounsem , say he , " the landlord observe , take out his pipe with a low laugh . " it be Transome , sir . maybe you do not   belong to this part . it be the candidate ' ull do most for the workingmen , and 's prove it too , in the way o ' be open - handed and wish them to enjoy themselves . if I have twenty vote , I would give one for Transome , and I do not   care who hear I . " 

 the landlord peer out from his fungous cluster of feature with a beery confidence that the high figure of twenty have somehow raise 241   the hypothetic value of his vote . 

 " spilkin , now , " say Tommy , wave his hand to the landlord , " you let one gentelman speak to another , will you ? this genelman want to know about my bill . do he , or do not   he ? " 

 " what then ? I speak accord , " say the landlord , mildly hold his own . 

 " you be all very well , spilkin , " return Tommy , " but y'aren't   I . I know what the bill be . it be public business . I be none o ' your common bill - sticker , master ; I have   leave off stick up ten guineas reward for a sheep - stealer , or low stuff like that . these be Trounsem 's bill ; and I be the rightful family , and so I give he a lift . a Trounsem I be , and a Trounsem I will be bury ; and if Old Nick try to lay hold on I for poach , I will say , ' you be hang for a lawyer , Old Nick ; every hare and pheasant on the Trounsem 's land be mine ' ; and what rise the family , rise old Tommy ; and we be go to get into Parl'ment that be the long and the short on't , master . and I be the head o ' the family , and I stick the bill . there be Johnsons , and thomson , and Jacksons , and billson ; but I be a Trounsem , I be . what do you say to that , master ? " 

 this appeal , accompany by a blow on the table , while the landlord wink at the company , be address to Christian , who answer , with severe gravity 

 " I say there be not   any work more honorable than bill - sticking . " 

 " no , no , " say Tommy , wag his head from side to side . " I think you would come in to that . I think you would know well than say contrairy . but I will shake hand wi ' you ; I do not   want to knock any man 's head off . I be a good chap a sound crock an old family kep ' out o ' my right . I shall go to heaven , for all Old Nick . " 

 as these celestial prospect might imply that a little extra gin be begin to tell on the bill - sticker , Christian want to lose no time in arrest his attention . he lay his hand on Tommy 's and speak emphatically . 

 " but I will tell you what you bill - sticker be not up to . you should be on the look - out when Debarry 's side have stick up fresh bill , and go and paste yours over they . I know where there be a lot of Debarry 's bill now . come along with I and I will show you . we will paste they over , and then we will come back and treat the company . " 

  242 

 " Hooray ! " say Tommy . " let us be off then . " 

 he be one of the thoroughly inure , originally hale drunkard , and do not easily lose his head or leg or the ordinary amount of method in his talk . stranger often suppose that Tommy be tipsy when he have only take what he call " one blessed pint , " chiefly from that glorious contentment with himself and his adverse fortune which be not usually characteristic of the sober Briton . he knock the ash out of his pipe , seize his paste - vessel and his basket , and prepare to start with a satisfactory promise that he could know what he be about . 

 the landlord and some other have confidently conclude that they understand all about Christian now . he be a Transome 's man , come to see after the bill - stick in Transome 's interest . the landlord , tell his yellow wife snappishly to open the door for the gentleman , hop soon to see he again . 

 " this be a Transome 's house , sir , " he observe , " in respect of entertaining customer of that color . I do my duty as a publican , which , if I know it , be to turn back no genelman 's money . I say , give every genelman a chance , and the more the merry , in Parl'ment and out of it . and if anybody say they want but two parl'ment man , I say it ' ud be well for trade if there be six of them , and voter accord . " 

 " ay , ay , " say Christian ; " you be a sensible man , landlord . you do not   mean to vote for Debarry , then , eh ? " 

 " not nohow , " say the landlord , think that where negative be good the more you have of they the well . 

 as soon as the door have close behind Christian and his new companion Tommy say 

 " now , master , if you be to be my lantern , do not   you be a Jacky Lantern , which I take to mean one as lead you the wrong way . for I will tell you what if you have   have the luck to fall in wi ' Tommy Trounsem , do not   you let he drop . " 

 " no , no to be sure not , " say Christian . " come along here . we will go to the Back Brewery wall first . " 

 " no , no ; do not   you let I drop . give I a shilling any day you like , and I will tell you more nor you will hear from spilkin in a week . there isna many man like I . I carry pot for fifteen year off and on what do you think o ' that now , for a man as might ha ' live up there at Trounsem Park , and snare his own game ? which I would ha ' do , " say Tommy , wag his head at Christian in the dimness undisturbe by gas . " none o ' your shooting for I it be two to one you will miss . Snaring 's more 243   fishing - like . you bait your hook , and if it isna the fish ' good - will to come , that be nothing again ' the sporting genelman . and that be what I say by snare . " 

 " but if you have a right to the Transome estate , how be it you be keep out of it , old boy ? it be some foul shame or other , eh ? " 

 " it be the law that be what it be . you be a good sort of chap ; I do not   mind tell you . there 's folk bear to property , and there be folk catch hold on it ; and the law 's make for they to catch hold . I be pretty deep ; I see a good deal far than spilkin . there be Ned Patch , the peddler , use to say to I , ' you canna read , Tommy , ' say he . ' no ; thank you , ' say I ; ' I be not go to crack my headpiece to make myself as big a fool as you . ' I be fond o ' Ned . many be the pot we have   have together . " 

 " I see well enough you be deep , Tommy . how come you to know you be bear to property ? " 

 " it be the regester the parish regester , " say Tommy , with his know wag of the head , " that show as you be bear . I allay feel it inside I as I be somebody , and I could see other chap think it on I too ; and so one day at Littleshaw , where I kep ' ferret and a little bit of a public , there come a fine man look after I , and walk I up and down wi ' question . and I make out from the clerk as he have be at the regester ; and I give the clerk a pot or two , and he get it off our parson as the name o ' Trounsem be a great name hereabout . and I wait a bit for my fine man to come again . think I , if there be property want a right owner , I shall be call for ; for I do not   know the law then . and I wait and wait , till I see'd no fun I ' wait . so I part with my public and my ferret for she be dead a ' ready , my wife be , and I have not   no cumbrance . and off I start a pretty long walk to this country - side , for I could walk for a wager in they day . " 

 " ah ! well , here we be at the Back Brewery wall . put down your paste and your basket now , old boy , and I will help you . you paste , and I will give you the bill , and then you can go on talk . " 

 Tommy obey automatically , for he be now carry away by the rare opportunity of talk to a new listener , and be only eager to go on with his story . as soon as his back be turn , and he be stoop over his paste - pot , Christian , with quick adroitness , exchange the placard in his own bag for those in Tommy 's basket . Christian 's placard have 244   not be print at Treby , but be a new lot which have be send from Duffield that very day " highly spiced , " Quorlen have say , " come from a pen that be up to that sort of thing . " Christian have read the first of the sheaf , and suppose they be all alike . he proceed to hand one to Tommy and say 

 " here , old boy , paste this over the other . and so , when you get into this country - side , what do you do ? " 

 " why , I put up at a good public and order the good , for I would a bit o ' money in my pocket ; and I ax about , and they say to I , if it be Trounsem business you be after , you go to Lawyer Jermyn . and I go ; and say I , go along , he be maybe the fine man as walk I up and down . but no such thing . I will tell you what Lawyer Jermyn be . he stand you there , and hold you away from he wi ' a pole three yard long . he star at you , and say nothing , till you feel like a Tomfool ; and then he threat you to set the justice on you ; and then he be sorry for you , and hand you money , and preach you a sarmint , and tell you you be a poor man , and he will give you a bit of advice and you would well not be meddle wi ' thing belong to the law , else you be catch up in a big wheel and fly to bit . and I go of a cold sweat , and I wish I might never come I ' sight o ' Lawyer Jermyn again . but he say , if you keep I ' this neighborhood , behave yourself well , and I will pertect you . I be deep enough , but it be no use be deep , 'cause you can never know the law . and there be time when the deep fellow 's most frightened . " 

 " yes , yes . there ! now for another placard . and so that be all ? " 

 " All ? " say Tommy , turn round and hold the paste - brush in suspense . " do not   you be run too quick . think I , ' I will meddle no more . I have   get a bit o ' money I will buy a basket , and be a pot - man . it be a pleasant life . I shall live at public and see the world , and pick ' quaintance , and get a chance penny . ' but when I have turn into the Red Lion , and get myself warm again wi ' a drop o ' hot , something jump into my head . think I , Tommy , you have   do finely for yourself : you be a rat as have break up your house to take a journey , and show yourself to a ferret . and then it jump into my head : I would once two ferret as turn on one another , and the little un kill the big un . say I to the landlady , ' Missus , could you tell I of a lawyer , ' say I , ' not very big or fine , but a second - size a big - potato , like ? ' ' that I can , ' 245   say she ; ' there be one now in the bar parlor . ' ' be so kind as bring we together , ' say I. and she cry out I think I hear she now ' Mr. Johnson ! ' and what do you think ? " 

 at this crisis in Tommy 's story the gray cloud , which have be gradually thin , open sufficiently to let down the sudden moonlight , and show his poor battered old figure and face in the attitude and with the expression of a narrator sure of the come effect on his auditor ; his body and neck stretch a little on one side , and his paste - brush hold out with an alarming intention of tap Christian 's coat - sleeve at the right moment . Christian start to a safe distance , and say 

 " it be wonderful . I can not   tell what to think . " 

 " then never do you deny Old Nick , " say Tommy , with solemnity . " I have   believe in he more ever since . who be Johnson ? why , Johnson be the fine man as have walk I up and down with question . and I out with it to he then and there . and he speak I civil , and say , ' come away wi ' I , my good fellow . ' and he tell I a deal o ' law . and he say , ' whether you be a Tommy Trounsem or no , it be no good to you , but only to they as have get hold o ' the property . if you be a Tommy Trounsem twenty time over , it ' ud be no good , for the law 's buy you out ; and your life be no good , only to they as have catch hold o ' the property . the more you live , the more they will stick in . not as they want you now , ' say he ' you be no good to anybody , and you might howl like a dog foriver , and the law ' ud take no notice on you . ' say Johnson , ' I be do a kind thing by you to tell you . for that be the law . ' and if you want to know the law , master , you ask Johnson . I hear them say after , as he be an understrapper at Jermyn 's . I have   never forgot it from that day to this . but I see clear enough , as if the law have not   be again ' I , the Trounsem estate ' ud ha ' be mine . but folk be fool hereabouts , and I have   leave off talk . the more you tell them the truth , the more they will niver believe you . and I go and buy my basket and the pot , and " 

 " come then , fire away , " say Christian . " here be another placard . " 

 " I be get a bit dry , master . " 

 " well , then , make haste , and you will have something to drink all the soon . " 

  246 

 Tommy turn to his work again , and Christian , continue his help , say , " and how long have Mr. Jermyn be employ you ? " 

 " oh , no particular time off and on ; but a week or two ago he see I upo ' the road , and speak to I uncommon civil , and tell I to go up to his office and he will give I employ . and I be noway unwilling to stick the bill to get the family into Parl'ment . for there be no man can help the law . and the family 's the family , whether you carry pot or no . Master , I be uncommon dry ; my head 's a - turn round ; it be talk so long on end . " 

 the unwonted excitement of poor Tommy 's memory be produce a reaction . 

 " well , Tommy , " say Christian , who have just make a discovery among the placard which alter the bent of his thought , " you may go back to the Cross - Keys now , if you like ; here be a half - crown for you to spend handsomely . I can not   go back there myself just yet ; but you may give my respect to spilkin , and mind you paste the rest of the bill early to - morrow morning . " 

 " ay , ay . but do not   you believe too much I ' spilkin , " say Tommy , pocket the half - crown , and show his gratitude by give this advice " he be no harm much but weak . he think he be at the bottom o ' thing because he score you up . but I bear he no ill - will . Tommy Trounsem 's a good chap ; and any day you like to give I half - a - crown , I will tell you the same story over again . not now ; I be dry . come , help I up wi ' these thing ; you be a young chap than I . well , I will tell Spilkins you will come again another day . " 

 the moonlight , which have light up poor Tommy 's oratorical attitude , have serve to light up for Christian the print of the placard . he have expect the copy to be various , and have turn they half over at different depth of the sheaf before draw out those he offer to the bill - sticker . suddenly the clear light have show he on one of they a name which be just then especially interesting to he , and all the more when occur in a placard intend to dissuade the elector of North Loamshire from vote for the heir of the Transomes . he hastily turn over the bill that precede and succeed , that he might draw out and carry away all of this pattern ; for it might turn out to be wise for he not to contribute to the publicity of handbill which contain allusion to Bycliffe versus Transome . there be about a dozen of they ; he press they together and thrust they into his pocket , 247   return all the rest to Tommy 's basket . to take away this dozen might not be to prevent similar bill from be post up elsewhere , but he have reason to believe that these be all of the same kind which have be send to Treby from Duffield . 

 Christian 's interest in his practical joke have die out like a morning rushlight . apart from this discovery in the placard , old Tommy 's story have some indication in it that be worth ponder over . where be that well - inform Johnson now ? be he still an understrapper of Jermyn 's ? 

 with this matter in his thought , Christian only turn in hastily at Quorlen 's , throw down the black bag which contain the capture Radical handbill , say he have do the job , and hurry back to the Manor that he might study his problem . 

 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 I doe believe that , as the gall have severall receptacle in several creature , soe there be scarce any creature but hath that emunctorye somewhere . Sir Thomas Browne . 

 Fancy what a game at chess would be if all the chessman have passion and intellect , more or less small and cunning : if you be not only uncertain about your adversary 's man , but a little uncertain about your own ; if your knight could shuffle himself on to a new square by the sly ; if your bishop , in disgust at your castling , could wheedle your pawn out of their place ; and if your pawn , hat you because they be pawn , could make away from their appoint post that you might get checkmate on a sudden . you might be the long - headed of deductive reasoner , and yet you might be beat by your own pawn . you would be especially likely to be beat , if you depend arrogantly on your mathematical imagination , and regard your passionate piece with contempt . 

 yet this imaginary chess be easy compare with the game a man have to play against his fellow - man with other fellow - man for his instrument . he think himself sagacious , perhaps , because he trust no bond except that of self - interest : but the only self - interest he can safely rely on be what seem to be such to the mind he would use or govern . can he ever be sure of know this ? 

 Matthew Jermyn be under no misgiving as to the fealty of Johnson . he have " be the making of Johnson " ; and this seem to many man as a reason for expect devotion , in spite of the fact that they themselves , though very fond of their own person and life , be not at all devoted to the Maker they believe in . Johnson be a most serviceable 248   subordinate . be a man who aim at respectability , a family man , who have a good church - pew , subscribe for engraving of banquet picture where there be portrait of political celebrity , and wish his child to be more unquestionably genteel than their father , he present all the more numerous handle of worldly motive by which a judicious superior might get a hold on he . but this useful regard to respectability have its inconvenience in relation to such a superior : it be a mark of some vanity and some pride , which , if they be not touch just in the right handling - place , be liable to become raw and sensitive . Jermyn be aware of Johnson 's weakness , and think he have flatter they sufficiently . but on the point of know when we be disagreeable , our human nature be fallible . our lavender - water , our smile , our compliment , and other polite falsity , be constantly offensive , when in the very nature of they they can only be mean to attract admiration and regard . Jermyn have often be unconsciously disagreeable to Johnson , over and above the constant offence of be an ostentatious patron . he would never let Johnson dine with his wife and daughter ; he would not himself dine at Johnson 's house when he be in town . he often do what be equivalent to poohpoohing his conversation by not even appear to listen , and by suddenly cut it short with a query on a new subject . Jermyn be able and politic enough to have command a great deal of success in his life , but he could not help be handsome , arrogant , fond of be hear , indispose to any kind of comradeship , amorous and bland toward woman , cold and self - contain toward man . you will hear very strong denial that an attorney 's be handsome could enter into the dislike he excite ; but conversation consist a good deal in the denial of what be true . from the british point of view masculine beauty be regard very much as it be in the drapery business : as good solely for the fancy department for young nobleman , artist , poet , and the clergy . some one who , like Mr. Lingon , be disposed to revile Jermyn   perhaps it be Sir Maximus , have call he " a cursed , sleek , handsome , long - wind , overbear sycophant " ; epithet which express , rather confusedly , the mingled character of the dislike he excite . and serviceable John Johnson , himself sleek , and mindful about his broadcloth and his cambric front , have what he consider ' spirit " 249   enough within he to feel that dislike of Jermyn gradually gather force through year of obligation and subjection , till it have become an actuating motive dispose to use an opportunity ; if it do not watch for one . 

 it be not this motive , however , but rather the ordinary course of business , which account for Johnson 's play a double part as an electioneer agent . what man do in election be not to be class either among sin or mark of grace ; it would be profane to include business in religion , and conscience refer to failure , not to success . still , the sense of be gall by Jermyn 's harness be an additional reason for cultivate all relation that be independent of he ; and pique at Harold Transome 's behavior to he in Jermyn 's office perhaps give all the more zest to Johnson 's use of his pen and ink when he write a handbill in the service of Garstin , and Garstin 's incomparable agent , Putty , full of innuendo against Harold Transome , as a descendant of the Durfey - Transomes . it be a natural subject of self - congratulation to a man , when special knowledge , gain long ago without any forecast , turn out to afford a special inspiration in the present ; and Johnson feel a new pleasure in the consciousness that he of all people in the world next to Jermyn have the most intimate knowledge of the Transome affair . still well some of these affair be secret of Jermyn 's . if in an uncomplimentary spirit he might have be call Jermyn 's " man of straw , " it be a satisfaction to know that the unreality of the man John Johnson be confine to his appearance in annuity deed , and that elsewhere he be solid , locomotive , and capable of remember anything for his own pleasure and benefit . to act with doubleness towards a man whose conduct be double , be so near an approach to virtue that it deserve to be call by no mean name than diplomacy . 

 by such cause it come to pass that Christian hold in his hand a bill in which Jermyn be playfully allude to as Mr. German Cozen , who win game by clever shuffling and odd trick without any honor , and back Durfey 's crib against Bycliffe in which it be adroitly imply that the so - call head of the Transomes be only the tail of the Durfeys and that some say the Durfeys would have die out and leave their nest empty if it have not be for their German Cozen . 

 Johnson have not dare to use any recollection except such as might credibly exist in other mind besides his own . in the truth of the case , no one but himself have the prompting to recall these out - worn 250   scandal ; but it be likely enough that such foul - wing thing should be revive by election heat for Johnson to escape all suspicion . 

 Christian could gather only dim and uncertain inference from this flat irony and heavy joking ; but one chief thing be clear to he . he have be right in his conjecture that Jermyn 's interest about Bycliffe have its source in some claim of Bycliffe 's on the Transome property . and then , there be that story of the old bill - sticker 's , which , closely consider , indicate that the right of the present Transomes depend , or , at least , have depend on the continuance of some other life . christian in his time have gather enough legal notion to be aware that possession by one man sometimes depend on the life of another ; that a man might sell his own interest in property , and the interest of his descendant , while a claim on that property would still remain to some one else than the purchaser , suppose the descendant become extinct , and the interest they have sell be at an end . but under what condition the claim might be valid or void in any particular case , be all darkness to he . suppose Bycliffe have any such claim on the Transome estate : how be christian to know whether at the present moment it be worth anything more than a bit of rotten parchment ? Old Tommy Trounsem have say that Johnson know all about it . but even if Johnson be still above - ground and all johnson be mortal he might still be an understrapper of Jermyn 's , in which case his knowledge would be on the wrong side of the hedge for the purpose of Henry Scaddon . his immediate care must be to find out all he could about Johnson . he blame himself for not have question Tommy far while he have he at command ; but on this head the bill - sticker could hardly know more than the less dilapidated denizen of Treby . 

 now it have happen that during the week in which Christian have be at work try to solve the enigma of Jermyn 's interest about Bycliffe , Johnson 's mind also have be somewhat occupy with suspicion and conjecture as to new information on the subject of the old Bycliffe claim which Jermyn intend to conceal from he . the letter which , after his interview with Christian , Jermyn have write with a sense of perfect safety to his faithful ally Johnson , be , as we know , write to a Johnson who have find his self - love incompatible with that faithfulness of which it be suppose to be the foundation . anything that the patron feel it inconvenient for his oblige friend and 251   servant to know , become by that very fact an object of peculiar curiosity . the obliged friend and servant secretly dot on his patron 's inconvenience , provide that he himself do not share it ; and conjecture naturally become active . 

 Johnson 's legal imagination , be very differently furnish from Christian 's , be at no loss to conceive condition under which there might arise a new claim on the Transome estate . he have before he the whole history of the settlement of those estate make a hundred year ago by John Justus Transome , entail they , whilst in his possession , on his son Thomas and his heir - male , with remainder to the Bycliffes in fee . he know that Thomas , son of John Justus , prove a prodigal , have , without the knowledge of his father , the tenant in possession , sell his own and his descendant ' right to a lawyer - cousin name Durfey ; that , therefore , the title of the Durfey - Transomes , in spite of that old Durfey 's trick to show the contrary , depend solely on the purchase of the " base fee " thus create by Thomas Transome ; and that the Bycliffes be the " remainder man " who might fairly oust the Durfey - Transomes if ever the issue of the prodigal Thomas go clean out of existence , and cease to represent a right which he have bargain away from they . 

 Johnson , as Jermyn 's subordinate , have be closely cognizant of the detail concern the suit institute by successive Bycliffes , of whom Maurice Christian Bycliffe be the last , on the plea that the extinction of Thomas Transome 's line have actually come to pass a weary suit , which have eat into the fortune of two family , and have only make the cankerworm fat . the suit have close with the death of Maurice Christian Bycliffe in prison ; but before his death , Jermyn 's exertion to get evidence that there be still issue of Thomas Transome 's line surviving , as a security of the Durfey title , have issue in the discovery of a Thomas Transome at Littleshaw , in Stonyshire , who be the representative of the pawn inheritance . the death of Maurice have make this discovery useless have make it seem the wise part to say nothing about it ; and the fact have remain a secret know only to Jermyn and Johnson . no other Bycliffe be know or believe to exist , and the Durfey - Transomes might be consider safe , unless yes , there be an " unless " which Johnson could conceive : an heir or heiress of the Bycliffes if such a personage turn out to be in existence might sometime raise a new and valid claim when once inform that wretche old Tommy 252   Trounsem the bill - sticker , totter drunkenly on the edge of the grave , be the last issue remain above - ground from that dissolute Thomas who play his Esau part a century before . while the poor old bill - sticker breathe , the Durfey - Transomes could legally keep their possession in spite of a possible Bycliffe prove real ; but not when the parish have bury the bill - sticker . 

 still , it be one thing to conceive condition , and another to see any chance of prove their existence . Johnson at present have no glimpse of such a chance ; and even if he ever gain the glimpse , he be not sure that he should ever make any use of it . his enquiry of Medwin , in obedience to Jermyn 's letter , have extract only a negative as to any information possess by the lawyer of Bycliffe concern a marriage , or expectation of offspring on his part . but Johnson feel not the less sting by curiosity to know what Jermyn have find out : that he have find something in relation to a possible Bycliffe , Johnson feel pretty sure . and he think with satisfaction that Jermyn could not hinder he from know what he already know about Thomas Transome 's issue . many thing might occur to alter his policy and give a new value to fact . be it certain that Jermyn would always be fortunate ? 

 when greed and unscrupulousness exhibit themselves on a grand historical scale , and there be a question of peace or war or amicable partition , it often occur that gentleman of high diplomatic talent have their mind bent on the same object from different point of view . each , perhaps , be think of a certain duchy or province , with a view to arrange the ownership in such a way as shall well serve the purpose of the gentleman with high diplomatic talent in whom each be more especially interested . but these select mind in high office can never miss their aim from ignorance of each other 's existence or whereabouts . their high title may be learn even by common people from every pocket almanac . 

 but with mean diplomat , who might be mutually useful , such ignorance be often obstructive . Mr. John Johnson and Mr. Christian , otherwise Mr. Scaddon , might have have a concentration of purpose and an ingenuity of device fit they to make a figure in the parcelling of Europe , and yet they might never have meet , simply because Johnson know nothing of Christian , and because Christian do not know where to find Johnson . 

  253 

 CHAPTER XXX . 

 his nature be too noble for the world : 
 he would not flatter Neptune for his trident , 
 or Jove for his power to thunder . his heart be his mouth ; 
 what his breast forge , that his tongue must vent ; 
 and , be angry , doth forget that ever 
 he hear the name of death . Coriolanus . 
 Christian and Johnson do meet , however , by mean that be quite incalculable . the incident which bring they into communication be due to Felix Holt , who of all man in the world have the least affinity either for the industrious or the idle parasite . 

 Mr. Lyon have urge Felix to go to Duffield on the fifteenth of December to witness the nomination of the candidate for North Loamshire . the minister wish to hear what take place ; and the pleasure of gratify he help to outweigh some oppose reason . 

 " I shall get into a rage at something or other , " Felix have say . " I have   tell you one of my weak point . where I have any particular business , I must incur the risk my nature bring . but I have   no particular business at Duffield . however , I will make a holiday and go . by dint of see folly , I shall get lesson in patience . " 

 the weak point to which Felix refer be his liability to be carry completely out of his own mastery by indignant anger . his strong health , his renunciation of selfish claim , his habitual preoccupation with large thought and with purpose independent of everyday casualty , secure he a fine and even temper , free from moodiness or irritability . he be full of long - suffering toward his unwise mother , who " press he daily with her word and urge he , so that his soul be vex ; " he have choose to fill his day in a way that require the utmost exertion of patience , that require those little rill - like outflowing of goodness which in mind of great energy must be feed from deep source of thought and passionate devotedness . in this way his energy serve to make he gentle ; and now , in this twenty - sixth year of his life , they have cease to make he angry , except in the presence of something that rouse his deep indignation . when once exasperate , the passionateness of his nature throw off the yoke of a long - train consciousness in which thought and emotion have be more and more completely mingle , and concentrate itself in a rage as ungovernable as that of boyhood . he be thoroughly aware of the liability , and know that in such circumstance he could not answer for himself . sensitive people with feeble frame 254   have often the same sort of fury within they ; but they be themselves shatter , and shatter nothing . Felix have a terrible arm : he know that he be dangerous ; and he avoid the condition that might cause he exasperation as he would have avoid intoxicate drink if he have be in danger of intemperance . 

 the nomination - day be a great epoch of successful trickery , or , to speak in a more parliamentary manner , of war - stratagem , on the part of skilful agent . and Mr. Johnson have his share of inward chuckle and self - approval , as one who might justly expect increase renown , and be some day in as general request as the great Putty himself . to have the pleasure and the praise of electioneer ingenuity , and also to get pay for it , without too much anxiety whether the ingenuity will achieve its ultimate end , perhaps give to some select person a sort of satisfaction in their superiority to their more agitated fellow - man that be worthy to be class with those generous enjoyment of have the truth chiefly to yourself , and of see other in danger of drown while you be high and dry , which seem to have be regard as unmixe privilege by Lucretius and Lord Bacon . 

 one of Mr. Johnson 's great success be this . Spratt , the hat manager of the Sproxton Colliery , in careless confidence that the collier and other laborer under he would follow his order , have provide cart to carry some load of voteless enthusiasm to Duffield on behalf of Garstin ; enthusiasm which , be already pay for by the recognize benefit of Garstin 's existence as a capitalist with a share in the Sproxton mine , be not to cost much in the form of treat . a capitalist be hold worthy of pious honor as the cause why workingmen exist . but Mr. Spratt do not sufficiently consider that a cause which be to be prove by argument or testimony be not an object of passionate devotion to collier : a visible cause of beer act on they much more strongly . and even if there have be any love of the far - off Garstin , hatred of the too immediate Spratt would have be the strong motive . hence Johnson 's calculation , make long ago with Chubb , the remarkable publican , have be well found , and there have be diligent care to supply treat at Duffield in the name of Transome . after the election be over it be not improbable that there would be much friendly joke between Putty and Johnson as to the success of this trick against Putty 's employer , and Johnson would be conscious of rise in the opinion of his celebrated senior . 

  255 

 for the show of hand and the cheering , the hustling and the pelting , the roaring and the hissing , the hard hit with small missile and the soft hit with small joke , be strong enough on the side of Transome to balance the similar " demonstration " for Garstin , even with the Debarry interest in his favor . and the inconvenient presence of Spratt be easily get rid of by a dexterously - manage accident , which send he bruise and limp from the scene of action . Mr. Chubb have never before feel so thoroughly that the occasion be up to a level with his talent , while the clear daylight in which his virtue would appear when at the election he vote , as his duty to himself bind he , for Garstin only , give he thorough repose of conscience . 

 Felix Holt be the only person look on at the senseless exhibition of this nomination - day , who know from the beginning the history of the trick with the Sproxton man . he have be aware all along that the treating at Chubb 's have be continue , and that so far Harold Transome 's promise have produce no good fruit ; and what he be observe to - day , as he watch the uproarious crowd , convince he that the whole scheme would be carry out just as if he have never speak about it . he could be fair enough to Transome to allow that he might have wish , and yet have be unable , with his notion of success , to keep his promise ; and his bitterness toward the candidate only take the form of contemptuous pity ; for Felix be not spar in his contempt for man who put their inward honor in pawn by seek the prize of the world . his scorn fall too readily on the fortunate . but when he see Johnson pass to and fro , and speak to Jermyn on the husting , he feel himself get angry , and jump off the wheel of the stationary cart on which he be mount , that he might no long be in sight of this man , whose vitiating can not have make his blood hot and his finger tingle on the first day of encounter he at Sproxton . it be a little too exasperating to look at this pink - faced rotund speciman of prosperity , to witness the power for evil that lie in his vulgar can not , back by another man 's money , and to know that such stupid iniquity flourish the flag of Reform , and Liberalism , and justice to the needy . while the roaring and the scuffling be still go on , Felix , with his thick stick in his hand , make his way through the crowd , and walk on through the Duffield street , till he come out on a grassy suburb , where the house surround a small common . here he walk 256   about in the breezy air , and eat his bread and apple , tell himself that this angry haste of his about evil that could only be remedie slowly , could be nothing else than obstructive , and might some day he see it so clearly that the thought seem like a presentiment be obstructive of his own work . 

 " not to waste energy , to apply force where it would tell , to do small work close at hand , not wait for speculative chance of heroism , but prepare for they " these be the rule he have be constantly urge on himself . but what could be a great waste than to beat a scoundrel who have law and opodeldoc at command ? after this meditation , Felix feel cool and wise enough to return into the town , not , however , intend to deny himself the satisfaction of a few pungent word wherever there be place for they . blow be sarcasm turn stupid : wit be a form of force that leave the limb at rest . 

 anything that could be call a crowd be no long to be see . the show of hand have be pronounce to be in favor of Debarry and Transome , and a poll have be demand for Garstin , the business of the day might be consider at an end . but in the street where the husting be erect , and where the great hotel stand , there be many group , as well as stroller and steady walker to and fro . man in superior greatcoat and well - brush hat be await with more or less impatience an important dinner , either at the Crown , which be Debarry 's house , or at the Three Cranes , which be Garstin 's , or at the Fox and Hounds , which be Transome 's . knot of sober retailer , who have already din , be to be see at some shop - door ; man in very shabby coat and miscellaneous head - covering , inhabitant of Duffield and not county voter , be lounge about in dull silence , or listen , some to a grimy man in a flannel shirt , hatless and with turbid red hair , who be insist on political point with much more ease than have seem to belong to the gentleman speaker on the husting , and other to a Scotch vendor of article useful to sell , whose unfamiliar accent seem to have a guarantee of truth in it want as an association with everyday English . some rough - look pipe - smoker , or distinguish cigar - smoker , choose to walk up and down in isolation and silence . but the majority of those who have show a burn interest in the nomination have disappear , and cockade no long stud a close - press crowd , like , and also very unlike , meadow - flower among the grass . the street 257   pavement be strangely paint with fragment of perishable missile grind flat under heavy foot : but the worker be rest from their toil , and the buzz and tread and the fitfully discernible voice seem like stillness to Felix after the roar with which the wide space have be fill when he leave it . 

 the group round the speaker in the flannel shirt stand at the corner of a side - street , and the speaker himself be elevate by the head and shoulder above his hearer , not because he be tall , but because he stand on a project stone . at the opposite corner of the turning be the great inn of the Fox and Hounds , and this be the ultra - liberal quarter of the high street . Felix be at once attract by this group ; he like the look of the speaker , whose bare arm be powerfully muscular , though he have the pallid complexion of a man who live chiefly amidst the heat of furnace . he be lean against the dark stone building behind he with fold arm , the grimy paleness of his shirt and skin stand out in high relief against the dark stone building behind he . he lift up one forefinger , and mark his emphasis with it as he speak . his voice be high and not strong , but Felix recognize the fluency and the method of an habitual preacher or lecturer . 

 " it be the fallacy of all monopolist , " he be say . " we know what monopolist be : man who want to keep a trade all to themselves , under the pretence that they will furnish the public with a well article . we know what that come to : in some country a poor man can not   afford to buy a spoonful of salt , and yet there be salt enough in the world to pickle every live thing in it . that be the sort of benefit monopolist do to mankind . and these be the man who tell we we be to let politic alone ; they will govern we well without our know anything about it . we must mind our business ; we be ignorant ; we have   no time to study great question . but I tell they this : the great question in the world be , how to give every man a man 's share in what go on in life " 

 " hear , hear ! " say Felix in his sonorous voice , which seem to give a new impressiveness to what the speaker have say . every one look at he : the well - wash face and its educate expression along with a dress more careless than that of most well - to - do workman on a holiday , make his appearance strangely arrest . 

 " not a pig 's share , " the speaker go on , " not a horse 's , not the share of a machine feed with oil only to make it work and nothing else . it 258   be not   a man 's share just to mind your pin - making , or your glass - blowing , and higgle about your own wage , and bring up your family to be ignorant son of ignorant father , and no well prospect ; that be a slave 's share ; we want a freeman 's share , and that be to think and speak and act about what concern we all , and see whether these fine gentleman who undertake to govern we be do the good they can for we . they have   get the knowledge , say they . very well , we have   get the want . there be many a one would be idle if hunger do not   pinch he ; but the stomach set we to work . there be a fable tell where the noble be the belly and the people the member . but I make another sort of fable . I say , we be the belly that feel the pinch , and we will set these aristocrat , these great people who call themselves our brain , to work at some way of satisfy we a bit well . the aristocrat be pretty sure to try and govern for their own benefit ; but how be we to be sure they will try and govern for our ? they must be look after , I think , like other workman . we must have what we call inspector , to see whether the work 's well do for we . we want to send our inspector to Parliament . well , they say you have   get the Reform Bill ; what more can you want ? send your inspector . but I say , the Reform Bill be a trick it be nothing but swear - in special constable to keep the aristocrat safe in their monopoly ; it be bribe some of the people with vote to make they hold their tongue about give vote to the rest . I say , if a man do not   beg or steal , but work for his bread , the poor and the more miserable he be , the more he would need have a vote to send an inspector to Parliament else the man who be bad off be likely to be forget ; and I say , he be the man who ought to be first remember . else what do their religion mean ? why do they build church and endow they that their son may get pay well for preach a Saviour , and make themselves as little like he as can be ? if I want to believe in Jesus Christ , I must shut my eye for fear I should see a parson . and what be a bishop ? a bishop 's a person dress up , who sit in the House of Lords to help and throw out Reform Bills . and because it be hard to get anything in the shape of a man to dress himself up like that , and do such work , they have to give he a palace for it , and plenty of thousand a - year . and then they cry out ' the Church be in danger , ' ' the poor man 's Church . ' and why be it the poor man 's Church ? because he can have a seat for nothing . I think it be for nothing ; for it would be hard to tell what he get by it . if the 259   poor man have a vote in the matter , I think he would choose a different sort of church to what that be . but do you think the aristocrat will ever alter it , if the belly do not   pinch they ? not they . it be part of their monopoly . they will supply we with our religion like everything else , and get a profit on it . they will give we plenty of heaven . we may have land there . that be the sort of religion they like a religion that give we workingmen heaven , and nothing else . but we will offer to change with they . we will give they back some of their heaven , and take it out in something for we and our child in this world . they do not   seem to care so much about heaven themselves till they feel the gout very bad ; but you will not   get they to give up anything else , if you do not   pinch them for it . and to pinch they enough , we must get the suffrage , we must get vote , that we may send the man to Parliament who will do our work for we ; and we must have Parliament dissolve every year , that we may change our man if he do not   do what we want he to do ; and we must have the country divide so that the little king of the county can not   do as they like , but must be shake up in one bag with we . I say , if we workingman be ever to get a man 's share , we must have universal suffrage , and annual Parliaments , and the vote by ballot , and electoral district . " 

 " no ! something else before all that , " say Felix , again startle the audience into look at he . but the speaker glance coldly at he and go on . 

 " that be what Sir Francis Burdett go in for fifteen year ago ; and it be the right thing for we , if it be Tomfool who go in for it . you must lay hold of such handle as you can . I do not   believe much in liberal aristocrat ; but if there be any fine carve gold - head stick of an aristocrat will make a broomstick of himself , I will lose no time but I will sweep with he . and that be what I think about Transome . and if any of you have acquaintance among county voter , give them a hint that you wish them to vote for Transome . " 

 at the last word , the speaker step down from his slight eminence , and walk away rapidly , like a man whose leisure be exhaust , and who must go about his business . but he have leave an appetite in his audience for further oratory , and one of they seem to express a general sentiment as he hurry immediately to Felix , and say , " come , sir , what do you say ? " 

  260 

 Felix do at once what he would very likely have do without be ask he step on the stone , and take off his cap by an instinctive prompting that always lead he to speak uncover . the effect of his figure in relief against the stone background be unlike that of the previous speaker . he be considerably tall , his head and neck be more massive , and the expression of his mouth and eye be something very different from the mere acuteness and rather hard - lipped antagonism of the trade - union man . Felix Holt 's face have the look of habitual meditative abstraction from object of mere personal vanity or desire , which be the peculiar stamp of culture , and make a very roughly - cut face worthy to be call " the human face divine . " even lion and dog know a distinction between man 's glance ; and doubtless those Duffield man , in the expectation with which they look up at Felix , be unconsciously influence by the grandeur of his full yet firm mouth , and the calm clearness of his gray eye , which be somehow unlike what they be accustom to see along with an old brown velveteen coat , and an absence of chin - propping . when he begin to speak , the contrast of voice be still strong than that of appearance . the man in the flannel shirt have not be hear have probably not care to be hear beyond the immediate group of listener . but Felix at once draw the attention of person comparatively at a distance . 

 " in my opinion , " he say , almost the moment after he be address , " that be a true word speak by your friend when he say the great question be how to give every man a man 's share in life . but I think he expect voting to do more toward it than I do . I want the workingmen to have power . I be a workingman myself , and I do not   want to be anything else . but there be two sort of power . there be a power to do mischief to undo what have be do with great expense and labor , to waste and destroy , to be cruel to the weak , to lie and quarrel , and to talk poisonous nonsense . that be the sort of power that ignorant number have . it never make a joint stool or plant a potato . do you think it be likely to do much toward govern a great country , and make wise law , and give shelter , food , and clothe to million of man ? ignorant power come in the end to the same thing as wicked power ; it make misery . it be another sort of power that I want we workingman to have , and I can see plainly enough that our all have vote will do little toward it at present . I hope we , or the child that come after we , will get plenty of political power some time . I tell everybody plainly , I hope there will be great change , and that some time , whether we 261   live to see it or not , man will have come to be ashamed of thing they be proud of now . but I should like to convince you that vote would never give you political power worth have while thing be as they be now , and that if you go the right way to work you may get power soon without vote . perhaps all you who hear I be sober man , who try to learn as much of the nature of thing as you can , and to be as little like fool as possible . a fool or idiot be one who expect thing to happen that never can happen ; he pour milk into a can without a bottom , and expect the milk to stay there . the more of such vain expectation a man have , the more he be a fool or idiot . and if any work man expect a vote to do for he what it never can do , he be foolish to that amount , if no more . I think that be clear enough , eh ? " 

 " hear , hear , " say several voice , but they be not those of the original group ; they belong to some stroller who have be attract by Felix Holt 's vibrate voice , and be Tories from the Crown . among they be Christian , who be smoke a cigar with a pleasure he always feel in be among people who do not know he , and doubtless take he to be something high than he really be . hearer from the Fox and Hounds also be slowly add themselves to the nucleus . Felix , accessible to the pleasure of be listen to , go on with more and more animation : " the way to get rid of folly be to get rid of vain expectation , and of thought that do not   agree with the nature of thing . the man who have have true thought about water , and what it will do when it be turn into steam and under all sort of circumstance , have make themselves a great power in the world : they be turn the wheel of engine that will help to change most thing . but no engine would have do , if there have be false notion about the way water would act . now , all the scheme about voting , and district , and annual Parliaments , and the rest , be engine , and the water or steam the force that be to work they must come out of human nature out of man 's passion , feeling , desire . whether the engine will do good work or bad depend on these feeling ; and if we have false expectation about man 's character , we be very much like the idiot who think he will carry milk in a can without a bottom . in my opinion , the notion about what mere voting will do are very much of that sort . " 

  262 

 " that be very fine , " say a man in dirty fustian , with a scornful laugh . " but how be we to get the power without vote ? " 

 " I will tell you what be the great power under heaven , " say Felix , " and that be public opinion the rule belief in society about what be right and what be wrong , what be honorable and what be shameful . that be the steam that be to work the engine . how can political freedom make we well , any more than a religion we do not   believe in , if people laugh and wink when they see man abuse and defile it ? and while public opinion be what it be while man have no well belief about public duty while corruption be not feel to be a damn disgrace while man be not ashamed in Parliament and out of it to make public question which concern the welfare of million a mere screen for their own petty private end , I say , no fresh scheme of voting will much mend our condition . for , take we workingmen of all sort . suppose out of every hundred who have a vote there be thirty who have some soberness , some sense to choose with , some good feeling to make they wish the right thing for all . and suppose there be seventy out of the hundred who be , half of they , not sober , who have no sense to choose one thing in politic more than another , and who have so little good feeling in they that they waste on their own drink the money that should have help to feed and clothe their wife and child ; and another half of they who , if they do not   drink , be too ignorant or stupid to see any good for themselves well than pocket a five - shilling piece when it be offer they . where would be the political power of the thirty sober man ? the power would lie with the seventy drunken and stupid vote ; and I will tell you what sort of man would get the power what sort of man would end by return whom they please to Parliament . " 

 Felix have see every face around he , and have particularly notice a recent addition to his audience ; but now he look about he , without appear to fix his glance on any one . in spite of his cool meditation an hour ago , his pulse be get quicken by indignation , and the desire to crush what he hat be likely to vent itself in articulation . his tone become more biting . 

 " they would be man who would undertake to do the business for a candidate , and return he : man who have no real opinion , but who pilfer the word of every opinion , and turn they into a ca not which will serve their purpose at the moment ; man who look out for dirty work to make their fortune by , because dirty work want little talent and no 263   conscience ; man who know all the in and out of bribery , because there be not a cranny in their own soul where a bribe can not   enter . such man as these will be the master wherever there be a majority of voter who care more for money , for drink , more for some mean little end which be their own and nobody else 's , than for anything that have ever be call right in the world . for suppose there be a poor voter name Jack , who have seven child , and twelve or fifteen shilling a - week wage , perhaps less . Jack can not   read I do not   say whose fault that be he never have the chance to learn ; he know so little that he perhaps think God make the poor - law , and if anybody say the pattern of the work - house be lay down in the Testament , he would not   be able to contradict they . what be poor Jack likely to do when he see a smart stranger come to he , who happen to be just one of these man that I say will be the master till public opinion get too hot for they ? he be a middle - sized man , we will say ; stout , with coat upon coat of fine broadcloth , open enough to show a fine gold chain : none of your dark , scowl man , but one with an innocent pink - and - white skin and very smooth light hair a most respectable man , who call himself a good , sound , well - know english name as Green , or Baker , or Wilson , or let we say , Johnson " 

 Felix be interrupt by an explosion of laughter from a majority of the bystander . some eye have be turn on Johnson , who stand on the right hand of Felix , at the very beginning of the description , and these be gradually follow by other , till at last every hearer 's attention be fix on he , and the first burst of laughter from the two or three who know the attorney 's name , let every one sufficiently into the secret to make the amusement common . Johnson , who have keep his ground till his name be mention , now turn away , look unusually white after be unusually red , and feeling by an attorney 's instinct for his pocket - book , as if he feel it be a case for take down the name of witness . 

 all the well - dress hearer turn away too , think they have have the cream of the speech in the joke against Johnson , which , as a thing worth tell , help to recall they to the scene of dinner . 

 " who be this Johnson ? " say Christian to a young man who have be stand near he , and have be one of the first to laugh . Christian 's curiosity have naturally be awaken by what might prove a golden opportunity . 

  264 

 " oh a London attorney . he act for Transome . that tremendous fellow at the corner there be some red - hot radical demagogue , and Johnson have offend he , I suppose ; else he would not   have turn in that way on a man of their own party . " 

 " I have hear there be a Johnson who be an understrapper of Jermyn 's , " say Christian . 

 " well , so this man may have be for what I know . but he be a London man now a very busy fellow on his own leg in Bedford Row . ha , ha ! it be capital , though , when these liberal get a slap in the face from the workingmen they be so very fond of . " 

 another turn along the street enable Christian to come to a resolution . have see Jermyn drive away an hour before , he be in no fear : he walk at once to the Fox and Hounds and ask to speak to Mr. Johnson . a brief interview , in which Christian ascertain that he have before he the Johnson mention by the bill - sticker , issue in the appointment of a long one at a later hour ; and before they leave Duffield they have come not exactly to a mutual understanding , but to an exchange of information mutually welcome . 

 Christian have be very cautious in the commencement , only intimate that he know something important which some chance hint have induce he to think might be interesting to Mr. Johnson , but that this entirely depend on how far he have a common interest with Mr. Jermyn . Johnson reply that he have much business in which that gentleman be not concern , but that to a certain extent they have a common interest . probably then , Christian observe , the affair of the Transome estate be part of the business in which Mr. Jermyn and Mr. Johnson might be understand to represent each other , in which case he need not detain Mr. Johnson ? at this hint Johnson could not conceal that he be become eager . he have no idea what Christian 's information be , but there be many ground on which Johnson desire to know as much as he could about the Transome affair independently of Jermyn . by little and little an understanding be arrive at . Christian tell of his interview with Tommy Trounsem , and state that if Johnson could show he whether the knowledge could have any legal value , he could bring evidence that a legitimate child of Bycliffe 's exist : he feel certain of his fact , and of his proof . Johnson explain , that in this case the death of the old bill - sticker would give the child the first valid claim to the 265   Bycliffe heirship ; that for his own part he should be glad to further a true claim , but that caution would have to be observe . how do Christian know that Jermyn , be inform on this subject ? christian , more and more convinced that Johnson would be glad to counteract Jermyn at length become explicit about Esther , but still withhold his own real name , and the nature of his relation with Bycliffe . he say he would bring the rest of his information when Mr. Johnson take the case up seriously , and place it in the hand of Bycliffe 's old lawyer of course he would do that ? Johnson reply that he would certainly do that ; but that there be legal nicety which Mr. Christian be probably not acquaint with ; that Esther 's claim have not yet accrue , and that hurry be useless . 

 the two man part , each in distrust of the other , but each well please to have learn something . Johnson be not at all sure how he should act , but think it likely that event would soon guide he . Christian be begin to meditate a way of secure his own end without depend in the least on Johnson 's procedure . it be enough for he that he be now assure of Esther 's legal claim on the Transome estate . 

 CHAPTER XXXI . 

 " in the copia of the factious language the word Tory be entertain , and be a vocal clever - sound word , readily pronounce , it keep its hold , and take possession of the foul mouth of the faction . the Loyalists begin to cheer up and to take heart of grace , and in the working of this crisis , accord to the common law of scold , they consider which way to make payment for so much of Tory as they have be treat with to clear score . immediately the train take , and run like wildfire and become general . and so the account of Tory be balance , and soon begin to run up a sharp score on the other side . " North 's Examen , p. 321 . 

 at last the great epoch of the election for North Loamshire have arrive . the road approach Treby be early traverse by a large number of vehicle , horseman , and also foot - passenger than be ever see at the annual fair . Treby be the polling - place for many voter whose face be quite strange in the town ; and if there be some stranger who do not come to poll , though they have business not unconnected with the election , they be not liable to be regard with suspicion or especial curiosity . it be understand that no division of a county have ever be more thoroughly canvass , and that there would be a hard run between Garstin and Transome . Mr. Johnson 's headquarters be at Duffield ; but it be a maxim which he repeat after the great Putty , that a capable agent make himself omnipresent ; and quite apart from the express between he and Jermyn , Mr. John Johnson 's presence in the universe 266   have potent effect on this December day at Treby Magna . 

 a slight drizzling rain which be observe by some Tories who look out of their bedroom window before six o'clock , make they hope that , after all , the day might pass off well than alarmist have expect . the rain be feel to be somehow on the side of quiet and Conservatism ; but soon the breaking of the cloud and the mild gleam of a December sun bring back previous apprehension . as there be already precedent for riot at a Reformed election , and as the Trebian district have have its confidence in the natural course of thing somewhat shake by a land proprietor with an old name offer himself as a radical candidate , the election have be look forward to by many with a vague sense that it would be an occasion something like a fighting match , when bad character would probably assemble , and there might be struggle and alarm for respectable man , which would make it expedient for they to take a little neat brandy as a precaution beforehand and a restorative afterward . the tenant on the Transome estate be comparatively fearless : poor Mr. Goffe , of Rabbit 's end , consider that " one thing be as maul as the other , " and that an election be no bad than the sheep - rot ; while Mr. Dibbs , take the more cheerful view of a prosperous man , reflect that if the Radicals be dangerous , it be safe to be on their side . it be the voter for Debarry and Garstin who consider that they alone have the right to regard themselves as target for evil - minded man ; and Mr. Crowder , if he could have get his idea countenance , would have recommend a muster of farm - servant with defensive pitchfork on the side of church and king . but the bold man be rather gratify by the prospect of be groan at , so that they might face about and groan in return . 

 Mr. Crow , the high constable of Treby , inwardly rehearse a brief address to a riotous crowd in case it should be want , have be warn by the rector that it be a primary duty on these occasion to keep a watch against provocation as well as violence . the rector , with a brother magistrate who be on the spot , have think it desirable to swear in some special constable , but the presence of loyal man not absolutely require for the polling be not look at in the light of a provocation . the Benefit Clubs from various quarter make a show , some with the orange - color ribbon and streamer of the true Tory candidate , some with the mazarine of the Whig . the orange - color 267   band play " Auld Lang Syne , " and a loud mazarine band come across they with " oh , whistle and I will come to thee , my lad " probably as the tune the most symbolical of Liberalism which their repertory would furnish . there be not a single club bear the radical blue : the Sproxton Club member wear the mazarine , and Mr. Chubb wear so much of it that he look   at a sufficient distance   like a very large gentianella . it be generally understand that " these brave fellow , " represent the fine institution of Benefit Clubs , hold aloft the motto , " let brotherly love continue , " be a civil force calculate to encourage voter of sound opinion and keep up their spirit . but a considerable number of unadorned heavy navvy , collier , and stone - pit man , who use their freedom as british subject to be present in Treby on this great occasion , look like a possible uncivil force whose politic be dubious until it be clearly see for whom they cheer and for whom they groan . 

 thus the way up to the polling - booth be variously line , and those who walk it , to whatever side they belong , have the advantage of hear from the opposite side what be the most marked defect or excess in their personal appearance ; for the Trebians of that day hold , without be aware that they have Cicero 's authority for it , that the bodily blemish of an opponent be a legitimate ground for ridicule ; but if the voter frustrate wit by be handsome , he be groan at and satirize accord to a formula , in which the adjective be Tory , Whig , or Radical , as the case might be , and the substantive a blank to be fill up after the taste of the speaker . 

 some of the more timid have choose to go through this ordeal as early as possible in the morning . one of the early be Mr. Timothy Rose , the gentleman - farmer from Leek Malton . he have leave home with some foreboding , have swathe his more vital part in layer of flannel , and put on two greatcoat as a soft kind of armor . but reflect with some trepidation that there be no resource for protect his head , he once more waver in his intention to vote ; he once more observed to Mrs. Rose that these be hard time when a man of independent property be expect to vote " willy - nilly ; " but finally coerce by the sense that he should be look ill on " in these time " if he do not stand by the gentleman round about , he set out in his gig , take with he a powerful wagoner , whom he order to keep he in sight as he go to 268   the polling - booth . it be hardly more than nine o'clock when Mr. Rose , have thus come up to the level of his time , cheer himself with a little cherry - brandy at the Marquis , drive away in a much more courageous spirit , and get down at Mr. Nolan 's , just outside the town . the retired Londoner , he consider , be a man of experience , who would estimate properly the judicious course he have take , and could make it know to other . Mr. Nolan be superintend the removal of some shrub in his garden . 

 " well , Mr. Nolan , " say Rose , twinkle a self - complacent look over the red prominence of his cheek , " have you be to give your vote yet ? " 

 " no ; all in good time . I shall go presently . " 

 " well , I would not   lose an hour , I would not . I say to myself , if I have   get to do gentleman a favor , I will do it at once . you see , I have   get no landlord , Nolan I be in that position o ' life that I can be independent . " 

 " just so , my dear sir , " say the wiry - faced Nolan , pinch his under - lip between his thumb and finger , and give one of those wonderful universal shrug , by which he seem to be recall all his garment from a tendency to disperse themselves . " come in and see Mrs. Nolan ? " 

 " no , no , thankye . Mrs. Rose expect I back . but , as I be say , I be a independent man , and I consider it be not my part to show favor to one more than another , but to make thing as even as I can . if I have be a tenant to anybody , well , in course I must have vote for my landlord that stand to sense . but I wish everybody well ; and if one be return to Parliament more than another , nobody can say it be my doing ; for when you can vote for two , you can make thing even . so I give one to Debarry and one to Transome ; and I wish Garstin no ill , but I can not   help the odd number , and he hang on to Debarry , they say . " 

 " God bless I , sir , " say Mr. Nolan , cough down a laugh , " do not   you perceive that you might as well have stay at home and not vote at all , unless you would rather send a Radical to Parliament than a sober Whig ? " 

 " well , I be sorry you should have anything to say against what I have   do , Nolan , " say Mr. Rose , rather crestfallen , though sustain by inward warmth . " I think you would agree with I , as you be a sensible man . but the most a independent man can do be to try and please all ; and if he have not   the luck here be wish I may do it another time , " add Mr. Rose , apparently confound a toast with a salutation , for he put out 269   his hand for a pass shake , and then step into his gig again . 

 at the time that Mr. Timothy Rose leave the town , the crowd in King Street and in the market - place , where the polling - booth stand , be fluctuate . voter as yet be scanty , and brave fellow who have come from any distance this morning , or who have sit up late drink the night before , require some reinforcement of their strength and spirit . every public house in Treby , not except the venerable and sombre Cross - Keys , be lively with change and numerous company . not , of course , that there be any treating : treat necessarily have stop , from moral scruple , when once " the wit be out ; " but there be drinking , which do equally well under any name . 

 Poor Tommy Trounsem , breakfast here on Falstaff 's proportion of bread , and something which , for gentility 's sake , I will call sack , be more than usually victorious over the ill of life , and feel himself one of the hero of the day . he have an immense light - blue cockade in his hat , and an amount of silver in a dirty little canvas bag which astonish himself . for some reason , at first inscrutable to he , he have be pay for his bill - stick with great liberality at Mr. Jermyn 's office , in spite of his have be the victim of a trick by which he have once lose his own bill and paste up Debarry 's ; but he soon see that this be simply a recognition of his merit as " an old family keep out of its right , " and also of his peculiar share in an occasion when the family be to get into Parliament . under these circumstance , it be due from he that he should show himself prominently where business be go forward , and give additional value by his presence to every vote for Transome . with this view he get a half - pint bottle fill with his peculiar kind of ' sack , " and hasten back to the market - place , feel good - natured and patronize toward all political party , and only so far partial as his family bind he to be . 

 but a disposition to concentrate at that extremity of King Street which issue in the market - place , be not universal among the increase crowd . some of they seem attract toward another nucleus at the other extremity of King Street , near the Seven Stars . this be Garstin 's chief house , where his committee sit , and it be also a point which must necessarily be pass by many voter enter the town on the eastern side . it seem natural that the mazarine color should be visible 270   here , and that Pack , the tall ' shepherd " of the Sproxton man , should be see move to and fro where there would be a frequent opportunity of cheer the voter for a gentleman who have the chief share in the Sproxton mine . but the side lane and entry out of King Street be numerous enough to relieve any pressure if there be need to make way . the lane have a distinguished reputation . two of they have odor of brewing ; one have a side entrance to Mr. Tiliot 's wine and spirit vault ; up another Mr. Muscat 's cheese be frequently be unload ; and even some of the entry have those cheerful suggestion of plentiful provision which be among the characteristic of Treby . 

 between ten and eleven the voter come in more rapid succession , and the whole scene become spirited . cheer , sarcasm , and oath , which seem to have a flavor of wit for many hearer , be begin to be reinforce by more practical demonstration , dubiously jocose . there be a disposition in the crowd to close and hem in the way for voter , either go or come , until they have pay some kind of toll . it be difficult to see who set the example in the transition from word to deed . some think it be due to Jacob Cuff , a Tory charity - man , who be a well - know ornament of the pothouse , and give his mind much leisure for amusing device ; but question of origination in stir period be notoriously hard to settle . it be by no mean necessary in human thing that there should be only one beginner . this , however , be certain that Mr. Chubb , who wish it to be notice that he vote for Garstin solely , be one of the first to get rather more notice than he wish , and that he have his hat knock off and crush in the interest of Debarry by Tories oppose to coalition . on the other hand , some say it be at the same time that Mr. Pink , the saddler , be stop on his way and make to declare that he be go to vote for debarry , get himself well chalk as to his coat , and push up an entry , where he remain the prisoner of terror combine with the want of any back outlet , and never give his vote that day . 

 the second Tory joke be perform with much gusto . the majority of the Transome tenant come in a body from the Ram Inn , with Mr. Banks , the bailiff , lead they . Poor Goffe be the last of they , and his worn melancholy look and forward - lean gait give the jocose Cuff the notion that the farmer be not what he call " compus . " Mr. Goffe be cut off from his companion and hem in : ask , by voice with hot breath 271   close to his ear , how many horse he have , how many cow , how many fat pig ; then jostle from one to another , who make trumpet with their hand , and deafen he by tell he to vote for Debarry . in this way the melancholy Goffe be hustle on till he be at the polling - booth , fill with confused alarm , the immediate alarm be that of have to go back in still bad fashion than he have come . arrive in this way after the other tenant have leave , he astonish all hearer who know he for a tenant of the Transomes by say " debarry , " and be jostle back trembling amid shout of laughter . 

 by stage of this kind the fun grow fast , and be in danger of get rather serious . the Tories begin to feel that their joke be return by other of a heavy sort , and that the main strength of the crowd be not on the side of sound opinion , but might come to be on the side of sound cudgel and kicking . the navvy and pitman in dishabille seem to be multiply , and to be clearly not belong to the party of Order . the shop be freely resort to for various form of playful missile and weapon ; and news come to the magistrate , watch from the large window of the Marquis , that a gentleman come in on horseback at the other end of the street to vote for Garstin have have his horse turn round and frighten into a headlong gallop out of it again . 

 Mr. Crow and his subordinate , and all the special constable , feel that it be necessary to make some energetic effort , or else every voter would be intimidate and the poll must be adjourn . the rector determine to get on horseback and go amidst the crowd with the constable ; and he send a message to Mr. Lingon , who be at the Ram , call on he to do the same . " Sporting Jack " be sure the good fellow mean no harm , but he be courageous enough to face any bodily danger , and ride out in his brown legging and colored bandana , speak persuasively . 

 it be nearly twelve o'clock when this sally be make : the constable and magistrate try the most pacific measure , and they seem to succeed . there be a rapid thinning of the crowd : the most boisterous disappear , or seem to do so by become quiet ; missile cease to fly , and a sufficient way be clear for voter along King Street . the magistrate return to their quarter , and the constable take convenient post of observation . Mr. Wace , who be one of Debarry 's committee , have suggest to the rector that it might be wise to send 272   for the military from Duffield , with order that they should station themselves at Hathercote , three mile off : there be so much property in the town that it would be well to make it secure against risk . but the rector feel that this be not the part of a moderate and wise magistrate , unless the sign of riot recur . he be a brave man , and fond of think that his own authority suffice for the maintenance of the general good in Treby . 

 CHAPTER XXXII . 

 go from I . yet I feel that I shall stand 
 Henceforward in thy shadow . nevermore 
 alone upon the threshold of my door 
 of individual life . I shall command 
 the us of my soul , nor lift my hand 
 Serenely in the sunshine as before 
 without the sense of that which I forbear 
 Thy touch upon the palm . the wide land 
 Doom take to part we , leave thy heart in mine 
 with pulse that beat double . what I do 
 and what I dream include thee , as the wine 
 must taste of its own grape . and when I sue 
 God for myself , he hear that name of thine , 
 and see within my eye the tear of two . 
  Mrs. Browning . 
 Felix Holt , seat at his work without his pupil , who have ask for a holiday with a notion that the wooden booth promise some sort of show , notice about eleven o'clock that the noise which reach he from the main street be get more and more tumultuous . he have long see bad augury for this election , but , like all people who dread the prophetic wisdom that end in desire the fulfillment of its own evil foreboding , he have check himself with remember that , though many condition be possible which might bring on violence , there be just as many which might avert it . there would , perhaps , be no other mischief than what he be already certain of . with these thought he sit down quietly to his work , mean not to vex his soul by go to look on at thing he would fain have make different if he could . but he be of a fiber that vibrate too strongly to the life around he to shut himself away in quiet , even from suffer and irremediable wrong . as the noise grow louder , and work more and more strongly on his imagination , he be oblige to lay down his delicate wheel - work . his mother come from her turnip - paring , in the kitchen , where little Job be her companion , to observe that they must be kill everybody in the High Street , and that the election , which have never be before at Treby , must have come for a judgment ; that there be mercy where you do not   look for 273   they , and that she thank God in his wisdom for make she live up a back street . 

 Felix snatch his cap and rush out . but when he get to the turning into the market - place the magistrate be already on horseback there , the constable be move about , and Felix observe that there be no strong spirit of resistance to they . he stay long enough to see the partial dispersion of the crowd and the restoration of tolerable quiet , and then go back to Mrs. Holt to tell she that there be nothing to fear now ; he be go out again , and she must not be in any anxiety at his absence . she might set by his dinner for he . 

 Felix have be think of Esther and her probable alarm at the noise that must have reach she more distinctly than they have reach he , for Malthouse Yard be remove but a little way from the main street . Mr. Lyon be away from home , have be call to preach charity sermon and attend meeting in a distant town ; and Esther , with the plaintive Lyddy for her sole companion , be not cheerfully circumstanced . Felix have not be to see she yet since her father 's departure , but to - day he give way to new reason . 

 " Miss Esther be in the garret , " Lyddy say , try to see what be go on . but before she be fetched she come run down the stair , draw by the knock at the door , which have shake the small dwelling . 

 " I be so thankful to see you , " she say , eagerly . " pray come in . " 

 when she have shut the parlor door behind they , Felix say , " I suspect that you might have be make anxious by the noise . I come to tell you that thing be quiet now . though , indeed , you can hear that they be . " 

 " I be frightened , " say Esther . " the shouting and roaring of rude man be so hideous . it be a relief to I that my father be not at home that he be out of the reach of any danger he might have fall into if he have be here . but I give you credit for be in the midst of the danger , " she add , smile , with a determination not to show much feeling . " sit down and tell I what have happen . " 

 they sit down at the extremity of the old black sofa , and Felix say 

 " to tell you the truth , I have shut myself up , and try to be as indifferent to the election as if I have be one of the fish in the Lapp , till the noise get too strong for I . but I only see the tail end of the disturbance . the poor noisy simpleton seem to give way before the magistrate and the constable . I hope nobody have be much hurt . 274   the fear be that they may turn out again by - and - by ; their give way so soon may not be altogether a good sign . there be a great number of heavy fellow in the town . if they go and drink more , the last end may be bad than the first . however " 

 Felix break off , as if this talk be futile , clasp his hand behind his head , and , lean backward , look at Esther , who be look at he . 

 " may I stay here a little while ? " he say , after a moment , which seem long . 

 " pray do , " say Esther , color . to relieve herself she take some work and bow her head over her stitch . it be in reality a little heaven to she that Felix be there , but she see beyond it see that by - and - by he would be go , and that they should be far on their way , not toward meeting , but parting . his will be impregnable . he be a rock , and she be no more to he than the white cling mist - cloud . 

 " I wish I could be sure that you see thing just as I do , " he say abruptly , after a minute 's silence . 

 " I be sure you see they much more wisely than I do ! " say Esther , almost bitterly , without look up . 

 " there be some people one must wish to judge truly . not to wish it would be mere hardness . I know you think I be a man without feel at least , without strong affection . you think I love nothing but my own resolution . " 

 " suppose I reply in the same sort of strain ? " say Esther , with a little toss of the head . 

 " how ? " 

 " why , that you think I a shallow woman , incapable of believe what be good in you , set down everything that be too high for I as a deficiency . " 

 " do not   parry what I say . answer I . " there be an expression of painful beseech in the tone with which Felix say this . Esther let she work fall on her lap and look at he , but she be unable to speak . 

 " I want you to tell I once that you know it would be easy to I to give myself up to love and be love , as other man do , when they can , than to " 

 this breaking - off in speech be something quite new in Felix . for the first time he have lose his self - possession , and turn his eye away . he be at variance with himself . he have begin what he feel he ought not to finish . 

 Esther , like a woman as she be a woman wait for love , never able to ask for it have her joy in these sign of her power ; but they 275   make her generous , not chary , as they might have do if she have have a pettier disposition . she say , with deep yet timid earnestness 

 " what you have choose to do have only convince I that your love would be the well worth have . " 

 all the fine part of Esther 's nature tremble in those word . to be right in great memorable moment be perhaps the thing we need most desire for ourselves . 

 Felix as quick as lightning turn his look upon she again , and , lean forward , take her sweet hand and hold it to his lip some moment before he let it fall again and raise his head . 

 " we shall always be the well for thinking of each other , " he say , lean his elbow on the back of the sofa , and support his head as he look at she with calm sadness . " this thing can never come to I twice over . it be my knighthood . that be always a business of great cost . " 

 he smile at she , but she sit bite her inner lip and press her hand together . she desire to be worthy of what she reverence in Felix , but the inevitable renunciation be too difficult . she see herself wander through the future weak and forsake . the charming sauciness be all go from her face , but the memory of it make this childlike dependent sorrow all the more touching . 

 " tell I what you would " Felix burst out , lean near to she ; but the next instant he start up , go to the table , take his cap in his hand and come in front of she . 

 " good - bye , " he say , very gently , not dare to put out his hand . but Esther put up hers instead of speak . he just press it and then go away . 

 she hear the door close behind he , and feel free to be miserable . she cry bitterly . if she might have marry Felix Holt , she could have be a good woman . she feel no trust that she could ever be good without he . 

 Felix reproach himself . he would have do well not to speak in that way . but the prompting to which he have chiefly listen have be the desire to prove to Esther that he set a high value on her feeling . he could not help see that he be very important to she ; and he be too simple and sincere a man to ape a sort of humility which would not have make he any the well if he have possess it . such pretence turn our life into sorry drama . and Felix wish Esther to know that her love be dear to he as the beloved dead be dear . he feel that they must 276   not marry that they would ruin each other 's life . but he have long for she to know fully that his will to be always apart from she be renunciation , not an easy preference . in this he be thoroughly generous ; and yet , now some subtle , mysterious conjuncture of impression and circumstance have make he speak , he question the wisdom of what he have do . express confession give definiteness to memory that might more easily melt away without ; and Felix feel for Esther 's pain as the strong soldier , who can march on hungering without fear that he shall faint , feel for the young brother the maiden - cheek conscript whose load be too heavy for he . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 Mischief , thou art afoot . Julius Casar . 

 Felix could not go home again immediately after quit Esther . he get out of the town , skirt it a little while , look across the December stillness of the field , and then re - enter it by the main road into the market - place , think that , after all , it would be well for he to look at the busy doing of man than to listen in solitude to the voice within he ; and he wish to know how thing be go on . 

 it be now nearly half - past one , and Felix perceive that the street be fill with more than the previous crowd . by the time he get in front of the booth , he be himself so surround by man who be be thrust hither and thither that retreat would have be impossible ; and he go where he be oblige to go , although his height and strength be above the average even in a crowd where there be so many heavy - armed workman use to the pickaxe . almost all shabby - coat Trebians must have be there , but the entry and back street of the town do not supply the mass of the crowd ; and besides the rural incomer , both of the more decent and the rougher sort , Felix , as he be push along , think he discern here and there man of that keener aspect which be only common in manufacturing town . 

 but at present there be no evidence of any distinctly mischievous design . there be only evidence that the majority of the crowd be excited with drink , and that their action could hardly be calculate on more than those of the oxen and pig congregate amidst hooting and pushing . the confused deafening shout , the incidental fighting , the knock over , pull and scuffling , seem to increase every moment . 277   such of the constable as be mix with the crowd be quite helpless ; and if an official staff be see above the head , it move about fitfully , show as little sign of a guide hand as the summit of a buoy on the wave . doubtless many hurt and bruise have be receive , but no one could know the amount of injury that be widely scatter . 

 it be clear that no more voting could be do , and the poll have be adjourn . the probability of serious mischief have grow strong enough to prevail over the rector 's objection to get military aid within reach ; and when Felix re - enter the town , a galloping messenger have already be dispatch to Duffield . the rector wish to ride out again , and read the Riot Act from a point where he could be well hear than from the window of the Marquis ; but Mr. Crow , the high constable , who have return from close observation , insist that the risk would be too great . new special constable have be swear in , but Mr. Crow say prophetically that if once mischief begin , the mob be past care for constable . 

 but the rector 's voice be ring and penetrate , and when he appear on the narrow balcony and read the formula , command all man to go to their home or about their lawful business , there be a strong transient effect . every one within hear listen , and for a few moment after the final word , " God save the king ! " the comparative silence continue . then the people begin to move , the buzz rise again , and grow , and grow , till it turn to shout and roar as before . the movement be that of a flood hem in ; it carry nobody away . whether the crowd would obey the order to disperse themselves within an hour , be a doubt that approach near to a negative certainty . 

 presently Mr. Crow , who call himself a tactician , take a well - intentione step , which go far to fulfill his own prophecy . he have arrive with the magistrate by a back way at the Seven Stars , and here again the Riot Act be read from a window , with much the same result as before . the rector have return by the same way to the Marquis , as the headquarters most suited for administration , but Mr. Crow remain at the other extremity of King Street , where some awe - strike presence be certainly need . see that the time be pass , and all effect from the voice of law have disappear , he show himself at an upper window , and address the crowd , tell they that the soldier have be send for , and that if they do not disperse they would have cavalry upon they instead of constable . 

  278 

 Mr. Crow , like some other high constable more celebrated in history , " enjoy a bad reputation " ; that be to say , he enjoy many thing which cause his reputation to be bad , and he be anything but popular in Treby . it be probable that a pleasant message would have lose something from his lip , and what he actually say be so unpleasant that , instead of persuade the crowd , it appear to enrage they . some one , snatch a raw potato from a sack in the green - grocer 's shop behind he , throw it at the constable , and hit he on the mouth . Straightway raw potato and turnip be fly by twenty at the window of the Seven Stars , and the pane be smash . Felix , who be half - way up the street , hear the voice turn to a savage roar , and see a rush toward the hardware shop , which furnish more effective weapon and missile than turnip and potato . then a cry run along that the Tories have send for the soldier , and if those among the mob who call themselves Tories as willingly as anything else be disposed to take whatever call itself the Tory side , they only help the main result of reckless disorder . 

 but there be proof that the predominant will of the crowd be against " Debarry 's man , " and in favor of Transome . several shop be invade , and they be all of they " tory shop . " the tradesman who could do so now lock their door and barricade their window within . there be a panic among the householder of this hitherto peaceful town , and a general anxiety for the military to arrive . the rector be in painful anxiety on this head ; he have send out two messenger as secretly as he could toward Hathercote , to order the soldier to ride straight to the town ; but he fear that these messenger have be somehow intercept . 

 it be three o'clock ; more than an hour have elapse since the reading of the Riot Act . the rector of Treby Magna write an indignant message and send it to the ram , to Mr. Lingon , the rector of Little Treby , say that there be evidently a radical animus in the mob , and that Mr. Transome 's party should hold themselves peculiarly responsible . where be Mr. Jermyn ? 

 Mr. Lingon reply that he be go himself out toward Duffield to see after the soldier . as for Jermyn , he be not that attorney 's sponsor ; he believe that Jermyn be go away somewhere on business to fetch voter . 

 a serious effort be now be make by all the civil force at command . the December day would soon be pass into evening , and all disorder would be aggravate by obscurity . the horror of fire be as likely 279   to happen as any minor evil . the constable , as many of they as could do so , arm themselves with carbine and sabre ; all the respectable inhabitant who have any courage , prepare themselves to struggle for order ; and many feel with Mr. Wace and Mr. Tiliot that the near duty be to defend the brewery and the spirit and wine vault , where the property be of a sort at once most likely to be threaten and most dangerous in its effect . the rector , with fine determination , get on horseback again , as the good mode of lead the constable , who could only act efficiently in a close body . by his direction the column of armed man avoid the main street , and make their way along a back road , that they might occupy the two chief lane lead into the wine - vault of the brewery , and bear down on the crowd from these opening , which it be especially desirable to guard . 

 meanwhile Felix Holt have be hotly occupy in King Street . after the first window - smashing at the Seven Stars , there be a sufficient reason for damage that inn to the utmost . the destructive spirit tend toward completeness ; and any object once maim or otherwise injure , be as readily doom by unreasone man as by unreasone boy . also the Seven Stars shelter Spratt ; and to some Sproxton man in front of that inn it be exasperate that Spratt should be safe and sound on a day when blow be go , and justice might be render . and again , there be the general desirableness of be inside a public house . 

 Felix have at last be willingly urge on to this spot . Hitherto sway by the crowd , he have be able to do nothing but defend himself and keep on his leg ; but he foresee that the people would burst into the inn ; he hear cry of " Spratt ! " " fetch he out ! " " we will pitch he out ! " " Pummel he ! " it be not unlikely that life might be sacrifice ; and it be intolerable to Felix to be witness the blind outrage of this mad crowd , and yet be do nothing to counteract they . even some vain effort would satisfy he well than mere gazing . within the wall of the inn he might save some one . he go in with a miscellaneous set , who disperse themselves with different object some to the tap - room , and to search for the cellar : some up - stair to search in all the room for Spratt , or any one else , perhaps , as a temporary scapegoat for Spratt . guide by the scream of woman , Felix at last get to a high up - stair passage , where the landlady and some of her servant be run away in helpless terror from two or three half - tipsy man , who have be 280   empty a spirit decanter in the bar . assume the tone of a mob - leader he cry out , " here , boy , here be well fun this way come with I ! " and draw the man back with he along the passage . they reach the low staircase in time to see the unhappy Spratt be drag , coatless and screaming , down the step . no one at present be strike or kick he ; it seem as if he be be reserve for punishment on some wide area , where the satisfaction might be more generally share . Felix follow close , determined , if he could , to rescue both assailer and assault from the bad consequence . his mind be busy with possible device . 

 down the stair , out along the stone through the gateway , Spratt be drag as a mere heap of linen and cloth rag . when he be get outside the gateway , there be an immense hoot and roar , though many there have no grudge against he , and only guess that other have the grudge . but this be the narrow part of the street ; it widen as it go onward , and Spratt be drag on , his enemy cry , " we will make a ring we will see how frightened he look ! " 

 " kick he , and have do with he , " Felix hear another say . " let us go to Tiliot 's vault there be more gin there ! " 

 here be two hideous threat . in drag Spratt onward the people be get very near to the lane lead up to Tiliot 's . Felix keep as close as he could to the threaten victim . he have throw away his own stick , and carry a bludgeon which have escape from the hand of an invader at the Seven Stars ; his head be bare ; he look , to undiscerne eye , like a lead spirit of the mob . in this condition he be observe by several person look anxiously from their upper window , and finally observe to push himself , by violent effort , close behind the dragged man . 

 meanwhile , the foremost among the constable , who , come by the back way , have now reach the opening of Tiliot 's lane , discern that the crowd have a victim amongst they . one spirited fellow , name Tucker , who be a regular constable , feel that no time be to be lose in meditation , call on his neighbor to follow he , and with a sabre that happen to be his weapon , get away for himself where he be not expect , by dint of quick resolution . at this moment Spratt have be let go have be drop , in fact , almost lifeless with terror , on the street stone , and the man round he have retreat for a little space , as if to amuse themselves with look at he . Felix have take his opportunity ; and see the first step toward a plan he be bent on , 281   he spring forward close to the cower Spratt . as he do this , Tucker have cut his way to the spot , and imagine Felix to be the destine executioner of Spratt for any discrimination of Tucker 's lie in his muscle rather than his eye he rush up to Felix , mean to collar he and throw he down . but Felix have rapid sens and quick thought ; he discern the situation ; he choose between two evil . quick as lightning he frustrate the constable , fall upon he , and try to master his weapon . in the struggle , which be watch without interference , the constable fall undermost , and Felix get his weapon . he start up with the bare sabre in his hand . the crowd round he cry " Hurray ! " with a sense that he be on their side against the constable . Tucker do not rise immediately ; but Felix do not imagine that he be much hurt . 

 " do not   touch he ! " say Felix . " let he go . here , bring Spratt , and follow I . " 

 Felix be perfectly conscious that he be in the midst of a tangled business . but he have chiefly before his imagination the horror that might come if the mass of wild chaotic desire and impulse around he be not divert from any further attack on place where they would get in the midst of intoxicating and inflammable material . it be not a moment in which a spirit like his could calculate the effect of misunderstanding as to himself : nature never make man who be at once energetically sympathetic and minutely calculate . he believe he have the power and be resolve to try , to carry the dangerous mass out of mischief till the military come to awe they which he suppose , from Mr. Crow 's announcement a long time ago , must be a near event . 

 he be follow the more willingly , because Tiliot 's lane be see by the hindmost to be now defend by constable , some of whom have firearm ; and where there be no strong counter - movement , any proposition to do something that be unspecified stimulate stupid curiosity . to many of the Sproxton man who be within sight of he , Felix be know personally , and vaguely believe to be a man who mean many queer thing , not at all of an everyday kind . press along like a leader , with the sabre in his hand , and invite they to bring on Spratt , there seem a well reason for follow he than for do anything else . a man with a definite will and an energetic personality act as a sort of flag to draw and bind together the foolish unit of a mob . it be on 282   this sort of influence over man whose mental state be a mere medley of appetite and confused impression , that Felix have dare to count . he hurry they along with word of invitation , tell they to hold up Spratt and not drag he ; and those behind follow he , with a grow belief that he have some design worth know , while those in front be urge along partly by the same notion , partly by the sense that there be a motive in those behind they , not know what the motive be . it be that mixture of push forward and be push forward , which be a brief history of most human thing . 

 what Felix really intend to do , be to get the crowd by the near way out of the town , and induce they to skirt it on the north side with he , keep up in they the idea that he be lead they to execute some stratagem , by which they would surprise something worth attack , and circumvent the constable who be defend the lane . in the meantime he trust that the soldier would have arrive , and with this sort of mob which be animate by no real political passion or fury against social distinction , it be in the high degree unlikely that there would be any resistance to a military force . the presence of fifty soldier would probably be enough to scatter the rioting hundred . how numerous the mob be , no one ever know : many inhabitant afterward be ready to swear that there must have be at least two thousand rioter . Felix know he be incur great risk ; but " his blood be up " ; we hardly allow enough in common life for the result of that enkindle passionate enthusiasm which , under other condition , make world - famous deed . 

 he be make for a point where the street branch off on one side toward a speedy opening between hedgerow , on the other toward the shabby wideness of Pollard 's end . at this forking of the street there be a large space , in the centre of which there be a small stone platform , mount by three step , with an old green finger - post upon it . Felix go straight to this platform and step upon it , cry " Halt ! " in a loud voice to the man behind and before he , and call to those who hold Spratt to bring he there . all come to a stand with face toward the finger - post , and perhaps for the first time the extremity of the crowd get a definite idea that a man with a sabre in his hand be take the command . 

 " now ! " say Felix , when Spratt have be bring to the stone platform , faint and trembling , " have anybody get cord ? if not , handkerchief knot fast ; give they to I . " 

  283 

 he draw out his own handkerchief , and two or three other be muster and hand to he . he order they to be knot together , while curious eye be fix on he . be he go to have Spratt hang ? Felix keep fast hold of his weapon , and order other to act . 

 " now , put it round his waist , wind his arm in , draw they a little backward so ! and tie it fast on the other side of the post . " 

 when that be do , Felix say , imperatively : 

 " leave he there we shall come back to he ; let we make haste ; march along , lad ! up Park Street and down Hobb 's Lane . " 

 it be the good chance he could think of for save Spratt 's life . and he succeed . the pleasure of see the helpless man tie up suffice for the moment , if there be any who have ferocity enough to count much on come back to he . nobody 's imagination represent the certainty that some one out of the house at hand would soon come and untie he when he be leave alone . 

 and the rioter push up Park Street , a noisy stream , with Felix still in the midst of they , though he be labor hard to get his way to the front . he wish to determine the course of the crowd along a by - road call Hobb 's Lane , which would have take they to the other the Duffield end of the town . he urge several of the man round he , one of whom be no less a person than the big Dredge , our old Sproxton acquaintance , to get forward , and be sure that all the fellow would go down the lane , else they would spoil sport . Hitherto Felix have be successful , and he have go along with an unbroken impulse . but soon something occur which bring with a terrible shock the sense that his plan might turn out to be as mad as all bold project be see to be when they have fail . 

 mingle with the more headlong and half - drunken crowd there be some sharp - visage man who love the irrationality of riot for something else than its own sake , and who at present be not so much the rich as they desire to be , for the pain they have take in come to the Treby election , induce by certain prognostic gather at Duffield on the nomination - day that there might be the condition favorable to that confusion which be always a harvest - time . it be know to some of these sharp man that Park Street lead out toward the grand house of Treby Manor , which be as good nay , well , for their purpose than the bank . while Felix be entertain his ardent purpose , these other son of 284   Adam be entertain another ardent purpose of their peculiar sort , and the moment have come when they be to have their triumph . 

 from the front rank backward toward Felix there run a new summon a new invitation . 

 " let we go to Treby Manor ! " 

 from that moment Felix be powerless ; a new definite suggestion overrode his vague influence . there be a determined rush past Hobb 's Lane , and not down it . Felix be carry along too . he do not know whether to wish the contrary . once on the road , out of town , with opening into field and with the wide park at hand , it would have be easy to liberate himself from the crowd . at first it seem to he the well part to do this , and to get back to the town as fast as he could , in the hope of find the military and get a detachment to come and save the Manor . but he reflect that the course of the mob have be sufficiently see , and that there be plenty of people in Park Street to carry the information fast than he could . it seem more necessary that he should secure the presence of some help for the family at the Manor by go there himself . the Debarrys be not of the class of people he be will not to be anxious about ; but Felix Holt 's conscience be alive to the accusation that any danger they might be in now be bring on by a deed of his . in these moment of bitter vexation and disappointment , it do occur to he that very unpleasant consequence might be hang over he of a kind quite different from inward dissatisfaction ; but it be useless now to think of avert such consequence . as he be press along with the multitude into Treby Park , his very movement seem to he only an image of the day 's fatality , in which the multitudinous small wickedness of small selfish end , really undirected toward any large result , have issue in widely - share mischief that might yet be hideous . 


 Felix wound in the Riot . 
 the light be decline : already the candle shine through many window of the Manor . already the foremost part of the crowd have burst into the office , and adroit man be busy in the right place to find plate , after set other to force the butler into unlock the cellar ; and Felix have only just be able to force his way on to the front terrace , with the hope of get to the room where he would find the lady of the household and comfort they with the assurance that rescue must 285   soon come , when the sound of horse ' foot convince he that the rescue be near than he have expect . just as he hear the horse , he have approach the large window of a room where a brilliant light suspend from the ceiling show he a group of woman cling together in terror . other of the crowd be push their way up the terrace - step and gravel - slope at various point . hear the horse , he keep his post in front of the window , and , motion with his sabre , cry out to the oncomer , " keep back ! I hear the soldier come . " some scramble back , some pause automatically . 

 the loud and loud sound of the hoof change its pace and distribution . " Halt ! fire ! " Bang ! bang ! bang ! come deafen the ear of the man on the terrace . 

 before they have time or nerve to move , there be a rush sound close to they again " Fire ! " a bullet whiz , and pass through Felix Holt 's shoulder the shoulder of the arm that hold the naked weapon which shine in the light from the window . 

 Felix fall . the rioter run confusedly , like terrified sheep . some of the soldier , turning , drive they along with the flat of their sword . the great difficulty be to clear the invade office . 

 the rector , who with another magistrate and several other gentleman on horseback have accompany the soldier , now jump on to the terrace , and hurry to the lady of the family . 

 presently there be a group round Felix , who have faint , and , reviving , have faint again . he have have little food during the day , and have be overwrought . two of the group be civilian , but only one of they know Felix , the other be a magistrate not resident in Treby . the one who know Felix be Mr. John Johnson , whose zeal for the public peace have bring he from Duffield when he hear that the soldier be summon . 

 " I know this man very well , " say Mr. Johnson . " he be a dangerous character quite revolutionary . " 

 it be a weary night ; and the next day , Felix , whose wound be declare trivial , be lodge in Loamford Jail . there be three charge against he : that he have assault a constable , that he have commit manslaughter   Tucker be dead from spinal concussion , and that he have lead a riotous onslaught on a dwelling - house . 

 four other man be commit : one of they for possess himself of a gold cup with the Debarry arm on it ; the three other , one of whom 286   be the colly Dredge , for riot and assault . 

 that morning Treby town be no long in terror ; but it be in much sadness . other man , more innocent than the hat Spratt , be groan under severe bodily injury . and poor Tucker 's corpse be not the only one that have be lift from the pavement . it be true that none grieve much for the other dead man , unless it be grief to say , " poor old fellow ! " he have be trample upon , doubtless , where he fall drunkenly , near the entrance of the Seven Stars . this second corpse be old Tommy Trounsem , the bill - sticker otherwise Thomas Transome , the last of a very old family - line . 

 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

 the field be hoary with December 's frost , 
 I too be hoary with the chill of age . 
 but through the field and through the untrodden wood 
 be rest and stillness only in my heart 
 the pall of winter shroud a throb life . 
 a week after that Treby riot , Harold Transome be at Transome Court . he have return from a hasty visit to town to keep his Christmas at this delightful country home , not in the good Christmas spirit . he have lose the election ; but if that have be his only annoyance , he have good humor and good sense enough to have bear it as well as most man , and to have pay the eight or nine thousand , which have be the price of ascertain that he be not to sit in the next Parliament , without useless grumbling . but the disappointment of life can never , any more than its pleasure , be estimate singly ; and the healthy and most agreeable of man be expose to that coincidence of various vexation , each heighten the effect of the other , which may produce in he something correspond to the spontaneous and externally unaccountable moodiness of the morbid and disagreeable . 

 Harold might not have grieve much at a small riot in Treby , even if it have cause some expense to fall on the county ; but the turn which the riot have actually take be a bitter morsel for rumination , on more ground than one . however the disturbance have arise and be aggravate and probably no one know the whole truth on these point the conspicuous , grave incident have all tend to throw the blame on the Radical party , that be to say , on Transome and on Transome 's agent ; and so far the candidateship and its result have do Harold dishonor in the county : precisely the opposite effect to that 287   which be a dear object of his ambition . More than this , Harold 's conscience be active enough to be very unpleasantly affect by what have befall Felix Holt . his memory , always good , be particularly vivid in its retention of Felix Holt 's complaint to he about the treating of the Sproxton man , and of the subsequent irritate scene in Jermyn 's office , when the personage with the inauspicious name of Johnson have expound to he the impossibility of revise an electioneer scheme once begin , and of turn your vehicle back when it have already begin to roll downhill . Remembering Felix Holt 's word of indignant warning about hire man with drink in they to make a noise , Harold could not resist the urgent impression that the offence for which Felix be commit be fatality , not bring about by any willing co - operation of his with the noisy rioter , but arise probably from some rather ill - judge effort to counteract their violence . and this urgent impression , which insist on grow into a conviction , become in one of its phase an uneasy sense that he hold evidence which would at once tend to exonerate Felix and to place himself and his agent in anything but a desirable light . it be likely that some one else could give equivalent evidence in favor of Felix the little talkative Dissenting preacher , for example : but , anyhow , the affair with the Sproxton man would be rip open and make the bad of by the opposite party . the man who have fail in the use of some indirectness , be help very little by the fact that his rival be man to whom that indirectness be a something human , very far from be alien . there remain this grand distinction , that he have fail , and that the jet of light be throw entirely on his misdoing . 

 in this matter Harold feel himself a victim . could he hinder the trick of his agent ? in this particular case he have try to hinder they , and have try in vain . he have not love the two agent in question , to begin with ; and now at this later stage of event he be more innocent than ever of bear they anything but the most sincere ill - will . he be more utterly exasperate with they than he would probably have be if his one great passion have be for public virtue . Jermyn , with his John Johnson , have add this ugly , dirty business of the Treby election to all the long - accumulate list of offence , which Harold be resolve to visit on he to the utmost . he have see some handbill carry the insinuation that there be a discreditable indebtedness to Jermyn on 288   the part of the Transomes . if any such notion exist apart from electioneer slander , there be all the more reason for let the world see Jermyn severely punish for abuse his power over the family affair , and tamper with the family property . and the world certainly should see this with as little delay as possible . the cool , confident , assume fellow should be bleed to the last drop in compensation , and all connection with he be finally get rid of . now that the election be do with , Harold mean to devote himself to private affair , till everything lie in complete order under his supervision . 

 this morning he be seat as usual in his private room , which have now be handsomely fit up for he . it be but the third morning after the first Christmas he have spend in his english home for fifteen year , and the home look like an eminently desirable one . the white frost be now lie on the broad lawn , on the many - form leaf of the evergreen and on the giant tree at a distance . log of dry oak blaze on the hearth ; the carpet be like warm moss under his foot ; he have breakfast just accord to his taste , and he have the interesting occupation of a large proprietor to fill the morning . all through the house now step be noiseless on carpet or on fine matting ; there be warmth in hall and corridor ; there be servant enough to do everything , and to do it at the right time . Skilful Dominic be always at hand to meet his master 's demand , and his bland presence diffuse itself like a smile over the household , infect the gloomy english mind with the belief that life be easy , and make his real predominance seem as soft and light as a down quilt . old Mr. Transome have gather new courage and strength since little Harry and Dominic have come , and since Harold have insist on his take drive . Mrs. Transome herself be see on a fresh background with a gown of rich new stuff . and if , in spite of this , she do not seem happy , Harold either do not observe it , or kindly ignore it as the necessary frailty of elderly woman whose life have have too much of dullness and privation . our mind get trick and attitude as our body do , think Harold , and age stiffen they into unalterableness . " poor mother ! I confess I should not like to be an elderly woman myself . one require a good deal of the purr cat for that , or else of the love gran - dame . I wish she would take more to little Harry . I suppose she have her suspicion about the lad 's mother , and be as rigid in those matter as in her Toryism . however , I do what 289   I can ; it would be difficult to say what there be want to she in the way of indulgence and luxury to make up for the old niggardly life . " 

 and certainly Transome Court be now such a home as many woman would covet . yet even Harold 's own satisfaction in the midst of its elegant comfort need at present to be sustain by the expectation of gratified resentment . he be obviously less bright and enjoy than usual , and his mother , who watch he closely without dare to ask question , have gather hint and draw inference enough to make she feel sure that there be some storm gathering between he and Jermyn . she do not dare to ask question , and yet she have not resist the temptation to say something bitter about Harold 's failure to get return as a Radical , helping , with feminine self - defeat , to exclude herself more completely from any consultation by he . in this way poor woman , whose power lie solely in their influence , make themselves like music out of tune , and only move man to run away . 

 this morning Harold have order his letter to be bring to he at the breakfast - table , which be not his usual practice . his mother could see that there be London business letter about which he be eager , and she have find out that the letter bring by a clerk the day before be to make an appointment with Harold for Jermyn to come to Transome Court at eleven this morning . she observe Harold swallow his coffee and push away his plate with an early abstraction from the business of breakfast which be not at all after his usual manner . she herself eat nothing : her sip of tea seem to excite she ; her cheek flush , and her hand be cold . she be still young and ardent in her terror ; the passion of the past be live in her dread . 

 when Harold leave the table she go into the long drawing - room , where she might relieve her restlessness by walk up and down , and catch the sound of Jermyn 's entrance into Harold 's room , which be close by . here she move to and fro amongst the rose - colored satin of chair and curtain the great story of this world reduce for she to the little tale of her own existence dull obscurity everywhere , except where the keen light fall on the narrow track of her own lot , wide only for a woman 's anguish . at last she hear the expect ring and footstep , and the opening and closing door . unable to walk about any long , she sink into a large cushion chair , helpless and prayerless . she be not 290   thinking of God 's anger or mercy , but of her son 's . she be think of what might be bring , not by death , but by life . 

 CHAPTER XXXV . 

 M. Check to your queen ! 
 N. Nay , your own king be bare , 
 and move so , you give yourself checkmate . 
 when Jermyn enter the room , Harold , who be seat at his library table examine paper , with his back toward the light and his face toward the door , move his head coldly . Jermyn say an ungracious " good - morning , " as little as possible like a salutation to one who might regard himself as a patron . on the attorney 's handsome face there be a black cloud of defiant determination slightly startling to Harold , who have expect to feel that the overpower weight of temper in the interview be on his own side . nobody be ever prepare beforehand for this expression of Jermyn 's face , which seem as strongly contrast with the cold impenetrableness which he preserve under the ordinary annoyance of business as with the bland radiance of his light moment . 

 Harold himself do not look amiable just then , but his anger be of the sort that seek a vent without wait to give a fatal blow ; it be that of a nature more subtly mixed than Jermyn 's less animally forcible , less unwavering in selfishness , and with more of high - breed pride . he look at Jermyn with increase disgust and secret wonder . 

 " sit down , " he say curtly . 

 Jermyn seat himself in silence , open his greatcoat , and take some paper from a side pocket . 

 " I have write to Makepeace , " say Harold , " to tell he to take the entire management of the election expense . so you will transmit your account to he . " 

 " very well . I be come this morning on other business . " 

 " if it be about the riot and the prisoner , I have only to say that I shall enter into no plan . if I be call on , I shall say what I know about that young fellow Felix Holt . People may prove what they can about Johnson 's damnable trick , or yours either . " 

 " I be not come to speak about the riot . I agree with you in think that quite a subordinate subject . "   when Jermyn have the black cloud over his face , he never hesitate or drawl , and make no latin quotation . 

 " be so good , then , as to open your business at once , " say Harold , in a tone of imperious indifference . 

  291 

 " that be precisely what I wish to do . I have here information from a London correspondent that you be about to file a bill against I in Chancery . " Jermyn , as he speak , lay his hand on the paper before he , and look straight at Harold . 

 " in that case , the question for you be , how far your conduct as the family solicitor will bear investigation . but it be a question which you will consider quite apart from I . " 

 " Doubtless . but prior to that there be a question which we must consider together . " 

 the tone in which Jermyn say this give an unpleasant shock to Harold 's sense of mastery . be it possible that he should have the weapon wrench out of his hand ? 

 " I shall know what to think of that , " he reply , as haughtily as ever , " when you have state what the question be . " 

 " simply , whether you will choose to retain the family estate , or lie yourself open to be forthwith legally deprive of they . " 

 " I presume you refer to some underhand scheme of your own , on a par with the annuity you have drain we by in the name of Johnson , " say Harold , feel a new movement of anger . " if so , you have well state your scheme to my lawyer , Dymock and Halliwell . " 

 " no . I think you will approve of my state in your own ear first of all , that it depend on my will whether you remain an important land proprietor in North Loamshire , or whether you retire from the country with the remainder of the fortune you have acquire in trade . " 

 Jermyn pause , as if to leave time for this morsel to be taste . 

 " what do you mean ? " say Harold , sharply . 

 " not any scheme of mine ; but a state of the fact result from the settlement of the estate make in 1729 : state of the fact which render your father 's title and your own title to the family estate utterly worthless as soon as the claimant be make aware of his right . " 

 " and you intend to inform he ? " 

 " that depend . I be the only person who have the requisite knowledge . it rest with you to decide whether I shall use that knowledge against you ; or whether I shall use it in your favor by put an end to the evidence that would serve to oust you in spite of your ' robust title of occupancy . ' " 

 Jermyn pause again . he have be speak slowly , but without the least hesitation , and with a bitter definiteness of enunciation . there be 292   a moment or two before Harold answer , and then he say abruptly 

 " I do not   believe you . " 

 " I think you be more shrewd , " say Jermyn , with a touch of scorn . " I think you understand that I have have too much experience to waste my time in tell fable to persuade a man who have put himself into the attitude of my deadly enemy . " 

 " well , then , say at once what your proof be , " say Harold , shake in spite of himself , and get nervous . 

 " I have no inclination to be lengthy . it be not more than a few week since I ascertain that there be in existence an heir of the Bycliffes , the old adversary of your family . more curiously , it be only a few day ago in fact , only since the day of the riot that the Bycliffe claim have become valid , and that the right of remainder accrue to the heir in question . " 

 " and how , pray ? " say Harold , rise from his chair , and make a turn in the room , with his hand thrust in his pocket . Jermyn rise too , and stand near the hearth , face Harold , as he move to and fro . 

 " by the death of an old fellow who get drunk and be trample to death in the riot . he be the last of that Thomas Transome 's line , by the purchase of whose interest your family get its title to the estate . your title die with he . it be suppose that the line have become extinct before and on that supposition the old Bycliffes found their claim . but I hunt up this man just about the time the last suit be closed . his death would have be of no consequence to you if there have not be a Bycliffe in existence ; but I happen to know that there be , and that the fact can be legally prove . " 

 for a minute or two Harold do not speak , but continue to pace the room , while Jermyn keep his position , hold his hand behind he . at last Harold say , from the other end of the room , speak in a scornful tone 

 " that sound alarming . but it be not to be prove simply by your statement . " 

 " clearly . I have here a document , with a copy which will back my statement . it be the opinion give on the case more than twenty year ago , and it bear the signature of the Attorney - General and the first conveyancer of the day . " 

 Jermyn take up the paper he have lay on the table , open they slowly and coolly as he go on speak , and as Harold advance toward he . 

 " you may suppose that we spar no pain to ascertain the state of the title in the last suit against Maurice Christian Bycliffe , which 293   threaten to be a hard run . this document be the result of a consultation ; it give an opinion which must be take as a final authority . you may cast your eye over that , if you please ; I will wait your time . or you may read the summing - up here , " Jermyn end , hold out one of the paper to Harold , and point to a final passage . 

 Harold take the paper with a slight gesture of impatience . he do not choose to obey Jermyn 's indication , and confine himself to the summing - up . he run through the document . but in truth he be too much excited really to follow the detail , and be rather act than read , till at once he throw himself into his chair and consent to bend his attention on the passage to which Jermyn have point . the attorney watch he as he read and twice re - read : 

 to sum up we be of opinion that the title of the present possessor of the Transome estate can be strictly prove to rest solely upon a base fee create under the original settlement of 1729 , and to be good so long only as issue exist of the tenant in tail by whom that base fee be create . we feel satisfied by the evidence that such issue exist in the person of Thomas Transome , otherwise Trounsem , of Littleshaw . but upon his decease without issue we be of opinion that the right in remainder of the Bycliffe family will arise , which right would not be bar by any statute of limitation . 

 when Harold 's eye be on the signature to this document for the third time , Jermyn say 

 " as it turn out , the case be close by the death of the claimant , we have no occasion for produce Thomas Transome , who be the old fellow I tell you of . the enquiry about he set he agog , and after they be drop he come into this neighborhood , think there be something fine in store for he . here , if you like to take it , be a memorandum about he . I repeat that he die in the riot . the proof be ready . and I repeat , that , to my knowledge , and mine only , there be a Bycliffe in existence ; and that I know how the proof can be make out . " 

 Harold rise from his chair again , and again pace the room . he be not prepare with any defiance . 

 " and where be he this Bycliffe ? " he say at last , stop in his walk , and face round toward Jermyn . 

 " I decline to say more till you promise to suspend proceeding against I . " 

 Harold turn again , and look out of the window , without speak , for a moment or two . it be impossible that there should not be a conflict 294   within he , and at present it be a very confused one . at last he say 

 " this person be in ignorance of his claim ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " have be bring up in an inferior station ? " 

 " yes , " say Jermyn , keen enough to guess part of what be go on in Harold 's mind . " there be no harm in leave he in ignorance . the question be a purely legal one . and , as I say before , the complete knowledge of the case , as one of evidence , lie exclusively with I . I can nullify the evidence , or I can make it tell with certainty against you . the choice lie with you . " 

 " I must have time to think of this , " say Harold , conscious of a terrible pressure . 

 " I can give you no time unless you promise I to suspend proceeding . " 

 " and then , when I ask you , you will lay the detail before I ? " 

 " not without a thorough understanding beforehand . if I engage not to use my knowledge against you , you must engage in write that on be satisfied by the detail , you will cancel all hostile proceeding against I , and will not institute fresh one on the strength of any occurrence now past . " 

 " well , I must have time , " say Harold , more than ever inclined to thrash the attorney , but feel bound hand and foot with knot that he be not sure he could ever unfasten . 

 " that be to say , " say Jermyn , with his black - browed persistence , " you will write to suspend proceeding . " 

 again Harold pause . he be more than ever exasperate , but he be threaten , mortify , and confound by the necessity for an immediate decision between alternative almost equally hateful to he . it be with difficulty that he could prevail on himself to speak any conclusive word . he walk as far as he could from Jermyn to the other end of the room then walk back to his chair and throw himself into it . at last he say , without look at Jermyn , " I agree I must have time . " 

 " very well . it be a bargain . " 

 " no far than this , " say Harold , hastily , flash a look at Jermyn " no far than this , that I require time , and therefore I give it to you . " 

 " of course . you require time to consider whether the pleasure of try to ruin I I to whom you be really indebted be worth the loss of the Transome estate . I shall wish you good - morning . " 

  295 

 Harold do not speak to he or look at he again , and Jermyn walk out of the room . as he appear outside the door and close it behind he , Mrs. Transome show her white face at another door which open on a level with Harold 's in such a way that it be just possible for Jermyn not to see she . he avail himself of that possibility , and walk straight across the hall , where there be no servant in attendance to let he out , as if he believe that no one be look at he who could expect recognition . he do not want to speak to Mrs. Transome at present ; he have nothing to ask from she , and one disagreeable interview have be enough for he this morning . 

 she be convince that he have avoid she , and she be too proud to arrest he . she be as insignificant now in his eye as in her son 's . " man have no memory in their heart , " she say to herself , bitterly . and then turn into her sitting - room she hear the voice of Mr. Transome and little Harry at play together . she would have give a great deal at this moment if her feeble husband have not always live in dread of her temper and her tyranny , so that he might have be fond of she now . she feel herself loveless ; if she be important to any one , it be only to her old waiting - woman Denner . 

 CHAPTER XXXVI . 

 be these thing then necessitie ? 
 then let we meet they like necessity . 
  Shakespeare : Henry IV . 
 see now the virtue live in a word ! 
 Hobson will think of swear it be noon 
 when he see Dobson at the May - day fair , 
 to prove poor Dobson do not rob the mail . 
 ' tis neighborly to save a neighbor 's neck : 
 what harm in lying when you mean no harm ? 
 but say ' tis perjury , then Hobson quake 
 he will none of perjury . 
  thus word embalm 
 the conscience of mankind : and roman law 
 bring still a conscience to poor Hobson 's aid . 
 few man would have feel otherwise than Harold Transome feel , if , have a reversion tantamount to possession of a fine estate , carry an association with an old name and considerable social importance , they be suddenly inform that there be a person who have a legal right to deprive they of these advantage ; that person 's right have never be contemplate by any one as more than a chance , and be quite unknown to himself . in ordinary case a short possession than Harold 's family have enjoy be allow by the law to constitute an indefeasible right ; and if in rare and peculiar instance the law leave the possessor of 296   a long inheritance expose to deprivation as the consequence of old obscure transaction , the moral reason for give legal validity to the title of long occupancy be not the less strong . nobody would have say that Harold be bind to hunt out this alleged remainder - man and urge his right upon he ; on the contrary , all the world would have laugh at such conduct , and he would have be think an interesting patient for a mad - doctor . the unconscious remainder - man be probably much well off , leave in his original station : Harold would not have be call upon to consider his existence , if it have not be present to he in the shape of a threat from one who have power to execute the threat . 

 in fact , what he would have do have the circumstance be different , be much clear than what he should choose to do or feel himself compel to do in the actual crisis . he would not have be disgrace if , on a valid claim be urge , he have get his lawyer to fight it out for he on the chance of elude the claim by some adroit technical management . nobody off the stage could be sentimental about these thing , or pretend to shed tear of joy because an estate be hand over from a gentleman to a mendicant sailor with a wooden leg . and this chance remainder - man be perhaps some such speciman of inheritance as the drunken fellow kill in the riot . all the world would think the actual Transomes in the right to contest any adverse claim to the utmost . but then it be not certain that they would win in the contest ; and not win , they would incur other loss besides that of the estate . there have be a little too much of such loss already . 

 but why , if it be not wrong to contest the claim , should he feel the most uncomfortable scruple about rob the claim of its sting by get rid of its evidence ? it be a mortal disappointment it be a sacrifice of indemnification to abstain from punish Jermyn . but even if he bring his mind to contemplate that as the wise course , he still shrink from what look like complicity with Jermyn ; he still shrink from the secret nullification of a just legal claim . if he have only know the detail , if he have know who this alleged heir be , he might have see his way to some course that would not have grate on his sense of honor and dignity . but Jermyn have be too acute to let Harold know this : he have even carefully keep to the masculine pronoun . and he believe that there be no one besides himself who would or could 297   make Harold any wiser . he go home persuade that between this interview and the next which they would have together , Harold would be leave to an inward debate , found entirely on the information he himself have give . and he have not much doubt that the result would be what he desire . Harold be no fool : there be many good thing he like well in life than an irrational vindictiveness . 

 and it do happen that , after write to London in fulfillment of his pledge , Harold spend many hour over that inward debate , which be not very different from what Jermyn imagine . he take it everywhere with he on foot and on horseback , and it be his companion through a great deal of the night . his nature be not of a kind give to internal conflict , and he have never before be long undecided and puzzle . this unaccustomed state of mind be so painfully irksome to he he rebel so impatiently against the oppression of circumstance in which his quick temperament and habitual decision could not help he that it add tenfold to his hatred of Jermyn , who be the cause of it . and thus , as the temptation to avoid all risk of lose the estate grow and grow till scruple look minute by the side of it , the difficulty of bring himself to make a compact with Jermyn seem more and more insurmountable . 

 but we have see that the attorney be much too confident in his calculation . and while Harold be be gull by his subjection to Jermyn 's knowledge , independent information be on its way to he . the messenger be Christian , who , after as complete a survey of probability as he be capable of , have come to the conclusion that the most profitable investment he could make of his peculiar experience and testimony in relation to Bycliffe and Bycliffe 's daughter , be to place they at the disposal of Harold Transome . he be afraid of Jermyn ; he utterly distrust Johnson ; but he think he be secure in rely on Harold Transome 's care for his own interest ; and he prefer above all issue the prospect of forthwith leave the country with a sum that at least for a good while would put he at his ease . 

 when , only three morning after the interview with Jermyn , Dominic open the door of Harold 's sitting - room , and say that " Meester Chreestian , " Mr. Philip Debarry 's courier and an acquaintance of his own at Naples , request to be admit on business of importance , Harold 's immediate thought be that the business refer to the so - call political affair which be just now his chief association with the 298   name of debarry , though it seem an oddness require explanation , that a servant should be personally an intermediary . he assent , expect something rather disagreeable than otherwise . 

 Christian wear this morning those perfect manner of a subordinate who be not servile , which he always adopt toward his unquestionable superior . Mr. Debarry , who prefer have some one about he with as little resemblance as possible to a regular servant , have a singular liking for the adroit , quiet - mannered Christian , and would have be amazed to see the insolent assumption he be capable of in the presence of people like Mr. Lyon , who be of no account in society . Christian have that sort of cleverness which be say to " know the world " that be to say , he know the price - current of most thing . 

 Aware that he be look at as a messenger while he remain stand near the door with his hat in his hand , he say , with respectful ease 

 " you will probably be surprised , sir , at my come to speak to you on my own account ; and , in fact , I could not have think of do so if my business do not happen to be something of more importance to you than to any one else . " 

 " you do not   come from Mr. Debarry , then ? " say Harold , with some surprise . 

 " no , sir . my business be a secret ; and , if you please , must remain so . " 

 " be it a pledge you be demand from I ? " say Harold , rather suspiciously , have no ground for confidence in a man of Christian 's position . 

 " yes , sir ; I be oblige to ask no less than that you will pledge yourself not to take Mr. Jermyn into confidence concern what pass between we . " 

 " with all my heart , " say Harold , something like a gleam pass over his face . his circulation have become more rapid . " but what have you have to do with Jermyn ? " 

 " he have not mention I to you then have he , sir ? " 

 " no ; certainly not never . " 

 christian thought , " Aha , Mr. Jermyn ! you be keep the secret well , be you ? " he say , aloud 

 " then Mr. Jermyn have never mention to you , sir , what I believe he be aware of that there be danger of a new suit be raise against you on the part of a Bycliffe , to get the estate ? " 

 " ah ! " say Harold , start up , and place himself with his back against the mantelpiece . he be electrify by surprise at the quarter 299   from which this information be come . any fresh alarm be counteract by the flash think that he might be enable to act independently of Jermyn ; and in the rush of feeling he could utter no more than an interjection . Christian conclude that Harold have no previous hint . 

 " it be this fact , that I come to tell you of . " 

 " from some other motive than kindness to I , I presume , " say Harold , with a slight approach to a smile . 

 " certainly , " say Christian , as quietly as if he have be state yesterday 's weather . " I should not have the folly to use any affectation with you , Mr. Transome . I lose considerable property early in life , and be now in the receipt of a salary simply . in the affair I have just mention to you I can give evidence which will turn the scale against you . I have no wish to do so , if you will make it worth my while to leave the country . " 

 Harold listen as if he have be a legendary hero , select for peculiar solicitation by the evil One . here be temptation in a more alluring form than before , because it be sweeten by the prospect of elude Jermyn . but the desire to gain time serve all the purpose of caution and resistance , and his indifference to the speaker in this case help he to preserve perfect self - command . 

 " you be aware , " he say , coolly , " that silence be not a commodity worth purchase unless it be load . there be many person , I dare say , who would like I to pay their travel expense for they . but they might hardly be able to show I that it be worth my while . " 

 " you wish I to state what I know ? " 

 " well , that be a necessary preliminary to any further conversation . " 

 " I think you will see , Mr. Transome , that , as a matter of justice , the knowledge I can give be worth something , quite apart from my future appearance or non - appearance as a witness . I must take care of my own interest , and if anything should hinder you from choose to satisfy I for take an essential witness out of the way , I must at least be pay for bring you the information . " 

 " can you tell I who and where this Bycliffe be ? " 

 " I can . " 

 " -And give I a notion of the whole affair ? " 

 " yes ; I have talk to a lawyer not Jermyn who be at the bottom of the law in the affair . " 

  300 

 " you must not count on any wish of mine to suppress evidence or remove a witness . but name your price for the information . " 

 " in that case I must be pay the high for my information . say , two thousand pound . " 

 " two thousand devil ! " burst out Harold , throw himself into his chair again , and turn his shoulder toward Christian . new thought crowd upon he . " this fellow may want to decamp for some reason or other , " he say to himself . " More people besides Jermyn know about his evidence , it seem . the whole thing may look black for I if it come out . I shall be believe to have bribe he to run away , whether or not . " thus the outside conscience come in aid of the inner . 

 " I will not give you one sixpence for your information , " he say , resolutely , " until time have make it clear that you do not intend to decamp , but will be forthcoming when you be call for . on those term I have no objection to give you a note , specify that after the fulfilment of that condition that be , after the occurrence of a suit , or the understanding that no suit be to occur I will pay you a certain sum in consideration of the information you now give I ! " 

 Christian feel himself catch in a vise . in the first instance he have count confidently on Harold 's ready seizure of his offer to disappear , and after some word have seem to cast a doubt on this presupposition he have inwardly determine to go away , whether Harold wish it or not , if he could get a sufficient sum . he do not reply immediately , and Harold wait in silence , inwardly anxious to know what Christian could tell , but with a vision at present so far clear that he be determined not to risk incur the imputation of have anything to do with scoundrelism . we be very much indebted to such a linking of event as make a doubtful action look wrong . 

 Christian be reflect that if he stay and face some possible inconvenience of be know publicly as Henry Scaddon for the sake of what he might get from Esther , it would at least be wise to be certain of some money from Harold Transome , since he turn out to be of so peculiar a disposition as to insist on a punctilious honesty to his own disadvantage . do he think of make a bargain with the other side ? if so , he might be content to wait for the knowledge till it come in some other way . Christian be begin to be afraid lest he should get nothing by this clever move of come to Transome Court . at last he say 

  301 

 " I think , sir , two thousand would not be an unreasonable sum , on those condition . " 

 " I will not give two thousand . " 

 " allow I to say , sir , you must consider that there be no one whose interest it be to tell you as much as I shall , even if they could ; since Mr. Jermyn , who know it , have not think fit to tell you . there may be use you do not   think of in get the information at once . " 

 " well ? " 

 " I think a gentleman should act liberally under such circumstance . " 

 " so I will . " 

 " I could not take less than a thousand pound . it really would not be worth my while . if Mr. Jermyn know I give you the information , he would endeavor to injure I . " 

 " I will give you a thousand , " say Harold , immediately , for Christian have unconsciously touch a sure spring . " at least , I will give you a note to the effect I speak of . " 

 he write as he have promise , and give the paper to Christian . 

 " now , do not   be circuitous , " say Harold . " you seem to have a business - like gift of speech . who and where be this Bycliffe ? " 

 " you will be surprised to hear , sir , that she be suppose to be the daughter of the old preacher , Lyon , in Malthouse Yard . " 

 " good God ! how can that be ? " say Harold . at once , the first occasion on which he have see Esther rise in his memory the little dark parlor the graceful girl in blue , with the surprisingly distinguish manner and appearance . 

 " in this way . Old Lyon , by some strange mean or other , married Bycliffe 's widow when this girl be a baby . and the preacher do not   want the girl to know that he be not her real father : he tell I that himself . but she be the image of Bycliffe , whom I know well an uncommonly fine woman step like a queen . " 

 " I have see she , " say Harold , more than ever glad to have purchase this knowledge . " but now , go on . " 

 Christian proceed to tell all he know , include his conversation with Jermyn , except so far as it have an unpleasant relation to himself . 

 " then , " say Harold , as the detail seem to have come to a close , " you believe that Miss Lyon and her supposed father be at present unaware of the claim that might be urge for she on the strength of her birth ? " 

 " I believe so . but I need not tell you that where the lawyer be on the scent you can never be sure of anything long together . I must 302   remind you , sir , that you have promise to protect I from Mr. Jermyn by keep my confidence . " 

 " never fear . depend upon it , I shall betray nothing to Mr. Jermyn . " 

 Christian be dismiss with a " good - morning " ; and while he cultivate some friendly reminiscence with Dominic , Harold sit chew the cud of his new knowledge , and find it not altogether so bitter as he have expect . 

 from the first , after his interview with Jermyn , the recoil of Harold 's mind from the idea of strangle a legal right throw he on the alternative of attempt a compromise . some middle course might be possible , which would be a less evil than a costly lawsuit , or than the total renunciation of the estate . and now he have learn that the new claimant be a woman a young woman , bring up under circumstance that would make the fourth of the Transome property seem to she an immense fortune . both the sex and the social condition be of the sort that lie open to many soften influence . and have see Esther , it be inevitable that , amongst the various issue , agreeable and disagreeable , depict by Harold 's imagination , there should present itself a possibility that would unite the two claim his own , which he feel to be the rational , and Esther 's , which apparently be the legal claim . 

 Harold , as he have constantly say to his mother , be " not a marry man " ; he do not contemplate bring a wife to Transome Court for many year to come , if at all . have little Harry as an heir , he prefer freedom . western woman be not to his taste ; they show a transition from the feebly animal to the thinking being , which be simply troublesome . Harold prefer a slow - witted large - eyed woman , silent and affectionate , with a load of black hair weigh much more heavily than her brain . he have see no such woman in England , except one which he have bring with he from the East . 

 therefore Harold do not care to be marry until or unless some surprising chance present itself ; and now that such a chance have occur to suggest marriage to he , he would not admit to himself that he contemplate marry Esther as a plan ; he be only oblige to see that such an issue be not inconceivable . he be not go to take any step expressly direct toward that end : what he have make up his mind to , as the course most satisfactory to his nature under present 303   urgency , be to behave to Esther with a frank gentle manliness , which must win her good will , and incline she to save his family interest as much as possible . he be help to this determination by the pleasure of frustrating Jermyn 's contrivance to shield himself from punishment , and his most distinct and cheer prospect be that within a very short space of time he should not only have effect a satisfactory compromise with Esther , but should have make Jermyn aware by a very disagreeable form of announcement , that Harold Transome be no long afraid of he . Jermyn should bite the dust . 

 at the end of these meditation he feel satisfied with himself and light - hearted . he have reject two dishonest proposition , and he be go to do something that seem eminently graceful . but he need his mother 's assistance , and it be necessary that he should both confide in she and persuade she . 

 within two hour after Christian leave he , Harold beg his mother to come into his private room , and there he tell she the strange and startling story , omitting , however , any particular which would involve the identification of Christian as his informant . Harold feel that his engagement demand his reticence ; and he tell his mother that he be bind to conceal the source of that knowledge which he have get independently of Jermyn . 

 Mrs. Transome say little in the course of the story : she make no exclamation , but she listen with close attention , and ask a few question so much to the point as to surprise Harold . when he show she the copy of the legal opinion which Jermyn have leave with he , she say she know it very well ; she have a copy herself . the particular of that last lawsuit be too well engraven on her mind : it happen at a time when there be no one to supersede she , and she be the virtual head of the family affair . she be prepared to understand how the estate might be in danger ; but nothing have prepare she for the strange detail for the way in which the new claimant have be rear and bring within the range of converge motif that have lead to this revelation , least of all for the part Jermyn have come to play in the revelation . Mrs. Transome see these thing through the medium of certain dominant emotion that make they seem like a long - ripen retribution . Harold perceive that she be painfully agitated , that she tremble , and that her white lip would not readily lend themselves to speech . and this be hardly more than he expect . he have not like the 304   revelation himself when it have first come to he . 

 but he do not guess what it be in his narrative which have most pierce his mother . it be something that make the threat about the estate only a secondary alarm . now , for the first time , she hear of the intend proceeding against Jermyn . Harold have not choose to speak of they before ; but have at last call his mother into consultation , there be nothing in his mind to hinder he from speak without reserve of his determination to visit on the attorney his shameful maladministration of the family affair . 

 Harold go through the whole narrative of what he call Jermyn 's scheme to catch he in a vise , and his power of triumphantly frustrating that scheme in his usual rapid way , speak with a final decisiveness of tone ; and his mother feel that if she urge any counter - consideration at all , she could only do so when he have no more to say . 

 " now , what I want you to do , mother , if you can see this matter as I see it , " Harold say in conclusion , " be to go with I to call on this girl in Malthouse Yard . I will open the affair to she ; it appear she be not likely to have be inform yet ; and you will invite she to visit you here at once , that all scandal , all hatch of law - mischief , may be avoid , and the thing may be bring to an amicable conclusion . " 

 " it seem almost incredible extraordinary a girl in her position , " say Mrs. Transome , with difficulty . it would have seem the bitter , humiliating penance if another sort of suffering have leave any room in her heart . 

 " I assure you she be a lady ; I see she when I be canvass , and be amazed at the time . you will be quite strike with she . it be no indignity for you to invite she . " 

 " oh , " say Mrs. Transome , with low - toned bitterness , " I must put up with all thing as they be determined for I . when shall we go ? " 

 " well , " say Harold , look at his watch , " it be hardly two yet . we could really go to - day , when you have lunch . it be well to lose no time . I will order the carriage . " 

 " stay , " say Mrs. Transome , with a desperate effort . " there be plenty of time . I shall not lunch . I have a word to say . " 

 Harold withdraw his hand from the bell , and lean against the mantelpiece to listen . 

 " you see I comply with your wish at once , Harold ? " 

 " yes , mother , I be much oblige to you for make no difficulty . " 

  305 

 " you ought to listen to I in return . " 

 " pray go on , " say Harold , expect to be annoy . 

 " what be the good of have these Chancery proceeding against Jermyn ? " 

 " good ? this good : that fellow have burden the estate with annuity and mortgage to the extent of three thousand a year ; and the bulk of they , I be certain , he hold himself under the name of another man . and the advance this yearly interest represent , have not be much more than twenty thousand . of course , he have hoodwink you , and my father never give attention to these thing . he have be up to all sort of devil 's work with the deed ; he do not   count on my come back from Smyrna to fill poor Durfey 's place . he shall feel the difference . and the good will be , that I shall save almost all the annuity for the rest of my father 's life , which may be ten year or more , and I shall get back some of the money , and I shall punish a scoundrel . that be the good . " 

 " he will be ruin . " 

 " that be what I intend , " say Harold , sharply . 

 " he exert himself a great deal for we in the old suit : everyone say he have wonderful zeal and ability , " say Mrs. Transome , get courage and warmth , as she go on . her temper be rise . 

 " what he do , he do for his own sake , you may depend on that , " say Harold , with a scornful laugh . 

 " there be very painful thing in that last suit . you seem anxious about this young woman , to avoid all further scandal and contest in the family . why do not   you wish to do it in this case ? Jermyn might be willing to arrange thing amicably to make restitution as far as he can if he have do anything wrong . " 

 " I will arrange nothing amicably with he , " say Harold , decisively . " if he have ever do anything scandalous as our agent , let he bear the infamy . and the right way to throw the infamy on he be to show the world that he have rob we , and that I mean to punish he . why do you wish to shield such a fellow , mother ? it have be chiefly through he that you have have to lead such a thrifty , miserable life you who use to make as brilliant a figure as a woman need wish . " 

 Mrs. Transome 's rise temper be turn into a horrible sensation , as painful as a sudden concussion from something hard and immovable when we have strike out with our fist , intend to hit something warm , soft , 306   and breathe like ourselves . poor Mrs. Transome 's stroke be send jar back on she by a hard unalterable past . she do not speak in answer to Harold , but rise from the chair as if she give up the debate . 

 " woman be frightened at everything I know , " say Harold , kindly , feel that he have be a little harsh after his mother 's compliance . " and you have be use for so many year to think Jermyn a law of nature . come , mother , " he go on , look at she gently , and rest his hand on her shoulder , " look cheerful . we shall get through all these difficulty . and this girl I dare say she will be quite an interesting visitor for you . you have not have any young girl about you for a long while . who know ? she may fall deeply in love with I , and I may be oblige to marry she . " 

 he speak laughingly , only think how he could make his mother smile . but she look at he seriously and say , " do you mean that , Harold ? " 

 " be I not capable of make a conquest ? not too fat yet a handsome , well - rounded youth of thirty - four ? " 

 she be force to look straight at the beam face , with its rich dark color , just bend a little over she . why could she not be happy in this son whose future she have once dream of , and who have be as fortunate as she have ever hop ? the tear come , not plenteously , but make her dark eye as large and bright as youth have once make they without tear . 

 " there , there ! " say Harold , coaxingly . " do not   be afraid . you shall not have a daughter - in - law unless she be a pearl . now we will get ready to go . " 

 in half an hour from that time Mrs. Transome come down , look majestic in sable and velvet , ready to call on " the girl in Malthouse Yard . " she have compose herself to go through this task . she see there be nothing well to be do . after the resolution Harold have take , some sort of compromise with this oddly - place heiress be the result most to be hop for ; if the compromise turn out to be a marriage well , she have no reason to care much : she be already powerless . it remain to be see what this girl be . 

 the carriage be to be drive round the back way , to avoid too much observation . but the late election affair might account for Mr. Lyon 's receive a visit from the unsuccessful radical candidate . 

  307 

 CHAPTER XXXVII . 

 I also could speak as ye do ; if your soul be in my soul 's stead , I could heap up word against you , and shake mine head at you . Book of Job . 

 in the interval since Esther part with Felix Holt on the day of the riot , she have go through so much emotion , and have already have so strong a shock of surprise , that she be prepared to receive any new incident of an unwonted kind with comparative equanimity . 

 when Mr. Lyon have get home again from his preaching excursion , Felix be already on his way to Loamford Jail . the little minister be terribly shake by the news . he see no clear explanation of Felix Holt 's conduct ; for the statement Esther have hear be so conflicting that she have not be able to gather distinctly what have come out in the examination by the magistrate . but Mr. Lyon feel confident that Felix be innocent of any wish to abet a riot or the infliction of injury ; what he chiefly fear be that in the fatal encounter with Tucker he have be move by a rash temper , not sufficiently guard against by a prayerful and humble spirit . 

 " my poor young friend be be teach with mysterious severity the evil of a too confident self - reliance , " he say to Esther , as they sit opposite to each other , listen and speak sadly . 

 " you will go and see he , father ? " 

 " verily will I. but I must straightway go and see that poor afflict woman , whose soul be doubtless whirl about in this trouble like a shapeless and unstable thing drive by divided wind . " Mr. Lyon rise and take his hat hastily , ready to walk out , with his greatcoat fly open and expose his small person to the keen air . 

 " stay , father , pray , till you have have some food , " say Esther , put her hand on his arm . " you look quite weary and shatter . " 

 " child , I can not stay . I can neither eat bread nor drink water till I have learn more about this young man 's deed , what can be prove and what can not be prove against he . I fear he have none to stand by he in this town , for even by the friend of our church I have be ofttime rebuke because he seem dear to I . but , Esther , my beloved child " 

 here Mr. Lyon grasp her arm , and seem in the need of speech to forget his previous haste . " I bear in mind this : the Lord knoweth they that be his ; but we we be leave to judge by uncertain sign , 308   that so we may learn to exercise hope and faith toward one another ; and in this uncertainty I cling with awful hope to those whom the world love not because their conscience , albeit mistakenly , be at war with the habit of the world . our great faith , my Esther , be the faith of martyr : I will not lightly turn away from any man who endure harshness because he will not lie ; nay , though I would not wantonly grasp at ease of mind through an arbitrary choice of doctrine , I can not but believe that the merit of the Divine Sacrifice be wide than our utmost charity . I once believe otherwise but not now , not now . " 

 the minister pause , and seem to be abstractedly gaze at some memory : he be always liable to be snatch away by thought from the pursuit of a purpose which have seem press . Esther seize the opportunity and prevail on he to fortify himself with some of Lyddy 's porridge before he go out on his tiring task of seek definite trustworthy knowledge from the lip of various witness , begin with that feminine darkener of counsel , poor Mrs. Holt . 

 she , regard all her trouble about Felix in the light of a fulfilment of her own prophecy , treat the sad history with a preference for edification above accuracy , and for mystery above relevance , worthy of a commentator on the Apocalypse . she insist chiefly , not on the important fact that Felix have sit at his work till after eleven , like a deaf man , have rush out in surprise and alarm , have come back to report with satisfaction that thing be quiet , and have ask she to set by his dinner for he fact which would tell as evidence that Felix be disconnect with any project of disturbance , and be averse to they . these thing come out incidentally in her long plaint to the minister ; but what Mrs. Holt feel it essential to state be , that long before Michaelmas be turn , sit in her chair , she have say to Felix that there would be a judgment on he for be so certain sure about the Pills and the Elixir . 

 " and now , Mr. Lyon , " say the poor woman , who have dress herself in a gown previously cast off , a front all out of curl , and a cap with no starch in it , while she hold little cough Job on her knee , " and now you see my word have come true soon than I think they would . Felix may contradict I if he will ; but there he be in prison , and here be I , with nothing in the world to bless myself with but half - a - crown a - week as I have   save by my own scraping , and this house I have   get to pay rent for . it be not I have do wrong , Mr. Lyon ; 309   there be nobody can say it of I not the orphan child on my knee be more innicent o ' riot and murder and anything else as be bad . but when you have   get a son so masterful and stop medicine as Providence have send , and his better have be take up and down the country since before he be a baby , it be o ' no use be good here below . but he be a baby , Mr. Lyon , and I give he the breast , " here poor Mrs. Holt 's motherly love over - come her expository eagerness , and she fall more and more to cry as she speak " and to think there be folk say now as he will be transport , and his hair shave off , and the treadmill , and everything . oh , dear ! " 

 as Mrs. Holt break off into sobbing , little Job also , who have get a confused yet profound sense of sorrow , and of Felix be hurt and go away , set up a little wail of wonder misery . 

 " Nay , Mistress Holt , " say the minister , soothingly , " enlarge not your grief by more than warrantable ground . I have good hope that my young friend , your son , will be deliver from any severe consequence beyond the death of the man Tucker , which I fear will ever be a sore burden on his memory . I feel confident that a jury of his country - man will discern between misfortune , or it may be misjudgment , and an evil will , and that he will be acquit of any grave offence . " 

 " he never steal anything in his life , Mr. Lyon , " say Mrs. Holt , revive . " nobody can throw it in my face as my son run away with money like the young man at the bank though he look most respectable , and far different on a Sunday to what Felix ever do . and I know it be very hard fighting with constable ; but they say Tucker 's wife'll be a deal well off than she be before , for the great folks'll pension she , and she will be put on all the charity , and her child at the Free School , and everything . your trouble 's easy borne when everybody give it a lift for you ; and if judge and jury want to do right by Felix , they will think of his poor mother , with the bread take out of her mouth , all but half - a - crown a - week and furniture which , to be sure , be most excellent , and of my own buying and get to keep this orphin child as Felix himself bring on I . and I might send he back to his old grandfather on parish pay , but I be not that woman , Mr. Lyon ; I have   a tender heart . and here be his little foot and toe , like marbil ; do but look " here Mrs. Holt draw off Job 's sock and shoe , and show a 310   well - wash little foot " and you will perhaps say I might take a lodger ; but it be easy talking ; it be not   everybody at a loose - end want a parlor and a bedroom ; and if anything bad happen to Felix , I may as well go and sit in the parish pound , and nobody to buy I out ; for it be beyond everything how the church member find fault with my son . but I think they might leave his mother to find fault ; for queer and masterful he might be , and fly in the face of the very scripture about the physic , but he be most clever beyond anything that I will say and be his own father 's lawful child , and I his mother , that be Mary Wall thirty year before ever I marry his father . " here Mrs. Holt 's feeling again become too much for she , but she struggle on to say , sobbingly , " and if they be to transport he , I should like to go to the prison and take the orphin child ; for he be most fond of have he on his lap , and say he would never marry ; and there be one above overheard he , for he be be take at his word . " 

 Mr. Lyon listen with low groan , and then try to comfort she by say that he would himself go to Loamford as soon as possible , and would give his soul no rest till he have do all he could do for Felix . 

 on one point Mrs. Holt 's plaint tally with his own foreboding , and he find they verify : the state of feeling in Treby among the Liberal Dissenting flock be unfavorable to Felix . none who have observe his conduct from the window see anything tend to excuse he , and his own account of his motif , give on his examination , be speak of with head - shake ; if it have not be for his habit of always think himself wise than other people , he would never have entertain such a wild scheme . he have set himself up for something extraordinary , and have speak ill of respectable trade - people . he have put a stop to the making of saleable drug , contrary to the nature of buy and selling , and to a due reliance on what Providence might effect in the human inside through the instrumentality of remedy unsuitable to the stomach , look at in a merely secular light ; and the result be what might have be expect . he have bring his mother to poverty , and himself into trouble . and what for ? he have do no good to " the cause " ; if he have fight about church - rate , or have be worst in some struggle in which he be distinctly the champion of Dissent and Liberalism , his case would have be one for gold , silver , and copper subscription , in order to 311   procure the good defence ; sermon might have be preach on he , and his name might have float on flag from Newcastle to Dorchester . but there seem to be no edification in what have befall Felix . the riot at Treby , " turn it which way you would , " as Mr. Muscat observe , be no great credit to Liberalism ; and what Mr. Lyon have to testify as to Felix Holt 's conduct in the matter of the Sproxton man , only make it clear that the defence of Felix be the accusation of his party . the whole affair , Mr. Nuttwood say , be dark and inscrutable , and seem not to be one in which the interference of God 's servant would tend to give the glory where the glory be due . that a candidate for whom the rich church member have all vote should have his name associate with the encouragement of drunkenness , riot , and plunder , be an occasion for the enemy to blaspheme ; and it be not clear how the enemy 's mouth would be stop by exertion in favor of a rash young man , whose interference have make thing bad instead of well . Mr. Lyon be warn lest his human partiality should blind he to the interest of truth : it be God 's cause that be endanger in this matter . 

 the little minister 's soul be bruise ; he himself be keenly alive to the complication of public and private regard in this affair , and suffer a good deal at the thought of Tory triumph in the demonstration that , except the attack on the Seven Stars , which call itself a Whig house , all damage to property have be bear by Tories . he care intensely for his opinion , and would have like event to speak for they in a sort of picture - writing that everybody could understand . the enthusiasm of the world be not to be stimulate by a commentary in small and subtle character which alone can tell the whole truth ; and the picture write in Felix Holt 's trouble be of an entirely puzzling kind : if he be a martyr , neither side want to claim he . yet the minister , as we have see , find in his christian faith a reason for cling the more to one who have not a large party to back he . that little man 's heart be heroic ; he be not one of those Liberals who make their anxiety for " the cause " of Liberalism a plea for cowardly desertion . 

 besides himself , he believe there be no one who could bear testimony to the remonstrance of Felix concern the treating of the Sproxton man , except Jermyn , Johnson , and Harold Transome . though he have the vague idea of what could be do in the case , he fix his mind on the probability that Mr. Transome would be move to the utmost exertion , 312   if only as an atonement ; but he dare not take any step until he have consult Felix , who he foresaw be likely to have a very strong determination as to the help he would accept or not accept . 

 this last expectation be fulfil . Mr. Lyon return to Esther , after his day 's journey to Loamford and back , with less of trouble and perplexity in his mind : he have at least get a definite course mark out , to which he must resign himself . Felix have declare that he would receive no aid from Harold Transome , except the aid he might give as an honest witness . there be nothing to be do for he but what be perfectly simple and direct . even if the pleading of counsel have be permit   and at that time it be not   on behalf of a prisoner on trial for felony , Felix would have decline it : he would in any case have speak in his own defence . he have a perfectly simple account to give , and need not to avail himself of any legal adroitness . he consent to accept the service of a respectable solicitor in Loamford , who offer to conduct his case without any fee . the work be plain and easy , Felix say . the only witness who have to be hunt up at all be some who could testify that he have try to take the crowd down Hobb 's Lane , and that they have go to the Manor in spite of he . 

 " then he be not so much cast down as you fear , father ? " say Esther . 

 " no , child ; albeit he be pale and much shake for one so stalwart . he hath no grief , he say , save for the poor man Tucker , and for his mother ; otherwise his heart be without a burden . we discourse greatly on the sad effect of all this for his mother , and on the perplexed condition of human thing , whereby even right action seem to bring evil consequence , if we have respect only to our own brief life , and not to that large rule whereby we be steward of the eternal dealing , and not contriver of our own success . " 

 " do he say nothing about I , father ? " say Esther , tremble a little , but unable to repress her egoism . 

 " yes ; he ask if you be well , and send his affectionate regard . Nay , he bid I say something which appear to refer to your discourse together when I be not present . ' tell she , ' he say , ' whatever they sentence I to , she know they can not   rob I of my vocation . with poverty for my bride , and preach and pedagoguy for my business , I be sure of a handsome establishment . ' he laugh doubtless bearing in 313   mind some playfulness of thine . " 

 Mr. Lyon seem to be look at Esther as he smile , but she be not near enough for he to discern the expression of her face . just then it seem make for melancholy rather than for playfulness . Hers be not a childish beauty ; and when the sparkle of mischief , wit and vanity be out of her eye , and the large look of abstract sorrow be there , you would have be surprise by a certain grandeur which the smile have hide . that change face be the perfect symbol of her mixed susceptible nature , in which battle be inevitable , and the side of victory uncertain . 

 she begin to look on all that have pass between herself and Felix as something not bury , but embalm and keep as a relic in a private sanctuary . the very entireness of her preoccupation about he , the perpetual repetition in her memory of all that have pass between they , tend to produce this effect . she live with he in the past ; in the future she seem shut out from he . he be an influence above her life , rather than a part of it ; some time or other , perhaps , he would be to she as if he belong to the solemn admonish sky , check her self - satisfied pettiness with the suggestion of a wide life . 

 but not yet not while her trouble be so fresh . for it be still her trouble , and not Felix Holt 's . perhaps it be a subtraction from his power over she , that she could never think of he with pity , because he always seem to she too great and strong to be pity ; he want nothing . he evade calamity by choose privation . the good part of a woman 's love be worship ; but it be hard to she to be send away with her precious spikenard reject , and her long tress too , that be let fall ready to soothe the weary foot . 

 while Esther be carry these thing in her heart , the January day be begin to pass by with their wonte wintry monotony , except that there be rather more of good cheer than usual remain from the feast of Twelfth Night among the triumphant Tories , and rather more scandal than usual excited among the mortified Dissenters by the wilfulness of their minister . he have actually mention Felix Holt by name in his evening sermon , and offer up a petition for he in the evening prayer , also by name not as " a young Ishmaelite , whom he would fain see bring back from the lawless life of the desert , and seat in the same fold even with the son of Judah and of Benjamin , " a suitable 314   periphrasis which Brother Kemp throw off without any effort , and with all the felicity of a suggestive critic . poor Mrs. Holt , indeed , even in the midst of her grief , experience a proud satisfaction ; that though she be not a church member she be now an object of congregational remark and ministerial allusion . feel herself a spotless character stand out in relief on a dark background of affliction , and a practical contradiction to that extreme doctrine of human depravity which she have never " give in to , " she be naturally gratify and soothe by a notice which must be a recognition . but more influential hearer be of opinion , that in a man who have so many long sentence at command as Mr. Lyon , so many parenthesis and modify clause , this naked use of a non - scriptural Treby name in an address to the Almighty be all the more offensive . in a low unlettered local preacher of the wesleyan persuasion such thing might pass ; but a certain style in prayer be demand from independent , the most educate body in the rank of orthodox Dissent . to Mr. Lyon such notion seem painfully perverse , and the next morning he be declare to Esther his resolution stoutly to withstand they , and to count nothing common or unclean on which a blessing could be ask , when the tenor of his thought be completely change by a great shock of surprise which make both himself and Esther sit look at each other in speechless amazement . 

 the cause be a letter bring by a special messenger from Duffield ; a heavy letter address to Esther in a business - like manner , quite unexampled in her correspondence . and the content of the letter be more startling than its exterior . it begin : 

 Madam , Herewith we send you a brief abstract of evidence which have come within our knowledge , that the right of remainder whereby the lineal issue of Edward Bycliffe can claim possession of the estate of which the entail be settle by John Justus Transome in 1729 , now first accrue to you as the sole and lawful issue of Maurice Christian Bycliffe . we be confident of success in the prosecution of this claim , which will result to you in the possession of estate to the value , at the low , of from five to six thousand per annum 

 it be at this point that Esther , who be read aloud , let her hand fall with the letter on her lap , and with a palpitating heart look at her father , who look again in silence that last for two or three minute . a certain terror be upon they both , though the thought that lay that weight on the tongue of each be different . 

  315 

 it be Mr. Lyon who speak first . 

 " this , then , be what the man name Christian refer to . I distrust he , yet it seem he speak truly . " 

 " but , " say Esther , whose imagination run necessarily to those condition of wealth which she could well appreciate , " do they mean that the Transomes would be turn out of Transome Court , and that I should go and live there ? it seem quite an impossible thing . " 

 " Nay , child , I know not . I be ignorant in these thing , and the thought of worldly grandeur for you hath more of terror than of gladness for I . nevertheless we must duly weigh all thing , not consider aught that befall we as a bare event , but rather as an occasion for faithful stewardship . let we go to my study and consider this writing far . " 

 how this announcement , which to Esther seem as unprepared as if it have fall from the sky , come to be make to she by solicitor other than Batt    Cowley , the old lawyer of the Bycliffes , be by a sequence as natural , that be to say , as legally natural , as any in the world . the secret worker of the apparent wonder be Mr. Johnson , who , on the very day when he write to give his patron , Mr. Jermyn , the serious warning that a bill be likely to be file in Chancery against he , have carry forward with add zeal the business already commence , of arrange with another firm his share in the profit likely to result from the prosecution of Esther Bycliffe 's claim . 

 Jermyn 's star be certainly go down , and Johnson do not feel an unmitigated grief . beyond some troublesome declaration as to his actual share in transaction in which his name have be use , Johnson see nothing formidable in prospect for himself . he be not go to be ruin , though Jermyn probably be : he be not a high - flyer , but a mere climbing - bird , who could hold on and get his livelihood just as well if his wing be clip a little . and , in the meantime , here be something to be gain in this Bycliffe business , which , it be not unpleasant to think , be a nut that Jermyn have intend to keep for his own particular cracking , and which would be rather a severe astonishment to Mr. Harold Transome , whose manner towards respectable agent be such as leave a smart in a man of spirit . 

 under the stimulus of small many - mixed motif like these , a great deal of business have be do in the world by well - clothe and , in 1833 , clean - shaven man , whose name be on charity list , and who do not know that they be base . Mr. Johnson 's character be not much more 316   exceptional than his double chin . 

 no system , religious or political , I believe , have lay it down as a principle that all man be alike virtuous , or even that all the people rat for L80 house be an honor to their specie . 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 

 the down we rest on in our aŽry dream 
 have not be pluck from bird that live and smart ; 
 ' tis but warm snow , that melt not . 
 the story and the prospect reveal to Esther by the lawyer 's letter , which she and her father study together , have make an impression on her very different from what she have be use to figure to herself in her many day - dream as to the effect of a sudden elevation in rank and fortune . in her day - dream she have not trace out the mean by which such a change could be bring about ; in fact , the change have seem impossible to she , except in her little private Utopia , which , like other Utopias , be fill with delightful result , independent of process . but her mind have fix itself habitually on the sign and luxury of ladyhood , for which she have the keen perception . she have see the very mat in her carriage , have scent the dry rose - leaf in her corridor , have feel the soft carpet under her pretty foot , and see herself , as she rise from her sofa cushion , in the crystal panel that reflect a long drawing - room , where the conservatory flower and the picture of fair woman leave she still with the supremacy of charm . she have tread the marble - firm gravel of her garden - walk and the soft deep turf of her lawn ; she have have her servant about she fill with adore respect , because of her kindness as well as her grace and beauty ; but she have have several accomplished cavalier all at once sueing for her hand one of whom , unite very high birth with long dark eyelash and the most distinguished talent , she secretly prefer , though his pride and hers hinder an avowal , and supply the inestimable interest of retardation . the glimpse she have have in her brief life as a family governess , supply her ready faculty with detail enough of delightful still life to furnish her day - dream ; and no one who have not , like Esther , a strong natural prompting and susceptibility toward such thing , and have at the same time suffer from the presence of opposite condition , can understand how powerfully those minor accident of rank which please the fastidious sense can preoccupy the imagination . 

  317 

 it seem that almost everything in her day - dream cavalier apart must be find at Transome Court . but now that fancy be become real , and the impossible appear possible , Esther find the balance of her attention reverse : now that her ladyhood be not simply in Utopia , she find herself arrest and painfully grasp by the mean through which the ladyhood be to be obtain . to her inexperience this strange story of an alienated inheritance , of such a last representative of pure - blooded lineage as old Thomas Transome the bill - sticker , above all of the dispossession hang over those who actually hold , and have expect always to hold , the wealth and position which be suddenly announce to be rightly her all these thing make a picture , not for her own taste and fancy to float in with elysian indulgence , but in which she be compel to gaze on the degrade hard experience of other human being , and on a humiliating loss which be the obverse of her own proud gain . even in her time of most untroubled egoism , Esther shrink from anything ungenerous ; and the fact that she have a very lively image of Harold Transome and his gypsy - eyed boy in her mind , give additional distinctness to the thought that if she enter they must depart . of the eld Transomes she have a dimmer vision , and they be necessarily in the background to her sympathy . 

 she and her father sit with their hand lock , as they might have do if they have be listen to a solemn oracle in the day of old reveal unknown kinship and rightful heirdom . it be not that Esther have any thought of renounce her fortune ; she be incapable , in these moment , of condense her vague idea and feeling into any distinct plan of action , nor indeed do it seem that she be call upon to act with any promptitude . it be only that she be conscious of be strangely awe by something that be call good fortune ; and the awe shut out any scheme of rejection as much as any triumphant joy in acceptance . her father , she learn , have die disappointed and in wrongful imprisonment , and an undefined sense of Nemesis seem half to sanctify her inheritance , and counteract its apparent arbitrariness . 

 Felix Holt be present in her mind throughout ; what he would say be an imaginary commentary that she be constantly frame , and the word that she most frequently give he for she dramatize under the inspiration of a sadness slightly bitter be of this kind : " that be clearly your destiny to be aristocratic , to be rich . I always see 318   that our lot lie widely apart . you be not fit for poverty , or any work of difficulty . but remember what I once say to you about a vision of consequence ; take care where your fortune lead you . " 

 her father have not speak since they have end their study and discussion of the story and the evidence as it be present to they . into this he have enter with his usual penetrating activity ; but he be so accustomed to the impersonal study of narrative , that even in these exceptional moment the habit of half a century assert itself , and he seem sometimes not to distinguish the case of Esther 's inheritance from a story in ancient history , until some detail recall he to the profound feeling that a great , great change might be come over the life of this child who be so close to he . at last he relapse into total silence , and for some time Esther be not move to interrupt it . he have sink back in his chair with his hand lock in her , and be pursue a sort of prayerful meditation : he lift up no formal petition , but it be as if his soul travel again over the fact he have be consider in the company of a guide ready to inspire and correct he . he be strive to purify his feeling in this matter from selfish or worldly dross a striving which be that prayer without cease , sure to wrest an answer by its sublime importunity . 

 there be no knowing how long they might have sit in this way , if it have not be for the inevitable Lyddy remind they dismally of dinner . 

 " yes , Lyddy , we come , " say Esther : and then , before move 

 " be there any advice you have in your mind for I , father ? " the sense of awe be grow in Esther . her intensest life be no long in her dream , where she make thing to her own mind : she be move in a world charge with force . 

 " not yet , my dear save this ; that you will seek special illumination in this juncture , and , above all , be watchful that your soul be not lift up within you by what , rightly consider , be rather an increase of charge , and a call upon you to walk along a path which be indeed easy to the flesh , but dangerous to the spirit . " 

 " you would always live with I , father ? " Esther say , under a strong impulse partly affection , partly the need to grasp at some moral help . but she have no soon utter the word than they raise a vision , show , as by a flash of lightning , the incongruity of that past which 319   have create the sanctity and affection of her life with that future which be come to she the little rusty old minister , with the one luxury of his Sunday evening pipe , smoke up the kitchen chimney , come to live in the midst of grandeur but no ! her father , with the grandeur of his past sorrow and his long struggle labor , forsake his vocation , and vulgarly accept an existence unsuited to he . Esther 's face flush with the excitement of this vision and its reversed interpretation , which five month ago she would have be incapable of see . her question to her father seem like a mockery ; she be ashamed . he answer slowly 

 " touch not that chord yet , my child . I must learn to think of thy lot accord to the demand of Providence . we will rest a while from the subject ; and I will seek calmness in my ordinary duty . " 

 the next morning nothing more be say . Mr. Lyon be absorb in his sermon - making , for it be near the end of the week , and Esther be oblige to attend to her pupil . Mrs. Holt come by invitation with little Job to share their dinner of roast - meat ; and , after much of what the minister call unprofitable discourse , she be quit the house when she hasten back with an astonished face , to tell Mr. Lyon and Esther , who be already in wonder at crash , thunder sound on the pavement , that there be a carriage stopping and stamp at the entry into Malthouse Yard , with " all sort of fine livery , " and a lady and gentleman inside . Mr. Lyon and Esther look at each other , both have the same name in their mind . 

 " if it be Mr. Transome or somebody else as be great , Mr. Lyon , " urge Mrs. Holt , " you will remember my son , and say he be get a mother with a character they may enquire into as much as they like . and never mind what Felix say , for he be so masterful he would stay in prison and be transport whether or no , only to have his own way . for it be not to be think but what the great people could get he off if they would ; and it be very hard with a king in the country and all the text in Proverbs about the King 's countenance , and Solomon and the live baby " 

 Mr. Lyon lift up his hand deprecatingly , and Mrs. Holt retreat from the parlor - door to a corner of the kitchen , the outer doorway be occupy by Dominic , who be enquire if Mr. and Miss Lyon be at home , and could receive Mrs. Transome and Mr. Harold Transome . while Dominic 320   go back to the carriage Mrs. Holt escape with her tiny companion to Zachary 's , the new pew - opener , observe to Lyddy that she know herself , and be not that woman to stay where she might not be want ; whereupon Lyddy , differ fundamentally , admonish her parting ear that it be well if she know herself to be dust and ash silently extend the application of this remark to Mrs. Transome , as she see the tall lady sweep in arrayed in her rich black and fur , with that fine gentleman behind she whose thick top - knot of wavy hair , sparkle ring , dark complexion , and general air of worldly exaltation unconnected with chapel , be painfully suggestive to Lyddy of Herod , Pontius Pilate , or the much - quote Gallio . 

 Harold Transome , greet Esther gracefully , present his mother , whose eagle - like glance , fix on she from the first moment of enter , seem to Esther to pierce she through . Mrs. Transome hardly notice Mr. Lyon , not from studied haughtiness , but from sheer mental inability to consider he as a person ignorant of natural history be unable to consider a fresh - water polyp otherwise than as a sort of animate weed , certainly not fit for table . but Harold see that his mother be agreeably strike by Esther , who indeed show to much advantage . she be not at all take by surprise , and maintain a dignified quietude ; but her previous knowledge and reflection about the possible dispossession of these Transomes give she a softened feeling toward they which ting her manner very agreeably . 

 Harold be carefully polite to the minister , throw out a word to make he understand that he have an important part in the important business which have bring this unannounced visit ; and the four make a group seat not far off each other near the window , Mrs. Transome and Esther be on the sofa . 

 " you must be astonish at a visit from I , Miss Lyon , " Mrs. Transome begin ; " I seldom come to Treby Magna . now I see you , the visit be an unexpected pleasure ; but the cause of my coming be business of a serious nature , which my son will communicate to you . " 

 " I ought to begin by say that what I have to announce to you be the reverse of disagreeable , Miss Lyon , " say Harold , with lively ease . " I do not   suppose the world would consider it very good news for I ; but a reject candidate , Mr. Lyon , " Harold go on , turn graciously to the minister , " begin to be inure to loss and misfortune . " 

  321 

 " truly , sir , " say Mr. Lyon , with a rather sad solemnity , " your allusion hath a grievous bearing for I , but I will not retard your present purpose by further remark . " 

 " you will never guess what I have to disclose , " say Harold , again look at Esther , " unless , indeed , you have already have some previous intimation of it . " 

 " do it refer to law and inheritance ? " say Esther , with a smile . she be already brighten by Harold 's manner . the news seem to be lose its chillness , and to be something really belong to warm , comfortable , interesting life . 

 " then you have already hear of it ? " say Harold , inwardly vex , but sufficiently prepare not to seem so . 

 " only yesterday , " say Esther , quite simply , " I receive a letter from some lawyer with a statement of many surprising thing , show that I be an heiress " here she turn very prettily to address Mrs. Transome " which , as you may imagine , be one of the last thing I could have suppose myself to be . " 

 " my dear , " say Mrs. Transome with elderly grace , just lay her hand for an instant on Esther 's , " it be a lot that would become you admirably . " 

 Esther blush , and say playfully : 

 " oh , I know what to buy with fifty pound a - year , but I know the price of nothing beyond that . " 

 her father sit look at she through his spectacle , stroke his chin . it be amazing to herself that she be take so lightly now what have cause she such deep emotion yesterday . 

 " I daresay , then , " say Harold , " you be more fully possess of particular than I be . so that my mother and I need only tell you what no one else can tell you that be , what be she and my feeling and wish under these new and unexpected circumstance . " 

 " I be most anxious , " say Esther , with a grave beautiful look of respect to Mrs. Transome " most anxious on that point . indeed , be of course in uncertainty about it , I have not yet know whether I could rejoice . " Mrs. Transome 's glance have soften . she like Esther to look at she . 

 " our chief anxiety , " she say , know what Harold wish she to say , " be , that there may be no contest , no useless expenditure of money . of course we will surrender what can be rightfully claim . " 

 " my mother express our feeling precisely , Miss Lyon , " say Harold . " and I be sure , Mr. Lyon , you will understand our desire . " 

  322 

 " Assuredly , sir . my daughter would in any case have have my advice to seek a conclusion which would involve no strife . we endeavor , sir , in our body , to hold to the apostolic rule that one christian brother should not go to law with another ; and I , for my part , would extend this rule to all my fellow - man , apprehend that the practice of our court be little consistent with the simplicity that be in Christ . " 

 " if it be to depend on my will , " say Esther , " there be nothing that would be more repugnant to I than any struggle on such a subject . but can not   the lawyer go on do what they will in spite of I ? it seem that this be what they mean . " 

 " not exactly , " say Harold , smile . " of course they live by such struggle as you dislike . but we can thwart they by determine not to quarrel . it be desirable that we should consider the affair together , and put it into the hand of honorable solicitor . I assure you we Transomes will not contend for what be not our own . " 

 " and this be what I have come to beg of you , " say Mrs. Transome . " it be that you will come to Transome Court and let we take full time to arrange matter . do oblige I : you shall not be tease more than you like by an old woman : you shall do just as you please , and become acquainted with your future home , since it be to be yours . I can tell you a world of thing that you will want to know ; and the business can proceed properly . " 

 " do consent , " say Harold , with win brevity . 

 Esther be flush and her eye be bright . it be impossible for she not to feel that the proposal be a more tempting step toward her change of condition than she could have think of beforehand . she have forget that she be in any trouble . but she look toward her father , who be again stroke his chin , as be his habit when he be doubt or deliberate . 

 " I hope you do not disapprove of Miss Lyon 's grant we this favor ? " say Harold to the minister . 

 " I have nothing to oppose to it , sir , if my daughter 's own mind be clear as to her course . " 

 " you will come now with we , " say Mrs. Transome , persuasively . " you will go back with we now in the carriage . " 

 Harold be highly gratified with the perfection of his mother 's manner on this occasion , which he have look forward to as difficult . since he have come home again he have never see she so much at her ease , or with so much benignancy in her face . the secret lie in the charm of Esther 's sweet young deference , a sort of charm that have not before enter into Mrs. 323   Transome 's elderly life . Esther 's pretty behavior , it must be confess , be not feed entirely from lofty moral source : over and above her really generous feeling , she enjoy Mrs. Transome 's accent , the high - breed quietness of her speech , the delicate odor of her drapery . she have always think that life must be particularly easy if one could pass it among refined people ; and so it seem at this moment . she wish , unmixedly , to go to Transome Court . 

 " since my father have no objection , " she say , " and you urge I so kindly . but I must beg for time to pack up a few clothe . " 

 " by all mean , " say Mrs. Transome . " we be not at all press . " 

 when Esther have leave the room , Harold say , " apart from our immediate reason for come , Mr. Lyon , I could have wish to see you about these unhappy consequence of the election contest . but you will understand that I have be much preoccupy with private affair . " 

 " you have well say that the consequence be unhappy , sir . and but for a reliance on something more than human calculation , I know not which I should most bewail the scandal which wrong - dealing have bring on right principle or the snare which it lay for the foot of a young man who be dear to I . ' one soweth , and another reapeth , ' be a verity that apply to evil as well as good . " 

 " you be refer to Felix Holt . I have not neglect step to secure the good legal help for the prisoner : but I be give to understand that Holt refuse any aid from I . I hope he will not go rashly to work in speak in his own defence without any legal instruction . it be an opprobrium of our law that no counsel be allow to plead for the prisoner in case of felony . a ready tongue may do a man as much harm as good in a court of justice . he pique himself on make a display , and display a little too much . " 

 " Sir , you know he not , " say the little minister , in his deep tone . " he would not accept , even if it be accord , a defense wherein the truth be screen or avoid , not from a vainglorious spirit of self - exhibition , for he hath a singular directness and simplicity of speech ; but from an averseness to a profession wherein a man may without shame seek to justify the wicked for reward , and take away the righteousness of the righteous from he . " 

 " it be a pity a fine young fellow should do himself harm by fanatical notion of that sort . I could at least have procure the advantage of 324   first - rate consultation . he do not   look to I like a dreamy personage . " 

 " nor be he dreamy ; rather , his excess lie in be too practical . " 

 " well , I hope you will not encourage he in such irrationality ; the question be not one of misrepresentation , but of adjust fact , so as to raise it to the power of evidence . do not   you see that ? " 

 " I do , I do . but I distrust not Felix Holt 's discernment in regard to his own case . he build not on doubtful thing and hath no illusory hope ; on the contrary , he be of a too - scornful incredulity where I would fain see a more childlike faith . but he will hold no belief without action correspond thereto ; and the occasion of his return to this , his native place , at a time which have prove fatal , be no other than his resolve to hinder the sale of some drug , which have chiefly support his mother , but which his well knowledge show he to be pernicious to the human frame . he undertake to support she by his own labor ; but , sir , I pray you to mark and old as I be , I will not deny that this young man instruct I herein I pray you to mark the poisonous confusion of good and evil which be the wide - spread effect of vicious practice . through the use of undue electioneering mean concern which , however , I do not accuse you far than of have act the part of he who wash his hand when he deliver up to other the exercise of an iniquitous power Felix Holt be , I will not scruple to say , the innocent victim of a riot ; and that deed of strict honesty , whereby he take on himself the charge of his aged mother , seem now to have deprive she of sufficient bread , and be even an occasion of reproach to he from the weak brother . " 

 " I shall be proud to supply she as amply as you think desirable , " say Harold , not enjoy this lecture . 

 " I will pray you to speak of this question with my daughter , who , it appear , may herself have large mean at command , and would desire to minister to Mrs. Holt 's need with all friendship and delicacy . for the present I can take care that she lack nothing essential . " 

 as Mr. Lyon be speak , Esther re - enter , equip for her drive . she lay her hand on her father 's arm and say , " you will let my pupil know at once , will you , father ? " 

 " Doubtless , my dear , " say the old man , tremble a little under the feeling that this departure of Esther 's be a crisis . nothing again would be as it have be in their mutual life . but he fear that he 325   be be master by a too tender self - regard , and struggle to keep himself calm . 

 Mrs. Transome and Harold have both rise . 

 " if you be quite ready , Miss Lyon , " say Harold , divine that the father and daughter would like to have an unobserved moment , " I will take my mother to the carriage and come back for you . " 

 when they be alone , Esther put her hand on her father 's shoulder and kiss he . 

 " this will not be a grief to you , I hope , father ? you think it be well that I should go ? " 

 " Nay , child , I be weak . but I would fain be capable of a joy quite apart from the accident of my aged earthly existence , which , indeed , be a petty and almost dry - up fountain whereas to the receptive soul the river of life pause not , nor be diminish . " 

 " perhaps you will see Felix Holt again and tell he all ? " 

 " shall I say aught to he for you ? " 

 " oh , no ; only that Job Tudge have a little flannel shirt and a box of lozenge , " say Esther , smile . " ah , I hear Mr. Transome come back . I must say good - bye to Lyddy , else she will cry over my hard heart . " 

 in spite of all the grave thought that have be , Esther feel it a very pleasant as well as new experience to be lead to the carriage by Harold Transome , to be seat on soft cushion , and bowl along , look at admiringly and deferentially by a person opposite , whom it be agreeable to look at in return , and talk to with suavity and liveliness . toward what prospect be that easy carriage really lead she ? she could not be always ask herself mentor - like question . her young , bright nature be rather weary of the sadness that have grow heavy in these last week , like a chill white mist hopelessly veil the day . her fortune be begin to appear worthy of be call good fortune . she have come to a new stage in her journey ; a new day have arise on new scene , and her young untired spirit be full of curiosity . 

 CHAPTER XXXIX . 

 no man believe that many - texture knowledge and skill as a just idea of the solar system , or the power of paint flesh , or of read write harmony can come late and of a sudden ; yet many will not stick at believe that happiness can come at any day and hour solely by a new disposition of event ; though there be naught less capable of a magical production than a mortal 's happiness , which be mainly a complex of habitual relation and disposition not to be work by news from foreign part , or any whirling of fortune 's wheel for one on whose brow Time have write legibly . 

 some day after Esther 's arrival at Transome Court , Denner , come to 326   dress Mrs. Transome before dinner a labor of love for which she have ample leisure now find her mistress seat with more than ever of a marble aspect of self - absorb suffering , which to the waiting - woman 's keen observation have be gradually intensify itself during the past week . she have tap at the door without have be summon , and she have venture to enter though she have hear no voice say , " come in . " 

 Mrs. Transome have on a dark warm dressing - gown , hang in thick fold about she , and she be seat before a mirror which fill a panel from the floor to the ceiling . the room be bright with the light of the fire and of wax candle . for some reason , contrary to her usual practice , Mrs. Transome have herself unfastened her abundant gray hair , which roll backward in a pale sunless stream over her dark dress . she be seat before the mirror apparently look at herself , her brow knit in one deep furrow , and her jewel hand lay one above the other on her knee . probably she have cease to see the reflection in the mirror , for her eye have the fix wide - open look that belong not to examination , but to reverie . motionless in that way , her clear - cut feature keep distinct record of past beauty , she look like an image fade , dry , and bleach by uncounted sun , rather than a breathing woman who have number the year as they pass , and have a consciousness within she which be the slow deposit of those ceaseless roil year . 

 Denner , with all her ingrained and systematic reserve , could not help show sign that she be startle , when , peer from between her half - close eyelid , she see the motionless image in the mirror opposite to she as she enter . her gentle opening of the door have not rouse her mistress , to whom the sensation produce by Denner 's presence be as little disturbing as those of a favorite cat . but the slight cry , and the start reflect in the glass , be unusual enough to break the reverie , Mrs. Transome move , lean back in her chair , and say 

 " so you be come at last , Denner ? " 

 " yes , madam ; it be not late . I be sorry you should have undo your hair yourself . " 

 " I undo it to see what an old hag I be . these fine clothe you put on I , Denner , be only a smart shroud . " 

 " pray do not   talk so , madam . if there be anybody do not   think it pleasant to look at you , so much the bad for they . for my part , I have   see no young one fit to hold up your train . look at your likeness down 327   below ; and though you be old now , what signify ? I would not   be Letty in the scullery because she be get red cheek . she may not   know she be a poor creature , but I know it , and that be enough for I ; I know what sort of a dowdy draggletail she will be in ten year ' time . I would change with nobody , madam . and if trouble be put up to market , I would soon buy old than new . it be something to have see the bad . " 

 " a woman never have see the bad till she be old , Denner , " say Mrs. Transome , bitterly . 

 the keen little waiting - woman be not clear as to the cause of her mistress 's add bitterness ; but she rarely bring herself to ask question , when Mrs. Transome do not authorize they by begin to give her information . bank the bailiff and the head - servant have nod and wink a good deal over the certainty that Mr. Harold be " none so fond " of Jermyn , but this be a subject on which Mrs. Transome have never make up her mind to speak , and Denner know nothing definite . again , she feel quite sure that there be some important secret connect with Esther 's presence in the house ; she suspect that the close Dominic know the secret , and be more trust than she be , in spite of her forty year ' service ; but any resentment on this ground would have be an entertained reproach against her mistress , inconsistent with Denner 's creed and character . she incline to the belief that Esther be the immediate cause of the new discontent . 

 " if there be anything bad come to you , I should like to know what it be , madam , " she say , after a moment 's silence , speak always in the same low quick way , and keep up her quiet labor . " when I awake at cock - crow , I would soon have one real grief on my mind than twenty false . it be well to know one 's rob than to think one be go to be murder . " 

 " I believe you be the creature in the world that love I well , Denner ; yet you will never understand what I suffer . it be of no use tell you . there be no folly in you , and no heartache . you be make of iron . you have never have any trouble . " 

 " I have   have some of your trouble , madam . " 

 " yes , you good thing . but as a sick - nurse , that never catch the fever . you never even have a child . " 

 " I can feel for thing I never go through . I use to be sorry for the poor French Queen when I be young ; I would have lie cold for she to lie warm . I know people have feeling accord to their birth and station . and you always take thing to heart , madam , beyond anybody else . 328   but I hope there be nothing new , to make you talk of the bad . " 

 " yes , Denner , there be there be , " say Mrs. Transome , speak in a low tone of misery , while she bent for her head - dress to be pin on . 

 " be it this young lady ? " 

 " why , what do you think about she , Denner ? " say Mrs. Transome , in a tone of more spirit , rather curious to hear what the old woman would say . 

 " I do not   deny she be graceful , and she have a pretty smile and very good manner : it be quite unaccountable by what bank say about her father . I know nothing of those Treby townsfolk myself , but for my part I be puzzle . I be fond of Mr. Harold . I always shall be , madam . I be at his bringing into the world , and nothing but his do wrong by you would turn I against he . but the servant all say he be in love with Miss Lyon . " 

 " I wish it be true , Denner , " say Mrs. Transome , energetically . " I wish he be in love with she , so that she could master he , and make he do what she please . " 

 " then it be not true what they say ? " 

 " not true that she will ever master he . no woman ever will . he will make her fond of he , and afraid of he . that be one of the thing you have never go through , Denner . a woman 's love be always freeze into fear . she want everything , she be secure of nothing . this girl have a fine spirit plenty of fire and pride and wit . man like such captive , as they like horse that champ the bit and paw the ground : they feel more triumph in their mastery . what be the use of a woman 's will ? if she try , she do not   get it , and she cease to be love . God be cruel when he make woman . " 

 Denner be use to such outburst as this . her mistress 's rhetoric and temper belong to her superior rank , her grand person , and her pierce black eye . Mrs. Transome have a sense of impiety in her word which make they all the more tempting to her impotent anger . the waiting - woman have none of that awe which could be turn into defiance : the Sacred Grove be a common thicket to she . 

 " it may not   be good luck to be a woman , " she say . " but one begin with it from a baby : one get use to it . and I should not   like to be a man to cough so loud , and stand straddle about on a wet day , and be so wasteful with meat and drink . they be a coarse lot , I think . then I 329   need not   make a trouble of this young lady , madam , " she add , after a moment 's pause . 

 " no , Denner , I like she . if that be all I should like Harold to marry she . it would be the good thing . if the truth be know and it will be know soon the estate be her by law such law as it be . it be a strange story : she be a Bycliffe really . " 

 Denner do not look amazed , but go on fasten her mistress 's dress , as she say 

 " well , madam , I be sure there be something wonderful at the bottom of it . and turn the old lawsuit and everything else over in my mind , I think the law might have something to do with it . then she be a bear lady ? " 

 " yes ; she have good blood in her vein . " 

 " we talk that over in the housekeeper 's room what a hand and an instep she have , and how her head be set on her shoulder almost like your own , madam . but her lightish complexion spoil she , to my thinking . and Dominic say Mr. Harold never admire that sort of woman before . there be nothing that smooth fellow could not   tell you if he would : he know the answer to riddle before they be make . however , he know how to hold his tongue ; I will say that for he . and so do I , madam . " 

 " yes , yes ; you will not talk of it till other people be talk of it . " 

 " and so , if Mr. Harold marry she , it would save all fuss and mischief ? " 

 " yes about the estate . " 

 " and he seem incline ; and she will not refuse he , I will answer for it . and you like she , madam . there be everything to set your mind at rest . " 

 Denner be put the finishing - touch to Mrs. Transome 's dress by throw an indian scarf over her shoulder , and so complete the contrast between the majestic lady in costume and the dishevel Hecuba - like woman whom she have find half an hour before . 

 " I be not at rest ! " Mrs. Transome say , with slow distinctness , move from the mirror to the window , where the blind be not draw down , and she could see the chill white landscape and the far - off unheeding star . 

 Denner , more distressed by her mistress 's suffering than she could have be by anything else , take up with the instinct of affection a gold vinaigrette which Mrs. Transome often like to carry with she , and go up to she put it into her hand gently . Mrs. Transome grasp the 330   little woman 's hand hard , and hold it so . 

 " Denner , " she say , in a low tone , " if I could choose at this moment , I would choose that Harold should never have be bear . " 

 " Nay , my dear , "   Denner have only once before in her life say " my dear " to her mistress , " it be a happiness to you then . " 

 " I do not   believe I feel the happiness then as I feel the misery now . it be foolish to say people can not   feel much when they be get old . not pleasure , perhaps little come . but they can feel they be forsake why , every fibre in I seem to be a memory that make a pang . they can feel that all the love in their life be turn to hatred or contempt . " 

 " not mine , madam , not mine . let what would be I should want to live for your sake , for fear you should have nobody to do for you as I would . " 

 " ah , then you be a happy woman , Denner ; you have love somebody for forty year who be old and weak now , and can not   do without you . " 

 the sound of the dinner - gong resound below , and Mrs. Transome let the faithful hand fall again . 

 CHAPTER XL . 

 " she be beautiful ; and therefore to be woo : 
 she be a woman ; therefore to be win . " 
  Henry IV . 
 if Denner have have a suspicion that Esther 's presence at Transome Court be not agreeable to her mistress , it be impossible to entertain such a suspicion with regard to the other member of the family . between she and little Harry there be an extraordinary fascination . this creature , with the soft , broad , brown cheek , low forehead , great black eye , tiny , well - define nose , fierce , bite trick toward every person and thing he dislike , and insistence on entirely occupy those he like , be a human speciman such as Esther have never see before , and she seem to be equally original in Harry 's experience . at first sight her light complexion and her blue gown , probably also her sunny smile and her hand stretch out toward he , seem to make a show for he as of a new sort of bird : he throw himself backward against his " Gappa , " as he call old Mr. Transome , and star at this new comer with the gravity of a wild animal . but she have no soon sit down on the sofa in the 331   library than he climb up to she , and begin to treat she as an attractive object in natural history , snatch up her curl with his brown fist , and , discover that there be a little ear under they , pinch it and blow into it , pull at her coronet of plait , and seem to discover with satisfaction that it do not grow at the summit of her head , but could be drag down and altogether undo . then find that she laugh , toss he back , kiss , and pretend to bite he in fact , be an animal that understand fun he rush off and make Dominic bring a small menagerie of white mouse , squirrel , and bird , with Moro , the black spaniel , to make her acquaintance . Whomsoever Harry like , it follow that Mr. Transome must like : " Gappa , " along with Nimrod the retriever , be part of the menagerie , and perhaps endure more than all the other live creature in the way of be tumble about . see that Esther bear have her hair pull down quite merrily , and that she be willing to be harness and beat , the old man begin to confide to she , in his feeble , smile , and rather jerk fashion , Harry 's remarkable feat : how he have one day , when Gappy be asleep , unpin a whole drawerful of beetle , to see if they would fly away ; then , disgust with their stupidity , be about to throw they all on the ground and stamp on they , when Dominic come in and rescue these valuable specimen ; also , how he have subtly watch Mrs. Transome at the cabinet where she keep her medicine , and , when she have leave it for a little while without lock it , have go to the drawer and scatter half the content on the floor . but what old Mr. Transome think the most wonderful proof of an almost preternatural cleverness be , that Harry would hardly ever talk , but preferred make inarticulate noise , or combine syllable after a method of his own . 

 " he can talk well enough if he like , " say Gappa , evidently think that Harry , like the monkey , have deep reason for his reticence . 

 " you mind he , " he add , nod at Esther , and shake with low - toned laughter . " you will hear : he know the right name of thing well enough , but he like to make his own . he will give you one all to yourself before long . " 

 and when Harry seem to have make up his mind distinctly that Esther 's name be " Boo , " Mr. Transome nod at she with triumphant satisfaction , and then tell she in a low whisper , look round cautiously beforehand , that Harry would never call Mrs. Transome " Gamma , " but always " Bite . " 332 

 " it be wonderful ! " say he , laugh slyly . 

 the old man seem so happy now in the new world create for he by Dominic and Harry , that he would perhaps have make a holocaust of his fly and beetle if it have be necessary in order to keep this living , lively kindness about he . he no long confine himself to the library , but shuffle along from room to room , stay and look on at what be go forward whenever he do not find Mrs. Transome alone . 

 to Esther the sight of this feeble - minded , timid , paralytic man , who have long abdicate all mastery over the thing that be his , be something piteous . certainly this have never be part of the furniture she have imagine for the delightful aristocratic dwelling in her Utopia ; and the sad irony of such a lot impress she the more because in her father she be accustom to age accompany with mental acuman and activity . her thought go back in conjecture over the past life of Mr. and Mrs. Transome , a couple so strangely different from each other . she find it impossible to arrange their existence in the seclusion of this fine park and in this lofty large - roomed house , where it seem quite ridiculous to be anything so small as a human being , without find it rather dull . Mr. Transome have always have his beetle , but Mrs. Transome ? it be not easy to conceive that the husband and wife have ever be very fond of each other . 

 Esther feel at her ease with Mrs. Transome : she be gratify by the consciousness for on this point Esther be very quick that Mrs. Transome admire she , and look at she with satisfied eye . but when they be together in the early day of her stay , the conversation turn chiefly on what happen in Mrs. Transome 's youth what she wear when she be present at Court who be the most distinguished and beautiful woman at that time the terrible excitement of the French Revolution the emigrant she have know , and the history of various title member of the Lingon family . and Esther , from native delicacy , do not lead to more recent topic of a personal kind . she be copiously instruct that the Lingon family be well than that even of the eld Transomes , and be privileged with an explanation of the various quartering , which prove that the Lingon blood have be continually enrich . poor Mrs. Transome , with her secret bitterness and dread , 333   still find a flavor in this sort of pride ; none the less because certain deed of her own life have be in fatal inconsistency with it . besides , genealogy enter into her stock of idea , and her talk on such subject be as necessary as the note of the linnet or the blackbird . she have no ultimate analysis of thing that go beyond blood and family the Herons of Fenshore or the Badgers of Hillbury . she have never see behind the canvas with which her life be hung . in the dim background there be the burn mount and the table of the law ; in the foreground there be Lady Debarry privately gossippe about she , and Lady Wyvern finally decide not to send her invitation to dinner . unlike that Semiramis who make law to suit her practical license , she live , poor soul , in the midst of desecrate sanctity , and of honor that look tarnished in the light of monotonous and weary sun . glimpse of the Lingon heraldry in their freshness be interesting to Esther ; but it occur to she that when she have know about they a good while they would cease to be succulent theme of converse or meditation , and Mrs. Transome , have know they all along , might have feel a vacuum in spite of they . 

 nevertheless it be entertaining at present to be seat on soft cushion with she net before she , while Mrs. Transome go on with her embroidery , and tell in that easy phrase , and with that refine high - breed tone and accent which she possess in perfection , family story that to Esther be like so many novelette ; what diamond be in the Earl 's family , own cousin to Mrs. Transome ; how poor Lady Sara 's husband go off into jealous madness only a month after their marriage , and drag that sweet blue - eyed thing by the hair ; and how the brilliant fanny , have marry a country parson , become so niggardly that she have go about almost beg for fresh egg from the farmer ' wife , though she have do very well with her six son , as there be a bishop and no end of interest in the family , and two of they get appointment in India . 

 at present Mrs. Transome do not touch at all on her own time of privation , or her trouble with her eld son , or on anything that lie very close to her heart . she converse with Esther , and act the part of hostess , as she perform her toilet and go on with her embroidery : these thing be to be do whether one be happy or miserable . even the patriarch Job , if he have be a gentleman of the modern West , 334   would have avoid picturesque disorder and poetical lament ; and the friend who call on he , though not less disposed than Bildad the Shuhite to hint that their unfortunate friend be in the wrong , would have sit on chair and hold their hat in their hand . the hard problem of our life have change less than our manner ; we wrestle with the old sorrow , but more decorously . Esther 's inexperience prevent she from divine much about this fine gray - haired woman , whom she could not help perceive to stand apart from the family group , as if there be some cause of isolation for she both within and without . to her young heart there be a peculiar interest in Mrs. Transome . an elderly woman , whose beauty , position , and graceful kindness toward herself , make deference to her spontaneous , be a new figure in Esther 's experience . her quick light movement be always ready to anticipate what Mrs. Transome want ; her bright apprehension and silvery speech be always ready to cap Mrs. Transome 's narrative or instruction even about dos and liniment , with some lively commentary . she must have behave charmingly ; for one day when she have trip across the room to put the screen just in the right place , Mrs. Transome say , take her hand , " my dear , you make I wish I have a daughter ! " 

 that be pleasant ; and so it be to be deck by Mrs. Transome 's own hand in a set of turquoise ornament , which become her wonderfully , wear with a white Cashmere dress , which be also insist on . Esther never reflect that there be a double intention in these pretty way toward she ; with young generosity , she be rather preoccupy by the desire to prove that she herself entertain no low triumph in the fact that she have right prejudicial to this family whose life she be learn . and besides , through all Mrs. Transome 's perfect manner , there pierce some undefinable indication of a hide anxiety much deep than anything she could feel about this affair of the estate to which she often allude slightly as a reason for inform Esther of something . it be impossible to mistake she for a happy woman ; and young speculation be always stir by discontent for which there be no obvious cause . when we be old , we take the uneasy eye and the bitter lip more as a matter of course . 

 but Harold Transome be more communicative about recent year than his mother be . he think it well that Esther should know how the fortune of his family have be drain by law expense , owe to suit mistakenly urge by her family ; he speak of his mother 's lonely life 335   and pinch circumstance , of her lack of comfort in her eld son , and of the habit she have consequently acquire of look at the gloomy side of thing . he hint that she have be accustom to dictate , and that , as he have leave she when he be a boy , she have perhaps indulge the dream that he would come back a boy . she be still sore on the point of his politic . these thing could not be help , but so far as he could , he wish to make the rest of her life as cheerful as possible . 

 Esther listen eagerly , and take these thing to heart . the claim to an inheritance , the sudden discovery of a right to a fortune hold by other , be acquire a very distinct and unexpected meaning for she . every day she be get more clearly into her imagination what it would be to abandon her own past , and what she would enter into in exchange for it ; what it would be to disturb a long possession , and how difficult it be to fix a point at which the disturbance might begin , so as to be contemplate without pain . 

 Harold Transome 's thought turn on the same subject , but accompany by a different state of feeling and with more definite resolution . he see a mode of reconcile all difficulty , which look pleasanter to he the long he look at Esther . when she have be hardly a week in the house , he have make up his mind to marry she ; and it have never enter into that mind that the decision do not rest entirely with his inclination . it be not that he think slightly of Esther 's demand ; he see that she would require considerable attraction to please she , and that there be difficulty to be overcome . she be clearly a girl who must be woo ; but Harold do not despair of present the requisite attraction , and the difficulty give more interest to the wooing than he could have believe . when he have say that he would not marry an Englishwoman , he have always make a mental reservation in favor of peculiar circumstance ; and now the peculiar circumstance be come . to be deeply in love be a catastrophe not likely to happen to he ; but he be readily amorous . no woman could make he miserable , but he be sensitive to the presence of woman , and be kind to they ; not with grimace , like a man of mere gallantry , but beamingly , easily , like a man of genuine good - nature . and each day he be near Esther , the solution of all difficulty by marriage become a more pleasing prospect ; though he have to confess to himself that the difficulty do not diminish on a nearer view , in spite of the flattering sense that 336   she brighten at his approach . 

 Harold be not one to fail in a purpose for want of assiduity . after an hour or two devote to business in the morning , he go to look for Esther , and if he do not find she at play with Harry and old Mr. Transome , or chat with his mother , he go into the drawing - room , where she be usually either seat with a book on her knee and " make a bed for her cheek " with one little hand , while she look out of the window , or else stand in front of one of the full - length family portrait with an air of rumination . Esther find it impossible to read in these day ; her life be a book which she seem herself to be construct try to make character clear before she , and look into the way of destiny . 

 the active Harold have almost always something definite to propose by way of fill the time ; if it be fine , she must walk out with he and see the ground ; and when the snow melt and it be no long slippery , she must get on horseback and learn to ride . if they staid indoor , she must learn to play at billiard , or she must go over the house and see the picture he have have hang anew , or the costume he have bring from the East ; or come into his study and look at the map of the estate , and hear what if it have remain in his family he have intend to do in every corner of it in order to make the most of its capability . 

 about a certain time in the morning Esther have learn to expect he . let every wooer make himself strongly expect ; he may succeed by dint of be absent , but hardly in the first instance . one morning Harold find she in the drawing - room , lean against a console - table , and look at the full - length portrait of a certain Lady Betty Transome , who have live a century and a half before , and have the usual charm of lady in Sir Peter Lely 's style . 

 " do not   move , pray , " he say on enter ; " you look as if you be stand for your own portrait . " 

 " I take that as an insinuation , " say Esther , laughing , and move toward her seat on an ottoman near the fire , " for I notice almost all the portrait be in a conscious , affected attitude . that fair Lady Betty look as if she have be drill into that posture , and have not will enough of her own ever to move again unless she have a little push give to she . " 

 " she brighten up that panel well with her long satin skirt , " say Harold , as he follow Esther , " but alive I dare say she would have 337   be less cheerful company . " 

 " one would certainly think that she have just be unpacked from silver paper . ah , how chivalrous you be ! " say Esther , as Harold , kneel on one knee , hold her silken netting - stirrup for she to put her foot through . she have often fancy pleasant scene in which such homage be render to she , and the homage be not disagreeable now it be really come ; but , strangely enough , a little dart sensation at that moment be accompany by the vivid remembrance of some one who have never pay the least attention to her foot . there have be a slight blush , such as often come and go rapidly , and she be silent a moment . Harold naturally believe that it be he himself who be fill the field of vision . he would have like to place himself on the ottoman near Esther , and behave very much more like a lover ; but he take a chair opposite to she at a circumspect distance . he dare not do otherwise . along with Esther 's playful charm she convey an impression of personal pride and high spirit which warn Harold 's acuteness that in the delicacy of their present position he might easily make a false move and offend she . a woman be likely to be credulous about adoration , and to find no difficulty in refer it to her intrinsic attraction ; but Esther be too dangerously quick and critical not to discern the least awkwardness that look like offer her marriage as a convenient compromise for himself . beforehand , he might have say that such characteristic as hers be not loveable in a woman ; but , as it be , he find that the hope of please she have a piquancy quite new to he . 

 " I wonder , " say Esther , break the silence in her usual light silvery tone " I wonder whether the woman who look in that way ever feel any trouble . I see there be two old one up - stair in the billiard - room who have only get fat ; the expression of their face be just of the same sort . " 

 " a woman ought never to have any trouble . there should always be a man to guard she from it .   Harold Transome be masculine and fallible ; he have incautiously sit down this morning to pay his address by talk about nothing in particular ; and , clever experienced man as he be , he fall into nonsense . 

 " but suppose the man himself get into trouble you would wish she to mind about that . or suppose , " add Esther , suddenly look up merrily 338   at Harold , " the man himself be troublesome ? " 

 " oh , you must not strain probability in that way . the generality of man be perfect . take I , for example . " 

 " you be a perfect judge of sauce , " say Esther , who have her triumph in let Harold know that she be capable of take note . 

 " that be perfection number one . pray go on . " 

 " oh , the catalogue be too long I should be tired before I get to your magnificent ruby ring and your glove always of the right color . " 

 " if you would let I tell you your perfection , I should not be tired . " 

 " that be not complimentary ; it mean that the list be short . " 

 " no ; it mean that the list be pleasant to dwell upon . " 

 " pray do not   begin , " say Esther , with her pretty toss of the head ; " it would be dangerous to our good understanding . the person I like well in the world be one who do nothing but scold I and tell I of my fault . " 

 when Esther begin to speak , she mean to do no more than make a remote unintelligible allusion , feel , it must be own , a naughty will to flirt and be saucy , and thwart Harold 's attempt to be felicitous in compliment . but she have no soon utter the word than they seem to she like a confession . a deep flush spread itself over her face and neck , and the sense that she be blush go on deepen her color . Harold feel himself unpleasantly illuminate as to a possibility that have never yet occur to he . his surprise make an uncomfortable pause , in which Esther have time to feel much vexation . 

 " you speak in the past tense , " say Harold , at last ; " yet I be rather envious of that person . I shall never be able to win your regard in the same way . be it anyone at Treby ? because in that case I can enquire about your fault . " 

 " oh , you know I have always live among grave people , " say Esther , more able to recover herself now she be speak to . " before I come home to be with my father I be nothing but a school - girl first , and then a teacher in different stage of growth . People in those circumstance be not usually flatter . but there be variety in fault - finding . at our Paris school the master I like well be an old man who storm at I terribly when I read Racine , but yet show that he be proud of I . " 

  339 

 Esther be get quite cool again . but Harold be not entirely satisfied ; if there be any obstacle in his way , he wish to know exactly what it be . 

 " that must have be a wretched life for you at Treby , " he say " a person of your accomplishment . " 

 " I use to be dreadfully discontent , " say Esther , much occupy with mistake she have make in her netting . " but I be become less so . I have have time to get rather wise , you know ; I be two - and - twenty . " 

 " yes , " say Harold , rise and walk a few pace backward and forward , " you be past your majority ; you be empress of your own fortune and more beside . " 

 " dear I , " say Esther , let her work fall , and lean back against the cushion ; " I do not   think I know very well what to do with my empire . " 

 " well , " say Harold , pause in front of she , lean one arm on the mantelpiece , and speak very gravely , " I hope that in any case , since you appear to have no near relative who understand affair , you will confide in I , and trust I with all your intention as if I have no other personal concern in the matter than a regard for you . I hope you believe I capable of act as the guardian of your interest , even where it turn out to be inevitably oppose to my own . " 

 " I be sure you have give I reason to believe it , " say Esther , with seriousness , put out her hand to Harold . she have not be leave in ignorance that he have have opportunity twice offer of stifle her claim . 

 Harold raise the hand to his lip , but dare not retain it more than an instant . still the sweet reliance in Esther 's manner make an irresistible temptation to he . after stand still a moment or two , while she bent over her work , he glide to the ottoman and seat himself close by she , look at her busy hand . 

 " I see you have make mistake in your work , " he say , bend still near , for he see that she be conscious , yet not angry . 

 " Nonsense ! you know nothing about it , " say Esther , laughing , and crush up the soft silk under her palm . " those blunder have a design in they . " 

 she look round , and see a handsome face very near she . Harold be look , as he feel , thoroughly enamored of this bright woman , who be not at all to his preconceived taste . perhaps a touch of hypothetic jealousy now help to heighten the effect . but he master all indiscretion , and only look at she as he say 

  340 

 " I be wonder whether you have any deep wish and secret that I can not   guess . " 

 " pray do not   speak of my wish , " say Esther , quite overmaster by this new and apparently involuntary manifestation in Harold ; " I could not possibly tell you one at this moment I think I shall never find they out again . oh , yes , " she say , abruptly , struggle to relieve herself from the oppression of unintelligible feeling " I do know one wish distinctly . I want to go and see my father . he write I word that all be well with he , but still I want to see he . " 

 " you shall be drive there when you like . " 

 " may I go now I mean as soon as it be convenient ? " say Esther , rise . 

 " I will give the order immediately , if you wish it , " say Harold , understand that the audience be break up . 

 CHAPTER XLI . 

 he rat I as the merchant do the ware 
 he will not purchase " quality not high 
 ' twill lose its color open to the sun , 
 have no aroma , and , in fine , be naught 
 I barter not for such commodity 
 there be no ratio betwixt sand and gem . " 
 ' tis wicked judgment ! for the soul can grow , 
 as embryo , that live and move but blindly , 
 burst from the dark , emerge , regenerate , 
 and lead a life of vision and of choice . 
 Esther do not take the carriage into Malthouse Lane , but leave it to wait for she outside the town ; and when she enter the house she put her finger on her lip to Lyddy and run lightly up - stair . she wish to surprise her father by this visit , and she succeed . the little minister be just then almost surround by a wall of book , with merely his head peep above they , be much embarrassed to find a substitute for table and desk on which to arrange the volume he keep open for reference . he be absorb in master all those painstaking interpretation of the Book of Daniel , which be by this time well go to the limbo of mistaken criticism ; and Esther , as she open the door softly , hear he rehearse aloud a passage in which he declare , with some parenthetic proviso , that he conceive not how a perverse ingenuity could blunt the edge of prophetic explicitness , or how an open mind could fail to see in the chronology of " the little horn " the resplendent lamp of an inspire symbol search out the germinal growth of an anti - christian power . 

  341 

 " you will not like I to interrupt you , father ? " say Esther , slyly . 

 " ah , my beloved child ! " he exclaim , upset a pile of book , and thus unintentionally make a convenient breach in his wall , through which Esther could get up to he and kiss he . " Thy appear be as a joy despair of . I have think of thee as the blinded think of the daylight which indeed be a thing to rejoice in , like all other good , though we see it not nigh . " 

 " be you sure you have be as well and comfortable as you say you be in your letter ? " say Esther , seat herself close in front of her father and lay her hand on his shoulder . 

 " I write truly , my dear , accord to my knowledge at the time . but to an old memory like mine the present day be but as a little water pour on the deep . it seem now that all have be as usual , except my study , which have go somewhat curiously into prophetic history . but I fear you will rebuke I for my negligent apparel , " say the little man , feel in front of Esther 's brightness like a bat overtake by the morning . 

 " that be Lyddy 's fault , who sit cry over her want of christian assurance instead of brush your clothe and put out your clean cravat . she be always say her righteousness be filthy rag , and really I do not   think that be a very strong expression for it . I be sure it be dusty clothe and furniture . " 

 " Nay , my dear , your playfulness glance too severely on our faithful Lyddy . Doubtless I be myself deficient , in that I do not aid her infirm memory by admonition . but now tell I aught that you have leave untold about yourself . your heart have go out somewhat toward this family the old man and the child , whom I have not reckon of ? " 

 " yes , father . it be more and more difficult to I to see how I can make up my mind to disturb these people at all . " 

 " something should doubtless be devise to lighten the loss and the change to the aged father and mother . I would have you in any case seek to temper a vicissitude , which be nevertheless a providential arrangement not to be wholly set aside . " 

 " do you think , father do you feel assured that a case of inheritance like this of mine be a sort of providential arrangement that make a command ? " 

 " I have so hold it , " say Mr. Lyon , solemnly ; " in all my meditation I have so hold it . for you have to consider , my dear , that you have 342   be lead by a peculiar path , and into experience which be not ordinarily the lot of those who be seat in high place , and what I have hint to you already in my letter on this head , I shall wish on a future opportunity to enter into more at large . " 

 Esther be uneasily silent . on this great question of her lot she see doubt and difficulty , in which it seem as if her father could not help she . there be no illumination for she in this theory of providential arrangement . she say suddenly   what she have not think of at all suddenly  

 " have you be again to see Felix Holt , father ? you have not mention he in your letter . " 

 " I have be since I last write , my dear , and I take his mother with I , who , I fear , make the time heavy to he with her plaint . but afterward I carry she away to the house of a brother minister at Loamford , and return to Felix , and then we have much discourse . " 

 " do you tell he of everything that have happen I mean about I about the Transomes ? " 

 " Assuredly I tell he , and he listen as one astonish . for he have much to hear , know naught of your birth , and that you have any other father than Rufus Lyon . ' tis a narrative I trust I shall not be call on to give to other ; but I be not without satisfaction in unfold the truth to this young man , who hath work himself into my affection strangely I would fain hope for end that will be a visible good in his less way - wear life , when mine shall be no long . " 

 " and you tell he how the Transomes have come , and that I be stay at Transome Court ? " 

 " yes , I tell these thing with some particularity , as be my will not concern what hath imprint itself on my mind . " 

 " what do Felix say ? " 

 " truly , my dear , nothing desirable to recite , " say Mr. Lyon , rub his hand over his brow . 

 " dear father , he do say something , and you always remember what people say . pray tell I ; I want to know . " 

 " it be a hasty remark , and rather escape he than be consciously frame . he say , ' then she will marry Transome ; that be what Transome mean . ' " 

 " that be all ? " say Esther , turn rather pale , and bite her lip with the determination that the tear should not start . 

 " yes , we do not go far into that branch of the subject . I apprehend there be no warrant for his seeming prognostic , and I should not be 343   without disquiet if I think otherwise . for I confess that in your accession to this great position and property , I contemplate with hopeful satisfaction your remain attach to that body of congregational Dissent , which , as I hold , hath retain most of pure and primitive discipline . your education and peculiar history would thus be see to have coincide with a long train of event in make this family property a means of honor and illustrate a purer form of Christianity than that which hath unhappily obtain the pre - eminence in this land . I speak , my child , as you know , always in the hope that you will fully join our communion ; and this dear wish of my heart nay , this urgent prayer would seem to be frustrate by your marriage with a man , of whom there be at least no visible indication that he would unite himself to our body . " 

 if Esther have be less agitated , she would hardly have help smile at the picture her father 's word suggest of Harold Transome " join the church " in Malthouse Yard . but she be too seriously preoccupy with what Felix have say , which hurt she in a two - edge fashion that be highly significant . first , she be very angry with he for dare to say positively whom she would marry ; and secondly , she be angry at the implication that there be from the first a cool deliberate design in Harold Transome to marry she . Esther say to herself that she be quite capable of discern Harold Transome 's disposition , and judging of his conduct . she feel sure he be generous and open . it do not lower he in her opinion that since circumstance have bring they together he evidently admire she be in love with she in short , desire to marry she ; and she think that she discern the delicacy which hinder he from be more explicit . there be no point on which young woman be more easily pique than this of their sufficiency to judge the man who make love to they . and Esther 's generous nature delight to believe in generosity . all these thought be make a tumult in her mind while her father be suggest the radiance her lot might cast on the cause of congregational Dissent . she hear what he say , and remember it afterward , but she make no reply at present , and choose rather to start up in search of a brush an action which would seem to her father quite a usual sequence with she . it serve the purpose of divert he from a lengthy subject . 

  344 

 " have you yet speak with Mr. Transome concern Mrs. Holt , my dear ? " he say , as Esther be move about the room . " I hint to he that you would well decide how assistance should be tender to she . " 

 " no , father , we have not approach the subject . Mr. Transome may have forget it , and , for several reason , I would rather not talk of this of money matter to he at present . there be money due to I from the Lukyns and the Pendrells . " 

 " they have pay it , " say Mr. Lyon , open his desk . " I have it here ready to deliver to you . " 

 " keep it , father , and pay Mrs. Holt 's rent with it , and do anything else that be want for she . we must consider everything temporary now , " say Esther , envelop her father in a towel , and begin to brush his auburn fringe of hair , while he shut his eye in preparation for this pleasant passivity . " everything be uncertain what may become of Felix what may become of we all . oh , dear ! " she go on , change suddenly to laugh merriment , " I be begin to talk like Lyddy , I think . " 

 " truly , " say Mr. Lyon , smile , " the uncertainty of thing be a text rather too wide and obvious for fruitful application ; and to discourse of it be , as one may say , to bottle up the air , and make a present of it to those who be already stand out of door . " 

 " do you think , " say Esther , in the course of their chat , " that the Treby people know at all about the reason of my be at Transome Court ? " 

 " I have have no sign thereof : and indeed there be no one , as it appear , who could make the story public . the man Christian be away in London with Mr. Debarry , Parliament now begin ; and Mr. Jermyn would doubtless respect the confidence of the Transomes . I have not see he lately . I know nothing of his movement . and so far as my own speech be concern , and my strict command to Lyddy , I have withhold the mean of information even as to your have return to Transome Court in the carriage , not wish to give any occasion to solicitous questioning till time hath somewhat inure I . but it hath get abroad that you be there , and be the subject of conjecture , whereof , I imagine , the chief be , that you be go as companion to Mistress Transome ; for some of our friend have already hint a rebuke to I that I should permit your take a position so little likely to further your spiritual welfare . " 

  345 

 " now , father , I think I shall be oblige to run away from you , not to keep the carriage too long , " say Esther , as she finish her reform on the minister 's toilet . " you look beautiful now , and I must give Lyddy a little lecture before I go . " 

 " yes , my dear ; I would not detain you , see that my duty demand I . but take with you this treatise , which I have purposely select . it concern all the main question between ourselves and the Establishment government , discipline , state - support . it be seasonable that you should give a near attention to these polemic , lest you be draw aside by the fallacious association of a State Church with elevated rank . " 

 Esther choose to take the volume submissively , rather than to adopt the ungraceful sincerity of say that she be unable at present to give her mind to the original function of a bishop or the comparative merit of Endowments and Voluntaryism . but she do not run her eye over the page during her solitary drive to get a foretaste of the argument , for she be entirely occupy with Felix Holt 's prophecy that she would marry Harold Transome . 

 CHAPTER XLII . 

 Thou sayst it , and not I ; for thou hast do 
 the ugly deed that make these ugly word . 
  sophocle : Electra . 
 Yea , it become a man 
 to cherish memory , where he have delight . 
 for kindness be the natural birth of kindness . 
 whose soul record not the great debt of joy , 
 be stamp for ever an ignoble man . 
  sophocle : Ajax . 
 it so happen that , on the morning of the day when Esther go to see her father , Jermyn have not yet hear of her presence at Transome Court . one fact conducing to keep he in this ignorance be , that some day after his critical interview with Harold day during which he have be wonder how long it would be before Harold make up his mind to sacrifice the luxury of satisfied anger for the solid advantage of secure fortune and position he be peremptorily call away by business to the south of England , and be oblige to inform Harold by letter of his absence . he take care also to notify his return ; but Harold make no sign in reply . the day pass without bring he any gossip concern Esther 's visit , for such gossip be almost confine to Mr. Lyon 's congregation , her Church pupil , Miss Louisa Jermyn among they , have be satisfied by her father 's write statement that she be go on a visit of uncertain duration . but on this day of Esther 's 346   call in Malthouse Yard , the Miss Jermyns in their walk see she get into the Transomes ' carriage , which they have previously observe to be wait , and which they now see bowl along on the road toward Little Treby . it follow that only a few hour later the news reach the astonished ear of Matthew Jermyn . 

 entirely ignorant of those converging indication and small link of incident which have raise Christian 's conjecture , and have gradually contribute to put he in possession of the fact ; ignorant too of some busy motif in the mind of his obliged servant Johnson ; Jermyn be not likely to see at once how the momentous information that Esther be the survive Bycliffe could possibly have reach Harold . his daughter naturally leap , as other have do , to the conclusion that the Transomes , seek a governess for little Harry , have have their choice direct to Esther , and observe that they must have attract she by a high salary to induce she to take charge of such a small pupil ; though of course it be important that his English and French should be carefully attend to from the first . Jermyn , hear this suggestion , be not without a momentary hope that it might be true , and that Harold be still safely unconscious of have under the same roof with he the legal claimant of the family estate . 

 but a mind in the grasp of a terrible anxiety be not credulous of easy solution . the one stay that bear up our hope be sure to appear frail , and if look at long will seem to totter . too much depend on that unconsciousness of Harold 's ; and although Jermyn do not see the course of thing that could have disclose and combine the various item of knowledge which he have imagine to be his own secret , and therefore his safeguard , he see quite clearly what be likely to be the result of the disclosure . not only would Harold Transome be no long afraid of he , but also , by marry Esther   and Jermyn at once feel sure of this issue , would be triumphantly free from any unpleasant consequence , and could pursue much at his ease the gratification of ruin Matthew Jermyn . the prevision of an enemy 's triumphant ease be in any case sufficiently irritate to hatred , and there be reason why it be peculiarly exasperate here : but Jermyn have not the leisure now for mere fruitless emotion ; he have to think of a possible device which might save he from imminent ruin not an indefinite adversity , but a ruin in detail , which his thought paint out with the sharp , ugly intensity . a man of sixty , with an unsuspicious wife and daughter 347   capable of shriek and faint at a sudden revelation , and of look at he reproachfully in their daily misery under a shabby lot to which he have reduce they with a mind and with habit dry hard by the year with no glimpse of an endurable standing - ground except where he could domineer and be prosperous accord to the ambition of push middle - class gentility , such a man be likely to find the prospect of worldly ruin ghastly enough to drive he to the most uninviting mean of escape . he will probably prefer any private scorn that will save he from public infamy , or that will leave he with money in his pocket , to the humiliation and hardship of new servitude in old age , a shabby hat and a melancholy hearth , where the firing must be use charily and the woman look sad . but though a man may be willing to escape through a sewer , a sewer with an outlet into the dry air be not always at hand . run away , especially when speak of as absconding , seem at a distance to offer a good modern substitute for the right of sanctuary ; but see closely , it be often find inconvenient and scarcely possible . 

 Jermyn , on thoroughly consider his position , see that he have no very agreeable resource at command . but he soon make up his mind what he would do next . he write to Mrs. Transome request she to appoint an hour in which he could see she privately : he know she would understand that it be to be an hour when Harold be not at home . as he seal the letter , he indulge a faint hope that in this interview he might be assure of Esther 's birth be unknown at Transome Court ; but in the bad case , perhaps some help might be find in Mrs. Transome . to such us may tender relation come when they have cease to be tender ! the Hazaels of our world who be push on quickly against their preconceived confidence in themselves to do doglike action by the sudden suggestion of a wicked ambition , be much few than those who be lead on through the year by the gradual demand of a selfishness which have spread its fibre far and wide through the intricate vanity and sordid care of an everyday existence . 

 in consequence of that letter to Mrs. Transome , Jermyn be , two day afterward , usher into the small drawing - room at Transome Court . it be a charming little room in its refurbish condition : it have two pretty inlay cabinet , great china vase with content that send forth odor of paradise , group of flower in oval frame on the wall , and Mrs. Transome 's own portrait in the evening costume of 1800 , with 348   a garden in the background . that brilliant young woman look smilingly down on Mr. Jermyn as he pass in front of the fire ; and at present her be the only gaze in the room . he could not help meet the gaze as he wait , hold his hat behind he could not help see many memory light up by it ; but the strong bent of his mind be to go on argue each memory into a claim , and to see in the regard other have for he a merit of his own . there have be plenty of road open to he when he be a young man ; perhaps if he have not allow himself to be determine   chiefly , of course , by the feeling of other , for of what effect would his own feeling have be without they ?   into the road he actually take , he might have do well for himself . at any rate , he be likely at last to get the bad of it , and it be he who have most reason to complain . the fortunate Jason , as we know from euripide , piously thank the goddess , and see clearly that he be not at all oblige to Medea ; Jermyn be , perhaps , not aware of the precedent , but think out his own freedom from obligation and the indebtedness of other toward he with a native faculty not inferior to Jason 's . 

 before three minute have pass , however , as if by some sorcery , the brilliant smile young woman above the mantelpiece seem to be appear at the doorway wither and frost by many winter , and with lip and eye from which the smile have depart . Jermyn advance , and they shake hand , but neither of they say anything by way of greeting . Mrs. Transome seat herself , and point to a chair opposite and near she . 

 " Harold have go to Loamford , " she say , in a subdue tone . " you have something particular to say to I ? " 

 " yes , " say Jermyn , with his soft and deferential air . " the last time I be here I could not take the opportunity of speak to you . but I be anxious to know whether you be aware of what have pass between I and Harold ? " 

 " yes , he have tell I everything . " 

 " about his proceeding against I ? and the reason he stop they ? " 

 " yes : have you have notice that he have begin they again ? " 

 " no , " say Jermyn , with a very unpleasant sensation . 

 " of course he will now , " say Mrs. Transome . " there be no reason in his mind why he should not . " 

 " have he resolve to risk the estate then ? " 

  349 

 " he feel in no danger on that score . and if there be , the danger do not   depend on you . the most likely thing be , that he will marry this girl . " 

 " he know everything then ? " say Jermyn , the expression of his face get cloud . 

 " everything . it be of no use for you to think of master he : you can not   do it . I use to wish Harold to be fortunate , and he be fortunate , " say Mrs. Transome , with intense bitterness . " it be not my star that he inherit . " 

 " do you know how he come by the information about this girl ? " 

 " no ; but she know it all before we speak to she . it be no secret . " 

 Jermyn be confound by this hopeless frustration to which he have no key . though he think of Christian , the thought shed no light ; but the more fatal point be clear : he hold no secret that could help he . 

 " you be aware that these chancery proceeding may ruin I ? " 

 " he tell I they would . but if you be imagine I can do anything , pray dismiss the notion . I have tell he as plainly as I dare that I wish he to drop all public quarrel with you , and that you could make an arrangement without scandal . I can do no more . he will not listen to I ; he do not   mind about my feeling . he care more for Mr. Transome than he do for I . he will not listen to I any more than if I be an old ballad - singer . " 

 " it be very hard on I , I know , " say Jermyn , in the tone with which a man fling out a reproach . 

 " I besought you three month ago to bear anything rather than quarrel with he . " 

 " I have not quarrel with he . it be he who have be always seek a quarrel with I . I have bear a great deal more than any one else would . he set his tooth against I from the first . " 

 " he see thing that annoy he ; and man be not like woman , " say Mrs. Transome . there be bitter innuendo in that truism . 

 " it be very hard on I I know that , " say Jermyn , with an intensification of his previous tone , rise and walk a step or two , then turn and lay his hand on the back of the chair . " of course the law in this case can not   in the least represent the justice of the matter . I make a good many sacrifice in time past . I give up a great deal of fine business for the sake of attend to the family affair , 350   and in that lawsuit they would have go to rack and ruin if it have not   be for I . " 

 he move away again , lay down his hat , which he have be previously hold , and thrust his hand into his pocket as he return . Mrs. Transome sit motionless as marble , and almost as pale . her hand lie cross on her knee . this man , young , slim , and graceful , with a selfishness which then take the form of homage to she , have at one time kneel to she and kiss those hand fervently , and she have think there be a poetry in such passion beyond any to be find in everyday domesticity . 

 " I stretch my conscience a good deal in that affair of Bycliffe , as you know perfectly well . I tell you everything at the time . I tell you I be very uneasy about those witness , and about get he throw into prison . I know it be the black thing anybody could charge I with , if they know my life from begin to end ; and I should never have do it , if I have not be under an infatuation such as make a man do anything . what do it signify to I about the loss of the lawsuit ? I be a young bachelor I have the world before I . " 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Transome , in a low tone . " it be a pity you do not   make another choice . " 

 " what would have become of you ? " say Jermyn , carry along a climax , like other self - justifier . " I have to think of you . you would not have like I to make another choice then . " 

 " clearly , " say Mrs. Transome , with concentrated bitterness , but still quietly ; " the great mistake be mine . " 

 egoism be usually stupid in a dialogue ; but Jermyn 's do not make he so stupid that he do not feel the edge of Mrs. Transome 's word . they increase his irritation . 

 " I hardly see that , " he reply , with a slight laugh of scorn . " you have an estate and a position to save , to go no far . I remember very well what you say to I ' a clever lawyer can do anything if he have the will ; if it be impossible , he will make it possible . and the property be sure to be Harold 's some day . ' he be a baby then . " 

 " I remember most thing a little too well ; you have well say at once what be your object in recall they . " 

 " an object that be nothing more than justice . with the relation I stand in , it be not likely I should think myself bind by all the form that be make to bind stranger . I have often immense trouble to raise the 351   money necessary to pay off debt and carry on the affair ; and , as I say before , I have give up other line of advancement which would have be open to I if I have not stay in this neighborhood at a critical time when I be fresh to the world . anybody who know the whole circumstance would say that my be hunt and run down on the score of my past transaction with regard to the family affair , be an abominably unjust and unnatural thing . " 

 Jermyn pause a moment , and then add , " at my time of life and with a family about I and after what have pass I should have think there be nothing you would care more to prevent . " 

 " I do care . it make I miserable . that be the extent of my power to feel miserable . " 

 " no , it be not the extent of your power . you could save I if you would . it be not to be suppose that Harold would go on against I if he know the whole truth . " 

 Jermyn have sit down before he utter the last word . he have lower his voice slightly . he have the air of one who think that he have prepare the way for an understanding . that a man with so much sharpness , with so much suavity at command a man who pique himself on his persuasiveness toward woman should behave just as Jermyn do on this occasion , would be surprising but for the constant experience that temper and selfish insensibility will defeat excellent gift will make a sensible person shout when shout be out of place , and will make a polished man rude when his polish might be of eminent use to he . 

 as Jermyn , sit down and lean forward with an elbow on his knee , utter his last word " if he know the whole truth " a slight shock seem to pass through Mrs. Transome 's hitherto motionless body , follow by a sudden light in her eye , as in an animal 's about to spring . 

 " and you expect I to tell he ? " she say , not loudly , but yet with a clear metallic ring in her voice . 

 " would it not be right for he to know ? " say Jermyn , in a more bland and persuasive tone than he have yet use . 

 perhaps some of the most terrible irony of the human lot be this of a deep truth come to be utter by lip that have no right to it . 

 " I will never tell he ! " say Mrs. Transome , start up , her whole frame thrill with a passion that seem almost to make she young again . her hand hang beside she clench tightly , her eye and lip 352   lose the helpless repressed bitterness of discontent , and seem suddenly feed with energy . " you reckon up your sacrifice for I : you have keep a good account of they , and it be needful : they be some of they what no one else could guess or find out . but you make your sacrifice when they seem pleasant to you ; when you tell I they be your happiness ; when you tell I that it be I who stoop , and I who bestow favor . " 

 Jermyn rise too , and lay his hand on the back of the chair . he have grow visibly pale , but seem about to speak . 

 " do not   speak ! " Mrs. Transome say peremptorily . " do not   open your lip again . you have say enough ; I will speak now . I have make sacrifice too , but it be when I know that they be not my happiness . it be after I see that I have stoop after I see that your tenderness have turn into calculation after I see that you care for yourself only , and not for I . I hear your explanation of your duty in life of our mutual reputation of a virtuous young lady attach to you . I bear it ; I let everything go ; I shut my eye : I might almost have let myself starve , rather than have scene of quarrel with the man I have love , in which I must accuse he of turn my love into a good bargain . " there be a slight tremor in Mrs. Transome 's voice in the last word , and for a moment she pause : but when she speak again it seem as if the tremor have freeze into a cut icicle . " I suppose if a lover pick one 's pocket , there be no woman would like to own it . I do not   say I be not afraid of you : I be afraid of you , and I know now I be right . " 

 " Mrs. Transome , " say Jermyn , white to the lip , " it be needless to say more . I withdraw any word that have offend you . " 

 " you can not   withdraw they . can a man apologize for be a dastard ? and I have cause you to strain your conscience , have I ? it be I who have sully your purity ? I should think the demon have more honor they be not so impudent to one another . I would not lose the misery of be a woman , now I see what can be the baseness of a man . one must be a man first to tell a woman that her love have make she your debtor , and then ask she to pay you by break the last poor thread between she and her son . " 

 " I do not ask it , " say Jermyn , with a certain asperity . he be begin to find this intolerable . the mere brute strength of a masculine creature rebel . he feel almost inclined to throttle the voice out of this woman . 

  353 

 " you do ask it : it be what you would like . I have have a terror on I lest evil should happen to you . from the first , after Harold come home , I have a terrible dread . it seem as if murder might come between you I do not   know what . I feel the horror of his not know the truth . I might have be drag at last , by my own feeling by my own memory to tell he all , and make he as well as myself miserable , to save you . " 

 again there be a slight tremor , as if at the remembrance of womanly tenderness and pity . but immediately she launch forth again . 

 " but now you have ask I , I will never tell he ! be ruin no do something more dastardly to save yourself . if I sin , my judgment go beforehand that I should sin for a man like you . " 

 swiftly upon those last word Mrs. Transome pass out of the room . the softly pad door close behind she make no noise , and Jermyn find himself alone . 

 for a brief space he stand still . human being in moment of passionate reproach and denunciation , especially when their anger be on their own account , be never so wholly in the right that the person who have to wince can not possibly protest against some unreasonableness or unfairness in their outburst . and if Jermyn have be capable of feeling that he have thoroughly merit this infliction , he would not have utter the word that draw it down on he . man do not become penitent and learn to abhor themselves by have their back cut open with the lash ; rather , they learn to abhor the lash . what Jermyn feel about Mrs. Transome when she disappear be , that she be a furious woman who would not do what he want she to do . and he be support as to his justifiableness by the inward repetition of what he have already say to she ; it be right that Harold should know the truth . he do not take into account   how should he ?   the exasperation and loathing excited by his daring to urge the plea of right . a man who have steal the pyx , and get frighten when justice be at his heel , might feel the sort of penitence which would induce he to run back in the dark and lie the pyx where the sexton might find it ; but if in do so he whisper to the Blessed Virgin that he be move by consider the sacredness of all property , and the peculiar sacredness of the pyx , it be not to be believe that she would like he the well for it . indeed , one often seem to see why the saint should prefer candle to word , especially 354   from penitent whose skin be in danger . some salt of generosity would have make Jermyn conscious that he have lose the citizenship which authorize he to plead the right ; still more , that his self - vindication to Mrs. Transome would be like the exhibition of a brand - mark , and only show that he be shame - proof . there be heroism even in the circle of hell for fellow - sinner who cling to each other in the fiery whirlwind and never recriminate . but these thing , which be easy to discern when they be paint for we on the large canvas of poetic story , become confused and obscure even for well - read gentleman when their affection for themselves be alarm by press detail of actual experience . if their comparison of instance be active at such time , it be chiefly in show they that their own case have subtle distinction from all other case , which should free they from unmitigated condemnation . 

 and it be in this way with Matthew Jermyn . so many thing be more distinctly visible to he , and touch he more acutely , than the effect of his act or word on Mrs. Transome 's feeling ! in fact he ask , with a touch of something that make we all akin be it not preposterous , this excess of feeling on point which he himself do not find powerfully move ? she have treat he most unreasonably . it would have be right for she to do what he have not ask , but only hint at in a mild and interrogatory manner . but the clear and most unpleasant result of the interview be , that this right thing which he desire so much would certainly not be do for he by Mrs. Transome . 

 as he be move his arm from the chair - back , and turn to take his hat , there be a boisterous noise in the entrance - hall ; the door of the drawing - room , which have close without latching , be push open , and old Mr. Transome appear with a face of feeble delight , play horse to little Harry , who roar and flog behind he , while Moro yap in a puppy voice at their heel . but when Mr. Transome see Jermyn in the room he stand still in the doorway , as if he do not know whether entrance be permissible . the majority of his thought be but ravel thread of the past . the attorney come forward to shake hand with due politeness , but the old man say , with a bewildered look , and in a hesitate way 

 " Mr. Jermyn ? why why where be Mrs. Transome ? " 

 Jermyn smile his way out past the unexpected group ; and little Harry , think he have an eligible opportunity , turn round to give a parting stroke on the stranger 's coat - tail . 

  355 

 CHAPTER XLIII . 

 whichever way my day decline , 
 I feel and feel , though leave alone , 
 his be work in mine own , 
 the footstep of his life in mine . 
         

 dear friend , far off , my lose desire 
 so far , so near , in woe and weal ; 
 oh , love the most when most I feel 
 there be a low and a high ! 
  Tennyson : in Memoriam . 
 after that morning on which Esther find herself redden and confuse by the sense of have make a distant allusion to Felix Holt , she feel it impossible that she should even , as she have sometimes intend , speak of he explicitly to Harold , in order to discuss probability as to the issue of his trial . she be certain she could not do it without betray emotion , and there be very complex reason in Esther 's mind why she could not bear that Harold should detect her sensibility on this subject . it be not only all the fibre of maidenly pride and reserve , of a bashfulness undefinably peculiar toward this man , who , while much old than herself , and bear the stamp of an experience quite hidden from her imagination , be take strongly the aspect of a lover it be not only this exquisite kind of shame which be at work within she : there be another sort of susceptibility in Esther , which her present circumstance tend to encourage , though she have come to regard it as not at all lofty , but rather as something which condemn she to littleness in comparison with a mind she have learn to venerate . she know quite well that , to Harold Transome , Felix Holt be one of the common people who could come into question in no other than a public light . she have a native capability for discern that the sense of rank and degree have its repulsion correspond to the repulsion dependent on difference of race and color ; and she remember her own impression too well not to foresee that it would come on Harold Transome as a shock , if he suspect there have be any love - passage between she and this young man , who to he be of course no more than any other intelligent member of the work class . " to he , " say Esther to herself , with a reaction of her new , well pride , " who have not have the sort of intercourse in which Felix Holt 's cultured nature would have assert its superiority . " and in her fluctuation on this matter , she find herself mentally protest that , whatever Harold might think , 356   there be a light in which he be vulgar compare with Felix . Felix have idea and motif which she do not believe Harold could understand . More than all , there be this test : she herself have no sense of inferiority and just subjection when she be with Harold Transome ; there be even point in he for which she feel a touch , not of anger , but of playful scorn ; whereas with Felix she have always a sense of dependence and possible illumination . in those large , grave , candid gray eye of his , love seem something that belong to the high enthusiasm of life , such as now might be forever shut out from she . 

 all the same , her vanity wince at the idea that Harold should discern what , from his point of view , would seem like a degradation of her taste and refinement . she could not help be gratify by all the manifestation from those around she that she be think thoroughly fit for a high position could not help enjoy , with more or less keenness , a rehearsal of that demeanor amongst luxury and dignity which have often be a part of her day - dream , and the rehearsal include the reception of more and more emphatic attention from Harold , and of an effusiveness in his manner , which , in proportion as it would have be offensive if it have appear early , become flattering as the effect of a grow acquaintance and daily contact . it come in so many form in this life of ours the knowledge that there be something sweetest and noblest of which we despair , and the sense of something present that solicit we with an immediate and easy indulgence . and there be a pernicious falsity in the pretence that a woman 's love lie above the range of such temptation . 

 Day after day Esther have an arm offer she , have very beaming look upon she , have opportunity for a great deal of light , airy talk , in which she know herself to be charming , and have the attractive interest of notice Harold 's practical cleverness the masculine ease with which he govern everybody and administer everything about he , without the least harshness , and with a facile good - nature which yet be not weak . in the background , too , there be the ever - present consideration , that if Harold Transome wish to marry she , and she accept he , the problem of her lot would be more easily solve than in any other way . it be difficult , by any theory of Providence , or consideration of result , to see a course which she could call duty : if something would come and urge itself strongly as pleasure , and save she from the effort to find a clue of principle amid the labyrinthine confusion of right and 357   possession , the promise could not but seem alluring . and yet , this life at Transome Court be not the life of her day - dream : there be dullness already in its ease , and in the absence of high demand ; and there be a vague consciousness that the love of this not unfascinating man who hover about she give an air of moral mediocrity to all her prospect . she would not have be able perhaps to define this impression ; but somehow or other by this elevation of fortune it seem that the high ambition which have begin to spring in she be forever nullify . all life seem cheapened ; as it might seem to a young student who , have believe that to gain a certain degree he must write a thesis in which he would bring his power to bear with memorable effect , suddenly ascertain that no thesis be expect , but the sum   in english money   of twenty - seven pound ten shilling and sixpence . 

 after all , she be a woman , and could not make her own lot . as she have once say to Felix , " a woman must choose mean thing , because only mean thing be offer to she . " her lot be make for she by the love she accept . and Esther begin to think that her lot be be make for she by the love that be surround she with the influence of a garden on a summer morning . 

 Harold , on his side , be conscious that the interest of his wooing be not stand still . he be begin to think it a conquest , in which it would be disappointing to fail , even if this fair nymph have no claim to the estate . he would have like and yet he would not have like that just a slight shadow of doubt as to his success should be remove . there be something about Esther that he do not altogether understand . she be clearly a woman that could be govern : she be too charming for he to fear that she would ever be obstinate or interfere . yet there be a lightning that shoot out of she now and then , which seem the sign of a dangerous judgment ; as if she inwardly see something more admirable than Harold Transome . now , to be perfectly charming , a woman should not see this . 

 one fine February day , when already the golden and purple crocus be out on the terrace one of those flattering day which sometimes precede the north - east wind of March , and make believe that the come spring will be enjoyable a very striking group , of whom Esther and Harold make a part , come out at midday to walk upon the gravel at Transome Court . they do not , as usual , go toward the pleasure ground on the eastern 358   side , because Mr. Lingon , who be one of they , be go home , and his road lie through the stone gateway into the park . 

 Uncle Lingon , who dislike painful confidence , and prefer know " no mischief of anybody , " have not object to be let into the important secret about Esther , and be sure at once that the whole affair , instead of be a misfortune , be a piece of excellent luck . for himself , he do not profess to be a judge of woman , but she seem to have all the " point , " and to carry herself as well as Arabella do , which be say a good deal . honest Jack Lingon 's first impression quickly become tradition , which no subsequent evidence could disturb . he be fond of his sister , and seem never to be conscious of any change for the bad in she since their early time . he consider that man a beast who say anything unpleasant about the person to whom he be attach . it be not that he wink ; his wide - open eye see nothing but what his easy disposition incline he to see . Harold be a good fellow , a clever chap ; and Esther 's peculiar fitness for he , under all the circumstance , be extraordinary ; it remind he of something in the classic , though he could not   think exactly what in fact , a memory be a nasty uneasy thing . Esther be always glad when the old rector come . with an odd contrariety to her former nicety she like his rough attire and careless frank speech ; they be something not point device that seem to connect the life of Transome Court with that rougher , commoner world where her home have be . 

 she and Harold be walk a little in advance of the rest of the party , who be retard by various cause . old Mr. Transome , wrap in a cloth cloak trim with sable , and with a soft warm cap also trim with fur on his head , have a shuffle uncertain walk . Little Harry be drag a toy vehicle , on the seat of which he have insist on tie Moro with a piece of scarlet drapery round he , make he look like a barbaric prince in a chariot . Moro , have little imagination , object to this , and bark with feeble snappishness as the tyrannous lad run forward , then whirl the chariot round , and run back to " Gappa , " then come to a dead stop , which overset the chariot , that he might watch Uncle Lingon 's water - spaniel run for the hurled stick and bring it in his mouth . Nimrod keep close to his old master 's leg , glance with much indifference at this youthful ardor about stick he have " go through all that " ; and Dominic walk by , look on blandly , and take care both of young and old . Mrs. Transome be not there . 


 Esther Lyon and Harold Transome . 
  359 

 look back and see that they be a good deal in advance of the rest , Esther and Harold pause . 

 " what do you think about thin the tree over there ? " say Harold , point with his stick . " I have a bit of a notion that if they be divide into clump so as to show the oak beyond it would be a great improvement . it would give an idea of extent that be lose now . and there might be some very pretty clump get out of those mixed tree . what do you think ? " 

 " I should think it would be an improvement . one like a ' beyond ' everywhere . but I never hear you express yourself so dubiously , " say Esther , look at he rather archly : " you generally see thing so clearly , and be so convinced , that I shall begin to feel quite tottering if I find you in uncertainty . pray do not   begin to be doubtful ; it be infectious . " 

 " you think I a great deal too sure too confident ? " say Harold . 

 " not at all . it be an immense advantage to know your own will , when you always mean to have it . " 

 " but suppose I could not   get it , in spite of meaning ? " say Harold , with a beam inquiry in his eye . 

 " oh , then , " say Esther , turn her head aside , carelessly , as if she be consider the distant birch - stem , " you would bear it quite easily , as you do your not get into Parliament . you would know you could get it another time or get something else as good . " 

 " the fact be , " say Harold , move on a little , as if he do not want to be quite overtaken by the other , " you consider I a fat , fatuous , self - satisfy fellow . " 

 " oh , there be degree , " say Esther , with a silvery laugh ; " you have just as much of those quality as be become . there be different style . you be perfect in your own . " 

 " but you prefer another style , I suspect . a more submissive , tearful , devout worshipper , who would offer his incense with more trembling . " 

 " you be quite mistaken , " say Esther , still lightly . " I find I be very wayward . when anything be offer to I , it seem that I prize it less , and do not   want to have it . " 

 here be a very baulk answer , but in spite of it Harold could not help believe that Esther be very far from object to the sort of incense he have be offer just then . 

 " I have often read that that be in human nature , " she go on , " yet 360   it take I by surprise in myself . I suppose , " she add , smile , " I do not   think of myself as human nature . " 

 " I do not   confess to the same waywardness , " say Harold . " I be very fond of thing that I can get . and I never long much for anything out of my reach . whatever I feel sure of get I like all the well . I think half those priggish maxim about human nature in the lump be no more to be rely on than universal remedy . there be different sort of human nature . some be give to discontent and longing , other to secure and enjoy . and let I tell you , the discontent longing style be unpleasant to live with . " 

 Harold nod with a meaning smile at Esther . 

 " oh , I assure you I have abjure all admiration for it , " she say , smile up at he in return . 

 she be remember the schooling Felix have give she about her byronic hero , and be inwardly add a third sort of human nature to those variety which Harold have mention . he naturally suppose that he might take the abjuration to be entirely in his own favor . and his face do look very pleasant ; she could not help like he , although he be certainly too particular about sauce , gravy , and wine , and have a way of virtually measure the value of everything by the contribution it make to his own pleasure . his very good - nature be unsympathetic ; it never come from any thorough understanding or deep respect for what be in the mind of the person he oblige or indulge ; it be like his kindness to his mother an arrangement of his for the happiness of other , which , if they be sensible , ought to succeed . and an inevitable comparison which haunt she , show she the same quality in his political view : the utmost enjoyment of his own advantage be the solvent that blend pride in his family and position , with the adhesion to change that be to obliterate tradition and melt down enchase gold heirloom into plat for the egg - spoon of " the people . " it be terrible the keen bright eye of a woman when it have once be turn with admiration on what be severely true ; but then , the severely true rarely come within its range of vision . Esther have have an unusual illumination ; Harold do not know how , but he discern enough of the effect to make he more cautious than he have ever be in his life before . that caution would have prevent he just then from follow up the question as to the style of person Esther would think pleasant to live with , even if Uncle Lingon have not join they , as he do , to 361   talk about sough tile , say presently that he should turn across the grass and get on to the Home Farm , to have a look at the improvement that Harold be make with such race speed . 

 " but you know , lad , " say the rector , as they pause at the expect parting , " you can not   do everything in a hurry . the wheat must have time to grow , even when you have   reform all us old Tories off the face of the ground . dash it ! now the election 's over , I be an old Tory again . you see , Harold , a Radical will not   do for the county . at another election , you must be on the look - out for a borough where they want a bit of blood . I should have like you uncommonly to stand for the county ; and a Radical of good family square well enough with a new - fashioned Tory like young debarry ; but you see , these riot it be be a nasty business . I shall have my hair comb at the session for a year to come . but , heyday ! what dame be this , with a small boy ? not one of my parishioner ? " 

 Harold and Esther turn , and see an elderly woman advance with a tiny red - haired boy , scantily attire as to his jacket , which merge into a small sparrow - tail a little high than his waist , but muffle as to his throat with a blue woollen comforter . Esther recognize the pair too well , and feel very uncomfortable . we be so pitiably in subjection to all sort of vanity even the very vanity we be practically renounce ! and in spite of the almost solemn memory connect with Mrs. Holt , Esther 's first shudder be raise by the idea of what thing this woman would say , and by the mortification of have Felix in any way represent by his mother . 

 as Mrs. Holt advance into close observation , it become more evident that she be attire with a view not to charm the eye , but rather to afflict it with all that expression of woe which belong to very rusty bombazine and the limp state of false hair . still , she be not a woman to lose the sense of her own value , or become abject in her manner under any circumstance of depression ; and she have a peculiar sense on the present occasion that she be justly rely on the force of her own character and judgment , in independence of anything that Mr. Lyon or the masterful Felix would have say , if she have think they worthy to know of her undertaking . she courtesie once , as if to the entire group , now include even the dog , who show various degree of curiosity , especially as to what kind of game the small animal Job 362   might prove to be after due investigation ; and then she proceed at once toward Esther , who , in spite of her annoyance , take her arm from Harold 's , say , " how do you do , Mrs. Holt ? " very kindly , and stoop to pat little Job . 

 " yes you know he , Miss Lyon , " say Mrs. Holt , in that tone which imply that the conversation be intend for the edification of the company generally ; " you know the orphin child , as Felix bring home for I that be his mother to take care of . and it be what I have   do nobody more so though it be trouble be my reward . " 

 Esther have raise herself again , to stand in helpless endurance of whatever might be come . but by this time young Harry , strike even more than the dog by the appearance of Job Tudge , have come round drag his chariot , and place himself close to the pale child , whom he exceed in height and breadth , as well as in depth of color . he look into Job 's eye , peep round at the tail of his jacket and pull it a little , and then , take off the tiny cloth - cap , observe with much interest the tight red curl which have be hide underneath it . Job look at his inspector with the round blue eye of astonishment , until Harry , purely by way of experiment , take a bon - bon from a fantastic wallet which hang over his shoulder , and apply the test to Job 's lip . the result be satisfactory to both . every one have be watch this small comedy , and when Job crunch the bon - bon while Harry look down at he inquiringly and pat his back , there be general laughter except on the part of Mrs. Holt , who be shake her head slowly , and slap the back of her left hand with the painful patience of a tragedian whose part be in abeyance to an ill - timed introduction of the humorous . 

 " I hope Job 's cough have be well lately , " say Esther , in mere uncertainty as to what it would be desirable to say or do . 

 " I dare say you hope so , Miss Lyon , " say Mrs. Holt , look at the distant landscape . " I have   no reason to disbelieve but what you wish well to the child , and to Felix , and to I . I be sure nobody have any occasion to wish I otherway . my character will bear enquiry , and what you , as be young , do not   know , other can tell you . that be what I say to myself when I make up my mind to come here and see you , and ask you to get I the freedom to speak to Mr. Transome . I say , whatever Miss Lyon may be now , in the way of be lift up among great people , 363   she be our minister 's daughter , and be not above come to my house and walk with my son Felix though I will not deny he make that figure on the Lord 's day , that will perhaps go against he with the judge , if anybody think well to tell he . " 

 here Mrs. Holt pause a moment , as with a mind arrest by the painful image it have call up . 

 Esther 's face be glow , when Harold glance at she ; and see this , he be considerate enough to address Mrs. Holt instead of she . 

 " you be then the mother of the unfortunate young man who be in prison ? " 

 " indeed I be , sir , " say Mrs. Holt , feel that she be now in deep water . " it be not likely I should claim he if he be not   my own ; though it be not by my will , nor my advice , sir , that he ever walk ; for I give he none but good . but if everybody 's son be guide by their mother , the world ' ud be different ; my son be not bad than many another woman 's son , and that in Treby , whatever they may say as have not   get their son in prison . and as to his give up the doctoring , and then stop his father 's medicine , I know it be bad that I know but it be I have have to suffer , and it be I a king and Parliament ' ud consider , if they mean to do the right thing , and have anybody to make it known to them . and as for the rioting and kill the constable my son say most plain to I he never mean it , and there be his bit of potato - pie for dinner get dry by the fire , the whole blessed time as I sit and never know what be come on I . and it be my opinion as if great people make election to get themselves into Parliament , and there be riot and murder to do it , they ought to see as the widow and the widow 's son do not   suffer for it . I well know my duty : and I read my Bible ; and I know in Jude where it be be stain with the dry tulip - leave this many a year , as you be tell not to rail at your better if they be the devil himself ; nor will I ; but this I do say , if it be three Mr. Transomes instead of one as be listen to I , as there be they ought to go to the king and get he to let off my son Felix . " 

 this speech , in its chief point , have be deliberately prepare . Mrs. Holt have set her face like a flint , to make the gentry know their duty as she know her : her defiant defensive tone be due to the consciousness , not only that she be brave a powerful audience , but that she be dare to stand on the strong basis of her own judgment in opposition to her son 's . her proposal have be waive off by Mr 364   Lyon and Felix ; but she have long have the feminine conviction that if she could " get to speak " in the right quarter , thing might be different . the daring bit of impromptu about the three Mr. Transomes be immediately suggest by a movement of old Mr. Transome to the foreground in a line with Mr. Lingon and Harold ; his furred and unusual costume appear to indicate a mysterious dignity which she must hasten to include in her appeal . 

 and there be reason that none could have foresee , which make Mrs. Holt 's remonstrance immediately effective . while old Mr. Transome star , very much like a waxen image in which the expression be a failure , and the rector , accustom to female parishioner and complainant , look on with a smile in his eye , Harold say at once , with cordial kindness 

 " I think you be quite right , Mrs. Holt . and for my part , I be determined to do my good for your son , both in the witness - box and elsewhere . take comfort ; if it be necessary , the king shall be appeal to . and rely upon it , I shall bear you in mind as Felix Holt 's mother . " 

 rapid thought have convince Harold that in this way he be well commend himself to Esther . 

 " well , sir , " say Mrs. Holt , who be not go to pour forth disproportionate thank , " I be glad to hear you speak so become ; and if you have be the king himself , I should have make free to tell you my opinion . for the Bible say the king 's favor be toward a wise servant ; and it be reasonable to think he would make all the more account of they as have never be in service , or take wage , which I never do , and never think of my son do ; and his father leave money , mean otherway , so as he might have be a doctor on horseback at this very minute , instead of be in prison . " 

 " what ! be he regularly apprentice to a doctor ? " say Mr. Lingon , who have not understand this before . 

 " Sir , he be , and most clever , like his father before he , only he turn contrary . but as for harm anybody , Felix never mean to harm anybody but himself and his mother , which he certainly do in respect of his clothe , and take to be a low workingman , and stop my living respectable , more particular by the pill , which have a sale , as you may be sure they suit people 's inside . and what folk can never have box enough of to swallow , I should think you have a right to sell . and there be many and many a text for it , as I have   open on without ever think ; for if it be true , ' ask , and you shall have , ' I should think 365   it be truer when you be willing to pay for what you have . " 

 this be a little too much for Mr. Lingon 's gravity ; he explode , and Harold could not help follow he . Mrs. Holt fix her eye on the distance , and slap the back of her left hand again ; it might be that this kind of mirth be the peculiar effect produce by forcible truth on high and worldly people who be neither in the Independent nor the General Baptist connection . 

 " I be sure you must be tired with your long walk , and little Job too , " say Esther , by way of break this awkward scene . " be not   you , Job ? " she add , stoop to caress the child , who be timidly shrink from Harry 's invitation to he to pull the little chariot Harry 's view be that Job would make a good horse for he to beat , and would run fast than Gappa . 

 " it be well you can feel for the orphin child , Miss Lyon , " say Mrs. Holt , choose an indirect answer rather than to humble herself by confess fatigue before gentleman who seem to be take she too lightly . " I do not   believe but what you would behave pretty , as you always do to I , though everybody say you hold yourself high . but I be sure you never do to Felix , for you let he sit by you at the Free School before all the town , and he with never a bit of stock round his neck . and it show you see that in he worth take notice of ; and it be but right , if you know my word be true , as you should speak for he to the gentleman . " 

 " I assure you , Mrs. Holt , " say Harold , come to the rescue " I assure you that enough have be say to make I use my good effort for your son . and now , pray , go on to the house with the little boy and take some rest . Dominic , show Mrs. Holt the way , and ask Mrs. Hickes to make her comfortable , and see that somebody take she back to Treby in the buggy . " 

 " I will go back with Mrs. Holt , " say Esther , make an effort against herself . 

 " no , pray , " say Harold , with that kind of entreaty which be really a decision . " let Mrs. Holt have time to rest . we shall have return , and you can see she before she go . we will say good - by for the present , Mrs. Holt . " 

 the poor woman be not sorry to have the prospect of rest and food , especially for " the orphin child , " of whom she be tenderly careful . like many woman who appear to other to have a masculine decisiveness of tone , and to themselves to have a masculine force of mind , and who come into severe collision with son arrive at the masterful stage , she 366   have the maternal cord vibrate strongly within she toward all tiny child . and when she see Dominic pick up Job and hoist he on his arm for a little while , by way of make acquaintance , she regard he with an approval which she have not think it possible to extend to a foreigner . since Dominic be go , Harry and old Mr. Transome choose to follow . Uncle Lingon shake hand and turn off across the grass , and thus Esther be leave alone with Harold . 

 but there be a new consciousness between they . Harold 's quick perception be least likely to be slow in seize indication of anything that might affect his position with regard to Esther . some time before , his jealousy have be awaken to the possibility that before she have know he she have be deeply interested in some one else . Jealousy of all sort whether for our fortune or our love be ready at combination , and likely even to outstrip the fact . and Esther 's renew confusion , unite with her silence about Felix , which now first seem noteworthy , and with Mrs. Holt 's graphic detail as to she walk with he and let he sit by she before all the town be ground not merely for a suspicion , but for a conclusion in Harold 's mind . the effect of this which he at once regard as a discovery , be rather different from what Esther have anticipate . it seem to he that Felix be the least formidable person that he could have find as an object of interest antecedent to himself . a young workman who have get himself throw into prison , whatever recommendation he might have have for a girl at a romantic age in the dreariness of dissent society at Treby , could hardly be consider by Harold in the light of a rival . Esther be too clever and tasteful a woman to make a ballad heroine of herself , by bestow her beauty and her land on this lowly lover . besides , Harold cherish the belief that , at the present time , Esther be more wisely disposed to bestow these thing on another lover in every way eligible . but in two direction this discovery have a determine effect on he , his curiosity be stir to know exactly what the relation with Felix have be , and he be solicitous that his behavior with regard to this young man should be such as to enhance his own merit in Esther 's eye . at the same time he be not inclined to any euphemism that would seem to bring Felix into the list with himself . 

 naturally when they be leave alone , it be Harold who speak first . " I should think there be a good deal of worth in this young fellow this Holt , notwithstanding the mistake he have make . a little queer and 367   conceited , perhaps ; but that be usually the case with man of his class when they be at all superior to their fellow . " 

 " Felix Holt be a highly cultivate man ; he be not at all conceite , " say Esther . the different kind of pride within she be coalesce now . she be aware that there have be a betrayal . 

 " ah ? " say Harold , not quite like the tone of this answer . " this eccentricity be a sort of fanaticism , then ? this give up be a doctor on horseback , as the old woman call it , and take to let I see watchmaking , be not   it ? " 

 " if it be eccentricity to be very much well than other man , he be certainly eccentric ; and fanatical too , if it be fanatical to renounce all small selfish motif for the sake of a great and unselfish one . I never know what nobleness of character really be before I know Felix Holt . " 

 it seem to Esther as if in the excitement of this moment , her own word be bring she a clear revelation . 

 " God bless I ! " say Harold , in a tone of surprised yet thorough belief , and look in Esther 's face . " I wish you have talk to I about this before . " 

 Esther at that moment look perfectly beautiful , with an expression which Harold have never hitherto see . all the confusion which have depend on personal feeling have give way before the sense that she have to speak the truth about the man whom she feel to be admirable . 

 " I think I do not   see the meaning of anything fine I do not   even see the value of my father 's character , until I have be teach a little by hear what Felix Holt say , and see that his life be like his word . " 

 Harold look and listen , and feel his slight jealousy allay rather than heighten . " this be not like love , " he say to himself , with some satisfaction . with all due regard to Harold Transome , he be one of those man who be liable to make the great mistake about a particular woman 's feeling , because they pique themselves on a power of interpretation derive from much experience . experience be enlightening , but with a difference . experiment on live animal may go on for a long period , and yet the fauna on which they be make may be limit . there may be a passion in the mind of a woman which precipitate she , not along the path of easy beguilement , but into a great leap away from it . Harold 's experience have not teach he this ; and Esther 's enthusiasm 368   about Felix Holt do not seem to he to be dangerous . 

 " he be quite an apostolic sort of fellow , then , " be the self - quiet answer he give to her last word . " he do not   look like that ; but I have only a short interview with he , and I be give to understand that he refuse to see I in prison . I believe he be not very well inclined toward I . but you see a great deal of he , I suppose , and your testimony to any one be enough for I , " say Harold , lower his voice rather tenderly . " now I know what your opinion be , I shall spare no effort on behalf of such a young man . in fact , I have come to the same resolution before , but your wish would make difficult thing easy . " 

 after that energetic speech of Esther 's , as often happen , the tear have just suffuse her eye . it be nothing more than might have be expect in a tender - hearted woman , consider Felix Holt 's circumstance , and the tear only make more lovely the look with which she meet Harold 's when he speak so kindly . she feel pleased with he ; she be open to the fallacious delight of be assure that she have power over he to make he do what she like , and quite forget the many impression which have convince she that Harold have a padded yoke ready for the neck of every man , woman , and child that depend on he . 

 after a short silence , they be get near the stone gateway , and Harold say , with an air of intimate consultation 

 " what could we do for this young man , suppose he be let off ? I shall send a letter with fifty pound to the old woman to - morrow . I ought to have do it before , but it really slip my memory , amongst the many thing that have occupy I lately . but this young man what do you think would be the good thing we could do for he , if he get at large again . he should be put in a position where his quality could be more telling . " 

 Esther be recover her liveliness a little , and be disposed to encourage it for the sake of veil other feeling , about which she feel renew reticence , now that the overpowering influence of her enthusiasm be past . she be rather wickedly amused and scornful at Harold 's misconception and ill - place intention of patronage . 

 " you be hopelessly in the dark , " she say , with a light laugh and toss of her head . " what would you offer Felix Holt ? a place in the Excise ? you might as well think of offer it to John the baptist . Felix have 369   choose his lot . he mean always to be a poor man . " 

 " Means ? yes , " say Harold , slightly pique , " but what a man mean usually depend on what happen . I mean to be a commoner ; but a peerage might present itself under acceptable circumstance . " 

 " oh , there be no sum in proportion to be do there , " say Esther , again gaily . " as you be to a peerage so be not Felix Holt to any offer of advantage that you could imagine for he . " 

 " you must think he fit for any position the first in the county . " 

 " no , I do not , " say Esther , shake her head mischievously . " I think he too high for it . " 

 " I see you can be ardent in your admiration . " 

 " yes , it be my champagne ; you know I do not   like the other kind . " 

 " that would be satisfactory if one be sure of get your admiration , " say Harold , lead she up to the terrace , and amongst the crocus , from whence they have a fine view of the park and river . they stand still near the east parapet , and see the dash of light on the water , and the pencil shadow of the tree on the grassy lawn . 

 " would it do as well to admire you , instead of be worthy to be admire ? " say Harold , turn his eye from that landscape to Esther 's face . 

 " it would be a thing to be put up with , " say Esther , smile at he rather roguishly . " but you be not in that state of self - despair . " 

 " well , I be conscious of not have those severe virtue that you have be praise . " 

 " that be true . you be quite in another genre . " 

 " a woman would not find I a tragic hero . " 

 " oh , no ! she must dress for general comedy such as your mother once describe to I where the most thrilling event be the drawing of a handsome check . " 

 " you be a naughty fairy , " say Harold , dare to press Esther 's hand a little more closely to he , and draw she down the eastern step into the pleasure - ground , as if he be unwilling to give up the conversation . " Confess that you be disgusted with my want of romance . " 

 " I shall not confess to be disgust . I shall ask you to confess that you be not a romantic figure . " 

 " I be a little too stout . " 

  370 

 " for romance yes . at least you must find security for not get stouter . " 

 " and I do not   look languish enough ? " 

 " oh , yes rather too much so at a fine cigar . " 

 " and I be not in danger of commit suicide ? " 

 " no ; you be a widower . " 

 Harold do not reply immediately to this last thrust of Esther 's . she have utter it with innocent thoughtlessness from the playful suggestion of the moment ; but it be a fact that Harold 's previous married life have enter strongly in her impression about he . the presence of Harry make it inevitable . Harold take this allusion of Esther 's as an indication that his quality of widower be a point that make against he ; and after a brief silence he say , in an altered , more serious tone 

 " you do not   suppose , I hope , that any other woman have ever hold the place that you could hold in my life ? " 

 Esther begin to tremble a little , as she always do when the love - talk between they seem get serious . she only give the rather stumble answer , " how so ? " 

 " Harry 's mother have be a slave be buy , in fact . " 

 it be impossible for Harold to preconceive the effect this have on Esther . his natural disqualification for judging of a girl 's feeling be heighten by the blind effect of an exclusive object which be to assure she that her own place be peculiar and supreme . Hitherto Esther 's acquaintance with oriental love be derive chiefly from Byronic poem , and this have not suffice to adjust her mind to a new story , where the Giaour concern be give she his arm . she be unable to speak ; and Harold go on 

 " though I be close on thirty - five , I never meet with a woman at all like you before . there be new era in one 's life that be equivalent to youth be something well than youth . I be never an aspirant till I know you . " 

 Esther be still silent . 

 " not that I dare to call myself that . I be not so confident a personage as you imagine . I be necessarily in a painful position for a man who have any feeling . " 

 here at last Harold have stir the right fibre . Esther 's generosity seize at once the whole meaning imply in that last sentence . she have a fine sensibility to the line at which flirtation must cease ; and she be now pale and shake with feeling she have not yet define for herself . 

 " do not let we speak of difficult thing any more now , " she say , 371   with gentle seriousness . " I be come into a new world of late , and have to learn life all over again . let we go in . I must see poor Mrs. Holt again , and my little friend Job . " 

 she pause at the glass door that open on the terrace , and enter there , while Harold go round to the stable . 

 when Esther have be up - stair and descend again into the large entrance - hall , she find its stony capaciousness make lively by human figure extremely unlike the statue . since Harry insist on play with Job again , Mrs. Holt and her orphan , after dining , have just be bring to this delightful scene for a game at hide - and - seek , and for exhibit the climb power of the two pet squirrel . Mrs. Holt sit on a stool , in singular relief against the pedestal of the Apollo , while Dominic and Denner   otherwise Mrs. Hickes   bear her company ; Harry , in his bright red and purple , flit about like a great tropic bird after the sparrow - tail Job , who hide himself with much intelligence behind the scagliola pillar and the pedestal ; while one of the squirrel perch itself on the head of the tall statue , and the other be already peep down from among the heavy stuccoed angel on the ceiling , near the summit of a pillar . 

 Mrs. Holt hold on her lap a basket fill with good thing for Job , and seem much soothe by pleasant company and excellent treatment . as Esther , descend softly and unobserved , lean over the stone banister and look at the scene for a minute or two , she see that Mrs. Holt 's attention , have be direct to the squirrel which have scamper on to the head of the Silenus carry the infant Bacchus , have be draw downward to the tiny babe look at with so much affection by the rather ugly and hairy gentleman , of whom she nevertheless speak with reserve as of one who possibly belong to the Transome family . 

 " it be most pretty to see its little limb , and the gentleman hold it . I should think he be amiable by his look ; but it be odd he should have his likeness take without any clothe . be he transome by name ? "   Mrs. Holt suspect that there might be a mild madness in the family . 

 Denner , peer and smile quietly , be about to reply , when she be prevent by the appearance of old Mr. Transome , who since his walk have be have " forty wink " on the sofa in the library , and now come out to look for Harry . he have doff his fur cap and cloak , but in lie down to sleep he have throw over his shoulder a soft oriental scarf which Harold have give he , and this still hang over his scanty white 372   hair and down to his knee , hold fast by his wooden - looking arm and laxly - clasp hand , which fall in front of he . 

 this singular appearance of an undoubted Transome fit exactly into Mrs. Holt 's thought at the moment . it lie in the probability of thing that gentry 's intellect should be peculiar : since they have not to get their own living , the good Lord might have economize in their case that common - sense which other be so much more in need of ; and in the shuffling figure before she she see a descendant of the gentleman who have choose to be represent without his clothe all the more eccentric where there be the mean of buy the good . but these oddity ' say nothing " in great folk , who be powerful in high quarter all the same . and Mrs. Holt rise and courtesie with a proud respect , precisely as she would have do if Mr. Transome have look as wise as Lord Burleigh . 

 " I hope I be in no way take a liberty , sir , " she begin , while the old gentleman look at she with bland feebleness ; " I be not that woman to sit anywhere out of my own home without invite and press to . but I be bring here to wait , because the little gentleman want to play with the orphin child . " 

 " very glad , my good woman sit down sit down , " say Mr. Transome , nod and smile between his clause . " nice little boy . your grandchild ? " 

 " indeed , sir , no , " say Mrs. Holt , continue to stand . quite apart from any awe of Mr. Transome sit down , she feel , would be a too great familiarity with her own pathetic importance on this extra and unlooked - for occasion . " it be not I have any grandchild , nor ever shall have , though most fit . but with my only son say he will never be marry , and in prison besides , and some say he will be transport , you may see yourself though a gentleman as there be not   much chance of my have grandchild of my own . and this be old Master Tudge 's grandchild , as my own Felix take to for pity because he be sickly and clemm'd , and I be noway against it , be of a tender heart . for I be a widow myself , and my son Felix , though big , be fatherless , and I know my duty in consequence . and it be to be wish , sir , as other should know it as be more in power and live in great house , and can ride in a carriage where they will . and if you be the gentleman as be the head of everything and it be not to be think you would give up to your son as a poor widow 's be force to do it 373   behoove you to take the part of they as be deserve ; for the Bible say gray hair should speak . " 

 " yes , yes poor woman what shall I say ? " say old Mr. Transome , feel himself scold , and , as usual , desirous of mollify displeasure . 

 " Sir , I can tell you what to say fast enough ; for it be what I should say myself if I could get to speak to the king . for I have   ask they that know , and they say it be the truth , both out of the Bible , and in , as the king can pardon anything and anybody . and judge by his countenance on the new sign , and the talk there be a while ago about his be the people 's friend , as the minister once say it from the very pulpit if there be any meaning in word , he will do the right thing by I and my son , if he be ask proper . " 

 " yes a very good man he will do anything right , " say Mr. Transome , whose own idea about the king just then be somewhat misty , consist chiefly in broken reminiscence of George III . " I will ask he anything you like , " he add , with a press desire to satisfy Mrs. Holt , who alarm he slightly . 

 " then , sir , if you will go in your carriage and say , this young man , Felix Holt by name , as his father be know the country round , and his mother most respectable he never mean harm to anybody , and so far from bloody murder and fighting , would part with his victual to they that need it more and if you would get other gentleman to say the same , and if they be not satisfied to enquire I will not believe but what the king ' ud let my son out of prison . or if it be true he must stand his trial , the king ' ud take care no mischief happen to he . I have   get my sens , and I will never believe as in a country where there be a God above and a king below , the right thing can not   be do if great people be willing to do it . " 

 Mrs. Holt , like all orator , have wax louder and more energetic , cease to propel her argument , and be propel by they . poor old Mr. Transome , get more and more frightened at this severe - speak woman , who have the horrible possibility to his mind of be a novelty that be to become permanent , seem to be fascinate by fear , and stand helplessly forgetful that if he like he might turn round and walk away . 

 Little Harry , alive to anything that have relation to " Gappa , " have pause in his game , and discern what he think a hostile aspect in this 374   naughty black old woman , rush toward she and proceed first to beat she with his mimic jockey 's whip , and then , suspect that her bombazine be not sensitive , to set his tooth in her arm . while Dominic rebuke he and pull he off , Nimrod begin to bark anxiously , and the scene be become alarm even to the squirrel , which scramble as far off as possible . 

 Esther , who have be wait for an opportunity of intervention , now come up to Mrs. Holt to speak some soothing word ; and old Mr. Transome , see a sufficient screen between himself and his formidable suppliant , at last gather courage to turn round and shuffle away with unusual swiftness into the library . 

 " Dear Mrs. Holt , " say Esther , " do rest comfort . I assure you , you have do the utmost that can be do by your word . your visit have not be throw away . see how the child have enjoy it ! I see little Job actually laugh . I think I never see he do more than smile before . " then turn round to Dominic , she say , " will the buggy come round to this door ? " 

 this hint be sufficient . Dominic go to see if the vehicle be ready , and Denner , remark that Mrs. Holt would like to mount it in the inner court , invite she to go back into the housekeeper 's room . but there be a fresh resistance raise in Harry by the threaten departure of Job , who have seem an invaluable addition to the menagerie of tame creature ; and it be barely in time that Esther have the relief of see the entrance hall clear so as to prevent any further encounter of Mrs. Holt with Harold , who be now come up the flight of step at the entrance . 

 CHAPTER XLIV . 

 I be sick at heart . the eye of day , 
 the insistent summer noon , seem pitiless , 
 shin in all the barren crevice 
 of weary life , leave no shade , no dark , 
 where I may dream that hide water lie . 
 shortly after Mrs. Holt 's striking presentation of herself at Transome Court , Esther go on a second visit to her father . the Loamford Assizes be approach ; it be expect that in about ten day Felix Holt 's trial would come on , and some hint in her father 's letter have give Esther the impression that he be take a melancholy view of the result . Harold Transome have once or twice mention the subject with a facile hopefulness as to " the young fellow 's come off easily , " 375   which , in her anxious mind , be not a counterpoise to disquieting suggestion , and she have not choose to introduce another conversation about Felix Holt , by question Harold concern the probability he rely on . since those moment on the terrace , Harold have daily become more of the solicitous and indirectly beseech lover ; and Esther , from the very fact that she be weigh on by thought that be painfully bewildering to she by thought which , in their newness to her young mind , seem to shake her belief that life could be anything else than a compromise with thing repugnant to the moral taste have become more passive to his attention at the very time that she have begin to feel more profoundly that in accept Harold Transome she leave the high mountain air , the passionate serenity of perfect love forever behind she , and must adjust her wish to a life of middling delight , overhang with the languorous haziness of motiveless ease , where poetry be only literature , and the fine idea have to be take down from the shelf of the library when her husband 's back be turn . but it seem as if all outward condition concur , along with her generous sympathy for the Transomes , and with those native tendency against which she have once begin to struggle , to make this middling lot the good she could attain to . she be in this half - sad , half - satisfied resignation to something like what be call worldly wisdom , when she go to see her father , and learn what she could from he about Felix . 

 the little minister be much depressed , unable to resign himself to the dread which have begin to haunt he , that Felix might have to endure the odious penalty of transportation for the manslaughter , which be the offence that no evidence in his favor could disprove . 

 " I have be encourage by the assurance of man instruct in this regard , " say Mr. Lyon , while Esther sit on the stool near he , and listen anxiously , " that though he be pronounce guilty in regard to this deed whereunto he hath calamitously fall , yet that a judge mildly dispose , and with a due sense of that invisible activity of the soul whereby the deed which be the same in outward appearance and effect , yet differ as the knife - stroke of the surgeon , even though it kill , differ from the knife - stroke of a wanton mutilater , might use his discretion in temper the punishment , so that it would not be very evil to bear . but now it be say that the judge who cometh be a severe man , and one nourish a prejudice against the bold spirit who 376   stand not in the old path . " 

 " I be go to be present at the trial , father , " say Esther , who be prepare the way to express a wish , which she be timid about even with her father . " I mention to Mrs. Transome that I should like to do so , and she say that she use in old day always to attend the assize , and that she would take I . you will be there , father ? " 

 " assuredly I shall be there , have be summon to bear witness to Felix 's character , and to his have utter remonstrance and warning long beforehand whereby he prove himself an enemy to riot . in our ear , who know he , it sound strangely that aught else should be credible ; but he hath few to speak for he , though I trust that Mr. Harold Transome 's testimony will go far , if , as you say , he be disposed to set aside minor regard , and not to speak the truth grudgingly and reluctantly . for the very truth hath a color from the disposition of the utterer . " 

 " he be kind ; he be capable of be generous , " say Esther . 

 " it be well . for I verily believe that evil - minded man have be at work against Felix . the Duffield Watchman hath write continually in allusion to he as one of those mischievous man who seek to elevate themselves through the dishonor of their party ; and as one of those who go not heart and soul with the need of the people , but seek only to get a hearing for themselves by raise their voice in crotchety discord . it be these thing that cause I heaviness of spirit : the dark secret of this young man 's lot be a cross I carry daily . " 

 " Father , " say Esther , timidly , while the eye of both be fill with tear , " I should like to see he again before his trial . might I ? will you ask he ? will you take I ? " 

 the minister raise his suffused eye to her , and do not speak for a moment or two . a new thought have visit he . but his delicate tenderness shrink even from an inward enquiry that be too curious that seem like an effort to peep at sacred secret . 

 " I see naught against it , my dear child , if you arrive early enough , and would take the elderly lady into your confidence , so that you might descend from the carriage at some suitable place the house of the Independent minister , for example where I could meet and accompany you . I would forewarn Felix , who would doubtless delight to see your face 377   again ; see that he may go away , and be , as it be , bury from you , even though it may be only in prison , and not " 

 this be too much for Esther . she throw her arm round her father 's neck and sob like a child . it be an unspeakable relief to she after all the pent - up , stifle experience , all the inward incommunicable debate of the last few week . the old man be deeply move , too , and hold his arm close round the dear child , pray silently . 

 no word be speak for some minute , till Esther raise herself , dry her eye , and , with an action that seem playful , though there be no smile on her face , press her handkerchief against her father 's cheek . then , when she have put her hand in his , he say , solemnly 

 " ' tis a great and mysterious gift , this clinging of the heart , my Esther , whereby it hath often seem to I that even in the very moment of suffer our soul have the keen foretaste of heaven . I speak not lightly , but as one who hath endure . and ' tis a strange truth that only in the agony of part we look into the depth of love . " 

 so the interview end , without any question from Mr. Lyon concern what Esther contemplate as the ultimate arrangement between herself and the Transomes . 

 after this conversation , which show he that what happen to Felix touch Esther more closely than he have suppose , the minister feel no impulse to raise the image of a future so unlike anything that Felix would share . and Esther would have be unable to answer any such question . the successive week , instead of bring she near to clearness and decision , have only bring that state of disenchantment belong to the actual presence of thing which have long dwelt in the imagination with all the factitious charm of arbitrary arrangement . her imaginary mansion have not be inhabit just as Transome Court be ; her imaginary fortune have not be attend with circumstance which she be unable to sweep away . she , herself , in her Utopia , have never be what she be now a woman whose heart be divide and oppress . the first spontaneous offering of her woman 's devotion , the first great inspiration of her life , be a sort of vanish ecstasy which have leave its wound . it seem to she a cruel misfortune of her young life that her good feeling , her most precious dependence , have be call forth just where the condition be hard , and that all the easy invitation of circumstance be toward something which that previous consecration of her longing have make a moral descent for she . it be 378   characteristic of she that she scarcely at all entertain the alternative of such a compromise as would have give she the large portion of the fortune to which she have a legal claim , and yet have satisfy her sympathy by leave the Transomes in possession of their old home . her domestication with this family have bring they into the foreground of her imagination ; the gradual wooing of Harold have act on she with a constant immediate influence that predominate over all indefinite prospect ; and a solitary elevation to wealth , which out of Utopia she have no notion how she should manage , look as chill and dreary as the offer of dignity in an unknown country . 

 in the age since Adam 's marriage , it have be good for some man to be alone , and for some woman also . but Esther be not one of these woman : she be intensely of the feminine type , verge neither toward the saint nor the angel . she be " a fair divide excellence , whose fullness of perfection " must be in marriage . and , like all youthful creature , she feel as if the present condition of choice be final . it belong to the freshness of her heart that , have have her emotion strongly stir by real object , she never speculate on possible relation yet to come . it seem to she that she stand at the first and last parting of the way . and , in one sense she be under no illusion . it be only in that freshness of our time that the choice be possible which give unity to life , and make the memory a temple where all relic and all votive offering , all worship and all grateful joy , be an unbroken history sanctify by one religion . 

 CHAPTER XLV . 

 we may not make this world a paradise 
 by walk it together with clasped hand 
 and eye that meeting feed a double strength . 
 we must be only join by pain divine , 
 of spirit blent in mutual memory . 
 it be a consequence of that interview with her father , that when Esther step early on a gray March morning into the carriage with Mrs. Transome , to go to the Loamford Assizes , she be full of an expectation that hold her lip in tremble silence , and give her eye that sightless beauty which tell that the vision be all within . 

 Mrs. Transome do not disturb she with unnecessary speech . of late , Esther 's anxious observation have be draw to a change in Mrs. Transome , show in many small way which only woman notice . it be not 379   only that when they sit together the talk seem more of an effort to she : that might have come from the gradual draining away of matter for discourse pertain to most sort of companionship , in which repetition be not feel to be as desirable as novelty . but while Mrs. Transome be dress just as usual , take her seat as usual , trifle with her drug and have her embroidery before she as usual , and still make her morning greeting with that finished easy politeness and consideration of tone which to rougher people seem like affectation , Esther notice a strange fitfulness in her movement . sometimes the stitch of her embroidery go on with silent unbroken swiftness for a quarter of an hour , as if she have to work out her deliverance from bondage by finish a scroll - pattern border ; then her hand drop suddenly and her gaze fall blankly on the table before she , and she would sit in that way motionless as a seated statue , apparently unconscious of Esther 's presence , till some thought dart within she seem to have the effect of an external shock and rouse she with a start , when she look around hastily like a person ashamed of have sleep . Esther , touch with wonder pity at sign of unhappiness that be new in her experience , take the most delicate care to appear inobservant , and only try to increase the gentle attention that might help to soothe or gratify this uneasy woman . but , one morning , Mrs. Transome have say , break a rather long silence 

 " my dear , I shall make this house dull for you . you sit with I like an embodied patience . I be unendurable ; I be get into a melancholy dotage . a fidgety old woman like I be as unpleasant to see as a rook with its wing break . do not   mind I , my dear . run away from I without ceremony . every one else do , you see . I be part of the old furniture with new drapery . " 

 " Dear Mrs. Transome , " say Esther , glide to the low ottoman close by the basket of embroidery , " do you dislike my sit with you ? " 

 " only for your own sake , my fairy , " say Mrs. Transome , smile faintly , and put her hand under Esther 's chin . " do not   it make you shudder to look at I ? " 

 " why will you say such naughty thing ? " say Esther , affectionately . " if you have have a daughter , she would have desire to be with you most when you most want cheer . and surely every young woman have something of a daughter 's feeling toward an old one who have be kind to she . " 380 

 " I should like you to be really my daughter , " say Mrs. Transome , rouse herself to look a little brighter . " that be something still for an old woman to hope for . " 

 Esther blush : she have not foresee this application of word that come from pity tenderness . to divert the train of thought as quickly as possible , she at once ask what she have previously have in her mind to ask . before her blush have disappear she say : 

 " oh , you be so good ; I shall ask you to indulge I very much . it be to let we set out very early to Loamford on Wednesday , and put I down at a particular house , that I may keep an appointment with my father . it be a private matter , that I wish no one to know about , if possible . and he will bring I back to you wherever you appoint . " 

 in that way Esther win her end without need to betray it ; and as Harold be already away at Loamford , she be the more secure . 

 the Independent minister 's house at which she be set down , and where she be receive by her father , be in a quiet street not far from the jail . Esther have throw a dark cloak over the handsomer covering which Denner have assure she be absolutely require of lady who sit anywhere near the judge at a great trial ; and as the bonnet of that day do not throw the face into high relief , but rather into perspective , a veil draw down give she a sufficiently inconspicuous appearance . 

 " I have arrange all thing , my dear , " say Mr. Lyon , " and Felix expect we . we will lose no time . " 

 they walk away at once , Esther not ask a question . she have no consciousness of the road along which they pass ; she could never remember anything but a dim sense of enter within high wall and go along passage , till they be usher into a large space than she have expect , and her father say : 

 " it be here that we be permit to see Felix , my Esther . he will presently appear . " 

 Esther automatically take off her glove and bonnet , as if she have enter the house after a walk . she have lose the complete consciousness of everything except that she be go to see Felix . she tremble . it seem to she as if he too would look alter after her new life as if even the past would change for she and be no long a steadfast remembrance , but something she have be mistake about , as she have be 381   about the new life . perhaps she be grow out of that childhood to which common thing have rareness , and all object look large . perhaps from henceforth the whole world be to be mean for she . the dread concentrate in those few moment seem bad than anything she have know before . it be what the dread of the pilgrim might be who have it whisper to he that the holy place be a delusion , or that he will see they with a soul unstirred and unbelieving . every minute that pass may be charge with some such crisis in the little inner world of man or woman . 

 but soon the door open slightly ; someone look in ; then it open wide , and Felix Holt enter . 

 " Miss Lyon Esther ! " and her hand be in his grasp . 

 he be just the same no , something inexpressibly well , because of the distance and separation , and the half - weary novelty , which make he like the return of the morning . 

 " take no heed of I , child , " say Mr. Lyon . " I have some note to make , and my time be precious . we may remain here only a quarter of an hour . " and the old man sit down at a window with his back to they , write with his head bend close to the paper . 

 " you be very pale ; you look ill , compare with your old self , " say Esther . she have take her hand away , but they stand still near each other , she look up at he . 

 " the fact be , I be not fond of prison , " say Felix , smile ; " but I suppose the good I can hope for be to have a good deal more of it . " 

 " it be think that in the bad case a pardon may be obtain , " say Esther , avoid Harold Transome 's name . 

 " I do not   rely on that , " say Felix , shake his head . " my wise course be to make up my mind to the very ugly penalty they can condemn I to . if I can face that , anything less will seem easy . but you know , " he go on , smile at she brightly , " I never go in for fine company and cushion . I can not   be very heavily disappointed in that way . " 

 " do you see thing just as you use to do ? " say Esther , turn pale as she say it " I mean about poverty , and the people you will live among . have all the misunderstanding and sadness leave you just as obstinate ? " she try to smile , but could not succeed . 

 " what - about the sort of life I should lead if I be free again ? " say Felix . 

 " yes . I can not   help be discourage for you by all these thing that 382   have happen . see how you may fail ! " Esther speak timidly . she see a peculiar smile , which she know well , gather in his eye . " ah , I dare say I be silly , " she say , deprecatingly . 

 " no , you be dreadfully inspire , " say Felix . " when the wicked Tempter be tired of snarl that word failure in a man 's cell , he send a voice like a thrush to say it for he . see now what a messenger of darkness you be ! " he smile , and take she two hand between his , press together as child hold they up in prayer . both of they feel too solemnly to be bashful . they look straight into each other 's eye , as angel do when they tell some truth . and they stand in that way while he go on speak . 

 " but I be proof against that word failure . I have   see behind it . the only failure a man ought to fear be failure in cleave to the purpose he see to be good . as to just the amount of result he may see from his particular work that be a tremendous uncertainty : the universe have not be arrange for the gratification of his feeling . as long as a man see and believe in some great good , he will prefer work toward that in the way he be well fit for , come what may . I put effect at their minimum , but I would rather have the maximum of effect , if it be of the sort I care for , than the maximum of effect I do not   care for a lot of fine thing that be not to my taste and if they be , the condition of hold they while the world be what it be , be such as would jar on I like grate metal . " 

 " yes , " say Esther , in a lone tone , " I think I understand that now , well than I use to do . " the word of Felix at last seem strangely to fit her own experience . but she say no more , though he seem to wait for it a moment or two , look at she . but then he go on 

 " I do not   mean to be illustrious , you know , and make a new era , else it would be kind of you to get a raven and teach it to croak ' failure ' in my ear . where great thing can not   happen , I care for very small thing , such as will never be know beyond a few garret and workshop . and then , as to one thing I believe in , I do not   think I can altogether fail . if there be anything our people want convincing of , it be , that there be some dignity and happiness for a man other than change his station . that be one of the belief I choose to consecrate my life to . if anybody could demonstrate to I that I be a flat for it , I should not   think it would follow that I must borrow money to set up genteelly and order new clothe . that be not a rigorous consequence to my understanding . " 

  383 

 they smile at each other , with the old sense of amusement they have so often have together . 

 " you be just the same , " say Esther . 

 " and you ? " say Felix . " my affair have be settle long ago . but yours a great change have come in they magic at work . " 

 " yes , " say Esther , rather falteringly . 

 " well , " say Felix , look at she gravely again , " it be a case of fitness that seem to give a chance sanction to that musty law . the first time I see you your birth be an immense puzzle to I . however , the appropriate condition be come at last . " 

 these word seem cruel to Esther . but Felix could not know all the reason for their seem so . she could not speak ; she be turn cold and feel her heart beat painfully . 

 " all your taste be gratify now , " he go on innocently . " but you will remember the old pedagogue and his lecture ? " 

 one think in the mind of Felix be , that Esther be sure to marry Harold Transome . man readily believe these thing of the woman who love they . but he could not allude to the marriage more directly . he be afraid of this destiny for she , without have any very distinct knowledge by which to justify his fear to the mind of another . it do not satisfy he that Esther should marry Harold Transome . 

 " my child , " say Mr. Lyon at this moment , not look round , but only look close at his watch , " we have just two minute more . " then he go on writing . 

 Esther do not speak , but Felix could not help observe now that her hand have turn to a deathly coldness , and that she be tremble . he believe , he know , that whatever prospect she have , this feeling be for his sake . an overpowering impulse from mingled love , gratitude , and anxiety , urge he to say 

 " I have a horrible struggle , Esther . but you see I be right . there be a fitting lot in reserve for you . but remember you have cost a great price do not   throw what be precious away . I shall want the news that you have a happiness worthy of you . " 

 Esther feel too miserable for tear to come . she look helplessly at Felix for a moment , then take her hand from his , and , turn away mutely , walk dreamily toward her father , and say , " Father , I be ready there be no more to say . " 

 she turn back again , toward the chair where her bonnet lay , with a face quite corpse - like above her dark garment . 

 " Esther ! " 384 

 she hear Felix say the word , with an entreating cry , and go toward he with the swift movement of a frightened child toward its protector . he clasp she , and they kiss each other . 

 she never could recall anything else that happen , till she be in the carriage again with Mrs. Transome . 

 CHAPTER XLVI . 

 why , there be maiden of heroic touch , 
 and yet they seem like thing of gossamer 
 you would pinch the life out of , as out of moth . 
 oh , it be not loud tone and mouthingness , 
 ' tis not the arm akimbo and large stride , 
 that make a woman 's force . the tiny bird , 
 with softest downy breast , have passion in they , 
 and be brave with love . 
 Esther be so place in the Court , under Mrs. Transome 's wing , as to see and hear everything without effort : Harold have receive they at the hotel , and have observe that Esther look ill , and be unusually abstract in her manner ; but this seem to be sufficiently account for by her sympathetic anxiety about the result of a trial in which the prisoner at the bar be a friend , and in which both her father and himself be important witness , Mrs. Transome have no reluctance to keep a small secret from her son , and no betrayal be make of that previous " engagement " of Esther 's with her father . Harold be particularly delicate and unobtrusive in his attention to - day : he have the consciousness that he be go to behave in a way that would gratify Esther and win her admiration , and we be all of we make more graceful by the inward presence of what we believe to be a generous purpose ; our action move to a hide music " a melody that be sweetly play in tune . " 

 if Esther have be less absorb by supreme feeling , she would have be aware that she be an object of special notice . in the bare squareness of a public hall , where there be not one jutting angle to hang a guess or a thought upon , not an image or a bit of color to stir the fancy , and where the only object of speculation , of admiration , or of any interest whatever be human being , that occupy position indicate some importance , the notice bestow on Esther would not have be surprising , even if it have be merely a tribute to her youthful charm , which be well champion by Mrs. Transome 's elderly majesty . but it be due also to whispering that she be an hereditary claimant of the Transome estate , whom Harold Transome be about to marry . 385   Harold himself have of late not care to conceal either the fact or the probability : they both tend rather to his honor than his dishonor . and to - day , when there be a good proportion of Trebians present , the whispering spread rapidly . 

 the Court be still more crowded than on the previous day , when our poor acquaintance Dredge and his two colly companion be sentence to a year 's imprisonment with hard labor , and the more enlightened prisoner , who steal the Debarry 's plate , to transportation for life . poor Dredge have cry , have wish he would " never heared of ' lection , " and in spite of sermon from the jail chaplain , fall back on the explanation that this be a world in which Spratt and Old Nick be sure to get the good of it ; so that in Dredge 's case , at least , most observer must have have the melancholy conviction that there have be no enhancement of public spirit and faith in progress from that wave of political agitation which have reach the Sproxton pit . 

 but curiosity be necessarily at a high pitch to - day , when the character of the prisoner and the circumstance of his offence be of a highly unusual kind . soon as Felix appear at the bar , a murmur rise and spread into a loud buzz , which continue until there have be repeat authoritative call for silence in the Court . rather singularly , it be now for the first time that Esther have a feeling of pride in he on the ground simply of his appearance . at this moment , when he be the centre of a multitudinous gaze , which seem to act on her own vision like a broad unmitigated daylight , she feel that there be something pre - eminent in he , notwithstanding the vicinity of numerous gentleman . no apple - woman would have admire he ; not only to feminine mind like Mrs. Tiliot 's , but to many mind in coat and waistcoat , there be something dangerous and perhaps unprincipled in his bare throat and great gothic head ; and his somewhat massive person would doubtless have come out very oddly from the hand of a fashionable tailor of that time . but as Esther see his large gray eye look round calmly and undefiantly , first at the audience generally , and then with a more observant expression at the lawyer and other person immediately around he , she feel that he bear the outward stamp of a distinguished nature . forgive she if she need this satisfaction ; all of we , whether man or woman , be liable to this weakness of like to have our preference justify before other as well as ourselves . Esther say inwardly , with a certain triumph , that Felix Holt look as worthy to be choose in the midst of this large assembly , as he have ever look in 386   their tete - a - tete under the sombre light of the little parlor in Malthouse Yard . 

 Esther have feel some relief in hear from her father that Felix have insist on do without his mother 's presence ; and since to Mrs. Holt 's imagination , notwithstanding her general desire to have her character enquire into , there be no greatly consolatory difference between be a witness and a criminal , and an appearance of any kind " before the judge " could hardly be make to suggest anything definite that would overcome the dim sense of unalleviated disgrace , she have be less inclined than usual to complain of her son 's decision . Esther have shudder beforehand at the inevitable farce there would be in Mrs. Holt 's testimony . but surely Felix would lose something for want of a witness who could testify to his behavior in the morning before he become involved in the tumult ? 

 " he be really a fine young fellow , " say Harold , come to speak to Esther after a colloquy with the prisoner 's solicitor . " I hope he will not make a blunder in defend himself . " 

 " he be not likely to make a blunder , " say Esther . she have recover her color a little , and be bright than she have be all the morning before . 

 Felix have seem to include she in his general glance , but have avoid look at she particularly . she understand how delicate feeling for she would prevent this , and that she might safely look at he , and toward her father , whom she could see in the same direction . turn to Harold , to make an observation , she see that he be look toward the same point , but with an expression on his face that surprise she . 

 " dear I , " she say , prompt to speak without any reflection ; " how angry you look ! I never see you look so angry before . it be not my father you be look at ? " 

 " oh , no ! I be angry at something I be look away from , " say Harold , make an effort to drive back the troublesome demon who would stare out at window . " it be that Jermyn , " he add , glance at his mother as well as Esther . " he will thrust himself under my eye everywhere since I refuse he an interview and return his letter . I be determined never to speak to he directly again , if I can help it . " 

 Mrs. Transome hear with a changeless face . she have for some time be watch , and have take on her marble look of immobility . she say an 387   inward bitter " of course ! " to everything that be unpleasant . 

 after this Esther soon become impatient of all speech ; her attention be rivette on the proceeding of the Court , and on the mode in which Felix bear himself . in the case for the prosecution there be nothing more than a reproduction , with irrelevancy add by witness , of the fact already know to we . Spratt have retain consciousness enough , in the midst of his terror , to swear that , when he be tie to the finger - post , Felix be preside over the action of the mob . the landlady of the Seven Stars , who be indebted to Felix for rescue from pursuit by some drunken rioter , give evidence that go to prove his assumption of leadership prior to the assault on Spratt , remember only that he have call away her pursuer to " well sport . " various respectable witness swear to Felix 's " encouragement " of the rioter who be drag Spratt in King Street ; to his fatal assault on Tucker ; and to his attitude in front of the drawing - room window at the Manor . 

 three other witness give evidence of expression use by the prisoner , tend to show the character of the act with which he be charge . two be Treby tradesman , the third be a clerk from Duffield . the clerk have hear Felix speak at Duffield ; the Treby man have frequently hear he declare himself on public matter ; and they all quote expression which tend to show that he have a virulent feeling against the respectable shopkeeping class , and that nothing be likely to be more congenial to he than the gutting of retailer 's shop . no one else know the witness themselves do not know fully how far their strong perception and memory on these point be due to a fourth mind , namely , that of Mr. John Johnson , the attorney , who be nearly related to one of the Treby witness , and a familiar acquaintance of the Duffield clerk . man can not be define as an evidence - give animal ; and in the difficulty of get up evidence on any subject , there be room for much unrecognized action of diligent person who have the extra stimulus of some private motive . Mr. Johnson be present in Court to - day , but in a modest , retired situation . he have come down to give information to Mr. Jermyn , and to gather information in other quarter , which be well illuminate by the appearance of Esther in company with the Transomes . 

 when the case for the prosecution close , all stranger think that it look very black for the prisoner . in two instance only Felix have 388   choose to put a cross - examining question . the first be to ask Spratt if he do not believe that his have be tie to the post have save he from a probably mortal injury ? the second be to ask the tradesman who swear to his have hear Felix tell the rioter to leave Tucker alone and come along with he , whether he have not , shortly before , hear cry among the mob summon to an attack on the wine - vault and brewery . 

 Esther have hitherto listen closely but calmly . she know that there would be this strong adverse testimony ; and all her hope and fear be bent on what be to come beyond it . it be when the prisoner be ask what he have to adduce in reply that she feel herself in the grasp of that tremor which do not disable the mind , but rather give keener consciousness of a mind have a penalty of body attach to it . 

 there be a silence as of night when Felix Holt begin to speak . his voice be firm and clear : he speak with simple gravity , and evidently without any enjoyment of the occasion . Esther have never see his face look so weary . 

 " my Lord , I be not go to occupy the time of the Court with unnecessary word . I believe the witness for the prosecution have speak the truth as far as a superficial observation would enable they to do it ; and I see nothing that can weigh with the jury in my favor , unless they believe my statement of my own motif , and the testimony that certain witness will give to my character and purpose as be inconsistent with my willingly abet disorder . I will tell the Court in as few word as I can , how I get entangle in the mob , how I come to attack the constable , and how I be lead to take a course which seem rather mad to myself , now I look back upon it . " 

 Felix then give a concise narrative of his motif and conduct on the day of the riot , from the moment when he be startle into quit his work by the early uproar of the morning . he omit , of course , his visit to Malthouse Yard , and merely say that he go out to walk again after return to quiet his mother 's mind . he get warm by the story of his experience , which move he more strongly than ever , now he recall it in vibrate word before a large audience of his fellow - man . the sublime delight of truthful speech to one who have the great gift of utter it , will make itself feel even through the pang of sorrow . 

  389 

 " that be all I have to say for myself , my Lord . I plead ' not guilty ' to the charge of manslaughter , because I know that word may carry a meaning which would not fairly apply to my act . when I throw Tucker down , I do not see the possibility that he would die from a sort of attack which ordinarily occur in fighting without any fatal effect . as to my assault a constable , it be a quick choice between two evil : I should else have be disable . and he attack I under a mistake about my intention . I be not prepared to say I never would assault a constable where I have more chance of deliberation . I certainly should assault he if I see he do anything that make my blood boil : I reverence the law , but not where it be a pretext for wrong , which it should be the very object of law to hinder . I consider that I should be make an unworthy defence , if I let the Court infer from what I say myself , or from what be say by my witness , that because I be a man who hat drunken , motiveless disorder , or any wanton harm , therefore I be a man who would never fight against authority : I hold it blasphemy to say that a man ought not to fight against authority : there be no great religion and no great freedom that have not do it , in the beginning . it would be impertinent for I to speak of this now , if I do not need to say in my own defence , that I should hold myself the bad sort of traitor if I put my hand to either fighting or disorder which must mean to injure somebody if I be not urge to it by what I hold to be sacred feeling , make a sacred duty either to my own manhood or to my fellow - man . and certainly , " Felix end , with a strong ring of scorn in his voice , " I never hold it a sacred duty to try and get a radical candidate return for North Loamshire , by willingly head a drunken howl mob , whose public action must consist in break window , destroy hard - got produce , and endanger the life of man and woman . I have no more to say , my Lord . " 

 " I foresaw he would make a blunder , " say Harold , in a low voice to Esther . then , see she shrink a little , he fear she might suspect he of be merely sting by the allusion to himself . " I do not   mean what he say about the radical candidate , " he add , hastily , in correction . " I do not   mean the last sentence . I mean that whole peroration of his , which he ought to have leave unsaid . it have do he harm with the jury they will not   understand it , or rather will misunderstand it . 390   and I will answer for it , it have sour the judge . it remain to be see what we witness can say for he , to nullify the effect of what he have say for himself . I hope the attorney have do his good in collect the evidence : I understand the expense of the witness be undertake by some liberal at Glasgow and in Lancashire , friend of Holt 's . but I suppose your father have tell you . " 

 the first witness call to the defence be Mr. Lyon . the gist of his statement be , that from the beginning of September last till the day of the election he be in very frequent intercourse with the prisoner ; that he have become intimately acquaint with his character and view of life , and his conduct with respect to the election , and that these be totally inconsistent with any other supposition than his be involve in the riot , and his fatal encounter with the constable , be due to the calamitous failure of a bold but good purpose . he state far that he have be present when an interview have occur in his own house between the prisoner and Mr. Harold Transome , who be then canvass for the representation of North Loamshire . that the object of the prisoner in seek this interview have be to inform Mr. Transome of treat give in his name to the workman in the pit and on the canal at Sproxton , and to remonstrate against its continuance ; the prisoner fear that disturbance and mischief might result from what he believe to be the end toward which this treating be direct namely , the presence of these man on the occasion of the nomination and polling . several time after this interview , Mr. Lyon say , he have hear Felix Holt recur to the subject therein discuss with expression of grief and anxiety . he himself be in the habit of visit Sproxton in his ministerial capacity : he know fully what the prisoner have do there in order to found a night school , and be certain that the prisoner 's interest in the workingmen of that district turn entirely on the possibility of convert they somewhat to habit of soberness and to a due care for the instruction of their child . finally , he state that the prisoner , in compliance with his request , have be present at Duffield on the day of the nomination , and have on his return express himself with strong indignation concern the employment of the Sproxton man on that occasion , and what he call the wickedness of hire blind violence . 

 the quaint appearance and manner of the little dissent minister could not fail to stimulate the peculiar wit of the bar . he be subject to 391   a troublesome cross - examination , which he bear with wide - eyed short - sighted quietude and absorption in the duty of truthful response . on be ask rather sneeringly , if the prisoner be not one of his flock ? he answer , in that deep tone which make one of the most effective transition of his vary voice 

 " Nay would to God he be ! I should then feel that the great virtue and the pure life I have behold in he be a witness to the efficacy of the faith I believe in and the discipline of the Church whereunto I belong . " 

 perhaps it require a large power of comparison than be possess by any of that audience to appreciate the moral elevation of an Independent minister who could utter those word . nevertheless there be a murmur which be clearly one of sympathy . 

 the next witness , and the one on whom the interest of the spectator be chiefly concentrated , be Harold Transome . there be a decided predominance of Tory feel in the Court , and the human disposition to enjoy the infliction of a little punishment on an opposite party , be in this instance , of a Tory complexion . Harold be keenly alive to this , and to everything else that might prove disagreeable to he in his have to appear in the witness - box . but he be not likely to lose his self - possession , or to fail in adjust himself gracefully , under condition which most man would find it difficult to carry without awkwardness . he have generosity and candor enough to bear Felix Holt 's proud rejection of his advance without any petty resentment ; he have all the susceptibility of a gentleman ; and these moral quality give the right direction to his acuman , in judging of the behavior that would well secure his dignity . everything require self - command be easy to he because of Esther 's presence ; for her admiration be just then the object which this well - tan man of the world have it most at heart to secure . 

 when he enter the witness - box he be much admire by the lady amongst the audience , many of whom sigh a little at the thought of his wrong course in politic . he certainly look like a handsome portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence , in which that remarkable artist have happily omit the usual excess of honey blandness mix with alert intelligence , which be hardly compatible with the state of man out of paradise . he stand not far off Felix ; and the two Radicals certainly make a striking contrast . Felix might have come from the hand of a 392   sculptor in the later roman period , when the plastic impulse be stir by the grandeur of barbaric form when roll collar be not yet conceive , and satin stock be not . 

 Harold Transome declare he have have only one interview with the prisoner : it be the interview refer to by the previous witness , in whose presence and in whose house it be begin . the interview , however , be continue beyond the observation of Mr. Lyon . the prisoner and himself quit the Dissenting minister 's house in Malthouse Yard together , and proceed to the office of Mr. Jermyn , who be then conduct electioneer business on his behalf . his object be to comply with Holt 's remonstrance by enquire into the allege proceeding at Sproxton , and , if possible , to put a stop to they . Holt 's language , both in the Malthouse Yard and in the attorney 's office , be strong : he be evidently indignant , and his indignation turn on the danger of employ ignorant man excite by drink on an occasion of popular concourse . he believe that Holt 's sole motive be the prevention of disorder , and what he consider the demoralization of the workman by treat . the event have certainly justify his remonstrance . he have not have any subsequent opportunity of observe the prisoner ; but if any reliance be to be place on a rational conclusion , it must , he think , be plain that the anxiety thus manifest by Holt be a guarantee of the statement he have make as to his motif on the day of the riot . his entire impression from Holt 's manner in that single interview be that he be a moral and political enthusiast , who , if he seek to coerce other , would seek to coerce they into a difficult , and perhaps impracticable , scrupulosity . 

 Harold speak with as noticeable directness and emphasis , as if what he say could have no reaction on himself . he have of course not enter unnecessarily into what occur in Jermyn 's office . but now he be subject to a cross - examination on this subject , which give rise to some subdue shrug , smile , and wink , among county gentleman . 

 the question be direct so as to bring out , if possible , some indication that Felix Holt be move to his remonstrance by personal resentment against the political agent concern in set on foot the treating at Sproxton , but such questioning be a sort of target - shooting that sometimes hit about widely . the cross - examining counsel have close connection among the Tories of Loamshire , and enjoy his business 393   to - day . under the fire of various question about Jermyn and the agent employ by he at Sproxton , Harold get warm , and in one of his reply say , with rapid sharpness 

 " Mr. Jermyn be my agent then , not now : I have no long any but hostile relation with he . " 

 the sense that he have show a slight heat would have vex Harold more if he have not get some satisfaction out of the thought that Jermyn hear those word . he recover his good temper quickly , and when , subsequently , the question come 

 " you acquiesce in the treating of the Sproxton man , as necessary to the efficient work of the reform constituency ? " Harold reply , with quiet fluency " yes ; on my return to England , before I put up for North Loamshire , I get the good advice from practised agent , both Whig and Tory . they all agree as to electioneer measure . " 

 the next witness be Michael Brincey , otherwise Mike Brindle , who give evidence of the saying and doing of the prisoner among the Sproxton man . Mike declare that Felix go " uncommon again ' drink , and pitch - and - toss , and quarrelling , and sich , " and be " all for schooling and bring up the little chap " ; but on be cross - examine , he admit that he " could not   give much account " ; that Felix do talk again ' idle folk , whether poor or rich , and that most like he mean the rich , who have " a right to be idle , " which be what he , Mike , like himself sometimes , though for the most part he be " a hard - work butty . " on be check for this superfluous allegation of his own theory and practice , Mike become timidly conscious that answering be a great mystery beyond the reach of a butty 's soul , and begin to err from defect instead of excess . however , he reassert that what Felix most want be , " to get them to set up a school for the little chap . " 

 with the two succeed witness , who swear to the fact that Felix have try to lead the mob along Hobb 's Lane instead of toward the Manor , and to the violently threatening character of Tucker 's attack on he , the case for the defence be understand to close . 

 meanwhile Esther have be look on and listen with grow misery , in the sense that all have not be say which might have be say on behalf of Felix . if it be the jury who be to be act on , she argue to herself , there might have be an impression make on their feeling 394   which would determine their verdict . be it not constantly say and see that jury pronounce Guilty or not guilty from sympathy for or against the accuse ? she be too inexperienced to check her own argument by thoroughly represent to herself the course of thing : how the counsel for the prosecution would reply , and how the judge would sum up , with the object of cool down sympathy into deliberation . what she have painfully press on her inward vision be that the trial be come to an end , and that the voice of right and truth have not be strong enough . 

 when a woman feel purely and nobly , that ardor of hers which break through formula too rigorously urge on man by daily practical need , make one of her most precious influence : she be the add impulse that shatter the stiffening crust of cautious experience . her inspire ignorance give a sublimity to action so incongruously simple , that otherwise they would make man smile . some of that ardor which have flash out and illuminate all poetry and history be burn to - day in the bosom of sweet Esther Lyon . in this , at least , her woman 's lot be perfect : that the man she love be her hero ; that her woman 's passion and her reverence for rare goodness rush together in an undivided current . and to - day they be make one danger , one terror , one irresistible impulse for her heart . her feeling be grow into a necessity for action , rather than a resolve to act . she could not support the thought that the trial would come to an end , that sentence would be pass on Felix , and that all the while something have be omit which might have be say for he . there have be no witness to tell what have be his behavior and state of mind just before the riot . she must do it . it be possible . there be time . but not too much time . all other agitation become merge in eagerness not to let the moment escape . the last witness be be call . Harold Transome have not be able to get back to she on leave the witness - box , but Mr. Lingon be close by she . with firm quickness she say to he 

 " pray tell the attorney that I have evidence to give for the prisoner lose no time . " 

 " do you know what you be go to say , my dear ? " say Mr. Lingon , look at she in astonishment . 

 " yes I entreat you , for God 's sake , " say Esther , in that low tone of urgent beseeching which be equivalent to a cry ; and with a look of 395   appeal more penetrate still , " I would rather die than not do it . " 

 the old rector , always lean to the good - natured view of thing , feel chiefly that there seem to be an additional chance for the poor fellow who have get himself into trouble . he dispute no far , but go to the attorney . 

 before Harold be aware of Esther 's intention she be on her way to the witness - box . when she appear there , it be as if a vibration , quick as light , have go through the Court and have shake Felix himself , who have hitherto seem impassive . a sort of a gleam seem to shoot across his face , and any one close to he would have see that his hand , which lie on the edge of the dock , tremble . 

 at the first moment Harold be startle and alarm ; the next , he feel delight in Esther 's beautiful aspect , and in the admiration of the Court . there be no blush on her face : she stand , divest of all personal consideration whether of vanity or shyness . her clear voice sound as it might have do if she have be make a confession of faith . she begin and go on without query or interruption . every face look grave and respectful . 

 " I be Esther Lyon , the daughter of Mr. Lyon , the Independent minister at Treby , who have be one of the witness for the prisoner . I know Felix Holt well . on the day of the election at Treby , when I have be much alarm by the noise that reach I from the main street , Felix Holt come to call upon I . he know that my father be away , and he think that I should be alarm by the sound of disturbance . it be about the middle of the day , and he come to tell I that the disturbance be quiet , and that the street be nearly empty . but he say he fear that the man would collect again after drinking , and that something bad might happen later in the day . and he be in much sadness at this thought . he stay a little while , and then he leave I . he be very melancholy . his mind be full of great resolution that come from his kind feeling toward other . it be the last thing he would have do to join in riot or to hurt any man , if he could have help it . his nature be very noble ; he be tender - hearted ; he could never have have any intention that be not brave and good . " 

 there be something so naive and beautiful in this action of Esther 's , that it conquer every low or petty suggestion even in the commonest mind . the three man in that assembly who know she good even her father and Felix Holt feel a thrill of surprise mingle with their 396   admiration . this bright , delicate , beautiful - shaped thing that seem most like a toy or ornament some hand have touch the chord , and there come forth music that bring tear . half a year before , Esther 's dread of be ridiculous spread over the surface of her life ; but the depth below be sleep . 

 Harold Transome be ready to give she his hand and lead she back to her place . when she be there , Felix , for the first time , could not help look toward she , and their eye meet in one solemn glance . 

 Afterward Esther find herself unable to listen so as to form any judgment on what she hear . the act out of that strong impulse have exhaust every energy . there be a brief pause , fill with a murmur , a buzz , and much coughing . the audience generally feel as if dull weather be set in again . and under those auspex the counsel for the prosecution get up to make his reply . Esther 's deed have its effect beyond the momentary one , but the effect be not visible in the rigid necessity of legal procedure . the counsel 's duty of restore all unfavorable fact to due prominence in the mind of the juror , have its effect altogether reinforce by the summing - up of the judge . even the bare discernment of fact , much more their arrangement with a view to inference , must carry a bias : human impartiality , whether judicial or not , can hardly escape be more or less loaded . it be not that the judge have severe intention ; it be only that he see with severity . the conduct of Felix be not such as incline he to indulgent consideration , and , in his direction to the jury , that mental attitude necessarily tell on the light in which he place the homicide . even to many in the Court who be not constrain by judicial duty , it seem that though this high regard feel for the prisoner by his friend , and especially by a generous - hearted woman , be very pretty , such conduct as his be not the less dangerous and foolish , and assault and kill a constable be not the less an offence to be regard without leniency . 

 Esther seem now so tremulous , and look so ill , that Harold beg she to leave the Court with his mother and Mr. Lingon . he would come and tell she the issue . but she say , quietly , that she would rather stay ; she be only a little overcome by the exertion of speak . she be inwardly resolve to see Felix to the last moment before he leave the Court . 

  397 

 though she could not follow the address of the counsel or the judge , she have a keen ear for what be brief and decisive . she hear the verdict , " guilty of manslaughter . " and every word utter by the judge in pronounce sentence fall upon she like an unforgetable sound that would come back in dream and in wake . she have her eye on Felix , and at the word , " imprisonment for four year , " she see his lip tremble . but otherwise he stand firm and calm . 

 Esther give a start from her seat . her heart swell with a horrible sensation of pain ; but , alarmed lest she should lose her self - command , she grasp Mrs. Transome 's hand , get some strength from that human contact . 

 Esther see that Felix have turn . she could no long see his face . " yes , " she say , draw down her veil , " let we go . " 

 CHAPTER XLVII . 

 the devil tempt we not ' tis we tempt he , 
 beckon his skill with opportunity . 
 the more permanent effect of Esther 's action in the trial be visible in a meeting which take place the next day in the principal room of the White Hart of Loamford . to the magistrate and other county gentleman who be draw together about noon , some of the necessary impulse might have be lack but for that stirring of heart in certain just - spirited man and good father among they , which have be raise to a high pitch of emotion by Esther 's maidenly fervor . among these one of the foremost be Sir Maximus Debarry , who have come to the assize with a mind , as usual , slightly rebellious under an influence which he never ultimately resist the influence of his son . Philip Debarry himself be detain in London , but in his correspondence with his father he have urge he , as well as his uncle Augustus , to keep eye and interest awake on the subject of Felix Holt , whom , from all the knowledge of the case he have be able to obtain , he be inclined to believe peculiarly unfortunate rather than guilty . Philip have say he be the more anxious that his family should intervene benevolently in this affair , if it be possible , because he understand that Mr. Lyon take the young man 's case particularly to heart , and he should always regard himself as oblige to the old preacher . at this superfineness of consideration Sir Maximus have vent a few " pshaw ! " and , in relation to the whole affair , have grumble that Phil be always set he to do he do not   know what always seem to turn nothing into something by dint of 398   word which have not   so much substance as a mote behind they . nevertheless he be coerce ; and in reality he be willing to do anything fair or good - natured which have a handle that his understanding could lay hold of . his brother , the rector , desire to be rigorously just ; but he have come to Loamford with a severe opinion concern Felix , think that some sharp punishment might be a wholesome check on the career of a young man dispose to rely too much on his own crude device . 

 before the trial commence , Sir Maximus have naturally be one of those who have observe Esther with curiosity , owe to the report of her inheritance , and her probable marriage to his once welcome but now exasperate neighbor , Harold Transome ; and he have make the emphatic comment " a fine girl ! something thoroughbre in the look of she . too good for a Radical ; that be all I have to say . " but during the trial Sir Maximus be work into a state of sympathetic ardor that need no fanning . as soon as he could take his brother by the buttonhole , he say 

 " I tell you what , Gus ! we must exert ourselves to get a pardon for this young fellow . confound it ! what be the use of mew he up for four year ? example ? nonsense . will there be a man knock down the less for it ? that girl make I cry . depend upon it , whether she be go to marry Transome or not , she be be fond of Holt in her poverty , you know . she be a modest , brave , beautiful woman . I would ride a steeple - chase , old as I be , to gratify her feeling . hang it ! the fellow be a good fellow if she think so . and he throw out a fine sneer , I think , at the radical candidate . depend upon it , he be a good fellow at bottom . " 

 the rector have not exactly the same kind of ardor , nor be he open too precisely that process of proof which appear to have convince Sir Maximus ; but he have be so far influence as to be incline to unite in an effort on the side of mercy , observe also that he " know Phil would be on that side . " and by the co - operation of similar movement in the mind of other man whose name be of weight , a meeting have be determine on to consult about get up a memorial to the Home Secretary on behalf of Felix Holt . his case have never have the sort of significance that could rouse political partisanship ; and such interest as be now feel in he be still more unmixed with that inducement . the gentleman who gather in the room at the White Hart be not as the large imagination of the North Loamshire Herald suggest , " of 399   all shade of political opinion , " but of as many shade as be to be find among the gentleman of that county . 

 Harold Transome have be energetically active in bring about this meeting . over and above the sting of conscience and a determination to act up to the level of all recognize honorableness , he have the powerful motive of desire to do what would satisfy Esther . his gradually heighten perception that she have a strong feeling toward Felix Holt have not make he uneasy . Harold have a conviction that might have seem like fatuity if it have not be that he see the effect he produce on Esther by the light of his opinion about woman in general . the conviction be , that Felix Holt could not be his rival in any formidable sense . Esther 's admiration for this eccentric young man be , he think , a moral enthusiasm , a romantic fervor , which be one among those many attraction quite novel in his own experience ; her distress about the trouble of one who have be a familiar object in her former home , be no more than naturally follow from a tender woman 's compassion . the place young Holt have hold in her regard have necessarily change its relation now that her lot be so widely change . it be undeniable , that what most conduced to the quieting nature of Harold 's conclusion be the influence on his imagination of the more or less detailed reason that Felix Holt be a watchmaker , that his home and dress be of a certain quality , that his person and manner that , in short   for Harold , like the rest of we , have many impression which save he the trouble of distinct idea , Felix Holt be not the sort of a man a woman would be in love with when she be woo by Harold Transome . 

 thus , he be sufficiently at rest on this point not to be exercise any painful self - conquest in act as the zealous advocate of Felix Holt 's cause with all person worth influence ; but it be by no direct intercourse between he and Sir Maximus that they find themselves in co - operation , for the old baronet would not recognize Harold by more than the faint bow , and Harold be not a man to expose himself to a rebuff . whatever he in his inmost soul regard as nothing more than a narrow prejudice , he could defy , not with air of importance , but with easy indifference . he could bear most thing good - humoredly where he feel that he have the superiority . the object of the meeting be discuss , and the memorial agree upon without any clashing . 400   Mr. Lingon be go home , but it be expect that his concurrence and signature would be give , as well as those of other gentleman who be absent . the business gradually reach that stage at which the concentration of interest cease when the attention of all but a few who be more practically concerned drop off and disperse itself in private chat , and there be no long any particular reason why everybody stay except that everybody be there . the room be rather a long one , and invite to a little movement ; one gentleman draw another aside to speak in an undertone about Scotch bullock ; another have something to say about the North Loamshire hunt to a friend who be the reverse of good - look , but who , nevertheless , while listen , show his strength of mind by give a severe attention also to his full - length reflection in the handsome tall mirror that fill the space between two window . and in this way the group be continually shift . 

 but in the meantime there be move toward this room at the White Hart the footstep of a person whose presence have not be invite , and who , very far from be draw thither by the belief that he would be welcome , know well that his entrance would , to one person at least , be bitterly disagreeable . they be the footstep of Mr. Jermyn , whose appearance that morning be not less comely and less carefully tend than usual , but who be suffer the torment of a compress rage , which , if not impotent to inflict pain on another , be impotent to avert evil from himself . after his interview with Mrs. Transome there have be for some reason a delay of positive procedure against he by Harold , of which delay Jermyn have twice avail himself ; first , to seek an interview with Harold , and then to send he a letter . the interview have be refuse ; and the letter have be return , with the statement that no communication could take place except through Harold 's lawyer . and yesterday Johnson have bring Jermyn the information that he would quickly hear of the proceeding in Chancery be resume : the watch Johnson keep in town have give he secure knowledge on this head . a doomed animal , with every issue earth up except that where its enemy stand , must , if it have tooth and fierceness , try its one chance without delay . and a man may reach a point in his life in which his impulse be not distinguish from those of a hunt brute by any capability of scruple . our selfishness be so robust and many - clutching , that , well encouraged , it easily devour all sustenance away from our poor little scruple . 401 

 since Harold would not give Jermyn access to he , that vigorous attorney be resolve to take it . he know all about the meeting at the White Hart , and he be go thither with the determination of accost Harold . he think he know what he should say , and the tone in which he should say it . it would be a vague intimation , carry the effect of a threat , which should compel Harold to give he a private interview . to any counter - consideration that present itself in his mind to anything that an imagined voice might say the imagined answer arise , " that be all very fine , but I be not go to be ruin if I can help it least of all , ruin in that way . " shall we call it degeneration or gradual development this effect of thirty additional winter on the soft - glance , versify young Jermyn ? 

 when Jermyn enter the room at the White Hart he do not immediately see Harold . the door be at the extremity of the room , and the view be obstruct by group of gentleman with figure broaden by overcoat . his entrance excite no particular observation : several person have come in late . only one or two , who know Jermyn well , be not too much preoccupied to have a glancing remembrance of what have be chat about freely the day before Harold 's irritated reply about his agent , from the witness box . receive and give a slight nod here and there , Jermyn push his way , look round keenly , until he see Harold stand near the other end of the room . the solicitor who have act for Felix be just then speak to he , but have put a paper into his hand turn away ; and Harold , standing isolate , though at no great distance from other , bent his eye on the paper . he look brilliant that morning ; his blood be flow prosperously . he have come in after a ride , and be additionally brighten by rapid talk and the excitement of seek to impress himself favorably , or at least powerfully , on the mind of neighbor near or more remote . he have just that amount of flush which indicate that life be more enjoyable than usual ; and as he stand with his left hand caress his whisker , and his right hold the paper and his riding - whip , his dark eye run rapidly along the write line , and his lip repose in a curve of good - humor which have more happiness in it than a smile , all beholder might have see that his mind be at ease . 

 Jermyn walk quickly and quietly close up to he . the two man be 402   of the same height , and before Harold look round Jermyn 's voice be say , close to his ear , not in a whisper , but in a hard , incisive , disrespectful and yet not loud tone 

 " Mr. Transome , I must speak to you in private . " 

 the sound jar through Harold with a sensation all the more insufferable because of the revulsion from the satisfied , almost elated , state in which it have seize he . he start and look round into Jermyn 's eye . for an instant , which seem long , there be no sound between they , but only angry hatred gathering in the two face . Harold feel himself go to crush this insolence : Jermyn feel that he have word within he that be fang to clutch this obstinate strength , and wring forth the blood and compel submission . and Jermyn 's impulse be the more urgent . he say , in a tone that be rather low , but yet hard and more biting 

 " you will repent else for your mother 's sake . " 

 at that sound , quick as a leap flame , Harold have strike Jermyn across the face with his whip . the brim of the hat have be a defense . Jermyn , a powerful man , have instantly thrust out his hand and clutch Harold hard by the clothe just below the throat , push he slightly so as to make he stagger . 

 by this time everybody 's attention have be call to this end of the room , but both Jermyn and Harold be beyond be arrest by any consciousness of spectator . 

 " let I go , you scoundrel ! " say Harold , fiercely , " or I will be the death of you . " 

 " do , " say Jermyn , in a grating voice ; " I be your father . " 

 in the thrust by which Harold have be make to stagger backward a little , the two man have get very near the long mirror . they be both white ; both have anger and hatred in their face ; the hand of both be upraised . as Harold hear the last terrible word he start at a leaping throb that go through he , and in the start turn his eye away from Jermyn 's face . he turn they on the same face in the glass with his own beside it , and see the hat fatherhood reassert . 

 the strong man reel with a sick faintness . but in the same moment Jermyn release his hold , and Harold feel himself support by the arm . it be Sir Maximus Debarry who have take hold of he . 

 " leave the room , sir ! " the baronet say to Jermyn , in a voice of imperious scorn . " this be a meeting of gentleman . " 

 " come , Harold , " he say , in the old friendly voice , " come away with I . " 

  403 

 CHAPTER XLVIII . 

 ' tis law as steadfast as the throne of Zeus 
 our day be heritor of day go by . 
 Aschylus : Agamemnon . 
 a little after five o'clock that day , Harold arrive at Transome Court . as he be wind along the broad road of the park , some parting gleam of the March sun pierce the tree here and there , and throw on the grass a long shadow of himself and the groom riding , and illuminate a window or two of the home he be approach . but the bitterness in his mind make these sunny gleam almost as odious as an artificial smile . he wish he have never come back to this pale English sunshine . 

 in the course of his eighteen mile ' drive he have make up his mind what he would do . he understand now , as he have never understand before , the neglect solitariness of his mother 's life , the allusion and innuendo which have come out during the election . but with a proud insurrection against the hardship of an ignominy which be not of his own making , he inwardly say , that if the circumstance of his birth be such as to warrant any man in regard his character of gentleman with ready suspicion , that character should be the more strongly assert in his conduct . no one should be able to allege with any show of proof that he have inherit meanness . 

 as he step from the carriage and enter the hall , there be the voice and the trot foot of little Harry as usual , and the rush to clasp his father 's leg and make his joyful puppy - like noise . Harold just touch the boy 's head , and then say to Dominic in a weary voice 

 " take the child away . ask where my mother be . " 

 Mrs. Transome , Dominic say , be up - stair . he have see she go up after come in from her walk with Miss Lyon , and she have not come down again . 

 Harold throw off his hat and greatcoat , go straight to his mother 's dressing - room . there be still a hope in his mind . he might be suffer simply from a lie . there be much misery create in the world by mere mistake or slander , and he might have be stun by a lie suggest by such slander . he rap at his mother 's door . 

 her voice say immediately , " come in . " 

 Mrs. Transome be rest in her easy - chair , as she often do between an afternoon walk and dinner . she have take off her walking - dress and 404   wrap herself in a soft dressing - gown . she be neither more nor less empty of joy than usual . but when she see Harold , a dreadful certainty take possession of she . it be as if a long expect letter , with a black seal , have come at last . 

 Harold 's face tell she what to fear the more decisively , because she have never before see it express a man 's deep agitation . since the time of its pouting childhood and careless youth she have see only the confident strength and good - humor imperiousness of maturity . the last five hour have make a change as great as illness make . Harold look as if he have be wrestle , and have have some terrible blow . his eye have that sunken look which , because it be unusual , seem to intensify expression . 

 he look at his mother as he enter , and her eye follow he as he move , till he come and stand in front of she , she look up at he , with white lip . 

 " Mother , " he say , speak with a distinct slowness , in strange contrast with his habitual manner , " tell I the truth , that I may know how to act . " 

 he pause a moment , and then say , " who be my father ? " 

 she be mute : her lip only tremble . Harold stand silent for a few moment , as if wait . then he speak again . 

 " he have say say it before other that he be my father . " 

 he look still at his mother . she seem as if age be strike she with a sudden wand as if her trembling face be get haggard before he . she be mute . but her eye have not fall ; they look up in helpless misery at her son . 

 her son turn away his eye from she , and leave she . in that moment Harold feel hard : he could show no pity . all the pride of his nature rebel against his sonship . 

 CHAPTER XLIX . 

 Nay , falter not ' tis an assured good 
 to seek the noblest ' tis your only good 
 now you have see it ; for that high vision 
 poison all mean choice forevermore . 
 that day Esther din with old Mr. Transome only . Harold send word that he be engage and have already din , and Mrs. Transome that she be feel ill . Esther be much disappointed that any tiding Harold might have bring relate to Felix be defer in this way ; and , her anxiety make she fearful , she be haunt by the thought that if there have be anything cheer to tell , he would have find time to tell 405   it without delay . old Mr. Transome go as usual to his sofa in the library to sleep after dinner , and Esther have to seat herself in the small drawing - room , in a well - light solitude that be unusually dispirit to she . pretty as this room be , she do not like it . Mrs. Transome 's full - length portrait , be the only picture there , urge itself too strongly on her attention : the youthful brilliancy it represent sadden Esther by its inevitable association with what she daily see have come instead of it a joyless , embitter age . the sense that Mrs. Transome be unhappy , affect Esther more and more deeply as the grow familiarity which relax the effort of the hostess reveal more and more the threadbare tissue of this majestic lady 's life . even the flower and the pure sunshine and the sweet water of Paradise would have be spoil for a young heart , if the bowered walk have be haunt by an Eve go gray with bitter memory of an Adam who have complain . " the woman she give I of the tree , and I do eat . " and many of we know how , even in our childhood , some blank discontent face on the background of our home have mar our summer morning . why be it , when the bird be sing , when the field be a garden , and when we be clasp another little hand just large than our own , there be somebody who find it hard to smile ? Esther have get far beyond that childhood to a time and circumstance when this daily presence of elderly dissatisfaction amidst such outward thing as she have always think must greatly help to satisfy , awake , not merely vague questioning emotion , but strong determine thought . and now , in these hour since her return from Loamford , her mind be in that state of highly - wrought activity , that large discourse , in which we seem to stand aloof from our own life weigh impartially our own temptation and the weak desire that most habitually solicit we . " I think I be get that power Felix wish I to have : I shall soon see strong vision , " she say to herself , with a melancholy smile flit across her face , as she put out her wax light that she might get rid of the oppressive urgency of wall and upholstery and that portrait smile with deluded brightness , unwitting of the future . 

 just then Dominic come to say that Mr. Harold send his compliment , and beg that she would grant he an interview in his study . he dislike the small drawing - room : if she would oblige he by go to the study at once , he would join she very soon . Esther go , in some wonder and 406   anxiety . what she most fear or hop in these moment relate to Felix Holt , and it do not occur to she that Harold could have anything special to say to she that evening on other subject . 

 certainly the study be pleasanter than the small drawing - room . a quiet light shone on nothing but greenness and dark wood , and Dominic have place a delightful chair for her opposite to his master 's , which be still empty . all the little object of luxury around indicate Harold 's habitual occupancy ; and as Esther sit opposite all these thing along with the empty chair which suggest the come presence , the expectation of his beseech homage bring with it an impatience and repugnance which she have never feel before . while these feeling be strongly upon she , the door open and Harold appear . 

 he have recover his self - possession since his interview with his mother : he have dress and be perfectly calm . he have be occupy with resolute thought , determine to do what he know that perfect honor demand , let it cost he what it would . it be true he have a tacit hope behind , that it might not cost he what he prize most highly : it be true he have a glimpse even of reward ; but it be not less true that he would have act as he do without that hope or glimpse . it be the most serious moment in Harold Transome 's life ; for the first time the iron have enter into his soul , and he feel the hard pressure of our common lot , the yoke of that mighty resistless destiny lay upon we by the act of other man as well as our own . 

 when Esther look at he she relent , and feel ashamed of her gratuitous impatience . she see that his mind be in some way burden . but then immediately spring the dread that he have to say something hopeless about Felix . 

 they shake hand in silence , Esther look at he with anxious surprise . he release her hand , but it do not occur to she to sit down , and they both continue stand on the hearth . 

 " do not   let I alarm you , " say Harold , see that her face gather solemnity from his . " I suppose I carry the mark of a past agitation . it relate entirely to trouble of my own of my own family . no one beyond be involve in they . " 

 Esther wonder still more , and feel still more relent . 

 " but , " say Harold , after a slight pause , and in a voice that be weight with new feeling , " it involve a difference in my position 407   with regard to you ; and it be on this point that I wish to speak to you at once . when a man see what ought to be do , he have well do it forthwith . he can not   answer for himself to - morrow . " 

 while Esther continue to look at he , with eye widen by anxious expectation , Harold turn a little , lean on the mantelpiece , and cease to look at she as he speak . 

 " my feeling drag I another way . I need not tell you that your regard have become very important to I that if our mutual position have be different that , in short , you must have see if it have not seem to be a matter of worldly interest , I should have tell you plainly already that I love you , and that my happiness could be complete only if you would consent to marry I . " 

 Esther feel her heart begin to beat painfully . Harold 's voice and word move she so much that her own task seem more difficult than she have before imagine . it seem as if the silence , unbroken by anything but the clicking of the fire , have be long , before Harold turn round toward she again and say 

 " but to - day I have hear something that affect my own position . I can not tell you what it be . there be no need . it be not any culpability of my own . but I have not just the same unsullied name and fame in the eye of the world around we , as I believe that I have when I allow myself to entertain that wish about you . you be very young , enter on a fresh life with bright prospect you be worthy of everything that be good . I may be too vain in think it be at all necessary ; but I take this precaution against myself . I shut myself out from the chance of try , after to - day , to induce you to accept anything which other may regard as speck and stain by any obloquy , however slight . " 

 Esther be keenly touch . with a paradoxical longing , such as often happen to we , she wish at that moment that she could have love this man with her whole heart . the tear come into her eye ; she do not speak , but , with an angel 's tenderness in her face , she lay her hand on his sleeve . Harold command himself strongly and say 

 " what be to be do now be , that we should proceed at once to the necessary legal measure for put you in possession of your own , and arrange mutual claim . after that I shall probably leave England . " 

 Esther be oppress by an overpowering difficulty . her sympathy with Harold at this moment be so strong , that it spread itself like a mist 408   over all previous thought and resolve . it be impossible now to wound he afresh . with her hand still rest on his arm , she say , timidly 

 " should you be urge oblige to go in any case ? " 

 " not in every case , perhaps , " Harold say , with an evident movement of the blood toward his face ; " at least not for long , not for always . " 

 Esther be conscious of the gleam in his eye . with terror at herself , she say , in difficult haste , " I can not   speak . I can not   say anything to - night . a great decision have to be make : I must wait till to - morrow . " 

 she be move her hand from his arm , when Harold take it reverentially and raise it to his lip . she turn toward her chair , and as he release her hand she sink down on the seat with a sense that she need that support . she do not want to go away from Harold yet . all the while there be something she need to know , and yet she could not bring herself to ask it . she must resign herself to depend entirely on his recollection of anything beyond his own immediate trial . she sit helpless under contend sympathy while Harold stand at some distance from she , feel more harass by weariness and uncertainty , now that he have fulfil his resolve , and be no long under the excitement of actually fulfil it . 

 Esther 's last word have forbid his revival of the subject that be necessarily supreme with he . but still she sit there , and his mind , busy as to the probability of her feeling , glance over all she have do and say in the later day of their intercourse . it be this retrospect that lead he to say at last 

 " you will be glad to hear that we shall get a very powerfully sign memorial to the Home Secretary about young Holt . I think your speak for he help a great deal . you make all the man wish what you wish . " 

 this be what Esther have be yearn to hear and dare not ask , as well from respect for Harold 's absorption in his own sorrow , as from the shrinking that belong to our dear need . the intense relief of hear what she long to hear , affect her whole frame : her color , her expression , change as if she have be suddenly free from some torturing constraint . but we interpret sign of emotion as we interpret other sign often quite erroneously , unless we have the right key to what they signify . Harold do not gather that this be what Esther have wait for , or that the change in she indicate more than he have 409   expect she to feel at this allusion to an unusual act which she have do under a strong impulse . 

 besides the introduction of a new subject after very momentous word have pass , and be still dwell on the mind , be necessarily a sort of concussion , shake we into a new adjustment of ourselves . 

 it seem natural that soon afterward Esther put out her hand and say , " good - night . " 

 Harold go to his bedroom on the same level with his study , think of the morning with an uncertainty that dip on the side of hope . this sweet woman , for whom he feel a passion new than any he have expect to feel , might possibly make some hard thing more bearable if she love he . if not well , he have act so that he could defy anyone to say he be not a gentleman . 

 Esther go up - stair to her bedroom , think that she should not sleep that night . she set her light on a high stand , and do not touch her dress . what she desire to see with undisturbed clearness be thing not present : the rest she need be the rest of a final choice . it be difficult . on each side there be renunciation . 

 she draw up her blind , like to see the gray sky , where there be some veil glimmering of moonlight , and the line of the forever run river , and the bend movement of the black tree . she want the largeness of the world to help she thought . this young creature , who trod lightly backward and forward , and lean against the window - frame , and shake back her brown curl as she look at something not visible , have live hardly more than six month since she see Felix Holt for the first time . but life be measure by the rapidity of change , the succession of influence that modify the being ; and Esther have undergo something little short of an inward revolution . the revolutionary struggle , however , be not quite at an end . 

 there be something which she now feel profoundly to be the good thing that life could give she . but if it be to be have at all it be not to be have without pay a heavy price for it , such as we must pay for all that be greatly good . a supreme love , a motive that give a sublime rhythm to a woman 's life , and exalt habit into partnership with the soul 's high need , be not to be have where and how she will : to know that high initiation , she must often tread where it be hard to tread , and feel the chill air , and watch through darkness . it be not true 410   that love make all thing easy : it make we choose what be difficult . Esther 's previous life have bring she into close acquaintance with many negation , and with many positive ill too , not of the acutely painful , but of the distasteful sort . what if she choose the hardship , and have to bear it alone , with no strength to lean upon no other well self to make a place for trust and joy ? her past experience save she from illusion . she know the dim life of the back street , the contact with sordid vulgarity , the lack of refinement for the sens , the summon to a daily task ; and the gain that be to make that life of privation something on which she dread to turn she back , as if it be heaven the presence and the love of Felix Holt be only a quivering hope , not a certainty . it be not in her woman 's nature that the hope should not spring within she and make a strong impulse . she know that he love she : have he not say how a woman might help a man if she be worthy ? and if she prove herself worthy ? but still there be the dread that after all she might find herself on the stony road alone , and faint and be weary . even with the fulfillment of her hope , she know that she pledge herself to meet high demand . 

 and on the other side there be a lot where everything seem easy but for the fatal absence of those feeling which , now she have once know they , it seem nothing less than a fall and degradation to do without . with a terrible prescience which a multitude of impression during her stay at Transome Court have contribute to form , she see herself in a silken bondage that arrest all motive , and be nothing well than a well - cushion despair . to be restless amidst ease , to be languid among all appliance for pleasure , be a possibility that seem to haunt the room of this house , and wander with she under the oak and elm of the park . and Harold Transome 's love , no long a hover fancy with which she play , but become a serious fact , seem to threaten she with a stifle oppression . the homage of a man may be delightful until he ask straight for love , by which a woman render homage . since she and Felix have kiss each other in the prison , she feel as if she have vow herself away , as if memory lie on her lip like a seal of possession . yet what have happen that very evening have strengthen her liking for Harold , and her care for all that regard he : it have increase her repugnance to turn he out of anything he have expect to be 411   his , or to snatch anything from he on the ground of an arbitrary claim . it have even make her dread , as a come pain , the task of say anything to he that be not a promise of the utmost comfort under this newly - disclose trouble of his . 

 it be already near midnight , but with these thought succeed and return in her mind like scene through which she be live , Esther have a more intense wakefulness than any she have know by day . all have be stillness hitherto , except the fitful wind outside . but her ear now catch a sound within slight , but sudden . she move near her door , and hear the sweep of something on the mat outside . it come close , and pause . then it begin again , and seem to sweep away from she . then it approach , and pause as it have do before . Esther listen , wonder . the same thing happen again and again , till she could bear it no long . she open the door , and in the dim light of the corridor , where the glass above seem to make a glimmering sky , she see Mrs. Transome 's tall figure pace slowly , with her cheek upon her hand . 

 CHAPTER L. 

 the great question in life be the suffering we cause : and the utmost ingenuity of metaphysics can not justify the man who have pierce the heart that love he . Benjamin Constant . 

 when Denner have go up to her mistress 's room to dress she for dinner , she have find she seat just as Harold have find she , only with eyelid droop and tremble over slowly - roll tear nay , with a face in which every sensitive feature , every muscle , seem to be quiver with a silent endurance of some agony . 

 Denner go and stand by the chair a minute without speak , only lay her hand gently on Mrs. Transome 's . at last she say beseechingly , " pray , speak , madam . what have happen ? " 

 " the bad , Denner the bad . " 

 " you be ill . let I undress you , and put you to bed . " 

 " no , I be not ill . I be not go to die ! I shall live I shall live ! " 

 " what may I do ? " 

 " go and say I shall not dine . then you may come back , if you will . " 

 the patient waiting - woman come back and sit by her mistress in motionless silence , Mrs. Transome would not let her dress be touch , 412   and wave away all proffer with a slight movement of her hand . Denner dare not even light a candle without be tell . at last , when the evening be far go , Mrs. Transome say : 

 " go down , Denner , and find out where Harold be , and come back and tell I . " 

 " shall I ask he to come to you , madam ? " 

 " no ; do not   dare to do it , if you love I . come back . " 

 Denner bring word that Mr. Harold be in his study , and that Miss Lyon be with he . he have not din , but have send later to ask Miss Lyon to go into his study . 

 " light the candle and leave I . " 

 " may not   I come again ? " 

 " no . it may be that my son will come to I . " 

 " may not   I sleep on the little bed in your bedroom ? " 

 " no , good Denner ; I be not ill . you can not   help I . " 

 " that be the hard word of all , madam . " 

 " the time will come but not now . kiss I . now go . " 

 the small quiet old woman obey , as she have always do . she shrink from seem to claim an equal 's share in her mistress 's sorrow . 

 for two hour Mrs. Transome 's mind hang on what be hardly a hope hardly more than the listening for a bare possibility . she begin to create the sound that her anguish crave to hear begin to imagine a footfall , and a hand upon the door . then , check by continual disappointment , she try to rouse a truer consciousness by rise from her seat and walk to her window , where she see streak of light move and disappear on the grass , and hear the sound of bolt and closing door . she hurry away and throw herself into her seat again , and bury her head in the deafening down of the cushion . there be no sound of comfort to she . 

 then her heart cry out within she against the cruelty of this son . when he turn from she in the first moment , he have not have time to feel anything but the blow that have fall on himself . but afterward be it possible that he should not be touch with a son 's pity be it possible that he should not have be visit by some thought of the long year through which she have suffer ? the memory of those year come back to she now with a protest against the cruelty that have all fall on she . she start up with a new restlessness from this spirit of resistance . she be not penitent . she have bear too hard a punishment . always the edge of calamity have fall on she . who have 413   feel for she ? she be desolate . God have no pity , else her son would not have be so hard . what dreary future be there after this dreary past ? she , too , look out into the dim night ; but the black boundary of tree and the long line of the river seem only part of the loneliness and monotony of her life . 

 suddenly she see a light on the stone balustrades of the balcony that project in front of Esther 's window , and the flash of a move candle fall on a shrub below . Esther be still awake and up . what have Harold tell she what have pass between they ? Harold be fond of this young creature , who have be always sweet and reverential to she . there be mercy in her young heart ; she might be a daughter who have no impulse to punish and to strike she whom fate have stricken . on the dim loneliness before she she seem to see Esther 's gentle look ; it be possible still that the misery of this night might be break by some comfort . the proud woman yearn for the caressing pity that must dwell in that young bosom . she open her door gently , but when she have reach Esther 's she hesitate . she have never yet in her life ask for compassion have never throw herself in faith on an unproffered love . and she might have go on pace the corridor like an uneasy spirit without a goal , if Esther 's thought , leap toward she , have not save she from the need to ask admission . 

 Mrs. Transome be walk toward the door when it open . as Esther see that image of restless misery , it blent itself by a rapid flash with all that Harold have say in the evening . she divine that the son 's new trouble must be one with the mother 's long sadness . but there be no waiting . in an instant Mrs. Transome feel Esther 's arm round her neck , and a voice say softly 

 " oh , why do not   you call I before ? " 

 they turn hand and hand into the room , and sit down on a sofa at the foot of the bed . the disorder gray hair the haggard face the reddened eyelid under which the tear seem to be come again with pain , pierce Esther to the heart . a passionate desire to soothe this suffer woman come over she . she clung round she again , and kiss her poor quivering lip and eyelid , and lay her young cheek against the pale and haggard one . word could not be quick or strong enough to utter her yearning . as Mrs. Transome feel that soft clinging , she say 

 " God have some pity on I . " 

  414 

 " rest on my bed , " say Esther . " you be so tired . I will cover you up warmly , and then you will sleep . " 

 " no tell I , dear tell I what Harold say . " 

 " that he have have some new trouble . " 

 " he say nothing hard about I ? " 

 " no nothing . he do not mention you . " 

 " I have be an unhappy woman , dear . " 

 " I fear it , " say Esther , press she gently . 

 " man be selfish . they be selfish and cruel . what they care for be their own pleasure and their own pride . " 

 " not all , " say Esther , on whom these word fall with a painful jar . 

 " all I have ever love , " say Mrs. Transome . she pause a moment or two , and then say , " for more than twenty year I have not have an hour 's happiness . Harold know it , and yet he be hard to I . " 

 " he will not be . to - morrow he will not be . I be sure he will be good , " say Esther , pleadingly . " remember he say to I his trouble be new he have not have time . " 

 " it be too hard to bear , dear , " Mrs. Transome say , a new sob rise as she cling fast to Esther in return . " I be old , and expect so little now a very little thing would seem great . why should I be punish any more ? " 

 Esther find it difficult to speak . the dimly - suggest tragedy of this woman 's life , the dreary waste of year empty of sweet trust and affection , afflict she even to horror . it seem to have come as a last vision to urge she toward the life where the draught of joy spring from the unchanging fountain of reverence and devout love . 

 but all the more she long to still the pain of this heart that beat against her . 

 " do let I go to your own room with you , and let I undress you , and let I tend upon you , " she say , with a woman 's gentle instinct . " it will be a very great thing to I . I shall seem to have a mother again . do let I . " 

 Mrs. Transome yield at last , and let Esther soothe she with a daughter 's tendance . she be undressed and go to bed ; and at last doze fitfully , with frequent start . but Esther watch by she till the chill of morning come , and then she only wrap more warmth around she , and sleep fast in the chair till Denner 's movement in the room rouse she . she start out of a dream in which she be tell Felix what have happen to she that night . 

 Mrs. Transome be now in the sounder morning sleep which sometimes 415   come after a long night of misery . Esther beckon Denner into the dressing - room , and say : 

 " it be late , Mrs. Hickes . do you think Mr. Harold be out of his room ? " 

 " yes , a long while ; he be out early than usual . " 

 " will you ask he to come up here ? say I beg you . " 

 when Harold enter Esther be lean against the back of the empty chair where yesterday he have see his mother sit . he be in a state of wonder and suspense , and when Esther approach he and give he her hand , he say , in a startled way 

 " good God ! how ill you look ! have you be sit up with my mother ? " 

 " yes . she be asleep now , " say Esther . they have merely press hand by way of greeting , and now stand apart look at each other solemnly . 

 " have she tell you anything ? " say Harold . 

 " no , only that she be wretched . oh , I think I would bear a great deal of unhappiness to save she from have any more . " 

 a painful thrill pass through Harold , and show itself in his face with that pale rapid flash which can never be paint . Esther press her hand together , and say , timidly , though it be from an urgent prompting 

 " there be nothing in all this place nothing since ever I come here I could care for so much as that you should sit down by she now , and that she should see you when she wake . " 

 then with delicate instinct , she add , just lay her hand on his sleeve , " I know you would have come . I know you mean it . but she be asleep now . go gently before she wake . " 

 Harold just lay his right hand for an instant on the back of Esther 's as it rest on his sleeve , and then step softly to his mother 's bedside . 


 an hour afterward , when Harold have lay his mother 's pillow afresh , and sit down again by she , she say 

 " if that dear thing will marry you , Harold , it will make up to you for a great deal . " 

 but before the day close Harold know that this be not to be . that young presence , which have flit like a white new - wing dove over all the saddening relic and new finery of Transome Court , could not find its home there . Harold hear from Esther 's lip that she love some one else , and that she resign all claim to the Transome estate . she wish to go back to her father . 

  416 

 CHAPTER LI . 

 the maiden say , I wis the londe 
 be very fair to see , 
 but my true - love that be in bonde 
 be fair still to I . 
 one April day , when the sun shine on the linger raindrop , Lyddy be go out , and Esther choose to sit in the kitchen , in the wicker - chair against the white table , between the fire and the window . the kettle be sing , and the clock be tick steadily toward four o'clock . 

 she be not read , but stitch ; and as her finger move nimbly , something play about her part lip like a ray . suddenly she lay down her work , press her hand together on her knee , and bent forward a little . the next moment there come a loud rap at the door . she start up and open it , but keep herself hide behind it . 

 " Mr. Lyon at home ? " say Felix , in his firm tone . 

 " no , sir , " say Esther from behind her screen ; " but Miss Lyon be , if you will please to walk in . " 

 " Esther ! " exclaim Felix , amazed . 

 they hold each other by both hand , and look into each other 's face with delight . 

 " you be out of prison ? " 

 " yes , till I do something bad again . but you ? how be it all ? " 

 " oh , it be , " say Esther , smile brightly as she move toward the wicker chair , and seat herself again , " that everything be as usual : my father be go to see the sick ; Lyddy be go in deep despondency to buy the grocery ; and I be sit here , with some vanity in I , need to be scold . " 

 Felix have seat himself on a chair that happen to be near she , at the corner of the table . he look at she still with question eye he grave , she mischievously smile . 

 " be you come back to live here then ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " you be not go to be married to Harold Transome , or to be rich ? " 

 " no . " something make Esther take up her work again , and begin to stitch . the smile be die into a tremor . 

 " why ? " say Felix , in rather a low tone , lean his elbow on the table , and rest his head on his hand while he look at she . 

 " I do not wish to marry he , or to be rich . " 

 " you have give it all up ? " say Felix , lean forward a little , and 417   speak in a still low tone . Esther do not speak . they hear the kettle sing and the clock loudly tick . there be no knowing how it be : Esther 's work fall , their eye meet ; and the next instant their arm be round each other 's neck , and once more they kiss each other . 

 when their hand fall again , their eye be bright with tear . Felix lay his hand on her shoulder . 

 " could you share the life of a poor man , then , Esther ? " 

 " if I think well enough of he , " she say , the smile come again , with the pretty saucy movement of her head . 

 " have you consider well what it would be ? that it would be a very bare and simple life ? " 

 " yes without atta of rose . " 

 Felix suddenly remove his hand from her shoulder , rise from his chair , and walk a step or two ; then he turn round and say , with deep gravity 

 " and the people I shall live among , Esther ? they have not just the same folly and vice as the rich , but they have their own form of folly and vice ; and they have not what be call the refinement of the rich to make their fault more bearable . I do not   say more bearable to I I be not fond of those refinement ; but you be . " 

 Felix pause an instant , and then add 

 " it be very serious , Esther . " 

 " I know it be serious , " say Esther , look up at he . " since I have be at Transome Court I have see many thing very seriously . if I have not , I should not have leave what I do leave . I make a deliberate choice . " 

 Felix stand a moment or two , dwell on she with a face where the gravity gather tenderness . 

 " and these curl ? " he say , with a sort of relent , seat himself again , and put his hand on they . 

 " they cost nothing they be natural . " 

 " you be such a delicate creature . " 

 " I be very healthy . poor woman , I think , be healthy than the rich . besides , " Esther go on , with a mischievous meaning , " I think of have some wealth . " 

 " how ? " say Felix , with an anxious start . " what do you mean ? " 

 " I think even of two pound a week : one need not   live up to the splendor of all that , you know ; we might live as simply as you like : there would be money to spare , and you could do wonder , and be oblige to work too , only not if sickness come . and then I think of a little income for 418   your mother , enough for she to live as she have be use to live ; and a little income for my father , to save he from be dependent when he be no long able to preach . " 

 Esther say all this in a playful tone , but she end , with a grave look of appeal submission 

 " I mean if you approve . I wish to do what you think it will be right to do . " 

 Felix put his hand on her shoulder again and reflect a little while , look on the hearth : then he say , lift up his eye , with a smile at her 

 " why , I shall be able to set up a great library , and lend the book to be dog's - eare and mark with bread - crumb . " 

 Esther say , laugh , " you think you be to be everything . you do not   know how clever I be . I mean to go on teach a great many thing . " 

 " teach I ? " 

 " oh , yes , " she say , with a little toss ; " I shall improve your french accent . " 

 " you will not   want I to wear a stock , " say Felix , with a defiant shake of the head . 

 " no ; and you will not attribute stupid thought to I before I have   utter they . " 

 they laugh merrily , each hold the other 's arm , like girl and boy . there be the ineffable sense of youth in common . 

 then Felix lean forward , that their lip might meet again , and after that his eye rove tenderly over her face and curl . 

 " I be a rough , severe fellow , Esther . shall you never repent ? never be inwardly reproach I that I be not a man who could have share your wealth ? be you quite sure ? " 

 " quite sure ! " say Esther , shake her head ; " for then I should have honor you less . I be weak my husband must be great and noble than I be . " 

 " oh , I tell you what , though ! " say Felix , start up , thrust his hand into his pocket , and crease his brow playfully , " if you take I in that way I shall be force to be a much well fellow than I ever think of be . " 

 " I call that retribution , " say Esther , with a laugh as sweet as the morning thrush . 

  419 

 EPILOGUE . 

 our fine hope be fine memory ; 
 and those who love in age think youth be happy , 
 because it have a life to fill with love . 
 the very next May , Felix and Esther be marry . every one in those day be marry at the parish church ; but Mr. Lyon be not satisfied without an additional private solemnity , " wherein there be no bondage to questionable form , so that he might have a more enlarged utterance of joy and supplication . " 

 it be a very simple wedding ; but no wedding , even the gay , ever raise so much interest and debate in Treby Magna . even very great people , like Sir Maximus and his family , go to the church to look at this bride , who have renounce wealth , and choose to be the wife of a man who say he would always be poor . 

 some few shake their head ; could not quite believe it ; and think there be " more behind . " but the majority of honest Trebians be affect somewhat in the same way as happy - look Mr. Wace be , who observe to his wife , as they walk from under the churchyard chestnut , " it be wonderful how thing go through you you do not   know how . I feel somehow as if I believe more in everything that be good . " 

 Mrs. Holt , that day , say she feel herself to be receive ' some reward , " imply that justice certainly have much more in reserve . little Job Tudge have an entirely new suit , of which he finger every separate brass button in a way that threaten an arithmetical mania ; and Mrs. Holt have out her good tea - tray and put down her carpet again , with the satisfaction of think that there would no more be boy come in all weather with dirty shoe . 

 for Felix and Esther do not take up their abode in Treby Magna ; and after a while Mr. Lyon leave the town too , and join they where they dwelt . on his resignation the church in Malthouse Yard choose a successor to he whose doctrine be rather high . 

 there be other departure from Treby . Mr. Jermyn 's establishment be break up , and he be understand to have go to reside at a great distance : some say " abroad , " that large home of ruined reputation . Mr. Johnson continue blonde and sufficiently prosperous till he get gray and rather more prosperous . some person who do not think highly 420   of he , hold that his prosperity be a fact to be keep in the background , as be dangerous to the moral of the young ; judge that it be not altogether creditable to the Divine Providence that anything but virtue should be reward by a front and back drawing - room in Bedford row . 

 as for Mr. Christian , he have no more profitable secret at his disposal . but he get his thousand pound from Harold Transome . 

 the Transome family be absent some time from Transome Court . the place be keep up and show to visitor , but not by Denner , who be away with her mistress . after a while the family come back , and Mrs. Transome die there . Sir Maximus be at her funeral , and throughout that neighborhood there be silence about the past . 

 Uncle Lingon continue to watch over the shooting on the Manor and the cover until that event occur which he have predict as a part of Church reform sure to come . Little Treby have a new rector , but other be sorry besides the old pointer . 

 as to all that wide parish of Treby Magna , it have since prosper as the rest of England have prosper . Doubtless there be more enlightenment now . whether the farmer be all public - spirited , the shopkeeper nobly independent , the Sproxton man entirely sober and judicious , the Dissenters quite without narrowness or asperity in religion and politic , and the publican all fit , like Gaius , to be the friend of an apostle these thing I have not hear ; not have correspondence in those part . whether any presumption may be draw from the fact that North Loamshire do not yet return a radical candidate , I leave to the all - wise I mean the newspaper . 

 as to the town in which Felix Holt now reside , I will keep that a secret , lest he should be trouble by any visitor have the insufferable motive of curiosity . 

 I will only say that Esther have never repent . Felix , however , grumble a little that she have make his life too easy , and that , if it be not for much walking , he should be a sleek dog . 

 there be a young Felix , who have a great deal more science than his father , but not much more money . 


 the END .