Ford Madox Ford 
 Last Post 

 Dedicatory letter 

 
 
 
  to Isabel Paterson 	 Madame et cher Confrere , 
 	

 	 I have for some year now have to consider you as be my fairy godmother in the United States — though how one can have a godmother junior to oneself I have yet to figure out . perhaps godmother of the kind that can turn pumpkin into glass coach can achieve miracle in seniority . or , when I come to think of it , I seem to remember that , for a whole tribe of Incas convert who know how and simultaneously , in the day of the Conquistadores , an Infanta of Spain go to the font , she be , whatever her age , of necessity junior to the elder at least of the tribe . that , however , be all a trifle - except for my gratitude!—compared with your present responsibility . 
 	 for , but for you , this book would only nebularly have exist — in space , in my brain , where you will , so it be not on paper and between board . Save , that be to say , for your stem , contemptuous and almost virulent insistence on know " what become of Tietjens " I never should have conduct this chronicle to the stage it have now reach . the soldier , tired of war ’s alarm , it have always seem to I , might be allow to rest beneath bowery vine . but you would not have it so . 
 	 you — and for once you align yourself with the great Public — demand an ending : if possible a happy ending . 
 	 Alas , I can not provide you with the end of Tietjens for a reason upon which I will later dwell — but I here provide you with a slice of one of Christopher ’s later day so that you may know how more or less he at present stand . for in this world of ours though life may end affair do not . even though Valentine and Tietjens be dead the Affair that they set go would go roll on down the generation — Mark junior and Mrs. Lowther , the unborn child and the rest will go on beneath the nut - bough or over the sea — or in the good club . it be not your day nor mine that shall see the end of they . 
 	 and think : how many people have we not know intimately and see daily for year ! then they move into another township , and , bad correspondent as we all be and sit - at - home as Fate make most of we , they drop out of our sight . they may — those friend of your — go and settle in Paris . you may see they for fortnight at decennial interval , or you may not . 
 	 so I would have prefer to let it be with Tietjens , but you would not have it . I have always jeer at author who sentimentalise over their character , and after finish a book exclaim like , say , Thackeray : " roll up the curtain ; put the puppet in their box ; quench the tallow footlight " .   .   . something like that . but I be bind to say that in certain mood in Avignon this year it would less have surprise I to go up to the upper chamber of the mill where I write and there to find that friend of mine than to find you . for you be to remember that for I Tietjens be the recreation of a friend I have — a friend so vivid to I that though he die many year ago I can not feel that he be yet dead . in the dedicatory letter of an early instalment of this series of book I say that in these volume I be try to project how this world would have appear to that friend today and how , in it , he would have act — or you , I believe , would say react . and that be the exact truth of the matter . 
 	 do you not find — you yourself , too — that , however it may be with the mass of humanity , in the case of certain dead people you can not feel that they be indeed go from this world ? you can only know it , you can only believe it . that is , at any rate , the case with I — and in my case the world daily become more and more people with such revenant and less and less with those who still walk this earth . it be only yesterday that I read of the death of another human being who will for the rest of time have for I that effect . that person die thousand of mile away , and yesterday it would have astonish I if she have walk into my room here in New York . to - day it would no long . it would have the aspect of the simple thing in the world . 
 	 so then , for I , it be with Tietjens . with his prototype I set out on several enterprise — one of they be a considerable periodical publication of a Tory kind — and for many year I be accustom as it be to " set " my mind by his comment on public or other affair . he be , as I have elsewhere say , the English Tory — the last English Tory , omniscient , slightly contemptuous — and sentimental in his human contact . and for many year before I contemplate the writing of these book — before the War even — I be accustom to ask myself not merely what he would have say of certain public or private affair , but how he would have act in certain position . and I do so still . I have only to say to my mind , as the child on the knee of an adult say to its senior : " tell we a fairy tale!”—i have only to say : " tell we what he would here have do ! " and at once he be there . 
 	 so , you see , I can not tell you the end of Tietjens , for he will end only when I be beyond pen and paper . for I at this moment he be , oddly enough , in Avignon , rather disappointed in the quality of the Louis Seize furniture that he have find there , and seat in front of the Taverne Riche under the plane he be find his Harris tweed oppressive . perhaps he be even mop the whitish brow under his silver - streak hair . and I have a strong itch to write to he that if he want to find Louis Treize stuff of the most admirable — perfectly fabulous armoire and chest — for almost nothing , he should go westward into the Limousin to .   .   . but nothing shall make I here write that name . .   .   . 
 	 and so he will go jog along with up and down and plenty of worry and some satisfaction , the Tory Englishman , run his head perhaps against few wall , perhaps against more , until I myself cease from those pursuit . .   .   . perhaps he will go on even long , if you , as Marraine , succeed in confer upon these work that longevity . .   .   . 
 	 but out and alas , now you can never write about I again : for it would , would n’t it ? look too much like : you scratch my back and I ’ll scratch your ! 
 	 so do not write about Tietjens : write your own projection of the life around you in term of your delicate and fierce art . then you will find I still more 
 	 your grateful and obedient 
 	 F. M. F. 
 	 New York , October 11th , 1927 . 
 
   part one 

 
  chapter 1 


 
 
 	 he lie star at the withy binder of his thatch ; the grass be infinitely green ; his view embrace four county ; the roof be support by six small oak sapling - trunk , roughly trim and brush from above by apple bough . french crab - apple ! the hut have no side . 
 	 the italian proverb say : he who allow the bough of tree to spread above his roof , invite the doctor daily . word to that effect . he would have grin , but that might have be see . 
 	 for a man who never move , his face be singularly walnut - colour ; his head , indent the skim - milk white of the pillow should have be a gipsy ’s , the dark , silvered hair cut extremely close , the whole face very carefully shaven and completely immobile . the eye move , however , with unusual , vivacity , all the life of the man be concentrate in they and their lid . 
 	 down the path that have be cut in swathe from the knee - high grass , and come from the stable to the hut , a heavy elderly peasant roll in his gait . 
 	 his over - long , hairy arm swing as if he need an axe or a log or a full sack to make he a complete man . he be broad - beamed , in cord breech , very tight in the buttock ; he be black legging , an unbuttoned blue waistcoat , a striped flannel shirt , open at the perspire neck , and a square , high hat of black felt . 
 	 he say : 
 	 " want to be shift ? " 
 	 the man in the bed close his eyelid slowly . 
 	 " ave a droper cider ? " 
 	 the other again similarly close his eye . the stand man support himself with an immense hand , gorilla - like , by one of the oaken post . 
 	 " best droper cider ever I taste , " he say . " be Lordship give I . be lordship sester I : ' gunning , ' e s , .   .   . ' the day the vixen get into keeper ’s coop enclosure . . . ' " 
 	 he begin and slowly complete a very long story , go to prove that english noble landlord prefer fox to pheasant . or should ! english landowner of the right sort . 
 	 be Lordship would no more ave that vixen kill or so much as flurry , she be gravid like than . .   .   . dreadful work a gravid vixen can do among encoop with pheasant poult . .   .   . have to eat fer six or seven , she have ! all a - grow . .   .   . so be Lordship sester Gunning . .   .   . 
 	 and then the description of the cider .   .   . ard ! thet cider be arder than a miser ’s art or’n ole maid ’s tongue . body it ad . strength it ad . stan to reason . ten year cider . not a drop be drunk in Lordship ’s ouse under ten year in cask . kill three sheep at week fer his indoor and outdoor servant . an three hundred pigeon . the pigeon - cote be a hundred foot high , an the pigeon ’ nestese in ole in the inside wall . clap - nest a ole wall at a go an take the squab . Times be not what they be , but be Lordship keep on . an always will ! 
 	 the man in the bed — Mark Tietjens — continue his own thought . 
 	 Old Gunning lumber slowly up the path towards the stable , his hand swing . the stable be a tile - heal , thatched affair , no real stable in the North Country sense — a place where the old mare shelter among chicken and duck . there be no tidiness amongst South Country folk . they have n’t it in they , though Gunning could bind a tidy thatch and trim a hedge properly . all - round man . really an all - round man ; he could do a great many thing . he know all about fox - hunting , pheasant - rear , wood - craft , hedging , dyking , pig - rearing and the habit of King Edward when shoot . smoke endless great cigar ! one finish , light another , throw away the stub . .   .   . ' 
 	 Fox - hunting , the sport of king with only twenty per cent . of the danger of war ! he , Mark Tietjens , have never care for hunting ; now he would never do any more ; he have never care for pheasant - shooting . he would never do any more . not could n’t ; would n’t . from henceforth . .   .   . it annoy he that he have not take the trouble to ascertain what it be Iago say , before he have take Iago ’s resolution . .   .   . from henceforth he never would speak word . .   .   . something to that effect : but you could not get that into a blank verse line . 
 	 perhaps Iago have not be speak blank verse when he have take his , Mark Tietjens ' , resolution . .   .   . take by the throat the circumciséd dog and smite he . .   .   . good man , Shakespeare ! all - round man in a way , too . probably very like Gunning . Knew Queen Elizabeth ’s habit when hunting ; also very likely how to hedge , thatch , break up a deer or a hare or a hog , and how to serve a writ and write bad French . lodge with a french family in Crutched Friars or the Minories . somewhere . 
 	 the duck be make a great noise on the pond up the hill . Old Gunning in the sunlight lumber between the stable - wall and the raspberry cane , up - hill . the garden be all up - hill . he look across the grass up at the hedge . when they turn he round he look down - hill at the house . rough , grey stone ! 
 	 half - round , he look across the famous four county ; half round , the other way on , he could see up the grass - slope to the hedge on the road - side . now he be look up - hill across the top of the hay - grass , over the raspberry cane at the hedge that Gunning be go to trim . full of consideration for he , they be , all the lot of they . for ever think of develop his possible interest . he do not need it . he have interest enough . 
 	 up the pathway that be above and beyond the hedge on a grass - slope go the Elliott child , a lanky girl of ten , with very long , corn - colour hair , a fat boy of five , unspeakably dirty . the girl too long and thin in the leg and ankle , her hair limp . war - starvation in early year . .   .   . well , that be not his’fault . he have give the nation the transport it need ; they should have find the stuff . they have n’t , so the child have long , thin leg and protrude wrist on pipe - stem arm . all that generation ! .   .   . no fault of his . he have manage the nation ’s transport as it should be manage . his department have . his own Department , make by himself from junior temporary clerk to senior permanent official , from the day of his entrance thirty - five year before to the day of his resolution never more to speak word . 
 	 nor yet stir a finger . he have to be in this world , in this nation . let they care for he ; he be do with they . .   .   . he know the sire and dam of every horse from Eclipse to Perlmutter . that be enough for he . they let he read all that could be read about racing . he have interest enough ! 
 	 the duck on the pond up the hill continue to make a great noise , churn boisterously the water with their wing and squawk . if they have be hen there would have be something the matter — a dog chase they . duck do not signify ; they go mad , contagiously . like nation and all the cattle of a county . 
 	 Gunning , lumber past the raspberry cane , take a bud or so and squeeze the pale thing between finger and thumb , then examine his thumb . look for maggot , no doubt . pale green leave the raspberry have ; a fragile plant amongst the robuster rosaceae . that be not war - starvation but race . their commissariat be efficient enough , but they be presumably not gross feeder . Gunning begin to brush the hedge , sharp , brush blow with his baggin hook . there be still far too much bramble amongst the quickset ; in a week the hedge would be unsightly again . 
 	 that be part of their consideration again ! they keep the hedge low so that he should be amuse by passer - by on the path , though they would have prefer to let it grow high so that the passer - by should not see into the orchard . .   .   . well , he have see passer - by . More than they know . .   .   . what the hell be Sylvia ’s game ? and that old ass Edward Campion ’s ? .   .   . well , be be not go to interfere . there be , however , undoubtedly something up ! .   .   . Marie Léonie — formerly charlotte!—knew neither of they by sight , though she have undoubtedly see they peer over the hedge ! 
 	 they — it be more of their considerateness — have contrive a shelf on the left corner - post of his shelter . so that bird should amuse he ! a hedge - sparrow , noiseless and quaker - grey , ghost - like , be on this shelf . a thin , under - vitalize be that you never see . it flit , hide itself deep in hedge - row . he have always think of it as an american bird : a voiceless nightingale , thin , long , thin - bill , almost without marking as become a bird that seldom see the sun but live in the twilight of deep hedge . american because it ought to wear a scarlet letter . he only know of Americans because of a book he have once read — a woman like a hedge - sparrow , creep furtive in shadow and get into trouble with a priest . 
 	 this desultory , slim bird , obviously Puritan , insert its thin bill into the dripping that Gunning have put on the shelf for the tom - tit . the riotous tom - tit , the bottle - tit , the great - tit , all that family love dripping . the hedge - sparrow obviously do not ; the dripping on that warmish June day have become oleaginous ; the hedge - sparrow , its bill all grease , mumble its upper and low mandible but take no more dripping . it look at Mark ’s eye . because these regard it motionlessly , it utter a long warning note and flit , noiseless , into invisibility . all hedge thing ignore you whilst you move on and do not regard they . the moment you stay still and fix your eye on they they warn the rest of the hedge and flit off . this hedge - sparrow no doubt have its young within earshot . or the warning might have be just cooperative . 
 	 Marie Léonie , née Riotor , be come up the step and then the path . he could hear her breathing . she stand beside he , shapeless in her long pinafore of figured cotton , and breathe heavily , hold a plate of soup and say : 
 	 " Mon pauvre homme ! Mon pauvre homme ! Ce qu’il ont fait de toi ! " 
 	 she begin a breathless discourse in French . she be of the large , blond , Norman type ; in the middle forty , her extremely fair hair very voluminous and noticeable . she have live with Mark Tietjens for twenty year now , but she have always refuse to speak a word of English , have an invincible scorn for both language and people of her adopt country . 
 	 her discourse pour on . she have set the little tray with the plate of reddish - yellowish soup on a flat shelf of wood that turn out on a screw from underneath the bed ' ; in the soup be a shin clinical thermometer that she move and regard from time to time , beside the plate a glass syringe , graduate . she say that Ils — they — have combine to render her soup of vegetable uneatable . they would not give she most::1 : Pan ' : but round one , like button ; they contrive that the carrot should be pauvre at their bottom end ; the leek be of the consistency of wood . they be determined that he should not have vegetable soup because they want he to have meat juice . they be anthropophagi . nothing but meat , meat , meat ! that girl ! .   .   . 
 	 she have always in the Gray ’s Inn Road have Paris turnip from Jacopo ’s in Old Compton Street . there be no reason why you should not grow mwet de Paris in this soil . the Paris turnip be barrel - shape , round , round , round like an adorable little pig till it turn into its funny little tail . that be a turnip to amuse you ; to change and employ your thought . Ils — he and she — be incapable of have their thought change by a turnip . 
 	 between sentence she ejaculate from time to time : 
 	 " my poor man ! what they have make of you ! " 
 	 her volubility flow over Mark like a rush of water over a grating , only a phrase or so now and then come to his attention . it be not unpleasant ; he like his woman . she have a cat that she make abstain from meat on Friday . in the Gray ’s Inn Road that have be easy , in a large room decorate with innumerable miniature and silhouette represent member of the Riotor family and its branch . Mme Riotor mére and Mme Riotor grand’mére too have be miniature painter , and Marie Léonie possess some astonishingly white statuary by the distinguished sculptor Monsieur Casimir – Bar , a lifelong friend of her family who have only never be decorate because of a conspiracy . so he have a great contempt for decoration and the decorate . Marie Léonie have be accustom to repeat the voluminous opinion of Monsieur Casimir – bar on the subject of decoration at great length on occasion . since he , Mark , have be honour by his sovereign she have less frequently recite they . she admit that the democracy of today have not the sterling value that have distinguish democrat of the day of her parent , so it might be well to carer oneself — to find a niche amongst those whom the state distinguish . 
 	 the noise of her voice , which be deep - cheste and not unpleasing , go on . Mark regard she with the ironic indulgence that you accord to a child , but indeed , when he have be still in harness , it have rest he always to come home to she as he have do every Thursday and Monday , and not infrequently on a Wednesday when there have be no racing . it have rest he to come home from a world of incompetent imbecile and to hear this brain comment on that world . she have view on virtue , pride , downfall , human career , the habit of cat , fish , the clergy , diplomat , soldier , woman of easy virtue , Saint Eustachius , President Grévy , the purveyor of comestible , custom - house officer , pharmacist , Lyons silk weaver , the keeper of boarding - house , garotter , chocolate - manufacturer , sculptor other than M. Casimir – Bar , the lover of married woman , housemaid . .   .   . 
 	 her mind , in fact , be like a cupboard , stuff , pack with the most incongruous material , tool , vessel and debris . once the door be open you never know what would tumble out or be follow by what . that be restful to Mark as foreign travel might have be — only he have never be abroad except when his father , before his accession to Groby , have live in Dijon for his child ’s education . that be how he know French . 
 	 her conversation have another quality that continually amuse he : she always end it with the topic with which she have choose to begin . thus , today have choose to begin with newt : de Paris , with Paris turnip she would end , and it amuse he to observe how on each occasion she would bring the topic back . she might be conclude a long comment on ironclad and have to get back suddenly to custard because the door - bell rang while her maid be out , but accomplish the transition she would before she answer the bell . otherwise she be frugal , shrewd , astonishingly cleanly and healthy . 
 	 whilst she be give he his soup , insert the glass syringe in his lip at half minute interval which she time by her wrist - watch , she be talk about furniture . .   .   . Ils would not let she apply to the specie of rabbit - hutch in the salon a varnish that she import from Paris ; Monsieur her brother - in - law have really exhibit when she have actually varnish a truly discreditable chair — have exhibit a distraction that have really fill she with amusement . it be possible that the fashion of the day be for furniture of decrepitude , or gross form . that they would not let her place in the salon the newly - gilt arm - chair of her late mother or the sculptural group represent Niobe and some of her offspring by the late Monsieur Casimir – Bar , or the overmantel clock that be an exact reproduction in bronze of the Fountain of the Médicis in the garden of the Luxembourg at Paris — that be a matter of taste . Elle might very well feel umbrage that she , Marie Léonie , should possess article of such acknowledge prestige . for what could be more unapproachable than a Second Empire fauteuil newly gild and maintain , she could assure the world , at such a pitch of glitter as dazzle the eye ? Elle might very well feel umbrage when you consider that the skirt that she wear when gardening be .   .   . well , in short be what it be ! nevertheless , in that skirt she allow herself to be see by the clergyman . but why do I , who be admittedly a man of honour and sensibility and repute to know all the thing of this world and perhaps of the next — why do he join in the infinitely stupid conspiracy against the work of the great genius Casimir - Bar ? she , Marie Léonie , could understand that he , in his difficult situation , would not wish to give permission to install in the salon work at which Elle take umbrage because her possession do not include object of art which all the world acknowledge to be of classic rank , not to mention the string of pearl which she , Marie Léonie , Riotor by birth , owe to the generosity of he , Mark , and her own economy . and other object of value and taste . that be reasonable . if your woman be poorly dot .   .   . let we call it dot .   .   . because certainly she , Marie Léonie , be not one to animadvert upon those in situation of difficulty . .   .   . it would ill become she so to do . nevertheless , a great period of year of honesty , frugality , regularity of life and cleanliness . .   .   . and she ask Mark if he have ever see in bar parlour trace of mud such as on wet day she have certainly observe in the salon of a certain person . .   .   . and certain revelation she could make as to the condition of a cupboard under the stair and the state to be observe behind certain press in the kitchen . but if you have not have experience in the control of domestic , what would you ? .   .   . nevertheless , a stretch of year pass in the state of housewifeliness such as she have already adumbrate upon give one the right to comment — of course with delicacy — upon the ménage of a young person even though her delicate situation might avert from her comment of an unchristian nature as to certain other fact . it do , however , seem to she , Marie Leonie , that to appear before a clergyman in a skirt decorate with no less than three visible tach of petrol , wear glove encrust with mud as you encrust a truffle with paste before bake it under the cinder — and hold , of all implement , a common gardening - trowel . .   .   . and to laugh and joke with he ! .   .   . surely the situation call for a certain — let they call it , retirement of demeanour . she be far from accord to the Priest as such the extravagant privilege to which he lay claim . the late Monsieur Casimir — Bar be accustom to say that , if we accord to our soi - disant spiritual adviser all that they would take , we should lie upon a bed that have neither sheet , eidredon , pillow , bolster , nor settle . and she , Marie Léonie , be inclined to agree with Monsieur Casimir – Bar , though , as one of the hero of the barricade in 1848 , he be apt to be a little extreme in his tenet . still a vicar be in England a functionary of the State and as such should be receive with a certain modesty and reserve . yet she , Marie Léonie , formerly Riotor , her mother have be bear Lavigne — Bourdreau and have in consequence a suspicion of Huguenot blood , so that she , Marie Léonie , might be expect to know how the protestant clergy should be receive — she then , Marie Léonie , from the little window on the side of the stair , have distinctly see Elle lay one hand on the shoulder of that clergyman and point — point , mind you , with the trowel — to the open front door and say — she have distinctly hear the word : " poor man , if you have hunger you will find Mr. Tietjens in the dining - room . he be just eat a sandwich . it ’ hungry weather ! " .   .   . that be six month ago , but Marie Léonie ’s ear still tingle at the word and the gesture . a trowel ! to point with a trowel ; pensez y ! if a trowel why not a main de fer , a dust - pan ? or a vessel even more homely ! .   .   . and Marie Léonie chuckle . 
 	 her grandmother Bourdreau remember a crockery - merchant of the ambulate sort who have once fill one of those implement — a vase de nuit — but of course new , with milk and have offer the whole gratuitously to any passer - by who would drink the milk . a young woman call Laborde accept his challenge there in the market - place of Noisy – lebrun . she have lose her fiance , who find the gesture exaggerated . but he be a farceur , that crockery - dealer ! 
 	 she draw from the pocket of her pinafore several fold page of a newspaper and from under the bed a double picture - frame — two frame hinge together so that they would close . she insert a sheet of the paper between the two frame and then hang the whole on a piece of picture wire that depend from the roof - tree beneath the thatch . two brace of picture - wire , too , come from the support post , to right and leave . they hold the picture — frame motionless and a little incline towards Mark ’s face . she be agreeable to look at , stretch up her arm . she lift his torso with great strength and infinite solicitude , prop it a little with the pillow and look to see that his eye fall on the print sheet . she say : 
 	 " you can see well , like that ? " 
 	 his eye take in the fact that he be to read of the Newbury Summer Meeting and the one at Newcastle . he close they twice to signify yes ! the tear come into her . she murmur : 
 	 " Mon pauvre homme ! Mon pauvre homme ! what they have do to you ! " she draw from another pocket in her pinafore a flask of eau - de - Cologne and a wad of cotton wool . with that , moisten , she wipe even more solicitously his face and then his thin , mahogany hand , which she uncover . she have the air of woman in France when they change the white satin clothe and wash the face of favourite virgin at the church door in August . 
 	 then she stand back and apostrophize he . he take in that the King ’s filly have win the Berkshire Foal plate and the horse of a friend the Seaton Delaval Handicap , at Newcastle . both might have be expect . he have mean to go to the Newcastle meeting this year and give Newbury a by . the last year he have go race he have do rather well at Newbury , so he have then think he would try Newcastle for a change , and , whilst he be there , take a look at Groby and see what that bitch Sylvia be do with Groby . well , that be do with . they would presumably bury he at Groby . 
 	 she say in deep , rehearsed tone : 
 	 " my man!”—she might almost have well say : " my deity!”—“what sort of life be this we lead here ? be there ever anything so singular and unreasonable ? if we sit to drink a cup of tea , the cup may at any moment be snatch from our mouth ; if we recline upon a divan — at any moment the divan may go . I do not comment on this that you lie by night as by day for ever here in the open air , for I understand that it be by your desire and consent that you lie here and I will never exhibit aversion from that which you desire and that to which you consent . but can not you bring it about that we should inhabit a house of some reason , one more suited to human being of this age , and one that be less of a procession of good and chattel ? you can bring that about . you be all - powerful here . I do not know what be your resource . it be never your habit to tell I . you keep I in comfort . never do I express a desire that you do not satisfy , though it be true that my desire be always reasonable . so I know nothing , though I read once in a paper that you be a man of extravagant rich , and that can hardly all have vanish , for there can have be few man of as great a frugality , and you be always fortunate and moderate in your wager . Sol know nothing and I would scorn to ask of these other , for that would imply doubt of your trust in I . I do not doubt that you have make arrangement for my future comfort , and I be in no uncertainty of the continuance of those arrangement . it be not material fear that I have . but all this appear to be a madness . why be we here ? what be the meaning of all this ? why do you inhabit this singular erection ? it may be that the open air be of necessity for your malady . I do not believe that you live in perpetual current of air in your chamber , though I never see they . but on the day you give to I you have everything of the most comfortable and you seem content with my arrangement . and your brother and his woman appear so mad in all the other affair of life that they may well be mad in this also . why then will you not end it ? you have the power . you be all - powerful here . your brother will spring from one corner to the other of this lugubrious place in order to anticipate your slight wish . Elle , too ! " 
 	 stretch out her hand , she have the air of a greek woman who invoke a deity , she be so large and fair and her hair be so luxuriantly blond . and indeed , to she , in his mystery and silence he have the air of a deity who could discharge unthinkable dart and vouchsafe unimaginable favour . though all their circumstance have change , that have not change , so that even his immobility enhance his mystery . in all their life together , not merely here , he have be silent whilst she have talk . on the two regular day of the week on which he have be use to visit she , from the moment when she would open her door exactly at seven in the evening and see he in his bowler hat with his carefully roll umbrella and with his race glass sling diagonally across he to the moment when , next morning at half — past ten , she would brush his bowler and hand he that and his umbrella , he would hardly speak a word — he would speak such few word as to give the idea of an absolute taciturnity , whilst she entertain he with an unceasing flow of talk and of comment on the news of the Quartier — of the french colonist of that part of London , or on the news in the french paper . he would remain seated on a hard chair , bend slightly forward , with , round the corner of his mouth , little crease that suggest an endless , indulgent smile . occasionally he would suggest that she should put half a sovereign upon a horse ; occasionally he would bring she an opulent present , heavy gold bangle floridly chase and set with large emerald , sumptuous fur , expensive travel trunk for when she have visit Paris or go to the seaside in the autumn . that sort of thing . once he have buy she a complete set of the work of Victor Hugo bind in purple morocco and all the work that have be illustrate by Gustave Doré , in green calf ; once a hoof of a racehorse , train in France , set in silver in the form of an inkstand . on her forty — first birthday — though she have no idea how he have ascertain that it be her forty - first birthday — he have give she a string of pearl and have take she to a hotel at Brighton keep by an ex - prize - fighter . he have tell she to wear the pearl at dinner , but to be careful of they because they have cost five hundred pound . he ask she once about her investment of her saving , and when she have tell he that she be invest in french rente viagère he have tell she that he could do well than that for she , and afterwards from time to time he have tell she of odd but very profitable way of invest small sum . 
 	 in this way , because his gift fill she with rapture on account of their opulence and weightiness , he have assume for she the aspect by degree of a godhead who could bless — and possibly blast — inscrutably . for many year after he have first pick she up in the Edgware Road outside the old Apollo she have regard he with suspicion , since he be a man and it be the nature of man to treat woman with treachery , lust and meanness . now she regard herself as the companion of a godhead , secure and immune from the evil working of Fortune — as if she have be seat on the shoulder of one of Jove ’s eagle , beside his throne . the Immortals have be know to choose human companion : when they have so do fortunate indeed have be the lot of the choose . of they she feel herself to be one . 
 	 even his seizure have not deprive she of her sense of his wide - spread and inscrutable power , and she could not rid herself of the conviction that if he would , he could talk , walk and perform the feat of strength of a Hercules . it be impossible not to think so ; the strength of his glance be undiminishe , and it be the dark glance of a man , proud , vigorous , alert and commanding . and the mysterious nature and occurrence of the seizure itself only confirm her subconscious conviction . the fit have come so undramatically that although the several pompous and , for she , nearly imbecile , english physician who have be call in to attend on he , agree that some sort of fit must have visit he as he lie in his bed , that have do nothing to change her mind . indeed , even when her own Doctor , Drouant – Rouault , assert with certitude and knowledge that this be a case of fulminant hemiplegia of a characteristic sort , though her reason accept his conclusion , her subconscious intuition remain the same . Doctor Drouant – Rouault be a sensible man ; that he have prove by point out the anatomical excellence of the work of sculpture by Monsieur Casimir – Bar and agree that only a conspiracy of rival could have prevent his arriving at the post of President of the Ecole des Beaux Arts . he be , then , a man of sense and his reputation amongst the french tradesman of the Quarter stand very high : she have never herself need the attention of a doctor . but if you need a doctor , obviously you go to a Frenchman and acquiesce in what he say . 
 	 but although she acquiesce in word to other , and indeed to herself , she could not convince herself in she for intérieur , nor indeed have she arrive at that amount of exterior conviction without some argument at least . she have point out , not only to Doctor Drouant – Rouault , but she have even conceive it to be her duty to point out to the english practitioner to whom she would not otherwise have speak , that the man lie there in her bed be a north - countryman , from Yorkshire , where man be of an inconceivable obstinacy . she have ask they to consider that it be not unusual for Yorkshire brother and sister or other relative to live for decade together in the same house and never address a word to each other , and she have point out that she know Mark Tietjens to be of an unspeakable determination . she know it from their lifelong intimacy . she have never , for instance , be able to make he change his diet by an ounce in weight , or the shaking of a pepper — pot as to flavour — not once in twenty year during which she have cook for he . she plead with these gentleman to consider as a possibility that the term of the Armistice be of such a nature as to make a person of Mark ’s determination and idiosyncrasy resolve to withdraw himself for ever from all human contact , and that if he do so determine nothing would cause he to change his determination . the last word he have speak have be whilst one of his colleague at the Ministry have be telephone to tell she , for Mark ’s information , what the term of the Armistice be . at the news , which she have have to give he over her shoulder , he have make from the bed some remark.—he have be recover from double pneumonia at the time.—what the remark have be she could not exactly repeat ; she be almost certain that it have be to the effect — in English — that he would never speak again . but she be aware that her own predilection be sufficient to bias her hearing . she have feel herself , at the news that the Allies do not intend to pursue the Germans into their own country — she have feel herself as if she could say to the High Permanent Official at the other end of the telephone that she would never speak word to he and his race again . it be the first thing that have come into her mind , and no doubt it have be the first thing to come into Mark ’s . 
 	 so she have plead with the doctor . they have pay practically no attention to she , and she be aware that that be very likely due to her ambiguous position as the companion for long , without any legal security , of a man whom they consider as now in no position to continue his protection of she . that she in no way resent ; it be in the nature of english male humanity . the Frenchman have naturally listen with deference , bow even a little . but he have remark with a sort of deaf obstinacy : Madame must consider that the occasion of the stroke only make more certain that it be a stroke . and that argument to she , as Frenchwoman , must seem almost incontrovertible . for the betrayal of France by her Allies at the supreme moment of triumph have be a crime , the news of which might well cause the end of the world to seem desirable . 
 
  chapter 2 


 
 
 	 she continue to stand beside he and to apostrophize he until it should be time to turn round the frame newspaper so that he could read the other side of the sheet . what he read first contain the remark of various writer on race . that he take in rapidly , as if it be a mere bonne bouche . she know that he regard with contempt the opinion of all writer on racing , but the two who write in this particular sheet with less contempt than the other . but the serious reading begin when she turn the page . here be endless , serrie column of the name of race - horse , their jockey and entrant at various race - meeting , their age , ancestry , former achievement . that he would peruse with minute attention that would cost he just under an hour . she would have like to stay with he whilst he read it , for the intensive study of matter connect with race - horse have always be their single topic of communion . she have spend almost sentimental hour lean over the back of his arm - chair reading news of the turf simultaneously with himself , and the compliment he have be use to pay she over her prediction of Form , if they be the only compliment he ever pay she , have fill she with the warm pleasure and confusion that she might have feel have he address the same compliment to she on the subject of her person . she do not indeed need compliment from he as to her person ; his complete contentment with she suffice — but she have rejoice in , and now miss , those long , quiet time of communing . she remark to he indeed that Seattle have win her race as she have several day ago predict because there have be no other competitor in any way of the same class as the filly , but there have be no answer , half - contemptuous grunt of acquiescence such as in the old day have be her . 
 	 an aeroplane have drone overhead and she have step out to look up at the bright toy that , shine upon by the sun , progress slowly across the pellucid sky . when she go in , in answer to the double closing of his lid that mean that he acquiesce in the turning of his news - sheet , she unhitch one brace from the oaken post to his right and , walk round his bed , attach the brace on the post to his left , do the reverse with the brace that have go to the left . in that way the picture - frame turn completely round and exhibit the other side of the newspaper - frame . 
 	 it be a contrivance that daily excite her annoyance and , as usual , she express herself . this be another instance of the madness of they — of her brother - in - law and his woman . why have they not obtain one of those ingenious machine , like an arm of bright brass support a reading - shelf of agreeably varnish mahogany , that you clamp to a bedstead and could adjust at any angle ? why indeed have they not procure one of those hut for the tuberculous that she have see depict in a catalogue . such hut could be paint in agreeable stripe of green and vermilion , thus present a gay appearance , and they could be turn upon a pivot so as to meet the ray of the sun or avoid the current of air cause by the wind ? what could be the explanation of this mad and gross structure ? a thatched roof support on post without wall ? do they desire he to be blow out of his bed by the draught ? do they merely desire to enrage she ? or could it be that their resource be of such exiguity that they could not afford the convenience of modern civilization ? 
 	 she might well have think that to be the case . but how could it , in face of the singular behaviour of Monsieur her beau - frére in the matter of the statuary of Casimir – bar the great sculptor . she have offer to contribute to the expense of the establishment even at the cost of the sacrifice of what she hold most dear , and how singular have be his behaviour . during their absence on the occasion of the great sale at Wingham Priory she have order the amiable if gross Gunning and the semi - imbecile carpenter to descend from her room to the salon that admirable Niob : and the admittedly incomparable Tbeti : inform Neptune of the death of a Son - in - law , not to mention she newly regilt Second Empire fauteuil . and in that gloomy wilderness how have they not shine in their respective whiteness and auriference ! the pose of the Niobe how passionate , the action of the Tbeti : how spirited and how at the same time pathetic ! and she have seize the opportunity to varnish with a special preparation import from the City of the Arts the only chair in the salon that be not too rough to be susceptible of varnish even though it come from Paris herself . a clumsy affair at that — of the epoch of Louis the Thirteenth of France , though heaven know whose epoch that be here . without doubt that of Cromwell the regicide ! 
 	 and Monsieur must need seize ' the moment of his entry on this thus enliven scene to exhibit the only display of emotion that she have ever know he vouchsafe . for otherwise Monsieur have the pose of be at least as self - contain if not as absolutely taciturn as Mark himself . she ask Mark : be that the moment for what be after all if you analyse it a manifestation of attachment for his young woman ? what else could it be ? ll — Monsieur their relative , pass for a man of unbounded knowledge . he know all knowledge . he could not but be aware of the supreme value of the work of Casimir – Bar who , but for the machination of his rival Monsieur Rodin and his confrére , must have attain to the high honour in France . but not only have Monsieur with hiss and tut - tut of anger order Gunning and the carpenter at once to remove the statuary and the fauteuil from the salon where she have exhibit they — with heaven know how much reluctance — with a view to their attract the attention of a chance customer — for chance customer do come in their absence without rendezvous . .   .   . not only that , but Monsieur , to gratify the perhaps not unnatural envy of Elle , have cast meretricious doubt on the pecuniary value of the work of Casimir – bar they - self . every one know how the Americans today be strip the unfortunate land of France of her choice art treasure ; the enormous price they pay ; the avidity they show . yet that man have try to persuade she that her statue be worth no more than a few shilling apiece . it be incomprehensible . he be in want of money to the extent of turn their house into a mere depot for dilapidated object in rough wood and battered brass . he have contrive to obtain singular price for these forlorn object from insane Yankees who come great distance to purchase these debris from he . yet when he be offer piece of the utmost beauty in the most perfect condition he just simply turn the object down with scoff . 
 	 for herself , she respect passion — though she could have imagine an object of passion more calculate to excite that feeling than Elle , whom for convenience she would call her ball:—mar . she at least be broad - minded , and moreover she understand the working of the human heart . it be creditable for a man to ruin himself for the object of his affection . but this at least she find exaggerated . 
 	 and what , then , be this determination to ignore the development of modern genius ? why would they not purchase for Mark a reading - desk with a brass arm that should indicate to the neighbour and dependent that at least he be a person of condition ? why no revolving hut ? there be certain symptom of that age that be disquieting . 
 	 she would be the first to acknowledge that . they ' have only to read in the paper of the deed of assassin , highway robber , of the subversive and the ignorant who everywhere seize the rein of power . but what be to be say against such innocent thing as the reading — desk , the revolving hut and the aeroplane . yes , the aeroplane ! 
 	 why do they ignore the aeroplane ? they have tell she that the reason why they have be unable to provide she with nawt : dt Pari : be that the season be become too advanced for the sowing of the seed of those admirable and amusing vegetable which , see advance through the pale electric light of the early hour of the morning , pile symmetrically as high as the first floor of the hotel , on the market - cart , provide one of the gay spectacle of the night - life of la Ville Lumiére . they have say that to procure the seed from Paris would demand at least a month . but suppose they have send a letter by aeroplane , request the dispatch of the seed equally by aeroplane , to procure they , as all the world know , would be a matter merely of a few hour . and , have thus bring the matter back to turnip again , she conclude : 
 	 " yes , mon pauvre homme , they have singular nature , our relative — for I will include the young woman in that category . I , at least , be broad - minded enough for that . but they have singular nature . it be a singular affair ! " ' 
 	 she depart up the path towards the stable , speculate on the nature of her man ’s relative . they be the relative of a godhead—«but god - head have relative of a singular nature . let Mark figure as Jupiter ; well , Jupiter have a son call Apollo who could not be regard as exactly fis de famille . his adventure have be of the most irregular . be it not know that he have spend a long space of time with the shepherd of King Admetus , singing and carousing ? well , Monsieur Tietjens might for convenience be regard as a sort of Apollo , now amongst the shepherd of Admetus and complete with female companion . if he do not often sing , he also conceal the tendency that have bring about his downfall . he be quiet enough about the house , extraordinary as the house might be . Elle also . if their relationship be irregular it present no aspect of reprehensible festivity . it be a sufficiently serious tollagt . that at least run in the family . 
 	 she come round the rough balk of the side of the stable upon Gunning , seat on the stone — sill of the door , cut with a broad - bladed clasp - knife considerable chunk out of a large meat pasty . she survey his extended legging , his immense bemire boot and his unshaven countenance and remark in French that the shepherd of Admetus be probably differently dress . they certainly be in all the performance of the Altai : that she have see . but perhaps he serve his turn . 
 	 Gunning say that he suppose he have to go on duty again . she , he suppose , be go to bottle off the cider or she would not have have he bring down that ere cask . she be to be careful to tie the cark tight ; it would get itself a ed proper . 
 	 she say that if she , a Norman of a hundred generation , do not know how to handle cider it would be a strange thing , and he say that it would be a pity if that cider go wrong after all the trouble they ad ad . 
 	 he brush the crumb of his demolish pie off the cord of his breech , carefully pick up the large fragment of crust and insert they into his month between his broad red lip . he ask if er ladyship know whether the Cahptn want the mare that afternoon . if not e might ’s well turn er on the Common . she say that she do not know ; the Captain have say nothing to she about it . he say he suppose e might ’s well . cramp say e would not have the settee ready to go to the station fore mornin . if she would wait there he would go git some tepid water and they would moisten the egg . she do not ask well . 
 	 he scramble to his foot and lumber down the stone path towards the house . she stand in the bright day regard the long grass of the orchard , the gnarl , whitened trunk of the fruit tree , the little lettuce like align rosette in the bed , and the slope of the land towards the old stone of the house that the bough of the apple — tree mostly hide . and she acknowledge that , in effect , she do not ask well . a Norman , if Mark have die in the ordinary course , she would no doubt have go back to the neighbourhood either of Falaise or Bayeux , from which place come the family of her grand - father and grand - mother respectively . she would probably have marry a rich farmer or a rich grazier , and , by choice , she would have pursue a life of bottle off cider and moisten the egg of sit hen . she have have her training as a coryphée at the Paris opera , and no doubt if she have not make her visit to London with the Paris opera troupe and if Mark have not pick she up in the Edgware Road where her lodging have be , she would have live similarly with some man in Clichy or Auteuil until with her economy she would have be able , equally , to retire to one or other of the pay of her family , and marry a farmer , a butcher , or a grazier . she acknowledge , for the matter of that , that she would probably not have raise more succulent poulet au grain or more full - bodied cider than come from the nest - box and the press here , and that she be lead no other life than that which she have always contemplate . nor , indeed , would she have want any other henchman than gun who , if you have give he a blue blouse with stitchery and a casquette with a black leather peak , would have pass for any peasant in Caen market . 
 	 he swing up the path , carry gingerly a large blue bowl , just as if his blouse belly out round he ; he have the same expression of the mouth ; the same intonation . it be nothing that she obstinately speak French to he . on his subject he could tell by intuition what her answer to his question be and she understand he well enough . 
 	 he say that he have well take the ens off the nestese fer fear they peck er and , and give she the bowl , bring out from the shadow a protest , ruffle and croon hen , before which he drop a handful of bran paste and a lettuce leaf . he come out with another and yet other . then he say she could go in and sprinkle the egg . he say that it always bother he to turn the egg ; his clumsy ol and bruk em ’s often as not . he say : 
 	 " wait whilst I bring out ol mare . bit o grass wunt do er much mischief . " 
 	 the hen , swell to an enormous size , parade hostilely against one another about her foot ; they cluck ; croon ; peck at lump of paste ; drink water eagerly from an iron dog - trough . with an exaggerated clatter of hoof old mare emerge from the stable . she be age nineteen , obstinate , bitter , very dark bay , extremely raw - boned . you might fill she with oats and mash five time a day but she would not put on flesh . she emerge into the light from the door with the trot of a prima - donna , for she know she have once be a famous creature . the hen flee ; she bite into the air , show immense tooth . Gunning open the orchard gate , just at hand ; she go out at a canter ; check ; crumple her knee together ; fall on her side and roll and roll ; her immense lean leg be incongruous , up in the air . 
 	 " yes , " Marie Léonie say , " pour moi - meme je ne demanderais pas mieux ' . " 
 	 Gunning remark : 
 	 " do not show er age , do she ? gambol like a five day lamb ! " his voice be full of pride , his grey face joyful . be Lordship once se that ol mare have orter be put in the Orse show up to Lunnon . some yeer ago that be ! 
 	 she go into the dark , warm , odorous depth of the hen - house — stable shed ; the horse - box being divide off from the hen half by wire netting , nest - box , blanket extend on use - pole . she have to bend down to get into the hen - half . the crack of light between the upright of the wall blink at she . she carry the bowl of tepid water gingerly , and thrust her hand into the warm hay hollow . the egg be fever — heat or thereabout ; she turn they and sprinkle in the tepid water ; thirteen , fourteen , fourteen , eleven — that hen be a breaker!—and fifteen . she empty out the tepid water and from other nest take out egg after egg . the acquisition gratify she . 
 	 in an upper box a hen brood low . it croon menacingly , then scream with the voice of poultry disaster as her hand approach it . the sympathetic voice of other hen outside come to she , scream with poultry disaster — and other hen on the Common . a rooster crow . 
 	 she repeat to herself that she do not demand a well life than this . but be it not self - indulgence to be so content ? ought she not to be , still , take step for her future — near Falaise or Bayeux ? do one not owe that to oneself ? how long would this life last here ? and , still more , when it break up , how would it break up ? what would il:—the strange people , do to she , her saving , her fur , trunk , pearl , turquoise , statuary , and newly - gilt Second empire chair and clock ? when the Sovereign die what do the Heir , his concubine , courtier and sycophant do to the Maintenon of the day ? what precaution ought she not to be take against that wrath to come ? there must be french lawyer in London . .   .   . 
 	 be it to be think that Il — Christopher Tietjens , clumsy , apparently slow — witted but actually gift with the insight of the supernatural . .   .   . Gunning would say : the Captain , he never say anything , but who know what he think ? he perceive everything . .   .   . be it to be think then that , once Mark be dead and he actual owner of the place call Groby and the vast stretch of coal - bear land that the newspaper have speak of , Christopher Tietjens would maintain his benevolent and frugal disposition of today ? it be truly thinkable . but , just as he appear slow — witted and be actually gift with the insight of the supernatural , so he might well now maintain this aspect of despise wealth and yet develop into a true Harpagon as soon as he hold the rein of power . the rich be note for hardness of heart , and brother will prey upon brother ’s widow soon than on another . ' 
 	 so that , certainly , she ought to put herself under the protection of the Authorities . but then , what authority ? the long arm of France would no doubt protect one of her national even in this remote and uncivilized land . but would it be possible to put that machinery in motion without the knowledge of Mark — and what dreadful step might mark not take in his wrath if he think that she have set machinery in motion ? 
 	 there appear nothing for it but to wait , and that side of her nature be indolent , perhaps be alone indolent , she be aware that she be content to wait . but be such a course right ? be it do justice to herself or to France ? for it be the duty of the french citizen , by industry , frugality and vigilance , to accumulate good ; and it be above all the duty of the french citizen to carry back accumulate hoard to that distressed country , strip bare as she be by the perfidious Allies . she might herself rejoice in these circumstance , these grass , orchard , poultry , cider - press , vegetable - garden — even if the turnip be not of the Paris Mott variety ! she might not ask for well . but there might be a little pay , near Falaise , or , in the alternative , near Bayeux , a little spot that she might enrich with these spoil from the barbarian . if every inhabitant of a pay : in France do the same would not France again be prosperous , with all its clocher toll out contentment across smile acre ? well , then ! 
 	 stand gaze at the poultry , whilst gun with a hone smooth out some notch from his baggin hook , previous to again go on duty , she begin to reflect on the nature of Christopher Tietjens , for she desire to estimate what be her chance of retain her fur , pearl and gilt article of vertu . .   .   . by the order of the doctor who attend daily on Mark — a dry , sandy , no doubt perfectly ignorant person — Mark be never to be leave out of sight . he be of opinion , this doctor , that one day Mark might move — physically . and there might be great danger if ever he do move . the lesion , if lesion there be in his brain , might then be restart with fatal effects.—some such talk . so they must never let he out of their sight . for the night they have an alarm that be connect by a wire from his bed to her . Hers be in a room that give onto the orchard . if he so much as stir in his bed the bell would ring in her ear . but indeed she rise every night , over and over again , to look from her window into his hut ; a dim lantern illuminate his sheet . these arrangement appear to she to be barbarous , but they meet the view of Mark and she be thus in no position to question they . .   .   . so she have to wait whilst Gunning hone out his sickle - shape , short - handle blade . 
 	 it have all then begin — all the calamity of the world have begin amidst the clamour and intoxication of that dreadful day . of Christopher Tietjens till then she have know little or nothing . for the matter of that of Mark himself she have know little or nothing until a very few year ago . she have know neither his name , nor how he occupy himself , not yet where he live . ' it have not be her business to inquire , so she have never make inquiry . then one day — after thirteen year — he have awaken one morning with an attack of bronchitis after a very wet Newmarket Craven Meeting . he have tell she to go to his Office with a note address to his chief clerk . to ask for his letter and to tell they to send a messenger to his chamber to get some clothe and necessary . 
 	 when she have tell he that she do not know what his Office be nor where be his chamber , nor even his surname , he have grunt . he have express neither surprise nor gratification , but she know that he have be gratify — probably with himself for have ' choose a woman companion who display no curiosity rather than with she for have display none . after that he have have a telephone instal in her room , and not infrequently he would stay later of a morning than have be his habit , let a messenger from the Office bring letter or fetch document that he have sign . when his father have die he have put she into mourning . 
 	 by that date , gradually , she have learn that he be Mark Tietjens of Groby , an immense estate somewhere in the North . he employ himself at an Office of the Government ’s in Whitehall — apparently with question of railway . she gather , chiefly from ejaculation of the Messenger , that he treat his Ministry with contempt , but be regard as so indispensable that he never lose his post . occasionally , the Office would ring up and ask she if she know where he be . she would gather from the paper afterwards that that be because there have be a great railway accident . on those occasion he would have be absent at a race — meeting . he give the Office , in fact , just as much of his time as he choose , no more and no less . she gather that , with his overpowering wealth , it be of no account to he except as an occupation of leisure time between meeting , and she gather that he be regard as an occult power amongst the ruler of the nation . once , during the War when he have hurt his hand , he dictate to she a note of a confidential nature to one of the Cabinet Ministers . it have concern itself with Transport and its tone have be that of singular , polite contempt . 
 	 for she he be in no way astonishing . he be the English Milor with le Spleen . she have read of he in the novel of Alexander Dumas , Paul de Kock , Eugene Sue and Ponson du Terrail . he represent the England that the continent applaud — the only England that the continent applaud . silent , obstinate , inscrutable , insolent but immensely wealthy and uncontrollably generous . for herself , elle ne demandait pas mieux . for there be about he nothing of the unexpected . he be as regular as the Westminster Chimes ; he never exact the unexpected of she and he be all - powerful and never in the wrong . he be , in short , what her country - woman call sérieux . no Frenchwoman ask well than that of lover or husband . it be the serious collage par excellence : they as a ménage , be sober , honest , frugal , industrious , immensely wealthy , and seriously save . for his dinner , twice a week , she cook he herself two mutton n chop with all but an eighth of an inch of the fat par off , two mealy potato , as light and as white as flour , an apple — pie with a very flaky crust which he eat with a wedge of Stilton and some pull bread and butter . this dinner be never varied once in twenty year , except during the season of game , when on alternate week a pheasant , a brace of grouse or of partridge would come from Groby . nor in the twenty year have they once be separate for a whole week except that every late summer he spend a month at Harrogate . she always have his dress — shirt wash for he by her own laundress in the Quartier . he spend almost every week - end in one country house or another , use at most two dress - shirt and that only if he stay till Tuesday . english people of good class do not dress for dinner on Sundays . that be a politeness to God , because theoretically you attend evening service and you do not go to church in the country in evening dress . as a matter of fact you never go to evening service — but it be complimentary to suggest by your dress that you might be visit by the impulse . so , at least , Marie Léonie Tietjens understand the affair . 
 	 she be look out on the Common that slop up to beech tree , at the poultry — bright chestnut bird , extremely busy on the intense green of the browse grass . the great rooster remind she of the late Monsieur Rodin , the sculptor who have conspire against Casimir – Bar . she have once see he in his studio , conduct some american lady round his work , and he have precisely resemble a rooster kick its leg back and droop its wing in the dust round a new hen . only round a new one . naturally ! .   .   . this rooster be a tremendous frenchman . Un vrai de la vraie . you could imagine nothing more unlike Christopher Tietjens ! .   .   . the backward - rake leg on the dancing toe ; the gait of a true master of deportment at an academy of young lady ! the vigilant clear eye cock up every minute . .   .   . Hark ! a swift shadow run over the ground : the sparrow - hawk ! the loud , pierce croon of that Father of his Country . how the hen all re - echo it ; how the chicken run to their mother and all together to the shadow of the hedge . Monsieur , the hawk would have no chance amidst that outcry . the hawk flit silent and detest noise . it will bring the poultry - keeper with his gun ! .   .   . all be discover because of the vigilance of Milord Chantecler . .   .   . there be those who reprove he because his eye be always on the sky , because he have a proud head . but that be his function — that and gallantry . perceive he with a grain of corn ; how he fly upon it ; how he invite with cry ! his favourite — the new — hen run duck joyously to he . how he bow , droop and prance , hold the grain of corn in his powerful bill , « deposit it , peck to bruise it and then deposit ' before his sultana of the moment . nor will he complain if a little ball of fluff run quickly and peck the grain from his bill before Madame Partlet can take it from he . his gallantry have be waste , but he be a good father ! .   .   . perhaps there be not even a grain of corn when he issue his invitation ; perhaps he merely call his favourite to he that he may receive their praise or perform the act of Love . .   .   . 
 	 he be then the man that a woman desire to have vouchsafe she . when he smite his wing feather behind his back and utter his clarion cry of victory over the hawk that now glide far away down the hill , his hen come out again from the shadow , the chicken from beneath their mother ' wing . he have give security to his country and in confidence they can return to their avocation . different , indeed , from that Monsieur Christopher who , even when he be still a soldier , more than anything resemble a full , grey , coarse meal - sack short in the wind and with roll , hard - blue eye . not hard eye , but of a hard blue ! and yet , curiously , he too have some of the spirit of Chantecler beneath his rolling shoulder of a farmyard boar . obviously you could not be your brother ’s brother and not have some trace of the Milor . .   .   . the spleen too . but no one could say that her Mark be not a proper man , Chic in an eccentric manner , but , oh yes , this . and that be his brother . 
 	 naturally he might try to despoil she . that be what brother do to brother ’s widow and child . .   .   . but , on occasion , he treat she with a pompous courtesy — a parade . on the first time he have see she — not so long ago that ; only during that period of the war that have be without measurable time — he have treat she to heavy but expressive gesture of respect and word of courtesy in an old - fashioned language that he must have learn at the Theatre Francais while they still play Ruy Blar . French be a different thing now , that she must acknowledge . when she go to Paris — which she do every late summer whilst her man go to Harrogate — the language her nephew speak be a different affair — without grace , courtesy , intelligibility . certainly without respect I oh , la la ! when they come to divide up her inheritance that would be a sharp kind of despoilment than ever Christopher Tietjens ' ! whilst she lie on her bed of death those young fellow and their wife would be all through her press and armoire like a pack of wolf . .   .   . La famille . ' well , that be very proper . it show the appropriate spirit of acquisition . what be a good mother for if not to despoil her husband ’s relative in the interest of their joint child ! 
 	 so Christopher have be as courteous as a well - train meal - sack of the dix - huitiéme . eighteenth century . old still , périade Moliére . when he have come into her room that have be dimly light with a veilleuse — a night — light ; they be so much more economical than shade electric lights!—he have precisely suggest to she a lumber character from Moliére as present at the Comédie Francaise ; elaborate of phrase and character but protuberant in odd place . she might in that case have suppose that he entertain design on her person ; but with his eye stick out in elaborate considerateness , he have only come to break to she the news that his brother be about to make an honest woman of she . that have be Mark ’s phrase . it be of course only God that can do that . .   .   . but the enterprise have have the full concurrence of Monsieur the Heir – Apparent . 
 	 he have indeed be active whilst she have slumber in a hood - chair after four day and three night on her foot . she would have surrender the body of Mark to no human being but his brother . now the brother have come to tell she not to be alarm — pant with nervousness and shortness of breath . .   .   . bad lung both the brother have ! pant he have come to tell she not to be alarm at find in her man ’s room a priest , a lawyer and a lawyer ’s clerk . .   .   . these black - rob people attend on death , bring will - form and the holy oil . the doctor and a man with oxygen cylinder have be there when she have go to repose herself . it be a pretty congregation of the vulture that attend on we during life . 
 	 she have start at once to cry out . that undoubtedly be what have make he nervous — the anticipation that she would cry out sharply in the black , silent London that brood between air - raid . in that silence , before sleep have visit her peignoir — envelop , and therefore clumsyish form , she have be aware of Christopher ’s activity on the telephone in the passage . it have strike she that he might have be warn the Pompes Funébres ! .   .   . so she have begin to scream : the sound that irresistibly you make when death be about to descend . but he have agitate himself to soothe she — for all the world like Monsieur Sylvain on the board of Moliére ’s establishment ! he speak that sort of French , in a hoarse whisper , in the shadow of the night - light .   .   . assure she that the priest be for marriage , with licence of the Archevéque de Cantorbéri such as in London you get in those day from Lambeth Palace for thirty pound sterling . that enable you to make any woman honest at any hour of the day or night . the lawyer be there to have a will resign . marriage in this singular country invalidate any previous will . so Tietjens ( Christophére ) assure she . 
 	 but then , if there be that haste , there be danger of death . she have often speculate as to whether he would or would not marry she as an act of death - bed contrition . rather contemptuously as great lord with spleen make their peace with God . she scream . in silent , black London . the night - light waver in its saucer . 
 	 he crepitate out that his brother be double , in this new will , his posthumous provision for she . with provision for the purchase of a house in France if she would not inhabit the Dower House at Groby . a Louis Treize dower - house . it be his idea of consolation . he affect to be business - like . .   .   . these English . but then , perhaps they do not go through your press and wardrobe whilst your corpse be still warm ! 
 	 she scream out that they might take away their marriage paper and will - form , but to give she her man again . if they have let she give he her tisane instead of .   .   . 
 	 with her breast heaving , she have cry into that man ’s face : 
 	 " I swear that my first act when I be Madame Tietjens and have the legal power will be to turn out all these man and give he infusion of poppy - head and lime - flower . " she expect to see he recoil , but he have say : 
 	 " in heaven ’s name do , my dear sister . it might save he and the nation . " 
 	 it be silly of he to talk like that . these fellow have too much pride of family . Mark do no more than attend to Transport . well , perhaps transport in those day have its importance . still , probably Tietjens , Christopher , overrate the indispensableness of Tietjens , Mark . .   .   . that would have be a month before the Armistice . they be black day . .   .   . a good brother , though . .   .   . 
 	 in the other room , whilst paper be sign , after the curl in his calott : and all have do reading from his book , Mark have sign to she to bend her head down to he and have kiss she . he whisper : 
 	 " thank God there be one woman - Tietjens who be not a whore and a bitch ! " he wince a little ; her tear have fall on his face . for the first time she have say : " Mon pauvre homme , ce qu’il ont fait de toi ! " she have be hurry from the room when Christopher have stop she . Mark have say : 
 	 " I regret to put you to further inconvenience .   .   . " in French . he have never speak to she in French before . marriage make a difference . they speak to you with ceremony out of respect for themselves and their station in life . you also be at liberty to address they as your pauvre homme . 
 	 there have to be another ceremony . a man look like a newly dress jail - bird step out with his book like an office register . with a blue - black jowl . he marry they over again . a civil marriage this time . 
 	 it be then that , for the first time , she have become aware of the existence of another woman - Tietjens , Christopher ’s wife . .   .   . she have not know that Christopher have a wife . why be not she there ? but Mark with his labour politeness and chest have tell she that he exaggerate the formality of the marriage because if both he and Christopher die , she , Marie Léonie Tietjens , might have trouble with acertain Sylvia . the Bitch ! .   .   . well , she , Marie Léonie , be prepared to face her sister - in - law . 
 
  chapter 3 


 
 
 	 the little maid , Beatrice , as well as Gunning , regard Marie Léonie with paralysed but bewildered obedience . she be Er Ladyship , a good mark ; a foreign Frenchy , bad ; extraordinarily efficient about the house and garden and poultry - yard , a matter for mixed feeling . she be fair , not black - avise , a good mark ; she be buxom , not skinny , like the real Quality . a bad mark because she be , then , not real Quality ; but a qualifiedly good mark because , if you as to ave Quality all about you in the ouse , tis well not to ave real Quality . .   .   . but on the whole the general feeling be favourable , because like themselves she be floridly blond . it make er uman like . never you trust a dark woman , and if you marry a dark man e will treat you have . in the english country - side it be like that . 
 	 Cabinet - maker Cramp , who be a remnant of the little dark persistent race that once have people Sussex , regard Marie Léonie with distrust that mingle with admiration for the quality of the varnish that she import from Paris . proper french Polish that be . he live in the cottage just across the path on the Common . E couldn ' say as ow e like the job the Governors give I m. he have to patch up and polish with beeswax — not varnish — rough stuff such s be granf’er ad ad . an ad get rid of . rough ol truck . More ' nundred yeer old . n more!- 
 	 he have to take bit of old wood out of one sort of old truck and fit it into miss bit of other old truck . buy old Moley ’s pig — pound board that have be Little Kingsworth church stall . the Cahptn ad ad I m , Cramp , use’in for all manner of patchin ’ up . the Captain have buy , too , ol Miss Cooper ’s rabbit utch . Beautifully bevel the panel be , too , when clean up n beeswaxed . cramp would acknowledge that . make he match the bevelling in the timber from Kingsworth Church stall for one of the miss door , an more of the timber for the patching . proper job , he , Cramp , have make of it , too ; he would say that . n it look proper when it be finish - a long , low press , with six bevel door ; beautiful purfle on the edge . like some of the stuff ls Lordship ad in the Tujer Room at Fittleworth House . More’n a undred yeer old . three undred . Four . .   .   . there ’ no knowin . n no accountin fer taste . E would say e ad n eye — the Cahptn ad . look at a bit of ol rough truck , the Cahptn would , n see it be old than the Monument to Sir Richard Atchison on Tadworth Ill that be set up in the year 1842 to celebrate the glorious victory of Free Trade . so the Monument say . lug a bit of rough ol truck out of the back of a cow - house where it have be throw — the Cahptn would . and his , Cramp ’s , heart would sink to see the ol mare come back , some day , the cart full of encoop , n leaden pig - trufls , n pewter plate that ad be use to stop up ole in cow - byre . 
 	 n off it would all go to Murrikay . Queer place Murrikay must be — full of the leavin of ol England . Pig - troughs , hen - coop , rabbit - hutch , wash - house copper that no one now have any use for . he load em , when he ’d scrub , and silver — sand and beeswax - n - turpentine em , onto the ol cart , n put to ol mare , n down to station , n on to Southampton n off to New York . must be a queer place , yon ! had not they no cabinet - maker or ol rough truck of the : own ? 
 	 well , it take all sort to make a world it thank God fer that . he , Cramp , have a good job likely to last I m be lifetime because some folk wus queer in the ed . the ol lumber go out yon and his , Cramp ’s missus , be gettin together a proper set of good . a tidy treat their sittin room look with aspidistra in mahogany tripod , n a Wilton carpet n bamboo cheer n mahogany whatnot . a proper woman Missus Cramp be if sharp in the tongue . 
 	 Miss ’s Cramp she didn ' give so much fer Er Ladyship . she be agin foreigner . all german spy they wus . have no truck with they , she would n’t . Oo noo if they wus s much s marry . some say they wus , some say they wusn . but you couldn ' take in Miss ’s Cramp . .   .   . N Quality ! what be to show that they be real Quality ? Livin how they do wasn ' Quality manner . Quality wus stick up n wear shiny clothe n have motor - car n statue n palm n ball — room n conservatory . n didn bottle 03 the cider n take the egg n speak queer lingo to th handy - man . n didn ' sell the cheer they sit on . the four young child also do n’t like Er Ladyship . never call em pretty dear , she do n’t , nor give em sweetie nor rag — doll nor apple . smack em if she find em in the orchard . never so much s give em red flannel cape in the winter . 
 	 but Bill , the eld , like Er Ladyship . call er a proper right un . never stop tarkin of er . n : be ad statue in er bedroom , n fine gilt cheer , n clock , n flowerin plant . Bill e’d make fer Er ladyship what she call 11 eightyjare . in three story , to stand in a corner n hold knick — nack out of fretwork to a pettern she ’d give I m. varnish proper , too . a good piece of work if he should not say so . .   .   . but Miss ’s Cramp she ’d never be allow in er ladyship ’s bedroom . a proper place it be . fit fer a Countess ! if Miss ’s Cramp could be allow to see it she ’d maybe change her opinion . .   .   . but Miss ’s Cramp she say : never you trust a fair woman , bein dark . 
 	 the matter of the cider , however , do give he to think . proper cider it be , when they be give a bottle or two . but it be n’t sussex cider . a little like Devonshire cider , more like Hereford - shire . but not the same as any . More head it have n be sweet , n browner . n not to be drunk s freely ! fair scour you it do if you drunk s much s a quart ! 
 	 ' the little settlement be advance furtively to the hedge . cramp put his bald poll out of his work — shed and then creep out . Mrs. Cramp , an untidy , dark , very thin woman emerge over her door - sill , wipe her hand on her apron . the four Cramp child at different stage of growth creep out of the empty pig - pound.—Cramp be not go to buy his winter pig till next fortnightly fair at Little Kingsworth.—The Elliott Children , with the milk - can , come at a snail ’s pace down the green path from the farm ; Mrs. Elliott , an enormous woman with untidy hair , peer over her own hedge , which form a little enclosure on the Common ; Young Hogben , the farmer ’s son , a man of forty , very thick - set , appear on the path in the beech — wood , ostensibly drive a great black sow . even Gunning leave his brushing and lumber to the edge of the stable . from there he could still see Mark in his bed , but also , look down - ward between the apple - trunk he could see Marie Léonie bottle the cider , large , florid and intent , in the open dairying - shed where water run in a v - shape wooden trough . 
 	 " runnin t ' cider out of cask with a chube ! " Mrs. Cramp scream up the hill to Mrs. Elliott . " Ooever eere ! " Mrs. Elliott rumble huskily back at Mrs. Cramp . all these figure close in furtively ; the child peer through tiny interstice in the hedge and mutter one to the other : " Ooever eere . .   .   . foreign way , I call it . .   .   . a glass chube . .   .   . ooever eere . " even Cramp , though , wipe his bald head with his carpenter ’s apron , he admonish Mrs. Cramp to remember that he have a good job — even Cramp descend from the path to the hedge — side and stand so close — peer over — that the thorn prick his perspiring chest through his thin shirt . they say to the baker who wearily follow his weary horse up the steep path , come from the deep wood below : it have ought to be stop . the police have ought to know . bottle cider by mean of a glass tube . and stand the cider in run water . where be the excise ? rot honest folk gut ! poison they . no doubt the governor could tell they a tale if he could speak or move . the police have ought to know . .   .   . show off , with cider in run water — to cool it when first bottle ! ooever eere ! just because they ad a ladyship to their tail . n more money than well folk . not so much money either . Reckon they ’d come to smash n be sell up like Igginson at Fittleworth . set isself up fer Quality , e do too ! .   .   . n not so much of a ladyship , neither . not so much more of a ladyship as we if the truth be know . not an Earl or a Lord , only a baronite — ess at that , supposin we all ad our right . .   .   . the police have ought to be bring into this affair ! 
 	 a number of member of the Quality , on shin horse , their leather creak beautifully , ride at a walk up the path . they be the real Quality . a fine old gentleman , thin as a lath , clean face , hooky nose , white moustache , lovely cane , lovely legging . on be Lordship ’s favourite hack . a bay mare . a fine lady , slim as a boy , rid astride as they do today though they do not use to . but time change . on the Countess ’s own chestnut with white forehead . a bad - temper horse . she must ride well that lady . another lady , grey haired , but slim too , rid side - saddle in a funny sort of get - up . long skirt with pannier and three - cornered hat like the one you see in picture of highwayman in the new pub in Queen ’s Norton . sort of old - fashioned , she look . but no doubt it be the new pattern . thing be so mixed up nowadays . be Lordship ’s friend could afford to do as they please . a boy , eighteen maybe . shiny legging too : all their clothe be shiny . ride well , too , the boy . look how his leg nip into Orlando — the chief whip ’s horse . out for an airing . be Lordship ’s groom of the stud only too glad if the horse can get exercise in hay - cut time . the real Quality . 
 	 they rein in their horse and sit star , a little far up the road , down into the orchard . they have ought to be tell what be go on down there . put white powder into the cider along o the sugar . the Quality ought to be tell . .   .   . but you do not speak to the Quality . well if they do not notice you . you never know . they stick together . might be friend of Tietjenses for all you know . you do n’t know Tietjenses ai n’t Quality . well git a move on or something might appen to you . you hear ? 
 	 the boy in the shiny legging and clothe — bare - head he be , with shiny fair hair and shiny cheek — exclaim in a high voice : 
 	 " I say , mother , I do n’t like this spying ! " and the horse start and jostle . 
 	 you see . they do n’t like this spying . get a move on . and all that peasantry get a move on whilst the horse go slowly up hill . queer thing the Gentry can do to you still if they notice you . it be all very well to say this be a land fit for whatever the word be that stand for simple folk . they have the police and the keeper in their hand and your cottage and living . 
 	 Gunning go out at the garden gate beside the stable and shout objurgation at Young Hogben . 
 	 " hey , do n’t you drive that sow . she ’ as much right on Common as you . " 
 	 the great sow be obstinately precede the squat figure of Young Hogben , who hiss and squeak behind she . she flap her great ear and sniff from side to side , a monument of black . imperturbability . 
 	 " you keep your og out of our swede " Young Hogben shout amidst objurgation . " in our forty - acre she be all day n all night too ! " 
 	 " you keep your swede outen our og , " Gunning shout back , swing his gorilla arm like a semaphore . he advance on to the Common . young Hogben descend the slope . 
 	 " you fence your og in same ’s other folk as ' to do , " Young Hogben menace . 
 	 " folk as abut on Commons as to fence out , not fence in , " Gunning menace . they stand foot to foot on the soft sward menace each other with their chin . 
 	 " be Lordship sell Tietjens ’s to the Cahptn . without common right , " the farmer say . " ask Mr. Fuller . " 
 	 " be Lordship could no more sell Tietjens ’s ' thout common right n you could milk without drinking right . Ast Lawyer Sturgis ! " Gunning maintain . put arsenic in among be root , Young Hogben maintain that he would . spend seven year up to Lewes jail if e do , Gunning maintain . they continue for long the endless , quarrel that obtain between tenant - farmer who be not Quality but use to brutalize his hind and gentleman ’s henchman who be use to popularity amongst his class and the peasantry . the only thing upon which they agree be that you would not think there adn’t be no war . the war ought to have give tenant - farmer the complete power of local tyrant ; it should have do the same for gentleman ’s bailiff . the sow grunt round Gunning ’s boot , look up for grain of maize that Gunning usually drop . in that way sow come to heel when you call they however far away they may be on the Common . 
 	 
 	 from the hard road up the hill — Tietjens ’s go up the slope to the hedge there — descend the elderly lady who be singularly attire in the eye of the country people . she consider that she be descend , not by blood , but by moral affinity from Madame de Maintenon , therefore she wear a long grey rid skirt with pannier , and a three - cornered , grey feel hat , and carry a rid switch of green shagreen . her thin grey face be tired but authoritative , her hair which she wear in a knot beneath her hat be luminously grey , her pince - nez rimless . 
 	 owe to the steepness of the bank on which the garden rise , the path of sea - pebble zigzag across most of its width , orange - coloured because it have be lately sand . she go furtively between quince - trunk , much like the hedge - sparrow , flit a stretch and then stop for the boy with the shin legging stolidly to overtake she . she say that it be dreadful to think that the sin of one ’s youth could so find one out . it ought to make her young companion think . to come at the end of one ’s life to inhabit so remote a spot . you could not get there with automobile . her own Delarue – Schneider have break down on the hill - road in the attempt to get there yesterday . 
 	 the boy , slim in the body , but heavy in the bright red cheek , with brown hair , truly shiny legging and a tie of green , scarlet and white stripe , have a temporarily glum expression . he say , nevertheless , with grumble determination , that he do not think this be play the game . moreover hundred of motor get up that hill ; how else would people come to buy the old furniture ? he have already tell Mrs. de Bray Pape that the carburetter of Delarue – Schneiders be a wash - out . 
 	 it be just that , Mrs. Pape maintain , that be so dreadful a thought . she go swiftly down another zigzag of the path and then falter . 
 	 it be that that be dreadful in these old country , she say . why could they never learn ? take example ? here be the descendant of a great family , the Tietjens of Groby , a haunt of ancient peace , the one reduce to a no doubt dreadful state by the sin of his youth , the other to make a living by sell old furniture . 
 	 the youth say she be mistaken . she must not believe all that his mother hint to she . his mother be all right , but her hint go far than fact warrant . if he want to let Groby to Mrs. de Bray Pape it be because he hat swank . his uncle also hat swank . .   .   . he mumble a little and add : " and .   .   . my father ! " moreover it be not play the game . he have soft brown eye that be now cloud and he be blush . 
 	 he mumble that mother be splendid , but he do not think she ought to have send he there . naturally she have her wrong . for himself he be a marxist – Communist . all Cambridge be . he therefore of course approve of his father ’s live with whom he wish . but there be way of do thing . because you be advanced you do not have to treat woman with discourtesy . the reverse , rather . he be painfully agitate by the time he overtake the tired lady at the corner of the next zigzag . 
 	 she want he not to misunderstand she . no discredit attach in her eye to the pursuit of sell old furniture . far from it . Mr. Lemuel of Madison Avenue might be call a dealer in old furniture . it be , of course , Oriental , which make a difference . but Mr. Lemuel be a most cultivate man . his country house at Croogers in the State of New York be keep up in a style that would have do credit to the grand seigneur of pre - revolutionary France . but from that to this .   .   . what a downfall ! 
 	 the house — the cottage — be by now nearly below her foot , the roof extremely high the window sink very deep in grey stone and very small . there be a paved semi - circular court before the door , the space have be cut out of the orchard bank and wall with stone . it be extravagantly green , sink in greenery , and the grass that come nearly to Mrs. Pape ’s middle be fill with hiding profusion of flower turn to seed . the four county sweep away from under she , hedge like string go away , enclose field , to the hill on the very distant horizon . the country near at hand woode . the boy beside she take a deep breath as he always do when he see a great view . on the moor above Groby , for instance . purple they be . 
 	 " it be n’t fit for human habitation ! " the lady exclaim with the triumphant intonation of one who see a great truth confirm . " the home of the poor in these old country beggar even pity . do you suppose they so much as have a bath ? " 
 	 " I should think my father and uncle be personally clean ! " the boy say . he mumble that this be suppose to be rather a show place . he could trust his father indeed to find rather a show place to live in . look at the rock plant in the sink garden ! he exclaim : " look here I let ’s go back ! " 
 	 Mrs. Pape ’s perturbation give way to obstinacy . she exclaim : 
 	 " never ! " she have a mission from the poor boy ’s injure mother . she would never look Sylvia Tietjens in the face if she flinch . sanitation go before anything . she hop to leave the world a well place before she pass over . she have Authority confer on she . Metem - psychosistically . she believe that the soul of Madame de Maintenon , the companion of Lewis the Fourteenth , have pass into she . how many convent have not the Maintenon set up and how rigidly have she not look after the virtue and the sanitation of the inhabitant ? that be what she , Mrs. Millicent de Bray Pape , look to . she have in the South of " France — the riviera — a palace , erect by Mr. Behrens , the celebrate architect - after the palace of the Maintenon at Sans Souci . but sanitated ! she ask the young man to believe she . the boudoir appear to be only a panel boudoir ; very large because of the useless vanity of le Raw Solale . Madame de Maintenon would have be content without such vanity . .   .   . but only touch a spring in the panel and every sort of bathing arrangement present itself to you hide in the wall . sunken bath ; bath above ground ; douche with sea — water extra — iodized ; lateral douche with and without bath - salt dissolve in the water . that be what she call make the world a little well . impossible not to be healthy with all that .   .   . 
 	 the boy mumble that he be not in principle against the old tree ’ come down . he be , indeed , in principle against his uncle ’s and his father ’s adoption of the peasant life . this be an industrial age . the peasant have always spoil every advance in the idea of the world . all the man at Cambridge be agree as to that . he exclaim : 
 	 " hi ! you can not do that . .   .   . not go through stand hay ! " 
 	 every fibre of his country boy landowner ’s soul if be outraged as he see the long trail of satiny grey that follow Mrs. de Bray Pape ’s long skirt . 
 	 how be his father ’s man to cut hay that have be trample like that ? but , unable to bear any long the suspense of the spectacular advance towards Mark Tietjens along those orange zigzag , Mrs. de Bray Pape be run straight down the bank towards the unwalle , thatched hut . she could see it through the top of the apple - tree . 
 	 the boy , desperately nervous , continue to descend the zigzag path that would take he into the very purlieus of his father ’s house — onto the paved court where there be rock plant between the interstice . his mother ought not to have force he to accompany Mrs. de Bray Pape . his mother be splendid . divinely beautiful : athletic as Atalanta or Betty Nuthall , in spite of her suffering . but she ought not to have send Mrs. de Bray Pape . it be mean as a sort of revenge . General Campion have not approve . he could see that , though he have say : " my boy , you ought always to obey your dear mother ! she have suffer so much . it be your duty to make it up to she by fulfil her slight whim . an Englishman always do his duty to his mother ! " 
 	 of course it be the presence of Mrs. de Bray Pape that force the General to say that . patriotism . General Campion be deadly afraid of mother . who be n’t ? but he would hardly have enjoin upon a son to go and spy upon his father and his father ’s .   .   . companion if he have not want to show Mrs. de Bray Pape how superior English family tie be to those of her country . they rag each other about that all day long . 
 	 and yet he do not know . the dominion of woman over those of the opposite sex be a terrible thing . he have see the old General whimper like a whip dog and mumble in his poor white moustache . .   .   . mother be splendid . but be not sex a terrible thing . .   .   . his breath come short . 
 	 he cover two foot of pebble with the orange sand roll into they . a tidy job it must be roll on that slope ! still , the actual gradient be not so steep on the zigzag . one in sixteen perhaps . he cover another two foot of pebble with orange sand roll in . how could he ? how could he cover another two ? his heel be tremble ! 
 	 four county run out below his foot . to the horizon ! he show he the kingdom of the earth . as great a view as above Groby , but not purple and with no sea . trust father to settle where you could see a great view by go up hill . Vox adhaesit . .   .   . " his foot be root to the earth . " .   .   . no , vox adhaesit faucibus mean that his voice stick to his jaw . palate rather . his palate be as dry as sawdust ! how could he do it ! .   .   . a terrible thing ! they call it Sex ! .   .   . his mother have coerce he into this dry palate and trembling heel by the force of her sex fever . dreadful good - night they have have in her boudoir , she force and force and force he with argument to go . to come here . beautiful mother ! .   .   . Cruel ! Cruel ! 
 	 the boudoir all light up . warm ! scented ! mother ’s shoulder ! a portrait of Nell Gwynn by Sir Peter Lely . Mrs. de Bray Pape want to buy it . thought she could buy the earth , but Lord Fittleworth only laugh . .   .   . how have they all get force down there ? by mother . .   .   . to spy on father . Mother have never set any store by Fittleworth — good fellow Fittleworth , good landlord!—till last winter when she have get to know that father have buy this place . then it be Fittleworth , Fittleworth , Fittleworth ! Lunches , dinner , dance at the Ambassadors . fittleworth be n’t say no . who could say no to mother with her figure in the saddle and her hair ? 
 	 if he have know when they come down to Fittleworth ’s last winter what he know now ! he know now that his mother , come down for the hunting , though she have never take much stock in hunting .   .   . still , she could ride . Jove , she could ride . 
 	 he have go queer all over again and again at first in take those leap that she take laughing . Diana , that ’ what she be . .   .   . well , no , Diana be .   .   . his mother , come down for the hunting , be there to torment father and his .   .   . companion . she have tell he . laugh in that way she have . .   .   . it must be sex cruelty ! .   .   . laugh like those Leonardi - do - da . .   .   . well , Vinci woman . a queer laugh , end with a crooked smile . .   .   . in correspondence with Father ’s servant . .   .   . dress up as a housemaid and look over the hedge . 
 	 how could she do it ? how ? how could she force he to be here ? what would Monty , the Prime Minister ’s son , Dobles , Porter — fat ass because his father be too beastly rich — what would his set think at Cambridge ? they be all Marxist – Communists to a man . but still .   .   . 
 	 what would Mrs. Lowther think if she really know ? .   .   . if she could have be in the corridor one night when he come out from his mother ’s boudoir ! he would have have the courage to ask she then . her hair be like floss silk , her lip like cut pomegranate . when she laugh she throw up her head . .   .   . he be now warm all over , his eye wet and warm . 
 	 when he have ask if he ought to — if she want he to — do whatever his mother want whether or no he approve . .   .   . if his mother ask he to do what he think be a mean action . .   .   . 
 	 but that have be on the Peacock Terrace with the famous Fittleworth Seven Sister Roses . .   .   . how she go against the rose . .   .   . in a yellow .   .   . no , moth - coloured .   .   . not yellow , not yellow . Green ’s forsaken , but yellow ’s forswear . great pity fill he at the thought that Mrs. Lowther might be forsake . but she must not be forswear .   .   . moth — colour silk . shimmer . against pink rose . her fine , fine hair , a halo . she have look up and sideways . she have be go to laugh with her lip like cut pomegranate . .   .   . she have tell he that as a rule it be a good thing to do what one ’s mother want when she be like Mrs. Christopher Tietjens . her soft voice . .   .   . soft southern voice . .   .   . oh , when she laugh at Mrs. de Bray Pape . .   .   . how could she be a friend of Mrs. de Bray Pape ’s ? .   .   . 
 	 if it have not be sunlight . .   .   . if he have come on Mrs. Lowther as he come out of his mother ’s boudoir ! he would have have courage . at night . late . he would have say : " if you be really interested in my fate tell I if I ought to spy upon my father and his .   .   . companion ! " she would not have laugh , late at night . she would have give he her hand . the lovely hand and the light foot . and her eye would have dimne . .   .   . lovely , lovely pansy ! pansy be heart - ease . .   .   . 
 	 why do he have these thought : these waft of intolerable .   .   . oh , desire . he be his mother ’s son . .   .   . his mother be .   .   . he would kill anyone who say it . .   .   . 
 	 thank God ! oh , thank God ! he be down on the crazy pave level with the house . and there be another path go up to Uncle Mark’::bed . the blessed Virgin — who be like Helen Lowther!—had watch over he . he have not to walk under those little deep , small - pan window . 
 	 his father ’s .   .   . companion might have be look out . he would have faint . .   .   . 
 	 his father be a good sort of man . but he , too , must be .   .   . like Mother . if what they say be true . ruin by dissolute living . but a good , grey man . the sort of man to be torment by Mother . great spatulate finger . but no one have ever tie fly like Father . some he have tie year ago be the good he , Mark Tietjens junior of Groby , have yet . and Father love the wine - colour moor . haw could he stifle under these bough ! a house overhang by tree be unsanitary . Italians say that . .   .   . 
 	 but what a lovely glimpse under the tree ! sweet - williams along the path . light filter by bough . Shadow . Gleams in the little window - pane . wall - stone all lichen . that ’s England . if he could spend a while here with Father . .   .   . 
 	 Father have be matchless with horse . woman , too . .   .   . what an inheritance be his , Mark Tietjens , junior ’s ! if he could spend a while here . .   .   . but his Father sleep with .   .   . if she come out of the door . .   .   . she must be beautiful . .   .   . no they say she be not a patch on mother . he have overhear that at fittleworth ’s . or Helen Lowther . .   .   . but his father have have his pick ? .   .   . if he choose then to sleep with .   .   . 
 	 if she come out of the door he would faint . .   .   . like the Venus of Botti .   .   . a crooked smile . .   .   . no , Helen Lowther would protect . .   .   . he might " * fall in love with his Father ’s .   .   . what do you know of what will happen to you when you come in contact with the Bad Woman . .   .   . of advanced view . .   .   . they say she be of advanced view . and a Latinist . .   .   . he be a Latinist . love it ! 
 	 or his father might with Hel .   .   . hot jealousy fill he . his father be the sort of man .   .   . she might .   .   . why do over .   .   . People like mother and father beget child ? 
 	 he keep his eye fascinatedly fix on the stone porch of the cottage whilst he stumble up the great stone slab to the path . the path lead to Uncle Mark ’s wall — less thatched hut . .   .   . no form fill the porch . what be to become of he ? he have great wealth ; terrific temptation would be his . his mother be no guide . his father might have be well . .   .   . well , there be Marxian – Communism . they all look to that now , in his set at Cambridge . Monty , the Prime Minister ’s son , with black eye ; Dobles , Campion ’s nephew , lean as a rat ; Porter , with a pig ’s snout , but witty as hell . fat ass . 
 
  Chapter 4 


 
 
 	 MARK TIETJENS think that a cow or a hog must have get into the orchard , there be such a rushing in the grass . he say to himself that that damn Gunning be always boast about his prowess as a hedger ; he might see that his confound hedge keep out the beast from the Common . an unusual voice — unusual in its intonation — remark : 
 	 " oh , Sir Mark Tietjens , this be dreadful ! " 
 	 it appear to be dreadful . a lady in a long skirt — an apparently elderly Di Vernon out of " Waverley , " which be one of the few novel Mark have ever read — be make dreadful havoc with the stand grass . the beautiful , proud head sway and go down as she rush knee — deep amongst it ; stop , rush again across his view and then stop apparently to wring her hand and once more explain that it be dreadful . a tiny rabbit , scar out by her approach , scuttere out under his bed and presumably down into the vegetable bed . Marie Léonie ’s Mistigris would probably get it and , since it be Friday , Marie Léonie would be perturb . 
 	 the lady push through the remain tall grass that stand between they and have the air of rise up at his bed — foot . she be rather a faint figure — like the hedge - sparrow . in grey , with a grey short coat and a waistcoat with small round button and a three - cornered hat . a tired , thin face . .   .   . well , she must be tired , push through that long grass with a long skirt . she have a switch of green shagreen . the hen - tomtit that live in the old shoe they have tuck on purpose under his thatch utter long warning cry . the hen - tomtit do not like the aspect of this apparition . 
 	 she be devour his face with she not disagreeable eye and muttering : 
 	 " dreadful ! dreadful ! " an aeroplane be pass close overhead . she look up and remark almost tearfully : 
 	 " have n’t it strike you that but for the sin of your youth you might be do stunt round these good - look hill ? now I — " 
 	 Mark consider the matter , fixedly return her glance . for an Englishman the phrase , " the sin of your youth , " as apply to a gentleman ’s physical immobility imply only one thing . it never have occur to he that that implication might be tack on to he . but of course it might . it be an implication of a disagreeable , or at least a discrediting , kind , because in his class they have be accustom to consider that the disability be incur by consort with public woman of a cheap kind . he have never consort with any .woman in his life but Marie Léonie , who be health exaggerated . but if he have have to do with woman he would have go in for the most expensive sort . and take precaution ! a gentleman owe that to his fellow ! 
 	 the lady be continue : 
 	 " I may as well tell you at once that I be Mrs. Millicent de Bray Pape . and have not it strike you that but for lair depravity — unbridle depravity — your brother might today be operate in Capel Court instead of peddle old furniture at the end of the world i " 
 	 she add disconcertingly : 
 	 " it ’ nervousness that make I talk like this . I have always be shy in the presence of notorious libertine . that be my education . " 
 	 her name convey to he that this lady be go to occupy Groby . he see no objection to it . she have , indeed , write to ask he if he see any objection to it . it have be a queerly write letter , in hieroglyph of a straggling and convoluted kind . .   .   . " I be the lady who be go to rent your mansion , Groby , from my friend Mrs. Sylvia . " 
 	 it have strike then — whilst Valentine have be hold the letter up for he to read . .   .   . pretty piece , Valentine , nowadays . the country air suit she — that this woman must be an intimate friend of his brother ’s wife Sylvia . otherwise she would have say " Mrs. Sylvia Tietjens , " at least . 
 	 now he be not so certain . this be not the sort of person to be an intimate friend of that bitch ’s . then she be a cat’s - paw . Sylvia ’s intimate — amongst woman — be all bibbie and Jimmies and Marjies . if she speak to any other woman it be to make use of she — as a lady ’s maid or a tool . 
 	 the lady say : " it must be agony to you to be reduce to let your ancestral home . but that do not seem to be a reason for not speak to I . I mean to ask the Earl ’s housekeeper for some egg for you , but I forget . I be always forget . I be so active . Mr. de Bray Pape say I be the most active woman from here to Santa Fe . " 
 	 Mark wonder : why Santa Fé ? that be probably because Mr. Pape have olive - tree plantation in that part of California . Valentine have tell he over Mrs. Pape ’s letter that Mr. Pape be the large olive — oil merchant in the world . he corner all the olive - oil and all the straw - colour flask in Provence , Lombardy , California , and inform his country that you be not really refine if you use in your salad oil that do not come out of a Pape Quality flask . he show lady and gentleman in evening dress start back from expensively lay dinner - table , hold their nose and exclaim : " have you no papa ? " 
 	 Mark wonder where Christopher get his knowledge , for naturally Valentine have the information from he . probably Christopher have look at american paper . but why should one look at american paper ? Mark himself never have . be not there the Field ? .   .   . he be a queer chap , Christopher . 
 	 the lady say : 
 	 " it be n’t a reason for not speak to I ! it be n’t ! " 
 	 her greyish face flush slowly . her eye glitter behind her rimless pince - nez . she exclaim : 
 	 " you be probably too haughtily aristocratic to speak to I , Sir Mark Tietjens . but I have in I the soul of the Maintenon ; you be only the fleshly descendant of a line of charter libertine . that be what Time and the New World have do to redress the balance of the Old . it be we who be keep up the status of the grand seigneur of old in your so - call ancestral home . " 
 	 he think she be probably right . not a bad sort of woman : she would naturally be irritated at his not answer she . it be proper enough . 
 	 he never remember to have speak to an American or to have think about America . except , of course , during the war . then he have speak to Americans in uniform about Transport . he have not like their collar , but they have know their job as far as their job go — which have be ask to be provide with a disproportionate amount of transport for too few troop . he have have to wring that transport out of the country . if he have have his way he would not have . but he have not have his way . because the Governing Classes be no good . transport be the soul of a war : the spirit of an army have use to be in its foot , Napoleon have say . something like that . but those fellow have starve the army of transport ; then flood it with so much it could not move ; then starve it again . then they have insist on his finding enormously too much transport for those fellow with queer collar who use it for dispose of typewriter and sewing machine that come over on transport . .   .   . it have break his back . that and solitude . there have not be a fellow he could talk to in the Government towards the end . not one who know the difference between the ancestry of Persimmon and the stud form of Sceptre or Isinglass . now they be pay for it . 
 	 the lady be say to he that her spiritual affinity be probably a surprise to Sir Mark . there be none the less no mistake about it . in every one of the Maintenon ’s house she feel instantly at home ; the sight in any Museum of any knickknack or jewel that have belong to the respectable companion of Louis Quatorze startle she as if with an electric shock . Mr. Quarternine , the celebrated upholder of the metempsychosistic school , have tell she that those phenomenon prove beyond doubt that the soul of the Maintenon have return to earth in her body . what , as against that , be the mere fleshly claim of Old Family ? 
 	 Mark consider that she be probably right . the old family of his country be a pretty inefficient lot that he be thankful to have do with . racing be mostly carry on by english noble from Frankfort — on — the - main . if this lady could be regard as speak allegorically she be probably right . and she have have to get a soul from some - where . 
 	 but she talk too much about it . People ought not to be so tremendously fluent . it be tiring ; it fail to hold the attention . she be go on . 
 	 he lose himself in speculation as to her reason for be there , trample on his brother ’s grass . it would give Gunning and the extra hand no end of an unnecessary job to cut . the lady be talk about Marie Antoinette . Marie Antoinette have go sledging on salt in summer . trample down hay - grass be really bad . or no well . if every one in the country trample on grass like that it would put up the price of fodder for transport animal to something prohibitive . 
 	 why have she come there ? she want to take Groby furnish . she might for he . he have never care about Groby . his father have never have a stud worth talk about . a sell plater or two . he have never care for hunting or shooting . he remember stand on Groby lawn watch the shooting party take to the hill on the Twelfth and feel rather a fool . Christopher of course love Groby . he be young and have not expect to own it . 
 	 a pretty muck Sylvia might have make of the place — if her mother have let she . well , they would know pretty soon . Christopher would be back if the machine do not break his obstinate neck . .   .   . what , then , be this woman do here ? she probably represent a new turn of the screw that that unspeakable woman be administer to Christopher . 
 	 his sister - in - law Sylvia represent for he unceasing , unsleepe activity of a fantastic kind . she want , he presume , his brother to go back and sleep with she . so much hatred could have no other motive . .   .   . there could be no other motive for send this american lady here . 
 	 the american lady be tell he that she intend to keep up at Groby a semi - regal state — of course with due democratic modesty . apparently she see her way to square that circle ! .   .   . probably there be way . there must be quite a lot of deucedly rich fellow in that country ! how do they reconcile do themselves well with democracy ? do their valet sit down to meal with they , for instance ? that would be bad for discipline . but perhaps they do not care about discipline . there be no knowing . 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape apparently approve of have footman in powder and the child of the tenant kneel down when she drive out in his father ’s coach and six . because she intend to use his father ’s coach and six when she drive over the moor to Redcar or Scarborough . that , Mrs. de Bray Pape have be tell by Sylvia , be what his father have do . and it be true enough . that queer old josser his father have always have out that monstrosity when he go justice or to the assize . that be to keep up his state . he do not see why Mrs. de Bray Pape should not keep up hers if she want to . but he do not see the tenant ' child kneel to the lady ! imagine old Scutt ’s child at it , or Long Tom 0 ' th ' Clough ’s ! .   .   . their grandchild , of course . they have call his father " Tietjens”—some of they even " Auld Mark ! " to his face . he himself have always be " Young Mark " to they . very likely he be still . these thing do not change any more than the heather on the moor . he wonder what the tenant would call she . she would have a tough time of it . they be not her tenant ; they be his and they jolly well know it . these fellow who take house and castle furnish think they jolly well hire the family . there have be before the war a fellow from Frankfort - on - the - Main take Lindisfarne or Holy Island or some such place and hire a bagpiper to play round the table while they eat . and close his eye whilst the fellow play reel . as if it have be a holy occasion . .   .   . friend of Sylvia ’s friend in the Government . to do her credit she would not stop with Jews . the only credit she have to her tail ! 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape be tell he that it be not undemocratic to have your tenant ' child kneel down when you pass . 
 	 a boy ’s voice say : 
 	 " Uncle Mark ! " who the devil could that be ? probably the son of one of the people he have week - end with . Bowlby ’s maybe ; or Teddy Hope ’s . he have always like child and they like he . 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape be say that , yes , it be good for the tenant ' child . the Rev. Dr. Slocombe , the distinguished educationalist , say that these touch old rite should be preserve in the interest of the young . he say that to see the Prince of Wales at the Coronation kneeling before his father and swear fealty have be most touching . and she have see picture of the main - tenon have it do when she walk out . she be now the Maintenon , therefore it must be right . but for Marie Antoinette .   .   . 
 	 the boy ’s voice say : 
 	 " I hope you will excuse . .   .   . I know it be n’t the thing .   .   . . " 
 	 he could not see the boy without turn his head on the pillow and he be not go to turn his head . he have a sense of someone a yard or so away at his olf — shoulder . the boy at least have not come through the stand hay . 
 	 he do not imagine that the son of anyone he have ever week - end with would ever walk through stand hay . the young generation be a pretty useless lot , but he could hardly believe they would have come to that yet . their son might . .   .   . he see vision of tall dining - room light up , with tall picture , and dress , and the sunset through high window over tall grass in the park . he be do with that . if any tenant ' child ever kneel to he it would be when he take his ride in his wooden coat to the little church over the Moors . .   .   . where his father have shoot himself . 
 	 that have be a queer go . he remember get the news . he have be din at Marie Léonie ’s . .   .   . 
 	 the boy ’s voice be , precisely , apologize for the fact that that lady have walk through the grass . at the same time , Mrs. de Bray Pape be say thing to the discredit of Marie Antoinette , whom apparently she dislike . he could not imagine why anyone should dislike Marie Antoinette . yet very likely she be dislikeable . the French , who be sensible people , have cut her head off , so they presumably dislike she . .   .   . 
 	 he have be din at Marie Léonie ’s , she stand , her hand fold before she , hang down , watch he eat his mutton chop and boil potato , when the porter from his Club have ' phone through that there be a wire for he . Marie Léonie have answer the telephone . he have tell she to tell the porter to open the telegram and read it to she . that be a not unusual proceeding . telegram that come to he at the Club usually announce the result of race that he have not attend . he hat to get up from the dinner - table . she have come back slowly , and say still more slowly that she have bad news for he ; there have be an accident ; his father have be find shoot dead . 
 	 he have sit still for quite a time ; Marie Léonie also have say nothing . he remember that he have finish his chop , but have not eat his apple - pie . he have finish his claret . 
 	 by that time he have come to the conclusion that his father have probably commit suicide , and that he — he , Mark Tietjens — be probably responsible for his father ’s have do that . he have get up , then , tell Marie Léonie to get herself some mourning , and have take the night train to Groby . there have be no doubt about it when he get there . his father have commit suicide . his father be not the man unadvisedly to crawl through a quicken - hedge with his gun at full - cock behind he , after rabbit . .   .   . it have be purpose . 
 	 there be , then , something soft about the Tietjens stock — for there have be no real and sufficient cause for the suicide . obviously his father have have grief . he have never get over the death of his second wife ; that be soft for a Yorkshireman . he have lose two son and an only daughter in the war ; other man have do that and get over it . he have hear through he , Mark , that his young son — Christopher — be a bad hat . but plenty of man have son who be bad hat . .   .   . something soft then about the stock ! Christopher certainly be soft . but that come from the mother . Mark ’s stepmother have be from the south of Yorkshire . soft people down there ! a soft woman . Christopher have be her ewe - lamb and she have die of grief when Sylvia have run away from he ! .   .   . 
 	 the boy with a voice have get himself into view towards the bottom of the bed , near Mrs. de Bray Pape .   .   . a tallish slip of a boy , with slightly chawbacony cheek , high - colour , lightish hair , brown eye . upstanding but softish . Mark seem to know he , but could not place he . the boy ask to be forgive for the intrusion , say that he know it be not the thing . 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape be talk improbably about Marie Antoinette , whom she very decidedly dislike . she say that Marie Antoinette have behave with great ingratitude to Madame de Maintenon — which must have be difficult . apparently , accord to Mrs. de Bray Pape , when Marie Antoinette have be a neglect little girl about the Court of France , Madame de Maintenon have befriend she , lend her frock , jewel and perfume . later Marie Antoinette have persecute her benefactor . from that have arise all the woe of France and the Old World in general . 
 	 that appear to Mark to be to mix history , but he be not very certain . Mrs. de Bray Pape say , however , that she have those little - know fact from Mr. Reginald Weiler , the celebrated professor of social economy at one of the Western Universities . 
 	 Mark return to the consideration of the softness of the Tietjens stock , whilst the boy gaze at he with eye that might have be implore or that might have be merely moon - strike . Mark could not see what the boy could have to be implore about , so it be probably just stupidity . his breech , however , be very nicely cut . very nicely , indeed ; Mark recognize , indeed , the tailor — a man in Conduit Street . if that fellow have the sense to get his rid breech from that man , he could not be quite an ass . .   .   . 
 	 that Christopher be soft because his mother do not come from the north of Yorkshire or Durham might be true enough — but that be not enough to account for the race die out . his , Mark ’s , father have no descendant by his son . the two brother who have be kill have be childless . he himself have none . Christopher .   .   . well , that be debateable ! 
 	 that he , Mark , have practically kill his own father he be ready to acknowledge . one make mistake ; that be one . if one make mistake , one should try to repair they ; otherwise , one must , as it be , cut one ’s loss . he could not bring his father back to life ; he have n’t , equally , be able to do anything for Christopher . .   .   . not much , certainly . the fellow have refuse his brass . .   .   . he could not really blame he . 
 	 the boy be ask he if he would not speak to they . he say he be Mark ’s nephew , Mark Tietjens junior . 
 	 Mark take credit to himself because he do not stir a hair . he have so make up his mind , he find , that Christopher ’s son be not his son that he have almost forget the cub ’s existence . but he ought not to have make up his mind so quickly : he be astonish to find from the automatic working of his mind that he so have . there be too many factor to be consider that he have never bother really to consider . Christopher have determine that this boy should have Groby : that have be enough for he , Mark . he do not care who have Groby . 
 	 but the actual sight of this lad whom he have never see before present the problem to he as some - thing that need solution . it come as a challenge . when he come to think of it , it be a challenge to he to make up his mind finally as to the nature of Woman . he imagine that he have never bother his head about that branch of the animal kingdom . but he find that , lie there , he must have spend quite a disproportionate amount of his time in think about the motif of Sylvia . 
 	 he have never speak much with any but man - and then mostly with man of his own class and type . naturally you address a few polite word to your week - end hostess . if you find yourself in the rose - garden of a Sunday before church with a young or old woman who know anything about horse , you talk about horse , or Goodwood , or Ascot to she for long enough to show politeness to your hostess ’s guest . if she know nothing about horse you talk about the rose or the iris , or the weather last week . but that pretty well exhausted it . nevertheless , he know all about woman . of that he be confident . that be to say , that when in the course of conversation or gossip he have hear the action of woman narrate or comment on , he have always be able to supply a motive for those action sufficient to account for they to his satisfaction , or to let he predict with accuracy what course the future would take . no doubt , twenty year of listen to the almost ceaseless but never disagreeable conversation of Marie Léonie have be a liberal education . 
 	 he regard his association with she with complete satisfaction — as the only subject for complete satisfaction to be find in the contemplation of the Tietjens family . Christopher ’s Valentine be a pretty piece enough and have her head screw confoundedly well on . but Christopher ’s association with she have bring such a peck of trouble down on his head that , except for the girl as an individual , it be a pretty poor choice . it be a man ’s job to pick a woman who would neither worry he nor be the cause of worry . well , Christopher have pick two — and look at the result ! 
 	 he himself have be completely unmistaken from the first minute . he have first see Marie Léonie on the stage at Covent Garden . he have go to Covent Garden in attendance on his step - mother , his father ’s second wife — the soft woman . a florid , gentle , really saintly person . she have pass around Groby for a saint . an anglican saint , of course . that be what be the matter with Christopher . it be the soft streak . a Tietjens have no business with saintliness in his composition ! it be bind to get he look on as a blackguard ! 
 	 but he have attend Covent Garden as a politeness to his stepmother , who very seldom find herself in Town . and there , in the second row of the ballet , he have see Marie Léonie — slimmer , of course , in those day . he have at once make up his mind to take up with she , and , an obliging commissionaire have obtain her address for he from the stage - door , he have , towards twelve - thirty next day , walk along the Edgware Road towards her lodging . he have intend to call on she ; he meet she , however , in the street . see she there , he have like her walk , her figure , her neat dress . 
 	 he have plant himself , his umbrella , his billy - cock hat and all , squarely in front of she — she have neither flinch nor attempt to bolt round he — and have say that , if at the end of her engagement in London , she care to be place " dan se drap , " with two hundred and fifty pound a year and pin money to be deliberate on , she might hang up her cream - jug at an apartment that he would take for she in St. John ’s Wood Park , which be the place in which , in those day , most of his friend have establishment . she have prefer the neighbourhood of the Gray ’s Inn Road , as remind she more of France . 
 	 but Sylvia be quite another pair of shoe . .   .   . 
 	 that young man be flush all over his face . the young of the tomtit in the old shoe be get impatient ; they be chirrup in spite of the alarm - cry of the mother on the bough above the thatch . it be certainly insanitary to have bough above your thatch , but what do it matter in day so degenerate that even the young of tom - tit could not restrain their chirping in face of their appetite . 
 	 that young man — Sylvia ’s by - blow — be address embarrassed remark to Mrs. de Bray Pape . he suggest that perhaps his uncle resent the lady ’s lecture on history and sociology . he say they have come to talk about the tree . perhaps that be why his uncle would not speak to they . 
 	 the lady say that it be precisely give lesson in history to the dissolute aristocracy of the Old World that be her mission in life . it be for their good , resent it how they might . as for talk about the tree , the young man have well do it for himself . she now intend to walk around the garden to see how the poor live . 
 	 the boy say that in that case he do not see why Mrs. de Bray Pape have come at all . the lady answer that she have come at the sacred behest of his injured mother . that ought to be answer enough for he . she flit , disturbedly from Mark ’s view . 
 	 the boy , swallow visibly in his throat , fix his slightly protrude eye on his uncle ’s face . he be about to speak , but he remain for a long time silent and goggling . that be a Christopher Tietjens trick — not a Tietjens family trick . to gaze at you a long time before speak . Christopher have it , no doubt , from his mother — exaggeratedly . she would gaze at you for a long time . not unpleasantly , of course . but Christopher have always irritate he , even as a small boy . .   .   . it be possible that he himself might not be as he be if he have not gaze at he for a long time , like a stuck pig . on the morning of that beastly day . Armistice Day . .   .   . beastly . 
 	 Cramp ’s eld son , a bugler in the second Hampshires , go down the path , his bugle shin behind his khaki figure . now they would make a beastly row with that instrument . on Armistice Day they have play the last Post on the step of the church under Marie Léonie ’s window . .   .   . the Last Post ! .   .   . the Last of England ! he remember think that . he have not by then have the full term of that surrender , but he have have a dose enough of Christopher ’s stuck - piggedness ! .   .   . a full dose ! he do not say he do not deserve it . if you make mistake you must take what you get for it . you should not make mistake . 
 	 the boy at the foot of the bed be make agonized motion with his throat : swallow his Adam ’s apple . 
 	 he say : 
 	 " I can understand , uncle , that you hate to see we . all the same , it seem a little severe to refuse to speak to we ! " 
 	 Mark wonder a little at the breakdown in communication that there must have be . Sylvia have be spy round that property , and round and round and round again . she have have renew interview with Mrs. Cramp . it have strike he as curious taste to like to reveal to dependent — to reveal and to dwell upon the fact that you be distasteful to your husband . if his woman have leave he he would have prefer to hold his tongue about it . he certainly would not have go caterwaul about it to the carpenter of the man she have take up with . still , there be no .accounting for taste . Sylvia have , no doubt , be so full of her own grief that very likely she have not listen to what Mrs. Cramp have say about his , Mark ’s , condition . on the one or two interview he have have with that bitch she have be like that . she have sail in with her grievance against Christopher with such vigour that she have go away with no idea at all as to the condition on which she be to be allow to inhabit Groby . obviously it tax her mind to invent what she invent . you could not invent that sort of sex - cruelty stuff without have your mind a little affected . she could not , for instance , have invent the tale that he , Mark , be suffer for the sin of his youth without its take it out of she . that be the ultimate retribution of Providence on those who invent gossip frequently . they go a little dotty . .   .   . the fellow — he could not call his name to mind , half Scotch , half Jew , who have tell he the bad tale against Christopher have gone:1 little dotty . he have grow a beard and wear a top - hat at inappropriate function . well , in effect , Christopher be a saint , and Provvy invent retribution of an ingenious kind against those who libel saint . 
 	 at any rate , that bitch must have become so engross in her tale that it have not come through to she that he , Mark , could not speak . of course , the result of venereal disease be not pleasant to contemplate , and , no doubt , Sylvia , have invent the disease for he , have not like to contemplate the resultant symptom . at any rate , that boy do not know — and neither do Mrs. de Bray Pape — that he do not speak . not to they , not to anybody . he be finish with the world . he perceive the trend of its action , listen to its aspiration , and even to its prayer , but he would never again stir lip or finger . it be like be dead — or be God . 
 	 this boy be apparently ask for absolution . he be of opinion that it be not a very sporting thing of himself and Mrs. Bray to come there . .   .   . 
 	 it be , however , sport enough . he could see that they be both as afraid of he , Mark , as of the very devil . its taste might , however , be question . still , the situation be unusual — as all situation be . obviously it be not in good taste for a boy to come to the house in which his father live with a mistress , nor for the wife ’s intimate friend either . still they apparently want , the one to let , the other to take , Groby . they could not do either if he , Mark , do not give permission , or , at any rate , if he oppose they . it be business , and business may be presume to cover quite a lot of bad taste . 
 	 and , in effect , the boy be say that his mother be , of course , a splendid person , but that he , Mark Junior , find her proceeding in many respect questionable . one could not , however , expect a woman — and an injured woman .   .   . the boy , with his shin eye and bright cheek , seem to beg Mark to concede that his mother be at least an injured woman . .   .   . one could not expect , then , a wronged woman to see thing eye to eye with .   .   . with young Cambridge ! for , he hasten to assure Mark , his Set — the son of the Prime Minister , young Doble , and Porter , as well as himself , be unanimously of opinion that a man ought to be allow to live with whom he like . he be not , therefore , question his father ’s action , and , for himself , if the occasion arise , he would be very glad to shake his father ’s .   .   . companion .   .   . by the hand . 
 	 his bright eye become a little humid . he say that he be not in effect question anything , but he think that he himself would have be the well for a little more of his father ’s influence . he consider that he have be too much under his mother ’s influence . they notice it , even at Cambridge ! that , in effect , be the real snag when it come to be a question of dissolve union once contract . scientifically consider . question of .   .   . of sex attraction , in spite of all the effort of scientist , remain fairly mysterious . the good way to look at it .   .   . the safe way , be that sex attraction occur , as a rule , between temperamental and physical opposite , because Nature desire to correct extreme . no one , in fact , could be more different than his father and mother — the one so graceful , athletic and .   .   . oh , charming . and the other so .   .   . oh , let we say perfectly honourable , but .   .   . oh , lawless . 
 	 because , of course , you can break certain law and remain the soul of honour . 
 	 Mark wonder if this boy be aware that his mother habitually inform every one whom she meet that his father live on woman . on the immoral earning of woman , she would infer when she think it safe . .   .   . 
 	 the soul of honour , then , and masculinely clumsy and damn fine in his way . .   .   . well , he , Mark Tietjens junior , be not there to judge his father . his uncle Mark could see that he regard his father with affection and admiration . but if nature — he must be pardon for use anthropomorphic expression since they be the short way — if nature , then , mean union of opposite character to redress extreme in the child , the process do not complete itself with .   .   . in short , with the act of physical union . for just as there be obviously inherit physical characteristic , and , no doubt , inherit memory , ' there yet remain the question of the influence of temperament by mean of personal association . so that for one opposite to leave the fruit of a union exclusively under the personal influence of the other opposite be very possibly to defeat the purpose of Nature .   .   . 
 	 that boy , Mark think , be a very curious problem . he seem to be a good , straight boy . a little loquacious ; still , that be to be excuse since he have to do all the talk himself . from time to time he have pause in his speech as if , deferentially , he wish to have Mark ’s opinion . that be proper . he , Mark , could not stand hobbledehoy — particularly the hobbledehoy of that age , who appear to be opinionative and emotional beyond the normal in hobbledehoy . 
 	 " anyhow , he could not stand the Young once they be beyond the age of childhood . but he be aware that , if you want to conduct a scientific investigation , if you want to arrive , for yourself , at the truth of an individual ’s parentage — you must set aside your like and dislike . 
 	 Heaven know , he have find Christopher , when he have be only one of the young one in his father’s — he have find he irritate enough .   .   . a rather moony , fair brat , interested mostly in mathematic , with a trick of stand with those goggle eye gaze bluely at you — year ago , in and around , at first the nursery , then the stable at Groby . then , if this lad irritate he , it be rather an argument in favour of his be Christopher ’s son than Sylvia ’s by — blow by another man . .   .   . what be the fellow ’s name ? a rank bad hat , anyhow . 
 	 the probability be that he be the other fellow ’s son . that woman would not have trepan Christopher into the marriage if she have n’t at least think that she be with child . there be nothing to be say against any wench ’ trick any man into marry she if she be in that condition . but once have get a man to give a name to your bastard you ought to treat he with some loyalty ; it be a biggish service he have do you . that Sylvia have never do . .   .   . they have get this young fellow into their — the Tietjenses’—family . there he be , with his finger on Groby already . .   .   . that be all right . as great family as Tietjens ' have have that happen to they . 
 	 but what make Sylvia pestilential be that she should afterwards have develop this sex - madness for his unfortunate brother . 
 	 there be no other way to look at it . she have undoubtedly lure Christopher on to marry she because she think , rightly or wrongly , that she be with child by another man . they would never know — she herself probably do not know!—whether this boy be Christopher ’s son or the other ’s . english woman be so untidy — shame - faced — about these thing . that be excusable . but every other action of her from that date have be inexcusable — except regard as action perpetrate under the impulsion of sex — viciousness . 
 	 it be perfectly proper — it be a mother ’s duty to give an unborn child a name and a father . but afterwards to blast the name of that father be more discreditable than to leave the child nameless . this boy be now Tietjens of Groby — but he be also the boy who be the son of a father who have behave unspeakably accord to the mother . .   .   . and the son of a mother who have be unable to attract her man ! .   .   . who advertise the fact to the estate carpenter ! if we say that the good of the breed be the supreme law what sort of virtue be this ? 
 	 it be all very well to say that every one of Sylvia ’s eccentricity have in view the sole aim of get her boy ’s father to return to she . no doubt they might . he , Mark , be perfectly ready to concede that even her infidelity , notorious as they have be , might have be merely way of call his unfortunate brother ’s attention back to she — of keep herself in his mind . after the marriage Christopher , find out that he have be a mere cat’s - paw , probably treat she pretty coldly or ignore she — maritally . .   .   . and he be a pretty attractive fellow , Christopher . he , Mark , be bind nowadays to acknowledge that . a regular saint and christian martyr and all that . .   .   . enough to drive a woman wild if she have to live beside he and be ignore . 
 	 it be obvious that woman must be allow what mean they can make use of to maintain — to arouse — their sex attraction for their man . that be what the bitch be for in the scale of thing . they have to perpetuate the breed . to do that they have to call attention to themselves and to use what device they see { it to use , each one accord to her own temperament . that cruelty be an excitant , he be quite ready , too , to concede . he be ready to concede anything to the woman . to be cruel be to draw attention to yourself ; you can not expect to be court by a man whom you allow to forget you . but there probably ought to be a limit to thing . you probably ought in this , as in all other thing , to know what you can do and what you can’t — and the proof of this particular pudding , as of all other , be in the eating . Sylvia have leave no stone unturned in the determination to keep herself in her man ’s mind , and she have certainly irretrievably lose her man : to another girl . then she be just a nuisance . 
 	 a woman intent on get a man back ought to have some system , some sort of scheme at the very least . but Sylvia — he know it from the interminable talk that he have have with Christopher on Armistice Night — Sylvia delight most in do what she call pull the string of shower - bath . she do extravagant thing , mostly of a cruel kind , for the fun of see what would happen . well , you can not allow yourself fun when you be on a campaign . not as to the subject matter of the campaign itself ! if then you do what you want rather than what be expedient , you damn well have to take what you get for it . damn well ! 
 	 what would have justify Sylvia , no matter what she do , would have be if she have succeed in have another child by his brother . she have n’t . the breed of Tietjens be not enrich . then she be just a nuisance . .   .   . 
 	 an infernal nuisance . .   .   . for what be she up to now ? it be perfectly obvious that both Mrs. de Bray Pape and this boy be here because she have have another outbreak of .   .   . practically sadism . they be here so that Christopher might be hurt some more and she not forget . what , then , be it ? what the deuce be it ? 
 	 the boy have be silent for some time . he be gaze at Mark with the goggle - eyed gasping that have be so irritate in his father — particularly on Armistice Day . .   .   . well , he , Mark , be apparently now concede that this boy be probably his brother ’s son . a real Tietjens after all be to reign over the enormously long , grey house behind the fantastic cedar . the tall cedar in Yorkshire . in England . in the empire . .   .   . he do n’t care . he who let a tree overhang his roof call the doctor in daily . .   .   . the boy ’s lip begin to move . no sound come out . he be presumably in a great state ! ' 
 	 he be undoubtedly like his father . Darker .   .   . brown hair , brown eye , high - colour cheek all flush now . Straight nose ; marked brown eyebrow . a sort of .   .   . scar , puzzled .   .   . what be it ? .   .   . expression . well , Sylvia be fair ; Christopher be dark - haired with silver streak , but fair - complexion . .   .   . damn it 1 this boy be more attractive than Christopher have be at his age and early . .   .   . Christopher hang round the school - room door in Groby , puzzle over the mathematical theory of wave . he , Mark , have not be able to stand he or , indeed , any of the other child . there be sister Effie — bear to be a curate ’s wife . .   .   . puzzle ! that be it ! .   .   . that bother woman , his father ’s second wife — the saint!—had introduce the puzzlement strain into the Tietjenses . .   .   . this be Christopher ’s boy , saintly strain and all . Christopher be probably bear to be a rural dean in a fat living writing treatise on the integral calculus all the time except on Saturday afternoon . with a great reputation for saintliness . well , he be n’t the one and have n’t the other . he be an old furniture dealer , who make a stink in virtuous nostril . .   .   . Provvy work in a mysterious way . the boy be say now : 
 	 " the tree .   .   . the great tree . .   .   . it darken the window .   .   . . " 
 	 Mark say : " Oha ! " to himself . Groby Great Tree be the symbol of Tietjens . for thirty mile round Groby they make their marriage vow by Groby Great Tree . in the other Ridings they say that Groby Tree and Groby well be equal in height and depth one to the other . when they be really imaginatively drunk Cleveland villager would declare — would knock you down if you deny — that Groby Great Tree be 365 foot high and Groby well 365 foot deep . a foot for every day of the year . .   .   . on special occasion — he could not himself be bother to remember what — they would ask permission to hang rag and thing from the bough . Christopher say that one of the chief indictment against Joan of Arc have be that she and the other village girl of Domrémy have hang rag and trinket from the bough of a cedar . offering to fairy . .   .   . Christopher set great store by the tree . he be a romantic ass . probably he set more store by the tree than by anything else at Groby . he would pull the house down if he think it incommode the tree . 
 	 Young Mark be bleat , positively bleat : 
 	 " the Italians have a proverb . .   .   . he who let a tree overhang his house invite a daily call from the doctor . .   .   . I agree myself . .   .   . in principle , of course .   .   . . " 
 	 well , that be that ! Sylvia , then , be propose to threaten to ask to have Groby Great Tree cut down . only to threaten to ask . but that would be enough to agonize the miserable Christopher . you could not cut down Groby Great Tree . but the thought that the tree be under the guardian - ship of unsympathetic people would be enough to drive Christopher almost dotty — for year and year . 
 	 " Mrs. de Bray Pape , " the boy be stammer , " be extremely keen on the tree ’s be .   .   . I agree in principle . .   .   . my mother wish you to see that — oh , in modern day — a house be practically unlettable if .   .   . so she get Mrs. de Bray Pape .   .   . she have not have the courage though she swear she have .   .   . . " 
 	 he continue to stammer . then he start and stop , crimson . a woman ’s voice have call : 
 	 " Mr. Tietjens . .   .   . Mr. Mark . .   .   . hi .   .   . hup ! " 
 	 a small woman , all in white , white breech , white coat , white wide - awake , be slip down from a tall bay with a white star on the forehead — a bay with large nostril and an intelligent head . she wave her hand obviously at the boy and then caress the horse ’s nostril . obviously at the boy .   .   . for it be obviously unlikely that Mark Senior would know a woman who could make a sound like " hi , hup 1 " to attract his attention . 
 	 Lord Fittleworth , in a square , hard hat , sit on an immense , coffinheade dapple - grey . he have bristling , close — crop moustache and sit like a limpet . he wave his crop in the direction of Mark and go on talk to Gunning , who be at his stirrup . the coffinheade beast start forward and rear a foot or so ; a wild , brazen , yelp sound have disturb it . the boy be more and more scarlet and , as emotion grow on he , more and more like Christopher on that beastly day . .   .   . Christopher with a piece of furniture under his arm , in Marie Léonie ’s room , his eye goggle out at the foot of the bed . 
 	 Mark swear painfully to himself . he hat to be remind of that day . now this lad and that infernal bugle that the young child of Cramp have get hold of from their bugler - brother have put it back damnably in his mind . it go on . at interval . one child have a try , then another . 
 	 obviously then Cramp the eld take it . it blare out . .   .   . Ta .   .   . Ta .   .   . Ta . .   .   . Ta .. ti .   .   . ta - ta — ti .   .   . Ta . .   .   . the Last Post . the b — y infernal Last Post . .   .   . well , Christopher , as that day Mark have predict , have get himself , with his raw sensibility , into a pretty b — y infernal mess while some drunken ass have play the Last Post under the window . .   .   . Mark mean that whilst that farewell be be play he have have that foresight . and he hat the bugle for remind he of it . he hat it more than he have imagine . he could not have imagine himself use profanity even to himself . he must have be profoundly move . deucedly and profoundly move at that beastly noise . it have come over the day like a disaster . he see every detail of Marie Léonie ’s room as it have be on that day . there be , on the marble mantel - shelf , under an immense engraving of the Sistine Madonna , a feeding - cup over a night — light in which Marie Léonie have be keep some sort of pap warm for he . .   .   . probably the last food to which he have ever help himself . .   .   . 
 
  chapter 5 


 
 
 	 but no .   .   . that must have be about twelve , or early or later , on that infernal day . in any case he could not remember any subsequent meal he have have then ; but he remember an almost infinitely long period of intense vexation . of mortification in so far as he could accuse himself of ever have feel mortify . he could still remember the fierce intaking of his breath through his nostril that have come when Christopher have announce what have seem to he then his ruinous intention . .   .   . it have not be till probably four in the morning that Lord Wolstonmark have ring he , Mark , up to ask he to countermand the transport that be to have go out from Harwich . .   .   . at four in the morning , the idiotic brutes.—His substitute have disappear in the rejoicing , and Lord Wolstonmark have want to know what code they use for harwich because the transport must at all cost be stop . there be go to be no advance into Germany . .   .   . he have never speak after that ! his brother be do for ; the country finish ; he be as good as down and out , as the phrase be , himself . in his deep mortification — yes , mortification!—he have say to Christopher that morning — the nth November , I9I8 — that he would never speak to he again . he have n’t at that moment mean to say that he would never speak to Christopher at all again — merely that he be never go to speak to he about affair — the affair of Groby ! Christopher might take that immense , far - spread , grey bothersome house and the tree and the well and the moor and all the John Peel outfit . or he might leave they . he , Mark , be never go to speak about the matter any more . he remember think that Christopher might have take he to mean that he intend to with - draw , for what it be worth , the light of his countenance from the Christopher Tietjens manage . 
 	 nothing have be far from his thought . she ! ' have a soft corner in his heart for Valentine Wannop . he have have it ever since sit , feel like a fool , in the anteroom of the War Office , beside she - gnawing at the handle of his umbrella . but , then , he have recommend she to become Christopher ’s mistress : he have , at any rate , beg she to look after his mutton chop and his button . so that it be not likely that when , a year or so later , Christopher announce that he really be at last go to take up with the young woman and to chance what come of it — it be not likely that he intend to dissociate himself from the two of they . 
 	 the idea have worry he so much that he have write a rough note — the last time that his hand have ever hold a pen — to Christopher . he have say that a brother ’s backing be not of great use to a woman , but in the special circumstance of the case , he be Tietjens of Groby for what it be worth , and Lady Tietjens — Marie Léonie — be perfectly willing to be see on all occasion with Valentine and her man , it might be worth some - thing , at any rate with tenantry and such like . well , he have not go back on that ! 
 	 but once the idea of retire , not only from the Office but the whole world , have come into his head it have grow and grow , on top of his mortification and his weariness . because he could not conceal from himself that he be weary to death — of the Office , of the nation , of the world and people . .   .   . People .   .   . he be tired of they , and of the street , and the grass , and the sky and the moor . he have do his job.—That be before Wolstonmark have telephone , and he still think that he have do his job of get thing here and there about the world to some purpose . 
 	 a man be in the world to do his duty by his nation and his family . .   .   . by his own people first . well , he have to acknowledge that he have let his own people down pretty badly — begin with Christopher . Chiefly Christopher . but that react on the tenantry . 
 	 he have always be tired of the tenantry and Groby . he have be bear tired of they . that happen . it happen particularly in old and prominent family . it be odd that Groby and the whole Groby business should so bore he ; he suppose he have be bear with some kink . all the Tietjenses be bear with some sort of kink . it come from the solitude maybe , on the moor , the hard climate , the rough neighbour — possibly even from the fact that Groby Great Tree over - shadow the house . you could not look out of the school - room window at all for its great , ragged trunk , and all the child ’s wing be darken by its branch . black ! .   .   . funeral plume ! the Hapsburgs be say to hate their palace — that be no doubt why so many of they , begin with Juan Ort , have come mucker . at any rate , they have chuck the royalty business . 
 	 and at a very early age he have decide that he would chuck the country — gentleman business . he do not see that he be the one to bother with those confound , hard — head beggar or with those confound wind - sweep moor and wet valley bottom . one owe the blighter a duty , but one do not have to live among they or see that they air their bedroom . it have be mostly swank that , always ; since the Corn Laws , it have be almost entirely swank . still , it be obvious that a landlord owe something to the estate from which he and his father have draw their income for generation and generation . 
 	 well , he have never intend to do it , because he have be bear tired of it . he like race and talk about race to fellow who like race . he have intend to do that to the end . 
 	 he have not be able to . 
 	 he have intend to go on live between the Office , his chamber , Marie Léonie ’s and week - end with race - horse owner of good family until his eye close . .   .   . of course God dispose in the end , even of the Tietjenses of Groby ! he have intend to give over Groby , on the death of his father , to whichever of his brother have heir and seem likely to run the estate well . that would have be quite satisfactory . Ted , his next brother , have have his head screw on all right . if he have have child he would have fill the bill . so would the next brother . .   .   . but neither : of they have have child and both have manage to get kill in Gallipoli . even sister Mary , who be actually next to he and a maîtresse femme if ever there be one , have manage to get kill as a Red Cross matron . she would have run Groby well enough — the great , blowsy , grey woman with a bit of a moustache . 
 	 thus God have let he down with a bump on Christopher . .   .   . well , Christopher would have run Groby well enough . but he would n’t . would not own a yard of Groby land ; would not touch a penny of Groby money . he be suffer for it now . 
 	 they be both , in effect , suffer , for Mark could not see what be to become of either Christopher or the estate . 
 	 until his father ’s death Mark have bother precious little about the fellow . he be by fourteen year the young : there have be ten child altogether , three of his own mother ’s child have die young and one have be soft . so Christopher have be still a baby when Mark have leave Groby for good — for good except for visit when he have bring his umbrella and see Christopher moon at the school - room door or in his own mother ’s sitting — room . so he have hardly see the boy . 
 	 and at Christopher ’s wedding he have definitely decide that he would not see he again — a mug who have get trepan into marry a whore . he wish his brother no ill , but the thought of he make Mark sickish . and then , for year , he have hear the bad possible rumour about Christopher . in a way they have rather console Mark . God know , he care little enough about the Tietjens family — particularly for the child by that soft saint . but he would rather have any brother of his be a wrong un than a mug . 
 	 then gradually , from the gossip that go abroad , he have come to think that Christopher be a very bad wrong un indeed . he could account for it easily enough . Christopher have a soft streak , and what a woman can do to deteriorate a fellow with a soft streak be beyond belief . and the woman Christopher have get hold of — who have get hold of he — pass belief too . Mark do not hold any great opinion of woman at all ; if they be a little plump , healthy , at little loyal and not noticeable in their dress that be enough for he . .   .   . but Sylvia be as thin as an eel , as full of vice as a mare that ’ a wrong un , completely disloyal and dress like any Paris cocotte . Christopher , as he see it , have have to keep that harlot to the tune of six or seven thousand a year , in a society of all wrong un too — and on an income of at most two . .   .   . plenty for a young son . but naturally he have have to go wrong to get the money . 
 	 so it have seem to he .   .   . and it have seem to matter precious little . he give a thought to his brother perhaps twice a year . but then one day — just after the two brother have be kill — their father have come up from Groby to say to Mark at the Club : 
 	 " have it occur to you that , since those two boy be kill , that fellow Christopher be practically heir to Groby ? you have no legitimate child , have you I " Mark reply that he have n’t any bastard either , and that he be certainly not ' go to marry . 
 	 at that date it have seem to he certain that he be not go to marry Papist Marie Léonie Riotor , and certainly he be not go to marry anyone else . so Christopher — or at any rate Christopher ’s heir — must surely come in to Groby . 
 	 it have not really , hitherto , occur to he . but when it be thus put forcibly into his mind he see instantly that it upset the whole scheme of his life . as he see Christopher then , the fellow be the last person in the world to have the charge of Groby — for you have to regard that as to some extent a cure of soul . and he , himself , would not be much well . he be hopelessly out of touch with the estate , and , even though his father ’s land - steward be a quite efficient fellow , he himself at that date be so hopelessly immerse in the affair of the then war that he would hardly have a moment of time to learn anything about the property . 
 	 there be , therefore , a breakdown in his scheme of life . that be already a pretty shake sort of affair . Mark be accustom to regard himself as master of his fate — as be so limited in his ambition and so entrenched behind his habit and his wealth that , if circumstance need not of necessity bend to his will , fate could hardly touch he . 
 	 and it be one thing for a Tietjens young son to be a bold sort of law - breaker — or at any rate that he should be contemptuous of restraint . it be quite another that the heir to Groby should be a soft sort of bad hat whose distasteful bungling lead his reputation to stink in the nostril of all his own class if a young son can be say to have a class . .   .   . at any rate in the class to which his father and eld brother belong . Tietjens be say to have sell his wife to her cousin the Duke at so contemptible a price that he be obviously penniless even after that transaction . he have sell she to other rich man — to bank manager , for instance . yet even after that he be reduce to give stumer cheque . if a man sell his soul to the devil he should at least insist on a good price . similar transaction be say to distinguish the social set in which that bitch move — but most of the man who , accord to Ruggles , sell their wife to member of the government obtain million by governmental financial tip — or peerage . not infrequently they obtain both peerage and million . but Christopher be such a confound ass that he have get neither the one nor the other . his cheque be turn down for twopence . and he be such a bungler that he must need get with child the daughter of their father ’s old friend , and let the fact be know to the whole world . .   .   . 
 	 this information he have from Ruggles — aud it kill their father . well , he , Mark , be absolutely to blame : that be that . but — infinitely worse - it have make Christopher absolutely determined not to accept a single penny of the money that have become Mark ’s and that have be his father ’s . and Christopher be as obstinate as a hog . for that Mark do not blame he . it be a Tietjens job to be as obstinate as a hog . 
 	 he could n’t , however , disabuse his mind of the idea that Christopher ’s refusal of Groby and all that come from Groby be as much a manifestation of the confound saintliness that he get from his soft mother as of a spirit of resentment . Christopher want to rid himself of his great possession . the fact that his father and brother have believe he to be what Marie Léonie would have call maquereau and have thus insult he he have merely grasp at with eagerness as an excuse . he want to be out of the world . that be it . he want to be out of a disgustingly inefficient and venial world , just as he , Mark , also want to be out of a world that he find almost more fusionless and dishonest than Christopher find it . 
 	 at any rate , at the first word that they have have about the heirship to Groby after their father ’s death , Christopher have declare that he , Mark , might take his money to the devil and the ownership of Groby with it . he propose never to forgive either his father or Mark . he have only consent to take Mark by the hand at the urgent solicitation of Valentine Wannop . .   .   . 
 	 that have be the most dreadful moment of Mark ’s life . the country be , even then , go to the devil ; his brother propose to starve himself ; Groby , by his brother ’s wish , be to fall into the hand of that bitch . .   .   . and the country go far and far towards the devil , and his brother starve bad and bad .   .   . and as for Groby .   .   . 
 	 the boy who practically own Groby have , at the first sound of the voice of the woman who wear white riding - kit and call " hi - hup!”—at the very first sound of her voice the boy have scamper oft through the raspberry cane and be now against the hedge , whilst she lean down over he , laugh , and her horse lean over behind she . fittleworth be smile at they benevolently , and at the same time continue his conversation with Gunning . .   .   . 
 	 the woman be too old for the boy , who have go scarlet at the sound of her voice . Sylvia have be too old for Christopher : she have get he on the hop when he have be only a kid . .   .   . the world go on . 
 	 he be nevertheless thankful for the respite . he have to acknowledge to himself that he be not as young as he have be . he have a great deal to think of if he be to get the hang of — he be certainly not go to interfere with — the world , and have to listen to conversation that be mostly moral apophthegms have tire he . he have get too many at too short interval . if he have speak he would not have , but , because he do not speak , both the lady who be descend from the Maintenon and that boy have pepper he with moral point of view that all require to be consider , with - out leave he enough time to get his breath mentally . 
 	 the lady have call they a corrupt and effete aristocracy . they be probably not corrupt , but certainly , regard as landowner , they be effete — both he and Christopher . they be simply bored at the contemplation of that terrific nuisance — and refuse to perform the duty of their post they refuse the emolument too . he could not remember that , after childhood , he have ever have a penny out of Groby . they would not accept that post ; they have take other . .   .   . well this be his , Mark ’s , last post . .   .   . he could have smile at his grim joke . 
 	 of Christopher he be not so sure . that ass be a terrific sentimentalist . probably he would have like to be a great landowner , keep up the gate on the estate — like Fittleworth , who be a perfect lunatic about gate . he be probably even now jaw - jaw gun about they , smack his boot - top with his crop - handle . yes - keep up the gate and see that the tenant ' land give so many bushel of wheat to the acre or support so many sheep the year round . .   .   . how many sheep would an acre keep all the year round , and how many bushel of wheat , under proper farming , should it give ? he , Mark , have not the least idea . Christopher would know — with the difference to be expect of every acre of all the thousand acre of Groby . .   .   . yes , Christopher have pore over Groby with the intentness of a mother look at her baby ’s face ! 
 	 so that his refusal to take on that stewardship might very well arise from a sort of craving for mortification of the spirit . Old Campion have once say that he believe — he positively believe with shudder — that Christopher desire to live in the spirit of Christ . that have seem horrible to the General , but Mark do not see that it be horrible , per se . .   .   . he doubt , however , whether Christ ' would have refuse to manage Groby have it be his job . Christ be a sort of an Englishman , and Englishmen do not , as a rule , refuse to do their job . .   .   . they have not use to . now , no doubt , they do . it be a russian sort of trick . he have hear that even before the revolution great russian noble would disperse their estate , give their serf their liberty , put on a hair shirt and sit by the roadside beg . .   .   . something like that . perhaps Christopher be a symptom that the English be change . he himself be not . he be just lazy and determine — and do with it ! 
 	 he have not at first be able to believe that Christopher be resolve — with a Yorkshire resolution — to have nothing to do with Groby or his , Mark ’s , money . he have , nevertheless , feel a warm admiration for his brother the moment the word have be say . Christopher would take none of his father ’s money ; he would never forgive either his father or his brother . a proper yorkshire sentiment , utter coldly and , as it be , good - humouredly . his eye , naturally , have goggle , but he have display no other emotion . 
 	 nevertheless , Mark have imagine that he might be up to some game . he might be merely mean to bring Mark to his knee . .   .   . but how could Mark be more bring to his knee than by offer to give over Groby to his brother ? it be true he have keep that up his sleeve whilst his brother have be out in France . after all , there be no sense in offer a fellow who might be go to become food for powder the management of great possession . he have feel a certain satisfaction in the fact that Christopher wax go out , though he be confoundedly sorry too . he really admire Christopher for do it — and he imagine that it might clear some of the smirchiness that must attach to Christopher ’s reputation , in spite of what he now know to be his brother ’s complete guiltless — ness of the crime that have be attribute to he . he have , of course , be wrong — he have reckon without the determined discredit that , after the war be over , the civilian population would contrive to attach to every man who have be to the front as a fight soldier . after all , that be natural enough . the majority of the male population be civilian , and , once the war be over and there be no more risk , they would bitterly regret that they have not go . they would take it out of the ex - soldier all right ! 
 	 so that Christopher have rather be additionally discredit than much help by his service to the country . Sylvia have be able to put it , very reasonably , that Christopher be by nature that idle and dissolute thing , a soldier . that , in time of peace , have help she a great deal . 
 	 still , Mark have be pleased with his brother , and once Christopher have be invalid back , and have return to his old — tin saving depot near Ealing , Mark have at once set wheel in motion to get his brother demobilize , so that he might look after Groby . by that time Groby be inhabit by Sylvia , the boy , and Sylvia ’s mother . the estate just have to be manage by the land - steward who have serve his father , neither Sylvia nor her family have any finger in that ; though her mother be able to assure he , Mark , that the estate be do as well as the Agricultural Committees of grocer and stock — jobber would let it . they insist on wheat be sow on expose moor where nothing but heather have a chance , and active moorland sheep be fatten in water - bottom full of liver fluke . but the land — steward fight they as well as one man could be expect to fight the chosen of a nation of small shop - keeper . .   .   . 
 	 and at that date — the date of Christopher ’s return to Ealing — Mark have still imagine that Christopher have really only be hold out for the possession of Groby . he be , therefore , disillusion rather nastily . he have manage to get Christopher demobilize — without tell he any - thing about it — by just about the time when the Armistice come along . .   .   . and then he find that he really have put the fat in the fire ! 
 	 he have practically beggar the wretched fellow , who , count on live on his pay for at least a year long , have mortgage his blood - money in order to go into a sort of partnership in an old - furniture business with a confound American . and , of course , the blood - money be considerably diminish , be an allowance make to demobilize officer compute on the number of their day of service . so he have dock Christopher of two or three hundred pound . that be the sort of mucky situation into which Christopher might be expect to be get by his well - wisher . .   .   . there he have be , just before Armistice Day , upon the point of demobilization and without an available penny ! it appear that he have to sell even the few book that Sylvia have leave he when she have strip his house . 
 	 that agreeable truth have force itself on Mark at just the moment when he have be so rotten bad with pneumonia that he might be expect to cash in at any moment . Marie Léonie have indeed , of her own initiative , telephone to Christopher that he have well come to see his brother if he want to meet he on this side of the grave . 
 	 they have at once start argue — or , rather , each have start expose his view . Christopher state what he be go to do , and mark his horror at what Christopher propose . Mark ’s horror come from the fact that Christopher propose to eschew comfort . an Englishmen ’s duty be to secure for himself for ever reasonable clothing , a clean shirt a day , a couple of mutton chop grill without condiment , two floury potato , an apple pie with a piece of Stilton and pull bread , a pint of Club Médoc , a clean room , in the winter a good fire in the grate , a comfortable arm - chair , a comfortable woman to see that all these be prepare for you , to keep you warm in bed and to brush your bowler and fold your umbrella in the morning . when you have that secure for life , you could do what you like provide that what you do never endanger that security . what be to be say against that ? 
 	 Christopher have nothing to advance except that he be not go to live in that way . he be not go to live in that way unless he could secure that , or something like it , by his own talent . his only available and at the same time marketable talent be his gift for know genuine old furniture . so he be go to make a living out of old furniture . he have have his scheme perfectly mature ; he have even secure an american partner , a fellow who have as great a gift for the cajolement of american purchaser of old stuff as he , Christopher , have for its discovery . it be still the war then , but Christopher and his partner , between they , have predict the american mop - ping up of the world ’s gold supply and the consequent stripping of european house of old stuff . .   .   . at that you could make a living . 
 	 other career , he say , be bar to he . the Department of Statistics , in which he have formerly have a post , have absolutely cold - shoulder he . they be not only adamant , they be also vindictive against civil servant who have become serve soldier . they take the view that those member of their staff who have prefer serving be idle and dissolute fellow who have merely take up arm in order to satisfy their lust for woman . woman have naturally prefer soldier to civilian ; the civilian be now get back on they . that be natural . 
 	 Mark agree that it be natural . before he have be interested in his brother as a serve soldier , he have be incline to consider most soldier as incompetent over Transport and , in general , nuisance . he agree , too , that Christopher could not go back to the Department . there he be certainly a marked man . he could possibly have insist on his right to be take back even though his lung , be by now pretty damage by exposure , might afford they a pretext for legally refuse he . H.M. Civil Service and Departments have the right to refuse employment to person likely to become unfit for good . a man who have lose an eye may be refuse by any Department because he may lose the other and so become liable for a pension . but , even if Christopher force himself on the Department , they would have their bad mark against he . he have be too rude to they during the war when they have try to force he to employ himself in the faking of statistic that the Ministry have coerce the Department into supply in order to dish the French , who demand more troop . with that point of view , Mark find himself entirely in sympathy . his long association with Marie Léonie , his respect for the way in which she have her head screw on , the constant intimacy with the life and point of view of french individual of the petite bourgeoisie which her gossip have give he — all these thing , together with his despair for the future of his own country , have give he a very considerable belief in the destiny and , indeed , in the virtue of the country across the Channel . it would , therefore , have be very distasteful to he that his brother should take pay from an organization that have be employ to deal treacherously with our Allies . it have , indeed , become extremely distasteful to he to take pay himself from a government that have force such a course upon the nation , and he would thankfully have resign from his office if he have not consider that his service be indispensable to the successful prosecution of the war which be then still proceed . he want to be do with it , but , at the moment , he see no chance . the war be by then obviously proceed towards a successful issue . owe to the military genius of the French , who , by then , have the supreme command , the enemy nation be daily be force to abandon great stretch of territory . but that only make the call on Transport the great , whilst , if we be successfully and unwastefully to occupy the enemy capital , as at that date he imagine that we obviously must , the demand for the provision of Transport must become almost unmeasurable . 
 	 still , that be no argument for the reentry of his brother into the service of the country . as he see thing , public life have become — and must remain for a long period — so demoralize by the member of the then Government , with their devious foreign policy and their intimacy with a class of shady financier such as have never hitherto have any finger in the english political pie — public life have become so discreditable an affair that the only remedy be for the real governing class to retire altogether from public pursuit . thing , in short , must become bad before they could grow well . with the dreadful condition of ruin at home and foreign discredit to which the country must almost immediately emerge under the conduct of the Scotch grocer , frankfort financier , Welsh pettifogger , Midland armament manufacturer and South Country incompetent who during the later year of the war have intrigue themselves into office — with that dreadful condition star it in the face , the country must return to something like its old standard of North Country common sense and english probity . the old governing class to which he and his belong might never return to power , but , whatever revolution take place — and he do not care I — the country must reawaken to the necessity for exact of whoever might be its governing class some semblance of personal probity and public honouring of pledge . he obviously be out of it , or he would be out of it with the end of the war , for even from his bed he have take no small part in the directing of affair at his Office . .   .   . a state of war obviously favour the come to the top of all kind of devious stormy petrel ; that be inevitable and could not be help . but in normal time a country — every country — be true to itself . 
 	 nevertheless , he be very content that his brother should , in the interim , have no share in affair . let he secure his mutton chop , his pint of claret , his woman and his umbrella , and it matter not into what obscurity he retire . but how be that to be secure ? there have seem to be several way . 
 	 he be aware , for instance , that Christopher be both a mathematician of no mean order and a Churchman . he might perfectly well take order , assume the charge of one of the three family living that Mark have in his gift , and , whilst competently discharge the duty of his cure , pursue whatever be the occupation of a well - care - for mathematician . 
 	 Christopher , however , whilst avow his predilection for such a life — which , as Mark see it , be exactly fit to his asceticism , his softness in general and his private taste — Christopher admit that there be an obstacle to his assume such a cure of soul — an obstacle of an insuperable nature . Mark at once ask he if he be , in fact , live with Miss Wannop . but Christopher answer that he have not see Miss Wannop since the day of his second proceeding to the front . they have then agree that they be not the sort of person to begin a hidden intrigue , and the affair have proceed no far . 
 	 Mark be , however , aware that a person of Christopher ’s way of thinking might well feel inhibited from take on a cure of soul if , in spite of the fact that he have abstain from seduce a young woman , he nevertheless privately desire to enter into illicit relation with she , and that that be sufficient to justify he in say that an insuperable obstacle exist . he do not know that he himself agree , but it be not his business to interfere between any man and his conscience in a matter of the Church . he be himself no very good Christian , at any rate as regard the relationship of man and woman . nevertheless , the Church of England be the Church of England . 
 	 no doubt , have Christopher be a Papist he could have have the young woman for his housekeeper and no one would have bother . 
 	 but what the devil , then , be his brother to do p he have be offer , as a sop in the pan , and to keep he quiet , no doubt , over the affair of the Department of Statistics , a vice - consulate in some Mediterranean poi - t — Toulon or Leghorn , or some - thing of the sort . that might have do well enough . it be absurd to think of a Tietjens , heir to Groby , be under the necessity of make a living . it be fantastic , but if Christopher be in a fantastic mood there be nothing to be do about it . a vice - consulate be a potty sort of job . you attend to ship ' manifest , get member of crew out of jail , give old lady tourist the address of boarding - house keep by English or half — caste , or provide the vice - admiral of visit british squadron with the name of local resident who should be invite to entertainment give on the flagship . it be a potty job ; innocuous too , if it could be regard as a sort of mark time . .   .   . and at that moment Mark think that Christopher be still hold out for some sort of concession on Mark ’s part before definitely assume the charge of Groby , its tenant and its mineral right . .   .   . but there be insuperable objection to even the vice — consulate . in the first place , the job would have be in the public service , a fact to which , as have be say , Mark strongly object . 
 	 then the job be offer as a sort of a bribe . and , in addition , the consular service exact from every one who occupy a consular or vice — consular post the deposit of a sum of four hundred pound sterling , and Christopher do not possess even so much as four hundred shilling . .   .   . and , in addition , as Mark be well aware , Miss Wannop might again afford an obstacle . a british vice - consul might possibly keep a Maltese or Levantine in a back street and no harm do , but he probably could not live with an english young woman of family and position without cause so much scandal as to make he lose his job . .   .   . 
 	 it be at this point that Mark again , but for the last time , ask his brother why he do not divorce Sylvia . 
 	 by that time Marie Léonie have retire to get some rest . she be pretty worn out . Mark ’s illness have be long and serious ; she have nurse he with such care that during the whole time she have not be out into the street except once or twice to go across the road to the catholic church , where she would offer a candle or so for his recovery , and once or twice to remonstrate with the butcher as to the quality of the meat he supply for Mark ’s broth . in addition , on many day , she have work late , under Mark’s — direction , on paper that the Office have send he . she either could not or would not put her man into the charge of any kind of night nurse . she allege that the war have mop up every kind of available attendant on the sick , but Mark shrewdly suspect that she have make no kind of effort to secure an assistant . there be her national dread of draught to account for that . she accept with discipline , if with despair , the english doctor ’s dictum that fresh air must be admit to the sick — room , but she sit up night after night in a hooded chair , watch for any change in the wind and move in accordance a complicated arrangement of screen that she maintain between her patient and the open window . she have , however , surrender Mark to his brother without a murmur , and have quietly go to her own room to sleep , and Mark , though he carry on almost every kind of conversation with his brother , and though he would not have ask she to leave they in order that he might engage on topic that his brother might like to regard as private — Mark seize the opportunity to lay before Christopher what he think of Sylvia and the relationship of that singular couple . 
 	 it amount , in the end , to the fact that Mark want Christopher to divorce his wife , and to the fact that Christopher have not alter in his view that a man can not divorce a woman . Mark put it that if Christopher intend to take up with Valentine , it matter practically very little whether after an attempt at a divorce he marry she or not . what a man have to do if he mean to take up with a woman , and as far as possible to honour she , be to make some sort of fight of it — as a symbol . marriage , if you do not regard it as a sacrament — as , no doubt , it ought to be regard — be nothing more than a token that a couple intend to stick to each other . nowadays people — the right people — bother precious little about anything but that . a constant change of partner be a social nuisance ; you could not tell whether you could or could not invite a couple together to a tea — fight . and society exist for social function . that be why promiscuity be no good . for social function you have to have an equal number of man and woman , or someone get leave out of conversation , and so you have to know who , officially in the social sense , go with whom . everyone know that all the child of Lupus at the War Office be really the child of a Prime Minister , so that presumably the Countess and the Prime Minister sleep together most of the time , but that do not mean that you invite the Prime Minister and the woman to social — official function , because they have n’t any ostensible token of union . on the contrary , you invite Lord and Lady Lupus together to all function that would get into the paper , but you take care to have the Lady at any private , weekend - ish party or intimate dinner to which the Chief be come . 
 	 and Christopher have to consider that if it come to marriage ninety per cent . of the inhabitant of the world regard the marriage of almost everybody else as invalid . a Papist obviously could not regard a marriage before an english registrar or a french main ' as have any moral validity . at good it be no more than a demonstration of aspiration after constancy . you go before a functionary publicly to assert that man and woman intend to stick to each other . equally for extreme protestant a marriage by a Papist priest , or a minister of any other sect , or a Buddhist Lama , have not the blessing of their own brand of deity . so that really , to all practical intent , it be sufficient if a couple really assure their friend that they intend to stick together , if possible , for ever ; if not , at least for year enough to show that they have make a good shot at it . Mark invite Christopher to consult whom he like in his , Mark ’s , particular set and he would find that they agree with his view . 
 	 so he be anxious that if Christopher intend to take up with the Wannop young woman he should take at least a shot at a divorce . he might not succeed in get one . he obviously have ground enough , but Sylvia might make counter - allegation , he , Mark , could not say with what chance of success . he be prepare himself to accept his brother ’s assertion of complete innocence , but Sylvia be a clever devil and there be no know what view a judge might take . where there have be such a hell of a lot of smoke he might consider that there must be enough flame to justify refuse a divorce . there would no doubt be , thus — a beastly stink . but a beastly stink would be well than the sort of veil ill — fame that Sylvia have contrive to get attach to Christopher . and the fact that Christopher have face the stink and make the attempt would be at least that amount of tribute to Miss Wannop . Society be good - natured and be inclined to take the view that if a fellow have face his punishment and take it he be pretty well absolve . there might be people who would hold out against they , but Mark suppose that what Christopher want for himself and his girl be reasonable material comfort with a society of sufficient people of the right sort to give they a dinner or so a week and a week - end or so a month in the week — end season . 
 	 Christopher have acquiesce in the justness of his view with so much amiability that Mark begin to hope that he would get his way in the large matter of Groby . he be prepared to go far and to stake as much as his assurance that if Christopher would settle down at Groby , accept a decent income and look after the estate , he , Mark , would assure his brother and Valentine of bearable social circumstance . 
 	 Christopher , however , have make no answer at all beyond say that if he try to divorce Sylvia it would apparently ruin his old — furniture business . for his american partner assure he that in the United States if a man divorce his wife instead of let her divorce he no one would do any business with he . he have mention the case of a man call Blum , a pretty warm stock — exchange man , who insist on divorce his wife against the advice of his friend ; he find when he return to the stock market that all his client cold‘-shouldere he , so that he be ruin . and as these fellow be shortly go to mop up everything in the world , include the old - furniture trade , Christopher suppose that he would have to study their prejudice . 
 	 he have come across his partner rather curiously . the fellow , whose father have be a German – Jew but a naturalized american citizen , have be in Berlin mop up german old furniture for sale in the american interior , where he have a flourishing business . so , when America have come in on the side that be not german , the Germans have just simply drop on Mr. Schatzweiler in their pleasant way , incorporate he in their force and have send he to the front as a miserable little Tommy before the Americans have be a month in the show . and there , amongst the prisoner he have have to look after , Christopher have find the little , large - eyed sensitive creature , unable to speak a word of german but just crazy about the furniture and tapestry in the french chateaux that the prisoner pass on their march . Christopher have befriend he ; keep he as far as possible separate from the other prisoner , who naturally do not like he , and have a good many conversation with he . 
 	 it have appear that Mr. Schatzweiler have have a good deal to do in the way of buy with Sir John Robertson , the old old - furniture millionaire , who be a close friend of Sylvia ’s and have be so considerable admirer of Christopher ’s furniture - buying gift that he have , year ago , propose to take Christopher into partnership with himself . at that time Christopher have regard Sir John ’s proposal as outside the range of his future ; he have then be employ in the Department of Statistics . but the proposal have always amuse and rather impress he . if , that be to say , that hard - head old Scotsman who have make a vast fortune at his trade make to Christopher a quite serious business proposition on the strength of Christopher ’s flair in the matter of old wood and curve , Christopher himself might take his own gift with a certain seriousness . 
 	 and by the time he come to be in command of the escort over those miserable creature he have pretty well realize that after the necessity for escort be over he would jolly well have to consider how he be go to make a living for himself . that be certain . he be not go to reinsert himself amongst the miserable collection of squit who occupy themselves in his old Department ; he be too old to continue in the Army ; he be certainly not go to accept a penny from Groby source . he do not care what become of he — but his not care do not take any tragico - romantic form . he would be quite prepared to live in a hut on a hillside and cook his meal over three brick outside the door — but that be not a method of life that be very practicable and even that need money . everyone who serve in the Army at the front know how little it take to keep life go — and satisfactory . but he do not see the world , when it settle down again , turn itself into a place fit for old soldier who have learn to appreciate frugality . on the contrary , the old soldier would be chivy to hell by a civilian population who abhor they . so that merely to keep clean and out of debt be go to be a tough job . 
 	 so , in his long vigil in tent , beneath the moon , with the sentry walk , challenge from time to time , round the barbed wire stockade , the idea of Sir John ’s proposition have occur to he with some force . it have gather strength from his meeting with Mr. Schatzweiler . the little fellow be a shiver artist , and Christopher have enough of superstition in he to be impress by the coincidence of their have come together in such unlikely circumstance . after all , Providence must let up on he after a time , so why should not this unfortunate and impressively oriental member of the Chosen People be a sign of a covenant ? in a way he remind Christopher of his former protégé Mac - master — he have the same dark eye , the same shape , the same shivering eagerness . 
 	 that he be a Jew and an American do not worry Christopher ; he have not object to the fact that Macmaster have be the son of a Scotch grocer . if he have to go into partnership and be throw into close contact with anyone at all he do not care much who it be as long as it be not either a bounder or a man of his own class and race . to be in close mental communion with either an english bounder or an Englishman of good family would , he be aware , be intolerable to he . but , for a little shivering , artistic Jew , as of old for Macmaster , ht ? be quite capable of feel a real fondness — as you might for an animal . their manner be not your manner and could not be expect to be , and whatever their intelligence , they would have a certain little alertness , a certain exactness of thought . .   .   . besides , if they do you in , as every business partner or protégé must be expect to do , you do not feel the same humiliation as you do if you be swindle by a man of your own race and station . in the one case it be only what be to be expect , in the other you be face with the fact that your own tradition have break down . and under the long strain of the war he have outgrow alike the mentality and the tradition of his own family and his own race . the one and the other be not fit to endure long strain . 
 	 so he welcome the implore glance and the eventual oriental gratitude of that little man in his unhappy tent . for , naturally , by communicate in his weighty manner with the United States Headquarters when he happen to find himself in its vicinity , he secure the release of the little fellow , who be by now safely back somewhere in the interior of the North American Continent . 
 	 but before that happen he have exchange a certain amount of correspondence with Sir John , and have discover from he and from one or two chance member of the American Expeditionary Force that the little man be quite a good old - furniture dealer . Sir John have by that time go out of business and his letter be not particularly cordial to Tietjens — which be only what be to be expect if Sylvia have be shed her charm over he . but it have appear that Mr. Schatzweiler have have a great deal of business with Sir John , who have indeed supply he with a great part of his material , and so , if Sir John have go out of business , Mr. Schatzweiler would need to find in England someone to take Sir John ’s place . and that be not go to be extraordinarily easy , for what with the amount of his money that the Germans have mop up — they have sell he immense quantity of old furniture and get pay for it , and have then enlist he in the rank of their Brandenburgers , where naturally he could do nothing with carved oak chest that have elaborate steel hinge and lock . .   .   . what then with that , and his prolonged absence from the neighbourhood of Detroit , where he have mostly find his buyer , Mr. Schatzweiler find himself extremely hamper in his activity . it therefore fall to Christopher , if he be to go into partnership with the now sanguine and charming oriental , to supply an immediate sum of money . that have not be easy , but by mean of mortgage his pay and his blood — money , and sell the book that Sylvia have leave he , he have be able to provide Mr. Schatzweiler with enough to make at least a start somewhere across the water . .   .   . and Mr. Schatzweiler and Christopher have between they evolve an ingenious scheme along line that the American have long contemplate , take into account the taste of his countryman and the nature of the time . 
 	 Mark have listen to his brother during all this with indulgence and even with pleasure . if a Tietjens contemplate go into trade he might at least contemplate an amusing trade carry on in a spirited manner . and what Christopher humorously project be at least more dignified than stockbroke or bill - discounting . moreover , he be pretty well convince by this time that his brother be completely reconcile to he and to Groby . 
 	 it be about then and when he have again begin to introduce the topic of Groby that Christopher get up from the chair at the bedside that he have be occupy and , have take his brother ’s wrist in his cool finger , remark : 
 	 " your temperature ’ pretty well down . do not you think it be about time that you set about marry Charlotte ? I suppose you mean to marry she before this bout be finish ; you might have a relapse . " 
 	 Mark remember that speech perfectly well , with the addition that if he , Christopher , hurry about it they might get the job do that night . it must therefore then have be about one o’clock of an afternoon about three week before the 11th November , 1918 . 
 	 Mark have reply that he would be much oblige to Christopher , and Christopher , have rouse Marie Léonie and tell she that he would be back in time to let she have a good night ’s rest , disappear , say that he be go straight to Lambeth . in those day , suppose you could command thirty pound or so , there be no difficulty in get marry at the short possible notice , and Christopher have promote too many last — minute marriage amongst his man not to know the rope . 
 	 Mark view the transaction with a good deal of satisfaction . it have need no arguing ; if the proceeding have the approval of the heir - presumptive to Groby there be nothing more to be say against it . and Mark take the view that if he agree to a proceeding that Christopher could only have counsel as heir - presumptive , that be an additional reason for Mark ’s expect that Christopher would eventually consent to administer Groby himself . 
 
  chapter 6 


 
 
 	 that would have be three week before the eleventh of November . his mind boggle a little at compute what the actual date in October must have be . with his then pneumonia his mind have not much register the date of that period ; day have go by in fever and boredom . still , a man ought to remember the date of his wedding . say it have be the twentieth of October , 1918 . the twentieth of October have be his father ’s birthday . when he come to think of it he could remember remember hazily that it be queer that he should be go out of life on the date his father have enter it . it make a sort of full stop . and it make a full stop that , practically on that day , Papists enter into their own in Groby . he have , that be to say , make up his mind to the fact that Christopher ’s son would have Groby as a home even if Christopher do n’t . and the boy be by now a full - fledge Papist , pickle and oil and wafere and all . Sylvia have rub the fact in about a week ago by send he a card for his nephew ’s provisional baptism and first communion about a week before . it have astonish he that he have not feel more bitter . 
 	 he have not any doubt that the fact have reconcile he to his marriage with Marie Léonie . he have tell his brother a year or so before that he would never marry she because she be a Papist , but he be aware that then he be only chip at Spelden , the fellow that write " Spelden on Sacrilege , " a book that predict all sort of disaster for fellow who own former Papist Church land or who have displace papist . when he have tell Christopher that he would never marry Charlotte — he have call she Charlotte for reason of camouflage before the marriage — he have be quite aware that he be chip at Spelden ’s ghost — for Spelden must have be dead a hundred year or so . as it be , he have be say grimly if pleasantly to that bogy : 
 	 " eh , old un . you see . you may prophesy disaster to Groby because a Tietjens be give it over the head of one of your fellow in Dutch William ’s time . but you can not frighten I into make an honest woman — let alone a Lady of Groby — out of a Papist . " 
 	 and he have n’t . he would swear that no idea of disaster to Groby have enter his head at the date of the marriage . now , he would not say ; but of what he feel then he be certain . he remember think whilst the ceremony be go on of the word of Fraser of Lovat before they execute he in the Forty – five . they have tell he on the scaffold that if he would make some sort of sub - mission to George II they would spare his body from be exhibit in quarter 011 the spike of the building in Edinburgh . and Fraser have answer I : " an the King will have my heid I care not what he may do with my , " name a part of a gentleman that be not now mention in drawing - room . so , if a Papist be to inhabit Groby House , it matter precious little if the first Lady Tietjens of Groby be Papist or Heathen . 
 	 a man as a rule do not marry his mistress whilst he have any kick in he . if he still aim at a career it might hinder he if she be know to have be his mistress , or , of course , a fellow who want to make a career might want to help himself on by make a good marriage . even if a man do not want to make a career he may think that a woman who have be his mistress as like as not may cuckold he after marriage , for , if she have go wrong with he , she would be more apt to go wrong elsewhere as well . but if a fellow be practically finish those consideration disappear , and he remember that you go to hell if you seduce virgin . it be as well at one time or another to make your peace with your creator . for ever be a long word and God be say to disapprove of unconsecrated union . 
 	 besides , it would very likely please Marie Léonie , though she have never say a word about it , and it would certainly dish Sylvia , who be no doubt count on be the first Lady Tietjens of Groby . and then , too , it would undoubtedly make Marie Léonie safe . in one way and another he have give his mistress quite a number of thing that might well be desirable to that bitch , and neither his not Christopher ’s life be worth much , whilst Chancery can be a very expensive affair if you get into it . 
 	 and he be aware that he have always have a soft spot in his heart for Marie Léonie , otherwise he would not have provide she with the name of Charlotte for public consumption . a man give his mistress another name if there be any chance of his marry she , so that it may look as if he be marry someone else when he do it . Marie Léonit Riotor look different from a casual Charlotte . it give she a well chance in the world outside . 
 	 so it have be well enough . the world be . change and there be no particular reason why he should not change with it . .   .   . and he have not be able to conceal from himself that he be get on the way . time lengthen out . when he have come in drenched from one of the potty local meeting that they have have to fall back on during the war he have know that something be come to he , because after Marie Léonie have tuck he up in bed he could not remember the strain of the winner of some handicap of no importance . Marie Léonie have give he a goodish tot of mm with butter in it and that might have make he hazy — but , all the same , that have never happen to he in his life before , rum or no rum . and by now he have forget even the name of the winner and the meeting . .   .   . 
 	 he could not conceal from himself that his memory be fail , though otherwise he consider himself to be as sound a man as he have ever be . but when it come to memory , ever since that day his brain have check at time as a tired horse will at a fence . .   .   . a tired horse ! 
 	 he could not bring himself to the computation of what three week back from the eleventh of November come to ; his brain would not go at it . for the matter of that , he could remember precious little of the event of that three week in their due order . Christopher have certainly be about , relieve Marie Léonie at night and attend to he with a soft , goggle - eyed attentiveness that only a man with a saint for a mother could have put up . for hour and hour he would read aloud in Boswell ’s " life of Johnson , " for which Mark have have a fancy . 
 	 and Mark could remember drowse off with satisfaction to the sound of the voice and drowse with satisfaction awake again , still to the sound of the voice . for Christopher have the idea that if his voice go drone on it would make Mark ’s slumber more satisfactory . 
 	 satisfaction . .   .   . perhaps the last satisfaction that Mark be ever to know . for at that time - during those three week — he have not be able to believe that Christopher really mean to stick out about the matter of Groby . how could you believe that a fellow who wait on you with the softness of a girl build of meal - sack be determined to .   .   . call it , break your heart . that be what it come to . .   .   . a fellow , too , who agree in the most astounding manner with your view of thing in general . a fellow , for the matter of that , who know ten time as much as you do . a damn learn fellow . .   .   . 
 	 Mark have no contempt for learn - particularly for young son . the country be go to the dog because of the want of education of the young son , whose business it be to do the work of the nation . it be a very old North Country rhyme that , that when land be go and money spend , then learn be most excellent . n 0 , he have no contempt for learn . he have never acquire any because he be too lazy : a little Sallust , a little Cornelius Nepos , a touch of Horace , enough French to read a novel and follow what Marie Léonie say .   .   . , even to himself he call she Marie Léonie once he be married to she . it have make her jump at first ! 
 	 but Christopher be a damn learn fellow . their father , a young son at the beginning , have be damn learn , too . they say that even at his death he have be one of the good latinist in England — the intimate friend of that fellow Wannop , the Professor . .   .   . a great age at which to die by his own hand , his father ’s ! why , if that marriage have be on the 20th October , 1918 , his father , then dead , must have be bear on the 20th October what ? .   .   . 1834 . .   .   . no , that be not possible . .   .   . no : ’ 44 . his father , Mark know , have be bear in 1812 — before Waterloo ! 
 	 great stretch of time . great change ! yet Father have not be an incult sort of a man . on the contrary , if he be burly and determine , he be quiet . and sensitive . he have certainly love Christopher very dearly — and Christopher ’s mother . 
 	 Father be very tall ; stoop like a topple poplar towards the end . his head seem very distant as if he hardly hear you . iron - grey ; short - whisker ! absent - minded towards the end . forget where he have put his handkerchief and where his spectacle be when he have push they up on to his forehead . .   .   . he have be a young son who have never speak to his father for forty year . Father ’s father have never forgive he for marry Miss Selby of Biggen .   .   . not because it be marry below he , but because his father have want their mother for his eld son . .   .   . and they have be poor in their early child : hood , wander over the continent , to settle at last in Dijon , where they have keep some sort of state , a large house in the middle of the town with several servant . he never could imagine how their mother have do it on four hundred a year . 
 	 but she have . a hard woman . but Father have keep in with french people and correspond with Professor Wannop and Learned Societies . he have always regard he , Mark , as rather a dunce . .   .   . Father would sit reading in elegantly bind book , by the hour . his study have be one of the show - room of the house in Dijon . 
 	 do he commit suicide ? if so then Valentine Wannop be his daughter . there could not be much get away from that , not that it matter much . in that case Christopher would be live with his half — sister . .   .   . not that it matter much . it do not matter much , to he , Mark .   .   . but his father be the sort of man that it might drive to suicide . 
 	 a luckless sort of beggar , Christopher ! .   .   . if you take the whole conglobulation at its bad — the father suicide , the son live with his sister in open sin , the son ’s son not his son , and Groby go over to Papist hand . .   .   . that be the sort of thing that would happen to a Tietjens of the Christopher variety : to any Tietjens who would not get out or get under as he , Mark , have do . tietjense take what they damn well get for do what they damn well want to . well , it land they in that sort of post . .   .   . a last post , for , if that boy be not Christopher ’s , Groby go out of Tietjens hand . there would be no more tietjense . Spelden might well be justify . 
 	 the grandfather of Father scalp by Indians in Canada in the war of 1812 ; the father die in a place where he should not have be — take what he get for it and cause quite a scandal for the Court of Victoria ; the eld brother of Father kill drunk whilst fox - hunting ; Father suicide ; Christopher a pauper by his own act with a by - blow in his shoe . if then there be to be any more Tietjenses by blood .   .   . poor little devil ! they would be their own cousin . something like that . .   .   . 
 	 and possibly none the bad off for that . .   .   . either Spelden or Groby Great Tree have perhaps do for the other . Groby Great Tree have be plant to commemorate the birth of great — grand - father who have die in a whoreshop — and it have always be whisper in Groby , amongst the child and servant , that Groby Great Tree do not like the house . its root tear chunk out of the foundation , and two or three time the trunk have have to be bricke into the front wall . it have be bring as a sapling from Sardinia at a time when gentleman still think about landscape gardening . a gentleman in those day consult his heir about tree planting . should you plant a group of copper beech against a group of white maple over against the ha - ha a quarter of a mile from the house so that the contrast see from the ball - room window should be agreeable — in thirty year ' time ? in those day think , in family , go in period of thirty year , owner gravely consult heir who should see that development of light and shade that the owner never would . 
 	 nowadays the heir apparently consult the owner 1 ' as to whether the tenant who be take the ancestral home furnish might not cut down tree in order to suit the sanitary idea of the day . .   .   . an american day ! well , why not ? those people could not be expect to know how picturesque a contrast the tree would make against the roof of Groby Great House when see from Peel ’s Moorside . they would never hear of Peel ’s moor - side , or John Peel , or the coat so greay . .   .   . 
 	 apparently that be the meaning of the visit of that young colt and Mrs. de Bray Pape . they have come to ask his , Mark ’s , sanction as owner to cut down Groby Great Tree . and then they have funk it and bolt . at any rate the boy be still talk earnestly to the woman in white over the hedge . as to where Mrs. de Bray Pape be , he have no mean of know ; she might be among the potato row study the potato of the poor for all he know . he hop she would not come upon Marie Léonie , because Marie Léonie would make short work of Mrs. de Bray Pape and be annoy on top of it . 
 	 but they be wrong to funk talk to Izim about cut down Groby Great Tree . he care nothing about it . Mrs. de Bray Pape might just as well have come and say cheerfully : " Hullo , old cock , we ’re go to cut down your bally old tree and let some light into the house .   .   . . " if that be the way Americans talk when they be cheerful ; he have no mean of know . he never remember to have talk to an American . .   .   . oh , yes , to Cammy Fittleworth ! she have certainly be a dreadfully slangy young woman before her husband come into the title . but then Fittleworth be confoundedly slangy too . they say he have to give up in the middle of a speech he try to make in the House of Lords because he could not do without the word " toppin , " which upset the Lord Chancellor . .   .   . so there be no know what Mrs. de Bray Pape might not have say if she have not think she be address asyphilitic member of an effete aristocracy mad about an old cedar tree . but she might just as well have cheer - fully announce it . he do not care . Groby Great Tree have never seem to like he . it never seem to like anybody . they say it never forgave the Tietjenses for transplant it from nice warm Sardinia to that lugubrious climate . .   .   . that be what the servant say to the child and the child whisper to each other in the dark corridor . 
 	 but poor old Christopher ! he be go to go mad if the suggestion be make to he . the bare hint ! poor old Christopher , who be now probably at that very minute in one of those beastly machine overhead , come back from Groby . .   .   . if Christopher bad to buy a beastly South Country show — cottage , Mark wish he would not have buy it so near a confound air — station . however , he expect , probably , that beastly Americans would come fly in the beastly machine to buy the beastly old junk . they do , indeed do so — send by Mr. Schatzweiler , who be certainly efficient except in the sending of cheque . 
 	 Christopher have nearly jump out of his skin — that be to say , he have sit as still as a lump of white marble - when he have gather that Sylvia and , still more his own heir , want to let Groby furnish . he have say to Mark , over Sylvia ’s first letter " you will not let ’em ? " and Mark know the agony that be behind his tallowy mask and goggle eye . .   .   . perfectly white around the nostril he go - that be the sign ! 
 	 and it have be as near to an appeal as he have ever come — unless the request for a loan on Armistice Day could be regard as an appeal . but Mark do not think that that could be regard as a score . in their game neither of they have yet make a real score . probably neither of they ever would ; they be a stout pair of North Countrymen whatever else could be say against they . 
 	 no : it have not be a score when Christopher have say : " you will not let ’em let Groby ? " the day before yesterday : Christopher have be in an agony , but he be not ask Mark not to let Groby be let ; he be only seek information as to how far Mark would let the degradation of the old place go . Mark have let he pretty well know that Groby might be pull down and replace by a terracotta hotel before he would stir a finger . on the other hand , Christopher have only to stir a finger and not a blade of grass between the cobble in the Stillroom Yard could be grub up . .   .   . but by the rule of the game neither of they could give an order . neither . Mark say to Christopher : " Groby ’s your ! " Christopher say to Mark : " Groby ’s yours 1 " with perfect good - humour and coldness . so probably the old place would fall to piece or Sylvia would turn it into a bawdy - house . .   .   . it be a good joke ! a good , grim Yorkshire joke ! 
 	 it be impossible to know which of they suffer more . Christopher , it be true , be have his heart break because the house suffer — but , damn it , be n’t mark himself pretty well heart - break because Christopher refuse to accept the house from he ? .   .   . it be impossible to know which ! 
 	 yes , his confounded heart have be break on Armistice Day in the morning — between the morning and the morning after . .   .   . yes : after Christopher have be read Boswell aloud , night after night for three week . .   .   . be that play the game ? be it play the game to get no sleep if you have not forgive your brother . .   .   . oh , no doubt it be play the game . you do not forgive your brother if he let you down in a damn beastly way . .   .   . and of course it be let a fellow down in a beastly — a beastly!—way to let he know that you believe he live on the immoral earning of his wife . .   .   . Mark have do that to Christopher . it be unforgivable all right . and equally of course you do not hurt your brother except on the line circumscribe by the nature of the offence : you be the good friend he have — except on the line circumscribe by the offence ; and he will nurse you like a blasted soft woman - except in so far as the line circumscribe by the offence do not preclude your ministration . 
 	 for , obviously , the good thing Christopher could have do for his brother ’s health would have be to have accept the stewardship of Groby — but his brother could die and he himself could die before he would do that . it be nevertheless a pretty cruel affair . .   .   . over Boswell the two brother have get as thick as thief with an astonishing intimacy — and with an astonishing similarity . if one of they make a comment on Bennett Langton it would be precisely the comment that the other have on his lip . it be what ass call telepathy nowadays .   .   . a warm , comfortable feeling , late at night with the light shade from your eye , the voice go on through the deep silence of London that await the crash of fall bomb . .   .   . well , Mark accept Christopher ’s dictum that he himself be an eighteenth - century bloke and be only forestall when he have want to tell Christopher that he be more old — fashioned still — a sort of seventeenth - century Anglican who ought to be stroll in a grove with the Greek Testament beneath the arm and all . .   .   . and , hang it all , there be room for he ! the land have not change . .   .   . there be still the deep beech - wood make grove beside the ploughland and the rook rise lazily as the plough come towards they . the land have not change . .   .   . well , the breed have not change . .   .   . there be Christopher . .   .   . only , the time .   .   . they have change . .   .   . the rook and the ploughland and the beech and Christopher be there still . .   .   . but not the frame of mind in the day . .   .   . the sun might rise and go above the plough till it set behind the hedge , and the ploughman go off to the inn settle ; and the moon could do the same . but they would — neither sun nor moon — look on the spit of Christopher in all their journey . never . they might as well expect to see a mastodon . .   .   . and he , Mark , himself be an old - fashioned buffer . that be all right . Judas Iscariot himself be an old — fashioned ass , once upon a time ! 
 	 but it be almost on the edge of not play the game for Christopher to let that intimacy establish itself and all the time to cherish that unforgivingness . .   .   . not quite not play the game : but almost . for have not Mark hold out feeler ? had not he make concession ? had n’t his very marrying of Marie Léonie be by way of a concession to Christopher ? do n’t Christopher , if the truth be to be know , want Mark to marry Marie Léonie because he , Christopher , want to marry Valentine Wannop and have n’t a hope ? if the truth be know . .   .   . well , he have make that concession to Christopher , who be a sort of a parson anyhow . but ought Christopher to have exact — to have telepathically will — that concession if he be not himself go to concede something ? ought he to have force he , Mark , to accept his moon womanly service when the poor devil be already wear out with his military duty of see old tin clean out day after day , if he mean to become a beastly old - furniture dealer and refuse Groby ? for , upon his soul , till the morning of Armistice Day , Mark have accept Christopher ’s story of Mr. Schatzweiler as merely a good - humour , grim threat . .   .   . a sort of a feint at a threat . .   .   . 
 	 well , probably it be play the game all right : if Christopher think it be jonnock , jonnock it be ! 
 	 but .   .   . a damn beastly shock . .   .   . why , he have be practically convalescent , he have be out of bed in a dressing - gown and have tell Lord Wolstonmark that he could pile in as many paper as he like from the Office . .   .   . and then Christopher , without a hat and in a beastly civilian suit of light mulberry - colour Harris tweed , have burst into the room with a beastly piece of old furniture under his arm . .   .   . a sort of inlay toy writing - desk . a model . for cabinet - maker ! a fine thing to bring into a convalescent bedroom , to a man quietly read Form T.O. LOUWR , 1962 , E i7 of the 10/11/18 , in front of a clean fire . .   .   . and chalk - white about the gill the fellow be - with an awful lot of silver in his hair . .   .   . what age be he ? forty ? forty - three ? God know ! 
 	 Forty . .   .   . he want to borrow forty quid on that beastly piece of furniture . to have an Armistice Day Beanfeast and set up house with his gal ! forty quid ! my God ! Mark feel his bowel turn over within he with disgust . .   .   . the gal — that fellow ’s half - sister as like as not — be wait in an empty house for he to go and seduce she . in order to celebrate the salvation of the world by seven million death ! 
 	 if you seduce a girl you do not do it on forty pound : you accept Groby and three , seven , ten thousand a year . so he have tell Christopher . 
 	 and then he have get it . full in the face . Christopher be not go to accept a penny from he . never . not ever ! .   .   . no doubt about that , either . that fact have go into Mark as a knife go into the stag ’s throat . it have hurt as much , but it have not kill ! damn it , it might as well have ! it might as well have . .   .   . do a fellow do that to his own brother just because his own brother have call he .   .   . what be the word ? Maquereau ! .   .   . probably a maquereau be bad than a pimp . .   .   . the difference between a flea and a louse , as Dr. Johnson say . 
 	 Eh , but Christopher be bitter ! .   .   . apparently he have go round first to Sir John Robert - son ’s with the jigamaree . year before , Sir John have promise to buy it for a hundred pound . 
 	 it be a special sort of model sign by some duke of a Bath cabinet - maker in 1762 . .   .   . be not that the year of the American Rebellion ? well , Christopher have buy it in a junk — shop of sort for a fiver and Sir John have promise he a hundred quid . he collect cabinet - maker ' model : extraordinarily valuable they be . Christopher have spit out that this be worth a thousand dollar . .   .   . think of his old - furniture customer ! 
 	 when Christopher have use that word — with the blue pebble stick out of his white - lard head - Mark have feel the sweat break out all over he . he have know it be all up . .   .   . Christopher have go on : you expect he to spit electric spark but his voice be wooden . Sir John have say to he : 
 	 " eh , no , mon . you ’re a fine soldier now , rap half the girl in Flanders and Ealing and ask we to regard you as hero . fine hero . and now you ’re safe . .   .   . a hundred pound be a price to a Christian that be faithful to his lovely wife . five pound be as much as I ’ll give you for the model , and be thankful it be five , not one , for old sake ’s sake ! " 
 	 that be what Sir John Robertson have say to Christopher : that be what the world be like to serve soldier in that day . you do not have to wonder that Christopher be bitter — even to his own brother with the sweat make his under - linen icy . Mark have say : 
 	 " my good chap . I will not lend you a penny on that idiotic jigamaree . but I ’ll write you a cheque for a thousand pound this minute . give I my cheque - book from the table .   .   . . " 
 	 Marie Léonie have come into the room on hear Christopher ’s voice . she like to hear the news from Christopher . and she like Christopher and Mark to have heated discussion . she have observe that they do Mark good : on the day when Christopher have first come there , three week before , when they certainly have heatedly discuss she have observe that Mark ’s temperature have fall from ninety - nine point six to ninety - eight point two . in two hour . .   .   . after all , if a Yorkshire man can quarrel he can live . they be like that , those other , she say . 
 	 Christopher have turn on she and say : 
 	 " Ma belle amie m’attend a ma maison ; nous voulon célébrer avec me camarade de régiment . Je n’ai pas le sous . Prétez moi quarante livre , je vous en prie , madame ! " he have add that he would leave his cabinet as a pledge . he be as stiff as a sentry outside Buckingham Palace . she have look at Mark with some astonishment . after all , she might well be astonish . he himself have make no sign and suddenly Christopher have exclaim ; 
 	 " Prétez les moi , prétez les moi , pour l’amour de Dieu ! " 
 	 Marie Léonie have go a little white , but she have turn up her skirt and turn down her stocking and take out the note . 
 	 " pour le dieu d’amour , monsieur , je veux bien , " she have say . .   .   . you never know what a french - woman would not say . that be out of an old song . 
 	 but the sweat burst out all over his face at the recollection : great drop of sweat . 
 
  chapter 7 


 
 
 	 MARIE LEONIE , a strong taste of apple in her mouth , strong savour of apple on the air , wasp around she and as if a snow - drift of down descend about her foot , be frown seriously over burgundy bottle into which run cider from a glass tube that she hold to their neck . she frown because the task be serious and engrossing , because the wasp annoy she and because she be resist an impulse inside herself . it tell she that something ail Mark and urge she to go and look at he . 
 	 it annoy she because , as a rule — a rule so strong that it have assume the aspect of a regulation - she feel presage of something ail Mark only at night . only at night ' . during the day usually she feel in she for intérizur that Mark be like what he be only because he want so to be . his glance be too virile and dominant to let you think other - wise — the dark , liquid , direct glance ! but at nightfall — or at any rate shortly after supper when she have retire to her room terrible premonition of disaster to Mark visit she . he be die where he lay ; he be beset by the spectral being of the countryside ; robber , even , have creep upon he , though that be unreasonable . for all the countryside know that Mark be paralysed and unable to store wealth in his mattress . .   .   . still , nefarious stranger might see he and imagine that he keep his gold repeater watch beneath his pillow . .   .   . so she would rise a hundred time in a night and , go to the low , diamond - casement window , would lean out and listen . but there would be no sound : the wind in the leaf ; the cry of water - bird over head . the dim light would be in the hut , see unmove through the apple — bough . 
 	 now , however , in broad daylight , towards the hour of tea , with the little maid on a stool beside her pluck the boiling - hen that be to go to market next day , with the box of egg on their shelf , each egg wire to the bottom of its box , wait till she have time to date - stamp it — in the open potting - shed in the quiet , broad light of a summer day she be visit by:1 presage of some - thing ail Mark . she resent it , but she be not the woman to resist it . 
 	 there be , however , nothing to warrant it . from the corner of the house to which she proceed she could see quite well the great part of Mark ’s solitary figure . gun , be talk to ' by the english lord , hold a spare horse by the bridle and be look at Mark over the hedge . he exhibit no emotion . a young man be walk along the inside of the hedge between it and the raspberry . that be no affair of her : Gunning be not protest . the head and shoulder of a young woman — or it might be another young man — be proceed along the outside of the hedge nearly level with the first one . that be equally no affair of her . probably they be look at the bird ’s nest . there be some sort of bird ’s nest , she have hear , in that thick hedge . there be no end to the folly of the English in the country as in the town : they would waste time over everything . this bird be a bottle .   .   . bottle - something , and Christopher and Valentine and the parson and the doctor and the artist who live down the hill be crazy about it . they walk on tiptoe when they be within twenty yard . Gunning be allow to trim the hedge , but apparently the bird know Gunning . .   .   . for Marie Léonie , all bird be " moineaux " ; as who should say " sparrer " ; in London they call they that — just as all flower be " giroflées”—as you might say wall - flower . .   .   . no wonder this nation be go to rack and min when it waste its time over preserve the nest of sparrer and name innumerable wall - flower ! the country be well enough — a sort of suburb of Caen : but the people ! .   .   . no wonder William , of Falaise , in Normandy subjugate they with such case . 
 	 now she have waste five minute , for the glass tube , hinge on rubber , that form she siphon from barrel to bottle have have perforce to be take out of the spile - hole ; the air have enter into it , and she would have to put it back and suck once more at the tube until the first trickle of cider enter her mouth . she dislike have to do that ; it waste the cider and she dislike the flavour in the afternoon when one have lunch . the little maid also would say : " a - oh , melady - ship , ah du call thet queer ! " .   .   . nothing would cure that child of say that though she be other - wise rage at docile . even Gunning scratch his head at the sight of those tube . 
 	 could these savage never understand that if you want to have cidr : moureux — foaming — you must have as little sediment as possible ? and that in the bottom of cask , even if they have not be move for a long time , there will always be sediment — particularly if you set up a how in the liquid by run it from a tap near the bottom . so you siphon off the top of the great cask for bottle moumux , and drink the rest from the cask , and run the thickest into little thin — wood cask with many hoop for freeze in the winter . .   .   . to make calvado where you can not have alembic because of the excise . .   .   . in this unhappy country you may not have alembic for the distilling of apple - jack , plum - brandy or other fine — because of the excise ! Quel pay ! Quels gen ! 
 	 they lack industry , frugality — and , above all , spirit ! look at that poor Valentine , hide in her room upstairs because there be people about whom she suspect of be people from the English Lord ’s house . .   .   . by right that poor Valentine should be help she with the bottle and ready to sell that lugubrious old furniture to visitor whilst her lord be away buy more old rubbish . .   .   . and she be distract because she could not find some print . they represent — Marie Léonie be well aware because she have hear the fact several time — street crier of ambulant ware in London year ago . there be only eight of these to be find . where be the other four ? the customer , an english lady of title , be anxious for they . as present for an immediate wedding ! Monsieur my brother — in - law have come upon the four that be to make up the set at a sale two day before . he have recount with satisfaction how he have find they on the grass . .   .   . it be suppose that he have bring they home ; but they be not in the warehouse at Cramp the carpenter ’ , they be not to be find leave in the cart . they be in no drawer or press . .   .   . what be to prove that man beau - frére have bring they home from the sale ? he be not there : he be go for a day and a half . naturally he would be go for a day and a half when he be most need . .   .   . and where be he go , leave his young wife in that nervous condition . for a day and a half ! he have never before be go for a day and a half . .   .   . there be then something brew ; it be in the air ; it be in her bone . .   .   . it be like that dreadful day of the Armistice when this miserable land betray the beautiful pay de Frame . ' . . when monsieur have borrow forty pound of she . .   .   . in the name of heaven why do not he borrow another forty — or eighty — or a hundred , rather than be distract and distract Mark and his unhappy girl ? .   .   . 
 	 she be not unsympathetic , that girl . she have civilization . she could talk of Philemon and Baucis . she have make her bachot , she be what you would call fille de famille . .   .   . but without chic . .   .   . without .   .   . without .   .   . well , she neither display enough erudition to be a bla bleu — though she have enough erudition!—nor enough chin to be a femme légere — a poule who would faire la noce with her gallant . Monsieur the brother - in - law be no gay spark . but you never know with a man . .   .   . the cut of a skirt ; a twist of the hair . .   .   . though today there be no hair to twist : but there be the equivalent . 
 	 and it be a fact that you never know a man . look at the case of Eleanor Dupont , who live for ten year with Duchamp of the Sorbonne . .   .   . Eleanor would never attend scrupulously to her attire because her man be blue spectacle and be a savant . .   .   . but what : happen . .   .   . there come along a little piece with a hat as large as cart - wheel cover with green - stuff and sleeve up above her ear — as the mode be then . .   .   . 
 	 that have be a lesson to she , Marie Léonie , who have be a girl at the time . she have deter - mine that if she achieve a collage sérieux with a monsieur of eighty and as blind as a bat she would study the mode of the day right down to the late perfume . these monsieur do not know it , but they move among femme du monde and the fashionable cocotte , and however much she at home might be the little brown bird of the domestic hearth , the line of her dress , her hair , her personal odour , must conform . Mark do not imagine ; she do not suppose he have ever see a fashionable journal in her apartment that be open to he , or have ever suspect that she walk in the row on a Sunday when he be away . .   .   . but she have study these thing like another . and more . for it be difficult to keep with the fashion and at the same time appear as if you be a serious petite bourgeoise . but she have do it ; and observe the result . .   .   . 
 	 but that poor Valentine . .   .   . her man be attach enough : and well he ought to be , consider the affair in which he have land she . but always there come the pic des tempêtes , the Cap Horn , round which you must go . it be the day when your man look at you and say : " H’m , h’m , " and consider if the candle be not more valuable than the game ! ah , then . .   .   . there be wise folk who put that at the seventh year ; other wise one , at the second ; other again , at the eleventh . .   .   . but in fact you may put it at any day on any year — to the hundredth . .   .   . and that poor Valentine with four spot of oil on her only skirt but two . and that so badly hung , though the stuff no doubt be once good . one must concede that ! they make admirable tweed in this country : well certainly than in Roubaix . but be that enough to save a country — or a woman dependent on a man who have introduce she into a bad affair ? 
 	 a voice behind she say : 
 	 " I see you have plenty of eggs!”—an unusual voice of a sort of breathless nervousness . Marie Léonie continue to hold the mouth of her tube into the neck of a burgundy bottle ; into this she have already introduce a small screw of sift sugar and an extremely minute portion of a powder that she get from a pharmacist of Rouen . this , she understand , make the cider of a rich brownness . 
 	 she do not see why cider should be brown , but it . be consider to be less fortifying if it be light golden . she continue also to think about Valentine , who would be twitter with nerve at the window whose iron — leaded casement be open above their head . she would have put down her latin book and have creep to the window to listen . 
 	 the little girl beside Marie Léonie have rise from the three - legged stool and hold a dead , white fowl with a nearly naked breast by its neck . she say hoarsely : 
 	 " these ere be er ladyship ’s settin of prize Reds . " she be blonde , red - faced and wear on her dull fair hair a rather large cap , on her thin body a check blue cotton gown . " arf a crownd a piece the heggs be or twenty - four shilling a dozen if you take a gross . " 
 	 Marie Léonie hear the hoarse voice with some satisfaction . this girl whom they have only have for a fortnight seem to be satisfactory mentally ; it be not her business to sell the egg but Gunning ’s ; nevertheless she know the detail . she do not turn round : it be not her business to talk to anyone who want to buy egg and she have no curiosity as to customer . she have too much else to think about . the voice say : 
 	 " half a crown seem a great deal for an egg . what be that in dollar ? this must be that tyranny over edible by the producer of which one have hear so much . " 
 	 " tiddn nothin in dollar , " the girl say . " Arf a dollar be two bob . arf a crownd be two n six . " 
 	 the conversation continue , but it grow dim in Marie Léonie ’s thought . the child and the voice dispute as to what a dollar be — or so it appear , for Marie Leonie be not familiar with either of the accent of the disputant . the child be a combative child . she drive both Gunning and the cabinet — maker Cramp with an organ of brass . of tin perhaps , like a penny whistle . when she be not grubbily work she read book with avidity — book about blood if she could get they . she have an exaggerated respect for the Family , but none for any other soul in the world . .   .   . 
 	 Marie Léonie consider that , by now , she might have get down to the depth of the cask where you find sediment . she run some cider into a clear glass , stop the tube with her thumb . the cider be clear enough to let she bottle another dozen , she judge ; then she would send for Gunning to take the spile - bung out of the next cask . four sixty - gallon cask she have to attend to ; two of they be do . she begin to tire : she be not unfatiguable if she be indefatigable . she begin at any rate to feel drowsy . she wish Valentine could have help she . but that girl have not much backbone , and she , Marie Léonie , acknowledge that for the sake of the future it be good that she should rest and read book in Latin or Greek . and avoid nervous encounter . 
 	 she have tuck she up under an eiderdown on their four - post bed because they would have all the window open and current of air must , above all , be avoid by woman . .   .   . Elle have smile and say that it have once be her dream to read the work of aeschyle beside the blue Mediterranean . they have kiss each other . .   .   . 
 	 the maid beside she be say that orfn n orfn she ’d eare er farver oo be a dealer wen a lot of of ens , say , ad go to three an nine , say " make it two arf dollar ? " they didn ave dollar in thet country but they do ave arf dollar . n Capt’n Kidd th ' pirate : e ad dollar , n piece of eight n moidor too ! a wasp annoy Marie Léonie ; it buzz almost on her nose , retire , return , make a wide circuit . there be already several wasp struggle in the glass of cider she have just draw ; there be other in circle round spot of cider on the slat of wood on which the barrel be arrange . they draw in their tail and then expand , ecstatically . yet only two night before she and Valentine have go with Gunning all over the orchard with a lantern , a trowel and a bottle of prussic acid , stop up hole along the path and in bank . she have like the experience ; the darkness , the ring of light from the lantern on the rough grass ; the feeling that she be out , near Mark , and that yet Gunning and his lantern keep spiritual visitor away . .   .   . what she suffer between the desire to visit her man in the deep night and the possibility of come up against revenant . .   .   . be it reasonable ? .   .   . what woman have to suffer for their man ! even if they be faithful . .   .   . what the unfortunate Elle have not suffer . .   .   . even on what you might call she nuit de note . .   .   . at the time it have seem incomprehensible . Marie Léonie have have no detail . it have merely seem fantastic : possibly even tragic because Mark have take it so hardly . truly she believe he have become insane . at two in the morning , beside Mark ’s bed . they have — the two brother — exchange word of considerable violence whilst the girl shiver . and be determine . that girl have be determine . she would not go back to her mother . at two in the morning . .   .   . well , if you refuse to go back to your mother at two in the morning you kick indeed your slipper over the mill ! 
 	 the detail of that night come back to she , amongst wasp and beneath the conversation of the unseen woman in the shed where the water run in the trough . she have set the bottle in the trough because it be a good thing to cool cider before the process of fermentation in the bottle begin . the bottle with their shin neck of green glass be an agreeable spectacle . the lady behind her back be talk of Oklahoma . .   .   . the cowboy with the large nose that she have see on the film at the Piccadilly Cinema have come from Oklahoma . it be , no doubt , somewhere in America . she have be use to go to the Piccadilly Cinema on a Friday . you do not go to the theatre on a Friday if you be bien pensant , but you may regard the cinema as be to the theatre what a repas maigre be as against a meal with meat . .   .   . the lady speak behind she come apparently from Oklahoma : she have eat prairie chicken in her time . on a farm . now , however , she be very rich . or so she tell the little maid . her husband could buy half Lord Fittleworth ’s estate and not miss the money . she say that if only people here would take example . .   .   . 
 	 on Armistice evening they have come thump on her door . the bell have fail to wake she after all the noise in the street of that day . .   .   . she have spring into the middle of the floor and fly to save Mark .   .   . from an air raid . she have for - get that it be the Armistice . .   .   . but the knocking have go on on the door . 
 	 before it have stand monsieur the brother - in - law and that girl in a dark blue girl - guide ’s sort of uniform . both chalk - white and weary to death . as if they lean against one another . .   .   . she have be for bid they go away , but Mark have come out of the bedroom . in his nightshirt with his leg bare . and hairy ! he have bid they come in , roughly , and have get back into bed . .   .   . that have be the last time he have be on his leg ! now , he have be in bed so long , his leg be no long hairy , but polish . like thin glaze bone ! 
 	 she have recall his last gesture . he have positively use a gesture , like a man rave . .   .   . and , indeed , he be rave . at Christopher . and dripping with sweat . twice she have wipe his face whilst they shout at each other . 
 	 it have be difficult to understand what they say because they have speak a sort of patois . naturally they return to the language they have speak in their childhood — when they be excited , these unexcitable people ! it resemble the patois of the Bretons . harsh . .   .   . 
 	 and , for herself , she have be all concerned for the girl . naturally she have be concern for the girl . one be a woman . .   .   . at first she have take she for a little piece from the street . .   .   . but even for a little piece from the street .   .   . then she have notice that there have be no rouge ; no imitation pearl necklace . .   .   . 
 	 of course when she have gather that Mark be press money on they she have feel different . different in two way . it could not be a little piece . and then her heart have contract at the idea of money be give away . they might be ruin . it might be these people instead of her Paris nephew who would pillage her corpse . but the brother - in - law push the thought of money away from he with both hand . if she — Elle — want to go with he she must share his fortune . .   .   . what a country ! what people ! 
 	 there have seem to be no understanding they then . .   .   . it have appear that Mark insist that the girl should stop there with her lover : the lover , on the contrary , insist that she should go home to her mother . the girl keep say that on no account would she leave Christopher . he could not be leave . he would die if he be leave . .   .   . and , indeed , that brother — in — law have seem sick enough . he pant worse than Mark . 
 	 she have eventually take the girl to her own room . a little , agonized , fair creature . she have feel inclined to enfold she in her arm but she have not do so . because of the money . .   .   . she might as well have . it be impossible to get these people to touch money . she would now give no little to lend that girl twenty pound for a frock and some under - garment . 
 	 the girl have sit there without speak . it have seem for hour . then some drunken man on the church step opposite have begin to play the bugle . long call . .   .   . tee .   .   . teee .   .   . TEEEE . .   .   . Ta — heee . .   .   . to — hee . .   .   . continue for ever . .   .   . 
 	 Valentine have begin to cry . she have say that it be dreadful . but you could not object . it be the last Post they be play . for the Dead . you could not object to their play the last Post for the Dead that night . even if it be a drunken man who play and even if it drive you mad . the Dead ought to have all they could get . 
 	 if she have not make the necessary allowance that would have seem to Marie Léonie an exaggerated sentiment . the English bugle — note could do no good to the french dead and the english loss be so negligible in quantity that it hardly seem worth while to become émotionnée when their funeral call be play by a drunken man . the french paper estimate the english loss at a few hundred : what be that as against the million of her own people ? .   .   . but she gather that this girl have go through something terrible that night with the wife , and be too proud to show emotion over her personal vicissitude she pretend to find an outlet because of the sound of that bugle . .   .   . well , it be mournful enough . she have understand it when Christopher , put his face in at the crack of the door , have whisper to she that he be go to stop the bugle because its sound be intolerable to Mark . 
 	 the girl apparently have be in a reverie , for she have not hear he . she , Marie Léonie , have go to look at Mark , and the girl sit there , on the bed . Mark be by then quite quiescent . the bugle have stop . to cheer he she have make a few remark about the inappropriateness of play , for a negligible number of dead , a funeral call at three in the morning . if it have be for the french dead — or if her country have not be betray ! it be betray her country to have give those monster an armistice when they be far from their border . merely that be treachery on the part of these sham Allies . they should have go right through those monster slay they by the million , defenceless , and then they should have lay waste their country with fire and sword . let they , too , know what it be to suffer as France have suffer . it be treachery enough not to have do that , and the child unborn would suffer for it . 
 	 but there they wait , then , even after that treachery have be do , to know what be the term of even that treachery . they might even now not intend to be go to Berlin . .   .   . what , then , be life for ? 
 	 Mark have groan . in effect he be a good frenchman . she have see to that . the girl have come into the room . she could not bear to be alone . .   .   . what a night of movement and cross movement . she have begin to argue with Mark . had n’t there , she have ask , be enough of suffering ? he agree that there have be enough of suffering . but there must be more . .   .   . even out of justice to the poor bloody german . .   .   . he have call they the poor bloody german . he have say that it be the bad disservice you could do your foe not to let they know that remorseless consequence follow determined action . to interfere in order to show fellow that if they do what they want they need not of necessity take what they get for it be in effect to commit a sin against God . if the Germans do not experience that in the sight of the world there be an end of Europe and the world . what be to hinder endless recurrence of what have happen near a place call Gemmenich on the 4th of August , 1914 . , at six o’clock in the morning ? there be nothing to hinder it . any other state from the small to the large might .   .   . 
 	 the girl have interrupt to say that the world have change , and Mark , lie back exhausted on his pillow , have say with a sort of grim sharpness : 
 	 " it be you who say it . .   .   . then you may run the world . .   .   . I know nothing about it .   .   . . " he appear exhaust . 
 	 it be singular the way those two discuss - discuss " the situation " at three - thirty in the morning . well , nobody want to be asleep that night , it seem . even in that obscure street mob go by , shout and play concertina . she have never hear Mark discuss before — and she be never to hear he discuss again . he appear to regard that girl with a sort of aloof indulgence ; as if he be fond of she but regard she as over - learn , too young , devoid of all experience . and Marie Léonie have watch they and listen with intentness . in twenty year these three week have for the first time show she her man in contact with his people . the contemplation have engross she . 
 	 she could , nevertheless , see that her man be exhaust in his inner being and obviously that girl be try beyond endurance . whilst she talk she appear to listen for distant sound . .   .   . she keep on recur to the idea that punishment be abhorrent to the modern mind . Mark stick to his point that to occupy Berlin be not punishment , but that not to occupy Berlin be to commit an intellectual sin . the consequence of invasion be counter - invasion and symbolical occupation , as the consequence of over - pride be humiliation . for the rest of the world , he know nothing of it ; for his own country that be logic — the logic by which she have live . to abandon that logic be to abandon clearness of mind : it be mental cowardice . to show the world Berlin occupy , with stand of arm and colour on her public place , be to show that England respected logic . not to show the world that , be to show that England be mentally cowardly . we dare not put the enemy nation to pain because we shrink from the contemplation . 
 	 Valentine have say : " there have be too much suffering ! " 
 	 he have say : 
 	 " yes , you be afraid of suffering . .   .   . but England be necessary to the world . .   .   . to my world . .   .   . well , make it your world and it may go to rack and ruin how it will . I be do with it . but then .   .   . you must accept the responsibility . a world with England present the spectacle of moral cowardice would be a world on a low plane . .   .   . if you lower the record for the mile you lower the standard of blood — stock . try to think of that . if Persimmon have not achieve what it do the French Grand Prix would be less of an event and the trainer at Maisons Lafitte would be less efficient . and the jockey . and the stable lad . and the sporting writer . .   .   . a world profit by the example of a steadfast nation .   .   . . " 
 	 suddenly Valentine say : 
 	 " where be Christopher i " with such intenseness that it be like a blow . 
 	 Christopher have go out . she exclaim : 
 	 " but you must not let he go out . .   .   . he be not fit to go out alone . .   .   . he have go out to go back .   .   . . " 
 	 Mark say : 
 	 " do not go .   .   . . " for she have get to the door . 
 	 " he go out to stop the Last Post . but you may play the last Post for I . perhaps he have go back to the Square . he have presumably well see what have happen to his wife . I should not myself . " 
 	 Valentine have say with extraordinary bitterness : 
 	 " he shall not . he shall not . " she have go . 
 	 it have come through to Marie Léonie partly then and partly subsequently that Christopher ’s wife have turn up at Christopher ’s empty house , that be in the Square a few yard away only . they have go back late at night probably for purpose of love and have find she there . she have come for the purpose of tell they that she be go to be operate on for cancer , so that with their sensitive nature they could hardly contemplate go to bed together at that moment . 
 	 it have be a good lie . that Mrs. Tietjens be a maitresse femme . there be no deny that . she herself be engage for those other both by her own inclination and the strong injunction of her husband , but Mme Tietjens be certainly ingenious . 
 	 she have manage to incommode and discredit that pair almost as much as any pair could be incommode and discredit , although they be the most harmless couple in the world . 
 	 they have certainly not have an agreeable festival on that Armistice Day . apparently one of the officer present at their dinner of celebration have go rave mad ; the wife of another of Christopher ’s comrade of the regiment have be rude to Valentine ; the colonel of the regiment have take the opportunity to die with every circumstance of melodrama . naturally all the other officer have run away and have leave Christopher and Valentine with the madman and the die colonel on their hand . 
 	 an agreeable voyage de noce . .   .   . it appear that they have secure a four - wheel cab in which , with the madman and the other , they have drive to Balham — an obscure suburb , with sixteen celebrant hang all over the outside of the cab and two on the horse ’ back — at any rate for a couple of mile from Trafalgar Square . they be not , of course , interested in the interior of the cab ; they be merely gay because there be to be no more suffering . no doubt Valentine and Christopher have get rid of the madman somewhere in Chelsea at an asylum for shell - shock case ; but the authority would not take the colonel , so they have drive on to Balham , the colonel make die speech about the late war , his achievement , the money he owe Christopher . .   .   . Valentine have appear to find that extremely try . the man die in the cab . 
 	 they have have to walk back into Town because the driver of the four - wheeler be so upset by the death in his cab that he could not drive . More - over , the horse be founder . it have be twelve midnight before they reach Trafalgar Square . they have have to struggle through pack crowd nearly all the way . apparently they be happy at the accomplishment of their duty — or their benevolence . they stand on the top step of St. Martin ’s Church , dominate the square , that be all illuminated and packed and roar , with bonfire make of the pave wood and omnibus , and the Nelson Column go up and the fountain — basin full of drunkard , and orator and band . .   .   . they stand on the top step , draw deep breath and fall into each other ’s arm . .   .   . for the first time — though apparently they have love each other for a lustre or more . .   .   . what people ! 
 	 then , at the top of the stair in the house in the Inn , they have perceive Sylvia , all in white ! .   .   . 
 	 apparently she have be inform that Christopher and that girl be in communication — by a lady who do not like Christopher because she owe he money . a Lady Macmaster . apparently there be no one in the world who do not dislike Christopher because they owe he money . the colonel and the lunatic and the husband of the lady who have be rude to Valentine .   .   . all ! all ! right down to Mr. Schatzweiler , who have only pay Christopher one cheque for a few dollar out of a great sum and have then contract a nervous breakdown on account of the suffering he have go through as a prisoner of war . .   .   . 
 	 but what sort of a man be that Christopher to have in his hand the fortune of a woman ? .   .   . any woman ! 
 	 those be practically the last word her Mark have ever speak to she , Marie Léonie . she have be support he whilst he drink a tisane she have make in order that he might sleep , and he have say gravely : 
 	 " it be not necessary that I should ask you to be kind to Mademoiselle Wannop . Christopher be incapable of look after she .   .   . . " his last word , for immediately afterwards the telephone bell have ring . he have just before seem to have a good deal of temperature , and it have be whilst his eye be goggle at she , the thermometer that she have stick in his mouth gleam on his dark lip , and whilst she be regret let he be torment by his family that the sharp drilling of the telephone have sound from the hall . immediately the strong german accent of Lord Wolstonmark have , with its accustomed disagreeableness , bur in her ear . he have say that the Cabinet be still sit and they desire to know at once the code that Mark use in his communication with various port . 
 	 his second in command appear to be lose amongst the celebration of that night . Mark have say with a sort of grim irony from the bedroom that if they want to stop his transport go out they might just as well not use cypher . if they want to use a twopenny - halfpenny economy as window - dressing for the election they ’d have to have they might as well give it as much publicity as they could . besides , he do not believe they would get into Germany with the transport they have . a good deal have be smash lately . 
 	 the Minister have say with a sort of heavy joy that they be not go into Germany : and that have be the most dreadful moment of Marie Léonie ’s life ; but with her discipline she have just simply repeat the word to Mark . he have then say something she do not quite catch : and he would not repeat what he have say . she say as much to Lord Wolstonmark , and the chuckle accent say that he suppose that that be the sort of news that would rattle the old boy . but one must adapt oneself to one ’s day ; the time be change . 
 	 she have go from the instrument to look at Mark . she speak to he ; she speak to he again . and again — rapid word of panic . his face be dark purple and congest ; he gaze straight before he . she raise he ; he sink back inertly . 
 	 she remember go to the telephone and speak in French to the man at the other end . 
 	 she have say that the man at the other end be a german and a traitor ; her husband should never speak to he or his fellow again . the man have say : " eh , what ’s that ? eh .   .   . who be you ? " 
 	 with appalling shadow chase up and down in her mind , she have say : 
 	 " I be Lady Mark Tietjens . you have murder my husband . clear yourself from off my line , murderer ! " 
 	 it have be the first time she have ever give herself that name ; it be indeed the first time she have ever speak in French to that Ministry . but Mark have finish with the Ministry , with the Government , with the nation . .   .   . with the world . 
 	 as soon as she could get that man off the wire she have ring up Christopher . he have come round with Valentine in tow . it have certainly not be much of a nuit dc note : for that young couple . 
 
   Part two 

 
  Chapter 1 


 
 
 	 SYLVIA TIETJENS , use the persuasion of her left knee , edge her chestnut near to the bay mare of the shin general . she say : 
 	 " if I divorce Christopher , will you marry I ? " 
 	 he exclaim with the vehemence of a shocked hen : 
 	 " Good God , no ! " 
 	 he shine everywhere except in such part of his grey tweed suit as would have show by shin that they have be put on more than once . but his little white moustache , his check , the bridge but not the tip of his nose , his rein , his Guards ' tie , his boot , martingale , snaffle , curb , finger , finger - nail — all these give evidence of interminable rubbing . .   .   . by himself , by his man , by Lord Fittleworth ’s stable - hand , groom . .   .   . interminable rubbing and supervision at the end of extended arm . merely to look at he you know that he be some - thing like Lord Edward Campion , Lieutenant – General retire , M.P. , K.C.M.G. ( military ) , V.C. , M.C. , D.S.O. .   .   . 
 	 so he exclaim : 
 	 " Good God , no ! " and use a little - finger touch on his snaffle - rein , make his mare recoil from Sylvia Tietjens ' chestnut . 
 	 annoy at its mate ’s motion , the bad - temper chestnut with the white forehead show its tooth at the mare , dance a little and throw out some flake of foam . Sylvia sway backwards and for - ward in her saddle and smile down into her husband ’s garden . 
 	 " you can n’t , you know , " she say , " expect to put an idea out of my head just by flurry the horse .   .   . . " 
 	 " a man , " the general say between " come up " to his mare , " do not marry his . . . " 
 	 his mare go backwards a pace or two into the bank and then a pace forwards . 
 	 " his what ? " Sylvia ask with amiability . " you can not be go to call I your cast mistress . no doubt most man would have a shot at it . but I never have be even your mistress . .   .   . I have to think of Michael ! " 
 	 " I wish , " the general say vindictively , " that you would settle what that boy be to be call . .   .   . Michael or Mark ! " he add : " I be go to say : ' his godson ’s wife . ' .   .   . a man may not marry his godson ’s wife . " 
 	 Sylvia leant over to stroke the neck of the chestnut . 
 	 " a man , " she say , " can not marry any other man ’s wife . .   .   . but if you think that I be go to be the second Lady Tietjens after that .   .   . french prostitute .   .   . " 
 	 " you would prefer , " the general say , " to be India .   .   . " 
 	 vision of India go through their hostile mind . they look down from their horse over Tietjens ’s in West Sussex , over a house with a high - pitch , tile roof with deep window of the grey local stone . he nevertheless see name like Akbbar Khan , Alexander of Macedon , the son of Philip , Delhi , the Massacre at Cawnpore . .   .   . his mind , give over from boyhood to the contemplation of the large jewel in the British Crown , spew up those romance . he be member for ' the West Cleveland Division and a thorn in the side of the Government . they must give he India . they know that if they do not he could publish revelation as to the closing day of the late war . .   .   . he would naturally never do that . one do not blackmail even a government . 
 	 still , to all intent , he be India . 
 	 Sylvia also be aware that he be to all intent and purpose India . she see reception in Government Houses , in which , habit with a tiara , she too would be INDIA . .   .   . as someone say in Shakespeare : 
 	 " I be die , Egypt , die ! only 
 	 I will importune Death a while until 
 	 of many thousand kiss this poor last 
 	 be lay upon thy lip .   .   . " 
 	 she imagine it would be agreeable , suppose she to betray this old Pantaloon India , to have a lover , gasp at her foot , exclaim : " I be die , India , die .   .   . " and she with her tiara , very tall . in white , probably . probably satin ! 
 	 the general say : 
 	 " you know you can not possibly divorce my god - son . you be a roman Catholic . " 
 	 she say , always with her smile : 
 	 " oh , can n’t I ? .   .   . besides it would be of the great advantage to Michael to have for a step - father the Field – Marshal Commanding .   .   . " 
 	 he say with impotent irritation : 
 	 " I wish you would settle whether that boy ’s name be Michael or Mark ! " 
 	 she say : 
 	 " he call himself Mark . .   .   . I call he Michael because I hate the name of Mark .   .   . . " 
 	 she regard Campion with real hatred . she say to herself that upon occasion she would be exemplarily revenge upon he . " Michael " be a Satterthwaite name — her father ’s ; " Mark , " the name for a Tietjens eld son . the boy have originally be baptize and register as Michael Tietjens . at his reception into the Roman Church he have be baptize " Michael Mark . " then have follow the only real deep humiliation of her life . after his Papist baptism the boy have ask to be call Mark . she have ask he if he really mean that . after a long pause — the dreadful long pause of child before they render a verdict!—he have say that he intend to call himself Mark from then on . .   .   . by the name of his father ’s brother , of his father ’s father , grandfather , great - grandfather . .   .   . by the name of the irascible apostle of the lion and the sword . .   .   . the Satterthwaites , his mother ’s family , might go by the board . 
 	 for herself , she hat the name of Mark . if there be one man in the world whom she hat because he be insensible of her attraction it be Mark Tietjens who lie beneath the thatched roof beneath her eye . .   .   . her boy , however , intend , with a child ’s cruelty , to call himself Mark Tietjens . .   .   . 
 	 the general grumble : 
 	 " there be no keeping track with you . .   .   . you say now you would be humiliate to be Lady Tietjens after that Frenchwoman . .   .   . but you have always say that that Frenchwoman be only the concubine of Sir Mark . I hear you tell your maid so only yesterday . .   .   . you say one thing , then you say another . .   .   . what be one to believe ? " 
 	 she regard he with sunny condescension . he grumble on : 
 	 " one thing , then another . .   .   . you say you can not divorce my godson because you be a roman Catholic . nevertheless , you begin divorce proceeding and throw all the mud you can over the miserable fellow . then you remember your creed and do not go on . .   .   . what sort of game be this ? " .   .   . she regard he still ironically but with good humour across the neck of her horse . 
 	 he say : 
 	 " there ’ really no fathom you . .   .   . a little time ago — for month on end , you be die of of internal cancer , in short .   .   . " 
 	 she comment with the utmost good temper : 
 	 " I do not want that girl to be Christopher ’s mistress . .   .   . you would think that no man with any imagination at all could .   .   . I mean with his wife in that condition . .   .   . but , of course , when she insist . .   .   . well , I be not go to stop in bed , in retreat , all my life .   .   . " 
 	 she laugh good - humouredly at her companion . 
 	 " I do not believe you know anything about woman , " she say . " why should you ? naturally Mark Tietjens marry his concubine . man always do as a sort of death — bed offering . you will eventually marry Mrs. Partridge if I do not choose to go to India . you think you would not , but you would . .   .   . as for I , I think it would be well for Michael if his mother be Lady Edward Campion — of India — than if she be merely Lady Tietjens the second of Groby , with a dowager who be once a cross - channel fly - by - night .   .   . . " she laugh and add : " anyhow , the sister at the blessed Child say that they never see so many lily — symbol of purity — as there be at my tea - party when I be die . .   .   . you ’ll admit yourself you never see anything so ravish as I amongst the lily and the tea - cup with the great crucifix above my head . .   .   . you be singularly move ! 
 	 you swear you would cut Christopher ’s throat yourself on the day the detective tell we that he be really live here with that girl .   .   . . " 
 	 the general exclaim : 
 	 " about the Dower House at Groby . .   .   . it ’ really damn awkward . .   .   . you swear to I that when you let Groby to that american madwoman I could have the Dower House and keep my horse in Groby stable . but now it appear I can n’t . .   .   . it appear . . . " 
 	 " it appear , " Sylvia say , " that Mark Tietjens mean to leave the Dower House at the disposal of his french concubine . .   .   . anyhow , you can afford a house of your own . you ’re rich enough ! " 
 	 the general groan : 
 	 " rich enough ! my God ! " 
 	 she say : 
 	 " you have still — trust you!—your young son ’s settlement . you have still your general ’s pay . you have the interest on the grant the nation make you at the end of the war . you have four hundred a year as a member of Parliament . you have cadge on I for your keep and your man ’s keep and your horse ' and groom ' at Groby for year and year .   .   . . " 
 	 Immense dejection cover the face of her companion . he say : 
 	 " Sylvia . .   .   . consider the expense of my constituency . .   .   . one would almost say you hat I ! " 
 	 her eye continue to devour the orchard and garden that be spread out below she . a furrow of raw , newly - turn earth run from almost beneath their horse ' hoof nearly vertically to the house below . she say : 
 	 " I suppose that be where they get their water - supply . from the spring above here . cramp the carpenter say they be always have trouble with the pipe ! " 
 	 the general exclaim : 
 	 " oh , Sylvia . and you tell Mrs. de Bray Pape that they have no water - supply so they could not take a bath ! " 
 	 Sylvia say : 
 	 " if I have n’t she would never have think of cut down Groby Great Tree . .   .   . do not you see that for Mrs. de Bray Pape people who do not take bath be outside the law ? so , though she ’s not really courageous , she will risk cut down their old tree .   .   . . " she add : " yes , I almost believe I do hate miser , and you be more next door to a miser than anyone else I ever honour with my acquaintance .   .   . " she add far : " but I should advise you to calm yourself . if I let you marry I you will have my Satterthwaite picking . not to mention the Groby picking till Michael come of age , and the — what be it?—ten thousand a year you will get from India . if out of all that you can not skimp enough to make up for house - room at my expense at Groby you be not half the miser I take you for ! " 
 	 a number of horse , with Lord Fittleworth ' and Gunning , come up from the soft track outside the side of the garden and on to the hard road that border the garden ’s top . Gunning sit one horse without his foot in the stirrup and have the bridle of two other over his elbow . they be the horse of Mrs. de Bray Pape , Mrs. Lowther and Mark Tietjens . the garden with its quince - tree , the old house with its immensely high - pitch roof such as be see in country where wood be once plentiful , the thatch of Mark Tietjens ' shelter and the famous four county , run from the other side of the hedge out to infinity . an aeroplane drone down towards they , many mile away . up from the road run a slope cover with bracken , to many great beech tree , along a wire hedge . that be the summit of Cooper ’s Common . in the stillness the hoof of all those horse make a noise like that of desultorily approach cavalry . Gunning halt his horse at a little distance ; the beast Sylvia ride be too ill - temper to be approach . 
 	 Lord Fittleworth ride up to the general and say : 
 	 " God damn it , Campion , ought Helen Lowther to be down there ? her ladyship will give I no rest for a fortnight ! " he shout at Gunning : " here you , blast you , you old scoundrel , where ’s the gate speeding complain you have be interfere with ? " he add to the general : " this old villain be in my service for thirty year , yet he ’ always counter - swing the gate in your godson ’s beastly field . of course a man have to look after his master ’s interest , but we shall have to come to some arrangement . we can not go on like this . " he add to Sylvia : 
 	 " it be n’t the sort of place Helen ought to go to , be it ? all sort of people live with all sort .   .   . if what you say be true ! " 
 	 the Earl of Fittleworth give in all place the impression that he wear a scarlet tail - coat , a white stock with a fox — hunt pin , white buckskin breeches , a rather painful eyeglass and a silk top - hat attach to his person by a silken cord . actually he be wear a square , high , black , feel hat , pepper - and - salt tweed and no eyeglass . still , he screw up one eye to look at you , and his lucid dark pupil , his contract swarthy face with its little bristling black - grey moustache , give he , perch on his immense horse , the air of a querulous but very masterful monkey . 
 	 he consider that he be out of earshot of Gunning and so continue to the other two : " ought n’t to give away master before their servant . .   .   . but it be n’t any place for the niece of the President of a show that Cammie have most of her money in . anyhow she will comb my whisker ! " before marry the Earl , Lady Fittleworth have be Miss Camden Grimm . " Regular Aga .   .   . Agapemone , so you say . a queer go for old Mark at his age . " 
 	 the general say to Fittleworth : 
 	 " here , I say , she say I be a regular miser . .   .   . you do not have any complaint , say , from your keeper that I do n’t tip enough ? tell she , will you ? that ’s the real sign of a miser ! " 
 	 Fittleworth say to Sylvia : 
 	 " you do not mind my talk like that of your husband ’s establishment , do you I " he add that in the old day they would not have talk like that before a lady about her husband . or perhaps , by Jove , they would have ! his grandfather have have a .   .   . 
 	 Sylvia be of opinion that Helen Lowther could look after herself . her husband be say not to pay she the attention that a lady have a right to expect of a husband . so if Christopher .   .   . 
 	 she take an appraising sideways glance at Fittleworth . that peer be go slightly purple under his brown skin . he gaze out over the landscape and swallow in his throat . she feel that her time for make a decision have come . time change , the world change ; she feel heavy in the morning than she have ever use to . she have have a long , ingenious talk with Fittleworth the night before , on a long terrace . she have be ingenious even for she ; but she be aware that afterwards Fittleworth have have a long bedroom talk with his Cammie . over even the great house a certain sense of suspense brood when the Master be talk to the Mistress . the Master and the Mistress — upon a word , usually from the Master — take themselves off , and the house - guest , at any rate in a small party , straggle , be uncertain as to who give the signal to retire , suppress yawn even . finally the butler approach the most intimate guest and say that the Countess will not be come down again . 
 	 that night Sylvia have shoot her bolt . on the terrace she have draw for the Earl a picture of the menage upon whose roof she now look down . it stretch out below she , that little domain , as if she be a goddess dominate its destiny . but she be not so certain of that . the dusky purple under Fittleworth ’s skin show no diminution . he continue to gaze away over his territory , read it as if it be in a book — a clump of tree go here , the red roof of a new villa grow up there in among the tree , a hop - oast with its characteristic cowl go from a knoll . he be get ready to say something . she have ask he the night before to root that family out of that slope . 
 	 naturally not in so many word . but she have draw such a picture of Christopher and Mark as make it , if the peer believe she , almost a necessity for a conscientious nobleman to do the good to rid his countryside of a plague - spot . .   .   . the point be whether Fittleworth would choose to believe she because she be a beautiful woman with a thrilling voice . he be terribly domestic and attach to his transatlantic female , as only very wicked dark man late in life can contrive to be , when they come of very wicked , haughty and influential house . they have , as it be , attend on the caprice of so many opera singer and famous professional that when , later in life , they take capricious or influential wife , they get the knack of very stiffly but minutely show every sort of elaborate deference to their life - partner . that be bear with they . 
 	 so that the fate of that garden and that high - pitch roof be , in fact , in the hand of Cammie Fittleworth — in so far as great peer today have influence over the fate of their neighbour . and it be to be presume that they have some . 
 	 but all man be curious creature . fittleworth stiffen at queer place . he have do so last night . he have stand a good deal . it have to be remember that Mark Tietjens be an old acquaintance of his — not as intimate as he would have be if the Earl have have child , for Mark prefer house of married people who have child . but the Earl know Mark very well . .   .   . now a man listen to gossip about another man whom he know very well will go pretty far towards believe what a beautiful woman will tell he . beauty and truth have a way of appear to be akin ; and it be true that no man know what another man be do when he be out of sight . 
 	 so that in invent or hint at a ruinous , conceal harem , with consequent disease to account for Mark ’s physical condition and apparent ruin , she think she be not go altogether too far . she have , at any rate , be ready to chance it . it be the sort of thing a man will believe .   .   . about his good friend even . he will say : " only think . .   .   . all the while old x .   .   . be appear such a quiet codger he be really . . . " and the word rivet conviction . 
 	 so that appear to get through . 
 	 her revelation as to Christopher ’s financial habit have not appear to do so well . the Earl have listen with his head on one side , whilst she have let he gather that Christopher live on woman — on the former Mrs. Duchemin , now Lady Macmaster , for instance . yes , to that the Earl have listen with deference , and it have seem a fairly safe allegation to make . Old Duchemin be know to have leave a pot of money to his widow . she have a very nice little place not six or seven mile away from where they stand . 
 	 and it have seem natural to bring in Edith Ethel , for , not so long ago , Lady Macmaster have pay Sylvia a visit . it be about the late Macmaster ’s debt to Christopher . that be a point about which Lady Macmaster be and always have seem to be a little cracky . she have actually visit Sylvia in order to see if Sylvia would not use her influence with Christopher . to get he to remit the debt . even in the old day Lady Macmaster have be use to worry Sylvia about that . 
 	 apparently Christopher have not carry his idiotcy as far as might be expect . he have drag that wretched girl down into those penurious surrounding , but he be not go to let she and the child she appear to be go to have suffer actual starvation , or even too great worry . and apparently , to satisfy a rather uneasy vanity , year before Macmaster have give Christopher a charge on his life insurance . Mac - master , as she well know , have spunge unmercifully on her husband , and Christopher have certainly regard the money he have advance as a gift . she herself have many time upbraid he about it ; it have appear to her one of Christopher ’s bad unbearablenesse . 
 	 but apparently the charge on the life insurance still exist and be now a charge on that miserable fellow ’s rather extensive estate . at any rate , the insurance company refuse to pay over any money to the widow until the charge be satisfied . .   .   . and the thought that Christopher be do for that girl what , she be convince , he never would have do for herself have add a new impulse to Sylvia ’s bitterness . indeed , her bitterness have by now give way almost entirely to a mere spirit of tormentingness — she want to torture that girl out of her mind . that be why she be there now . she imagine Valentine under the high roof suffer torture because she , Sylvia , be look down over the hedge . 
 	 but the visit of Lady Macmaster have certainly revive her bitterness as it have suggest to her new scheme of make herself a nuisance to the household below she . Lady Macmaster , in widow ’s weed of the most portentous crape , that give to she at once the elegance and the direness of a funeral horse , have really seem more than a little out of her mind . she have ask Sylvia ’s opinion of all sort of expedient for make Christopher loosen his grip , and she have continue her supplication even in correspondence . at last she have hit on a singular expedient . .   .   . some year before , apparently , Edith Ethel have have an affair of the heart with a distinguished Scottish Littérateur , now deceased . Edith Ethel , as be well know , have act the Egeria to quite a number of scottish man of letter . that be natural ; the macmaster ’ establishment be Scottish , Mac - master have be a Critic and have have Government fund for the relief of indigent man of letter , and Edith Ethel be passionately cultured . you could see that even in the form her crape take and in how she arrange it around she when she sit or agitatedly rise to wring her hand . 
 	 but the letter of this particular Scot have out - pass the language of ordinary egerianishness . they speak of Lady Macmaster ’s eye , arm , shoulder , feminine aura . .   .   . these letter Lady Macmaster propose to entrust to Christopher for sale to transatlantic collector . she say they ought to fetch £ 30,000 at least , and with the ten per cent . commission that Christopher might take , he might consider himself as amply repay for the four thousand odd that Macmaster ’s estate owe he . 
 	 and this have appear to Sylvia to be so eccentric an expedient that she have feel the utmost pleasure in suggest that Edith Ethel should drive up to Tietjens ’s with her letter and have an interview — if possible with Valentine Wannop in the absence of Tietjens . this , she calculate , would worry her rival quite a little , and even if it do not do that , she , Sylvia , would trust herself to obtain subsequently from Edith Ethel a great many grotesque detail as to the Wannop ’s exhausted appearance , shabby clothing , wear hand . 
 	 for it be to be remember that one of the chief torment of the woman who have be abandon by a man be the sheer thirst of curiosity for material detail as to how that man subsequently live . Sylvia Tietjens , for a great number of year , have torment her husband . she would have say herself that she have be a thorn in his flesh . that be largely because he have seem to she never to be incline to take his own part . if you live with a person who suffer from be put upon a good deal , and if that person will not assert his own right , you be apt to believe that your standard as gentleman and Christian be below his , and the experience be lastingly disagreeable . but , in any case , Sylvia Tietjens have have reason to believe that for many year , for well or for bad — and mostly for bad — she have be the dominating influence over Christopher Tietjens . now , except for extraneous annoyance , she be aware that she could no long influence he either for evil or for good . he be a solid , four - square lump of meal sack too heavy for she haul about . 
 	 so that the only real pleasure that she have be when , at night , in a circle of cosy friend , she could assert that she be not even yet out of his confidence . normally she would not — the member of her circle would not have — make confidante of her ex - husband ’s domestic . but she have have to chance whether the detail of Christopher ’s menage as reveal by the wife of his carpenter would prove to her friend sufficiently amusing to make her friend forget the social trespass she commit in consort with her husband ’s dependent , and she have to chance whether the carpenter ’s wife would not see that , by proclaim her wrong over the fact that her husband have leave she , she be proclaim her own unattractiveness . 
 	 she have hitherto chance both , but the time , she be aware , be at hand when she would have to ask herself whether she would not be well off if she be what the French call rangée as the wife of the Commander - in - chief in India than as a free - lance woman owe her popularity entirely to her own exertion . it would be slightly ignominious to owe part of her prestige to a pantaloon like General Lord Edward Campion , K.C.B. , but how restful might it not be ! to keep your place in a society of Marjies and Beatties — and even of Cammies , like the Countess of Fittleworth — mean constant exertion and watchfulness , even if you be comfortably wealthy and well - bear — and it mean still more exertion when your staple capital for entertainment be the domestic misfortune of a husband that do not like you . 
 	 she might well point out to Marjie , Lady Stern , that her husband ’s clothe lack button and the wife of his companion all imaginable chic ; she might well point out to Beattie , Lady Elsbacher , that accord to her husband ’s carpenter ’s wife , the interior of her husband ’s home resemble a cave encumber with packing case in dark - coloured wood , whereas in her day .   .   . or she might even point out to Cammie , Lady Fittleworth , to Mrs. de Bray Pape and Mrs. Lowther , that , have a defective water - supply , her husband ’s woman probably provide he only with difficulty with bath . .   .   . but every now and then someone — as have be the case once or twice with the three american lady — would point out , a little tentatively , that her husband be by now Tietjens of Groby to all intent and purpose . and people - and in particular american lady — would attach particular importance before she to English Country gentleman who have turn down title and the like . her husband have not turn down a title ; he have not be able to , for much as Mark have desire to refuse a baronetcy at the last moment he have be give to understand that he could n’t . but her husband have practically turn down a whole great estate , and the romantic aspect of that feat be begin to filter through to her friend . for all her assertion that his seem poverty be due to dissolute living and consequent bankruptcy , her friend would occasionally ask she whether in fact his poverty be not simply a voluntary affair , the result either of a wager or a strain of mysticism . they would point out that the fact that she and her son at least have all the symptom of considerable wealth look like a sign rather that Christopher do not desire wealth , or be generous , than that he have no long money to throw away . .   .   . ' 
 	 there be symptom of that sort of questioning of the mind rise up in the american lady whom Cammie Fittleworth like to have stay with she . Hitherto Sylvia have manage to squash they . after all , the Tietjens household below her foot be a singular affair for those who have not the clue to its mystery . she have the clue herself ; she know both about the silent feud between the two brother and about their attitude to life . and if it enrage she that Christopher should despise the thing that money could buy and that she so value , it none the less gratify she to know that , in the end , she be to be regard as responsible for that silent feud and the renunciation that it have cause . it be her tongue that have set go the discreditable story that Mark have once believe against his brother . 
 	 but if she be to retain her power to blast that household with her tongue , she feel she ought to have detail . she must have corroborative detail . otherwise she could not so very convincingly put over her picture of abandon corruption . you might have think that in she coerce Mrs. de Bray Pape and her son into make that rather outrageous visit , and in awakening Mrs. Lowther ’s innocent curiosity as to the content of the cottage , she have be inspire solely by the desire to torment Valentine Wannop . but she be aware that there be more than that to it . she might get detail of all sort of queerness that , triumphantly , to other group of listener she could retail as proof of her intimacy with that household . 
 	 if her listener show any sign of say that it be queer that a man like Christopher , who appear like a kindly group of sack , should actually be a triply cross being , compound of a love - lace , Pandarus and a Satyr , she could always answer : " ah , but what can you expect of people who have ham dry in their drawing - room ! " or if other allege that it be queer , if Valentine Wannop have Christopher as much under her thumb as she be say to have , even by Sylvia , that she should still allow Christopher to run an Agapemone in what be , after all , her own house , Sylvia would have like to be able to reply : " ah , but what can you expect of a woman upon whose stair you will find , side by side , a hairbrush , a frying - pan and a copy of Sappho ! " 
 	 that be the sort of detail that Sylvia need . the one item she have : the Tietjens , she know from Mrs. Carpenter Cramp , have an immense fireplace in their living - room and , after the time - honour custom , they smoke their ham in that chimney . but to people who do not know that smoking ham in great chimney be a time - honour custom , the assertion that Christopher be the sort of person who dry ham in his drawing - room would bring up image of your find yourself in a sort of place where ham recline on the sofa - cushion . even that be not a proof to the reflective that the perpetrator be a sadic lunatic — but few people be reflective and at any rate it be queer , and one queerness might be take as imply another . 
 	 but as to Valentine she could not get detail enough . you have to prove that she be a bad housekeeper and a blue - stocking in order that it should be apparent that Christopher be miserable — and you have to prove that Christopher be miserable in order to make it apparent that the hold that Valentine Wannop certainly have over he be something unholy . for that it be necessary to have detail of misplaced hairbrush , frying - pan and copy of Sappho . 
 	 it have , however , be difficult to get those detail . Mrs. Cramp , when appeal to , have make it rather plain that , far from be a bad housekeeper , Valentine Wannop do no housekeeping at all , whereas Marie Léonie — Lady Mark — be a perfect devil of a ménagére . apparently Mrs. Cramp be allow no far into the dwelling than the wash - house — because of half - pound of sugar and duster that Mrs. Cramp , in the character of charwoman , have believe to be her perquisite . Marie Léonie have n’t . 
 	 the local doctor and the parson , both of whom visit the house , have contribute only palely - colour portrait of the young woman . Sylvia have go to call on they , and make use of the Fittleworth aegis — hint that Lady Cammie want detail of her humbler neighbour for her own instruction — Sylvia have try to get behind the professional secrecy that distinguished parson and doctor . but she have not get much behind . the parson give she the idea that he think Valentine rather a jolly girl , very hospitable and with a fine tap of cider at disposal and fond of read under tree — the classic mostly . very much interested also in rock — plant as you could see by the bank under Tietjens ’s window . .   .   . their house be always call Tietjens ’s . Sylvia have never be under those window , and that enrage she . 
 	 from the doctor Sylvia , for a faint flash , gain the impression that Valentine enjoy rather poor health . but it have be only an impression arise from the fact that the doctor see she every day — and it be rather discount by the other fact that the doctor say that his daily visit be for Mark , who might be expect to pop off at any moment . so he need careful watching . a little excitement and he be do for . .   .   . otherwise Valentine seem to have a sharp eye for old furniture,“as the doctor know to his cost , for in a small way , he collect himself . and he say that at small cottage sale and for small object Valentine could drive a bargain that Tietjens himself never achieve . 
 	 otherwise , from both the doctor and the parson , she have an impression of Tietjens ’s as a queer house - hold — queer because it be so humdrum and unite . she really herself have expect something more exciting ! really . it do not seem possible that Christopher should settle down into tranquil devotion to brother and mistress after the year of emotion she have give he . it be as if a man should have jump out of a frying - pan into — a duckpond . 
 	 so , as she look at the red flush on Fittleworth ’s face , an almost mad moment of impatience have overcome she . this fellow be about the only man who have ever have the gut to stand up to she . .   .   . a fox - hunting squire : an extinct animal ! 
 	 the trouble be , you could not tell quite how extinct he be . he might be able to bite as hard as a fox . otherwise she would be run down , right now , run down that zigzag orange path to that forbid land . 
 	 that she have hitherto never dare . from a social point of view it would have be outrageous , but she be prepared to chance that . she be sure enough of her place in Society , and if people will excuse a man ’ leave his wife , they will excuse the wife ’s make at least one or two demonstration that be a bit thick . but she have simply not dare to meet Christopher : he might cut she . 
 	 perhaps he would not . he be a gentleman and gentleman do not actually cut woman with whom they have sleep . .   .   . but he might . .   .   . she might go down there , and in a dim , low room be make some sort of stipulation — God know what , the first that come into her head — to Valentine . you can always make up some sort of reason for approach the woman who have supplant you . but he might come in , moon in , and suddenly stiffen into a great , clumsy — oh , adorable — face of stone . 
 	 that be what you would not dare to face . that would be death . she could imagine he go out of the room , roll his shoulder . leave the whole establishment indifferently to she , 
 	 — close only himself in invisible bond — deny to she by the angel with the flaming sword ! .   .   . that be what he would do . and that before the other woman . he have come once very near it , and she have hardly recover from it . that pretend illness have not be so much pretended as all that ! she have smile angelically , under the great crucifix , in the convent that have be her nursing home — angelically , amongst lily , upon the general , the sister , the many caller that gradually come to her tea . but she have have to think that Christopher be probably in the arm of his girl and he have let she go when she have , certainly physically , need his help . 
 	 but that have not be a calm occasion , in that dark empty house . .   .   . and he have not , at that date , enjoy the favour , the domesticity , of that young woman . he have not have a chance of comparison , so the turning down have not count . he have treat she barbarously — as social counter go it have be helpful to she — but only at the strong urge of a young woman drive to fury : that could be palliate . it hardly indeed affect she now as a reverse . look at reasonably : if a man come home intend to go to bed with a young woman who have bewitch he for a number of year and find another woman who tell he that she have cancer , and then do a very creditable faint from the top of the stair and thus — in spite of practice and of be as hard as nail — put her ankle out of joint , he have get to choose between the one and the other . and the other in this case have be vigorous , determined on her man , even vituperative . obviously Christopher be not the sort of man who would like seduce a young woman whilst his wife be die of internal cancer , let alone a sprain ankle . but the young woman have arrive at a stage when she do not care for any delicacy or their dictate . 
 	 no . that she have be able to live down . but if new the same thing happen , in dim , quiet daylight , in a tranquil old room .   .   . that she would not be able to face . it be one thing to acknowledge that your man have go — there be no irrevocability about go . he may come back when the other woman be insignificant , a blue - stocking , entirely un — chic . .   .   . but if he take the step — the responsibility — of cut you , that would be to put between you a barrier that no amount of weariness with your rival could overstep . 
 	 Impatience grow upon she . the fellow be away in an aeroplane . go North . it be the only time she have ever know of he as have go away . it be her only chance of run down those orange zigzag . and now — it be all Lombard Street to a China apple that Fittleworth intend to disapprove of she run down . and you could not ignore Fittleworth . 
 
  Chapter 2 


 
 
 	 no , you could not ignore Fittleworth . as a fox — hunt squire he might be an extinct monster — though , then again , he might not : there be no knowing . but as a wicked , dark adept with bad woman , and one come of a race that have be adept with woman good and bad for generation , he be about as dangerous a person as you could find . that gross , slow , earthy , obstinate fellow Gunning could stand grouchily up to Fittleworth , answer he back and chance what Fittleworth could do to he . so could any cottager . but then they be his people . she be n’t .   .   . she , Sylvia Tietjens , and she do not believe she could afford to outface he . nor could half England . 
 	 Old Campion want India — probably she herself want Campion to have India . Groby Great Tree be cut down , and if you have not the distinction , if you rid yourself of the distinction , of Groby Great Tree just to wound a man to the heart — you may as well take India . time be change , but there be no knowing how the circumstance of a man like fittleworth change . he sit his horse like a monkey and gaze out over his land as his people have do for generation , bastard or legitimate . and it be all very well to regard he as merely a country squire marry to a transatlantic nobody and so out of it . he hop up to London — he and his Cammie too — and he pass unnoticeably about the good place and could drop a word or so here and there ; and for all the Countess ' foreign and unknown origin , she have access to ear to which it be dangerous to have access - dangerous for aspirant to India . campion might have his war — service and his constituency . but Cammie Fittleworth be popular in the right place , and Fittleworth have his hound and , when it come even to constituency , the tradesman of a couple of county . and be wicked . 
 	 it have be obvious to she for a long time that God would one day step in and intervene for the protection of Christopher . after all , Christopher be a good man — a rather sickeningly good man . it be , in the end , she reluctantly admit , the function of God and the invisible Powers to see that a good man shall eventually be permit to settle down to a stuffy domestic life .   .   . even to chaffer over old furniture . it be a comic affair — but it be the sort of affair that you have to admit . God be probably — and very rightly — on the side of the stuffy domesticity . otherwise the world could not continue — the child would not be healthy . and certainly God desire the production of large crop of healthy child . mind doctor of today say that all case of nervous breakdown occur in person whose parent have not lead harmonious life . 
 	 so Fittleworth might well have be select as the lightning conductor over the house of Tietjens . and the selection be quite a good one on the part of the Unseen Powers . and no doubt predestine . there be no accident about Mark ’s be under the aegis — if that be what you call it — of the Earl . Mark have for long be one of the power of the land , so have Fittleworth . they have move in the same sphere — the rather mysterious sphere of Good People — who rule the destiny of the nation in so far as the more decorative and more splendid job be concern . they must have meet about , here and there , constantly for year . and no doubt Mark have indicate that it be in that neighbourhood that he want to end his day simply because he want to be near the Fittleworths , who could be rely on to look after his Marie Leonie and the rest of they . 
 	 for the matter of that , Fittleworth himself , like God , be on the side of the stuffy domesticity and on the side of woman who be in the act of produce healthy child . early in life he have have a woman to whom he be say to have be hopelessly attach and whom he have acquire in romantic circumstance — a famous dancer whom he have snap up under the nose of a very great Person indeed . and the woman have die in child - birth — or have give birth to an infant child and go mad and committed suicide after that achievement . at any rate , for month and month , Fittleworth ’s friend have have to sit up night after night with he so that he might not kill himself . 
 	 later — after he have marry Cammie in the search for a domesticity that , except for his hound , he too have make really almost stuffy — he have interest himself — and of course his Countess — in the cause of provide tranquil condition for woman before childbirth . they have put up a perfectly lovely lying - in almshouse right under their own window , down there . 
 	 so there it be — and , as she take her sideways glance at Fittleworth , high up there in the air beside she , she be perfectly aware that she might be in for such a duel with he as have seldom yet fallen to her lot . 
 	 he have begin by say : " God damn it , Campion , ought Helen Lowther to be down there ? " then he have put it , as upon she , Sylvia ’s information , that the cottage be in effect a disorderly house . but he have add : " if what you say be true ? " 
 	 that of course be distinctly dangerous , for Fittleworth probably know quite well that it have be at she , Sylvia ’s , instigation that Helen Lowther war down there . and he be let she know that if it be at her instigation and if the house be really in her belief a brothel his Countess would be { rightfully displeased . frightfully . 
 	 Helen Lowther be of no particular importance , except to the Countess — and of course to Michael . she be one of those not unattractive Americans that drift over here and enjoy themselves with frightfully simple thing . she like visit ruin and chatter about nothing in particular , and gallop on the down and talk to old servant , and she like the adoration of Michael . probably she would have turn down the adoration of anyone old . 
 	 and the Countess probably like to protect her innocence . the Countess be fiftyish now , and of a generation that preserve a certain stiffness along with a certain old - fashioned broadness of mind and outspokenness . she be of a class of American that have once seem outrageously wealthy and who , if in the present stage of thing they do not seem overwhelming , yet retain an aspect of impressive comfort and social authority , and she move in a set most of whose individual , American , English , or even French , be of much the same class as herself . she tolerate — she even like — Sylvia , but she might well be mad if from under her roof Helen Lowther , who be in her charge , should come into social contact with an irregular couple . you never know when that point of view might not crop up in woman of that date and class . 
 	 Sylvia , however , have chance it . she have to — and in the end it be only pull the string of one more shower - bath . it be a shower - bath formidably charge — but in the end that be her vocation in life , and , if Campion have to lose India , she could always pursue her vocation in other countryside . she be tired , but not as tired as all that ! 
 	 so Sylvia have chance say that she suppose Helen Lowther could look after herself , and have add a salacious quip to keep the speech in character . she know nothing really of Helen Lowther ’s husband , who be probably a lean man with some dim avocation , but he could not be very impressionné , or he would not let his attractive young wife roam for ever over Europe . , 
 	 his Lordship give no further sign beyond repeat that if that fellow be the sort of fellow Mrs. Tietjens say he be , her ladyship would properly curl his whisker . and , in face of that , Sylvia simply have to make a concession to the extent of say that she do not see why Helen Lowther could not visit a show cottage that be know , apparently over half America . and perhaps buy some old stick . 
 	 his Lordship remove his gaze from the distant hill , and turn a cool , rather impertinent glance on she . he say : 
 	 " ah , if it ’ only that . . . " and nothing more . and she chance it again : 
 	 " if , " she say slowly too , " you think Helen Lowther be in need of protection I do not mind if I go down and look after her myself ! " 
 	 the general , who have try several interjection , now exclaim : 
 	 " surely you would not meet that fellow and that rather spoil it . 
 	 for Fittleworth could take the opportunity to leave she to what he be at liberty to regard as the direction of her natural protector . otherwise he must have say something to give away his attitude . so she have to give away more of her own with the word : 
 	 " Christopher be not down there . he have take an aeroplane to York — to save Groby Great Tree . your man Speeding see he when he go to get your saddle . get into a plane . " she add : " but he ’ too late . Mrs. de Bray Pape have a letter the day before yesterday to say the tree have be cut down . at her order ! " 
 	 Fittleworth say : " Good God ! " nothing more . the general regard he as one fear to be strike by lightning . campion have already tell she over and over again that F ittleworth would rage like a town bull at the bare idea that the tenant of a furnished house should interfere with its owner ’s timber . .   .   . but he merely continue to look away , commune with the handle of his crop . that call , Sylvia know , for another concession , and she say : 
 	 " now Mrs. de Bray Pape have get cold foot . horribly cold foot . that ’s why she ’ down there . she ’s get the idea that Mark may have she put in prison ! " she add far : 
 	 " she want to take my boy Michael with she to intercede . as the heir he have some right to a view ! " 
 	 and from those speech of hers Sylvia have the measure of her dread of that silent man . perhaps she be more tired than she think , and the idea of India more attractive . 
 	 at that point Fittleworth exclaim : 
 	 " damn it all , I ’ve get to settle the hash of that fellow Gunning ! " ' 
 	 he turn his horse ’s head along the road and beckon the general towards he with his crop handle . the general gaze back at she appealingly , but Sylvia know that she have to stop there and await Fittleworth ’s verdict from the general ’s lip . she be not even to have any duel of sour - entendus with Fittleworth . 
 	 she clench her finger on her crop and look towards Gunning . .   .   . if she be go to be ask by the Countess through old Campion to pack up , bag and baggage , and leave the house she would at least get what she could out of that fellow whom she have never yet manage to approach . 
 	 the horse of the general and Fittleworth , relieve to be out of the neighbourhood of Sylvia ’s chestnut , mince companionably along the road , the mare like her companion . 
 	 " this fellow gunning , " his Lordship begin . .   .   . he continue with great animation : " about these gate . .   .   . you be aware that my estate carpenter repair . . . " 
 	 those be the last word she hear , and she imagine Fittleworth continue for a long time about his bother gate in order to put Campion quite off his guard — and no doubt for the sake of manner . then he would drop in some shot that would be terrible to the old general . he might even cross — question he as to fact , with sly , side question , look away over the country . 
 	 for that she care very little . she do not pretend to be a historian : she entertain rather than instructed . and she have concede enough to Fittleworth . or perhaps it be to Cammie . Cammie be a great , fat , good - natured dark thing with pocket under her liquid eye . but she have a will . and by tell Fittleworth that she have not incite Helen Lowther and the two other to make an incursion into the Tietjens ' household Sylvia be aware that she have weaken . 
 	 she have not intend to weaken . it have happen . she have intend to chance convey the idea that she intend to worry Christopher and his companion into leave that country . 
 	 the heavy man with the three horse approach slowly , with the air of a small army in the narrow road . he be grubby and unbuttoned , but he regard she intently with eye a little bloodshot . 
 	 he say from a distance something that she do not altogether understand . it be about her chestnut . he be ask she to back that ere chestnut ’s tail into the hedge . she be not use to be speak to by the low class . she keep she horse along the road . in that way the fellow could not pass . she know what be the matter . her chestnut would lash out at Gunning ’s charge if they get near her stern . in the hunting season it wear a large k on its tail . 
 	 nevertheless the fellow must be a good man with horse : otherwise he would not be perch on one with the stirrup cross over the saddle in front of he and lead two other . she do not know that she would care to do that herself nowadays ; there have be a time when she would have . she have intend to slip down from the chestnut and hand it , too , over to gun . once she be down on the road he could not very well refuse . but she feel disinclined — to cock her leg over the saddle . he look like a fellow who could refuse . 
 	 he refuse . she have ask he to hold her horse whilst she go down and speak to his master . he have make no motion towards she ; he have continue to stare fixedly at she . she have say : 
 	 " you ’re Captain Tietjens ' servant , be n’t you ? I ’m his wife . stay with Lord Fittleworth ? " 
 	 he have make no answer and no movement except to draw the back of his right hand across his left nostril — for lack of a handkerchief . he say some - thing incomprehensible — but not conciliatory . then he begin a long speech . that she under - stand . it be to the effect that he have be thirty year , boy and man , with his Lordship and the rest of his time with th ' Cahptn . he also point out that there be a hitching post and chain by the gate there . but he do not advise she to hitch to it . the chestnut would kick to flinder any cart that come along the road . and the mere idea of the chestnut lash out and injure itself cause she to shudder ; she be a good horsewoman . 
 	 the conversation go with long pause . she be in no hurry ; she would have to wait till Campion or Fittleworth come back — with the verdict prob - ably . the fellow when he use short sentence be incomprehensible because of his dialect . when he speak long she get a word or two out of it . 
 	 it trouble she a little , now , that Edith Ethel might be come along the road . practically she have promise to meet she at that spot and at about that moment , Edith Ethel propose to sell her love — letter to Christopher — or through he . .   .   . the night before she have tell Fittleworth that Christopher have buy the place below she with money he have from Lady Macmaster because Lady Macmaster have be his mistress . fittleworth have boggle at that .   .   . it have be at that moment that he have go rather stiff to she . 
 	 as a matter of fact Christopher have buy that place out of a windfall . year before — before even she have marry he - he have have a legacy from an aunt , and in his visionary way have invest it in some Colonial — very likely canadian — property or invention or tramway concession , because he consider that some remote place , owe to its geographical position on some road — be go to grow . apparently during the war it have grow , and the completely forget investment have pay nine and sixpence in the pound . out of the blue . it could not be help . with a monetary record of visionariness and generosity such as Christopher have behind he some chicken must now and then come home — some visionary investment turn out sound , some debtor turn honest . she understand even that some colonel who have die on Armistice night and to whom Christopher have lend . a good sum in hundred have turn honest . at any rate his executor have write to ask she for Christopher ’s address with a view to make payment . she have n’t at the time know Christopher ’s address , but no doubt they have get it from the War Office or somewhere . 
 	 with windfall like those he have keep afloat , for she do not believe the old — furniture business as much as pay its way . she have hear through Mrs. Cramp that the american partner have embezzle most of the money that should have go to Christopher . you should not do business with Americans . Christopher , it be true , have year ago — during the war — predict an american invasion — as he always predict everything . he have , indeed , say that if you want to have money you must get it from where money be go to , so that if you want to sell you must prepare to sell what they want . and they want old furniture more than anything else . that be why there be so many of they here . she do not mind . she be already begin a little campaign with Mrs. de Bray Pape to make her refurnish Groby — to make her export all the clumsy eighteen - forty mahogany that the great house contain to Santa Fe , or wherever it be that Mr. Pape live alone ; and to refurnish with Louis Quatorze as befit the spiritual descendant of the Maintenon . the bad of it be that Mr. Pape be stingy . 
 	 she be , indeed , in a fine taking that morning — Mrs. de Bray Pape . in haul out the stump of Groby Great Tree the wood - cutter have apparently bring down two - third of the ball - room exterior wall , and that vast , gloomy room , with its immense lustre , be wreck , along with the old school - room above it . as far as she could make out from the steward ’s letter Christopher ’s boyhood ’s bed - room have practically disappear . .   .   . well , if Groby Great Tree do not like Groby House it have finely take its die revenge . .   .   . a nice shock Christopher would get ! anyhow , Mrs. de Bray Pape have already pretty well mangle the great dovecote in erect in it a new power station . 
 	 but apparently it be go to mangle the de Bray Papes to the tune of a pretty penny , and apparently Mr. Pape might be expect to give his wife no end of a time . .   .   . well , you can not expect to be God ’s vice - regent of England without bark your shin on old , hard thing . 
 	 no doubt Mark know all about it by now . perhaps it have kill he . she hop it have n’t , because she still hop to play he some tidy little trick before she have do with he . .   .   . if he be dead or die beneath that parallelogram of thatch down among the apple bough all sort of thing might be go to happen . quite inconvenient thing . 
 	 there would be the title . she quite definitely do not want the title , and it would become more difficult to injure Christopher . People with title and great possession be vastly more difficult to discredit than impoverished commoner , because the scale of morality change . title and great possession expose you to great temptation : it be scandalous , on the other hand , that the indigent should have any fun ! 
 	 so that , sit rather restfully in the sunlight on her horse , Sylvia feel like a general who be lose the fruit of victory . she do not much care . she have get down Groby Great Tree : that be as nasty a blow as the Tietjenses have have in ten generation . 
 	 but then a queer , disagreeable thought go through her mind , just as Gunning at last make again a semi - comprehensible remark . perhaps in let Groby Great Tree be cut down God be lift the ban off the Tietjenses . he might well . 
 	 Gunning , however , have say something like : 
 	 " Sheddn gaw dahn theer . ride Boldro up to farm n put he in loose box . " she gather that if she would ride her horse to some farm he could be put in a loose box and she could rest in the farmer ’s parlour . Gunning be look at she with a queer intent look . she could not just think what it mean . 
 	 suddenly it remind she of her childhood . her father have have a head gardener just as gnarl and just as apparently autocratic . that be it . she have not be much in the country for thirty year . apparently country people have not change much . time change ; people not so much . 
 	 for it come back to she with sudden extraordinary clearness . the side of a greenhouse , down there in the west where she have be " Miss Sylvia , oh Miss Sylvia ! " for a whole army of protest retainer , and that old , brown , gnarl fellow who be equally Mr. Carter for they all , except her father . Mr. Carter have be pot geranium shoot and she have be a little teasing a white kitten . she be thirteen , with immense plait of blonde hair . the kitten have escape from she and be rub itself , its back arched , against the legging of Mr. Carter , who have a special affection for it . she have propose — merely to torment Mr. Carter — to do something to the kitten , to force its paw into walnut shell perhaps . she have so little mean to hurt the kitten that she have for - get what it be she have propose to do . and suddenly the heavy man , his bloodshot eye fairly blazing , have threaten if she so much as blow on that kitten ’s fur to thrash she on a part of her anatomy on which public schoolboy rather than young lady be usually chastised .   .   . so that she would not be able to sit down for a week , he have say . 
 	 oddly enough , it have give she a queer pleasure , that return always with the recollection . she have never otherwise in her life be threaten with physical violence , and she know that within herself the emotion have often and often exist : if only Christopher would thrash she within an inch of her life .   .   . or yes — there have be Drake . .   .   . he have half - kill she : on the night before her wedding to Christopher . she have fear for the child within she ! that emotion have be unbearable ! 
 	 she say to Gunning — and she feel for all the world as if she be try a torment on Mr. Carter of year ago : 
 	 " I do not see why I need go to the farm . I can perfectly well ride Boldero down this path . I must certainly speak to your master . " 
 	 she have really no immediate notion of do anything of the sort , but she turn her horse towards the wicket gate that be a little beyond Gunning . 
 	 he scramble off his horse with singular velocity and under the neck of those he lead . it be like the running of an elephant , and , with all the rein bunch before he , he almost fall with his back on the little wicket towards whose latch she have be extend the handle of her crop . .   .   . she have not mean to raise it . she swear she have not mean to raise it . the vein stand out in his hairy open neck and shoulder . he say : no , she didn ' ! 
 	 her chestnut be reach its tooth out towards the lead horse . she be not certain that he hear she when she ask if he do not know that she be the wife of the Captain , his master , and guest of Lord Fittleworth , his ex — master . Mr. Carter certainly have not hear her year ago when she have remind he that she be his master ’s daughter . he have go on fulminate . Gunning be do that too — but more slowly and heavily . he say first that the Cahptn would tan her hide if she so much as disturb his brother by a look ; he would hide she within an inch of her life . as he have do already . 
 	 Sylvia say that by God he never have ; if he say he have he lie . her immediate reaction be to resent the implication that she be not as good a man as Christopher . he seem to have be boast that he have physically correct she . 
 	 Gunning continue dryly : 
 	 " you put it in th ' paper yourself . my 01 ' missus read it I . powerful set on Sir Mark ’s comfort , the Cahptn be . throw you downstairs , the Cahptn do , n give you cancer . it doesn show ! " that be the bad of attract chivalrous attention from professional people . she have begin divorce proceeding against Christopher , in the way of a petition for restitution of conjugal right , compound with the shade of Father Consett and her conscience as a Roman Catholic by argue that a petition for the restoration of your husband from a Strange Woman be not the same as divorce proceeding . in England at that date it be a preliminary and cause as much publicity as the real thing to which she have no intention of proceeding . it cause quite a terrific lot of publicity , because her counsel in his enthusiasm for the beauty and wit of his client — in his chamber the dark , Gaelic , youthful K.C. have be impressively sentimental in his enthusiasm — learn counsel have overstep the rather sober bound of the preliminary aspect of these case . he know that Sylvia ’s aim be not divorce but the casting of all possible obloquy on Christopher , and in his fervid Erse oratory he have cast as much mud as an enthusiastic terrier with its hind leg out of a fox ’s hole . it have embarrass Sylvia herself , sit brilliantly in court . and it have rouse the judge , who know something of the case , have , like half London of his class , take tea with the die Sylvia beneath the crucifix and amongst the lily of the nursing home that be also a convent . the judge have protest against the oratory of Mr. Sylvian Hatt , but Mr. Hatt have get in already a lurid picture of Christopher and Valentine in a dark , empty house on Armistice night throw Sylvia down - stair and so occasion in she a fell disease from which , under the court ’s eye , she be fade . this have distress Sylvia herself , for , rather with the idea of show the court and the world in general what a fool Christopher be to have leave she for a little brown sparrow , she have choose to appear all radiance and health . she have hop for the appearance of Valentine in court . it have not occur . 
 	 the judge have ask Mr. Hatt if he really propose to bring in evidence that Captain Tietjens and Miss Wannop have entice Mrs. Tietjens into a dark house — and on a shake of the head that Sylvia have not be able to refrain from give Mr. Hatt , the judge have make some extremely rude remark to her counsel . Mr. Hatt be at that time stand as parliamentary candidate for a Midland Borough and be anxious to attract as much publicity as that or any other case would give he . he have therefore go bald - headed for the judge , even accuse he of be indifferent to the suffering he be cause to Mr. Hatt ’s faint client . rightly handle , impertinence to a judge will gain quite a number of vote on the radical side of Midland constituency , judge be suppose to be all Tories . 
 	 anyhow , the case have be a fiasco from Sylvia ’s point of view , and for the first time in her life she have feel mortification ; in addition she have feel a great deal of religious trepidation . it have come into her mind in court — and it come with additional vividness there above that house , that , year ago in her mother ’s sitting - room in a place call Lobscheid , Father Consett have predict that if Christopher fall in love with another woman , she , Sylvia , would perpetrate act of vulgarity . and there she have be , not only toy with the temporal court in a matter of marriage , which be a sacrament , but lead undoubtedly into a position that she have to acknowledge be vulgar . she have precipitately leave the court when Mr. Hatt have for the second time appeal for pity for she — but she have not be able to stop it . .   .   . pity ! she appeal for pity ! she have regard herself — she have certainly desire to be regard — as the sword of the Lord smite the craven and the traitor — to Beauty ! and be it to be support that she be to be regard as such a fool as to be decoy into an empty house ! or as to let herself be throw down stair ! .   .   . but qui facit per alium be herself responsible , and there she have be in a position as mortifying as would have be that of any city clerk ’s wife . the florid period of Mr. Hatt have make she shiver all over , and she have never speak to he again . 
 	 and her position have be broadcast all over England — and now , here in the mouth of this gross henchman , it have recur . at the most inconvenient moment . for the thought suddenly recur , sweep over with immense force : God have change side at the cutting down of Groby Great Tree . 
 	 the first intimation she have have that God might change side have occur in that hateful court , and have , as it be , be prophesy by Father Consett . that dark saint and martyr be in Heaven , have die for the Faith , and undoubtedly he have the ear of God . he have prophesy that she would toy with the temporal court ; immediately she have feel herself degrade , as if strength have go out from she . 
 	 Strength have undoubtedly go out from she . never before in her life have her mind not spring to an emergency . it be all very well to say that she could not move physically either backwards or forwards for fear of cause a stampede amongst all those horse and that therefore her mental uncertainty might be excuse . but it be the finger of God — or of Father Consett who , as saint and martyr , be the agent of God . .   .   . or perhaps God himself be here really take a hand for the protection of his Christopher , who be undoubtedly an anglican saint . .   .   . the Almighty might well be dissatisfied with the other relatively amiable saint ’s conduct of the case , for surely Father Consett might be expect to have a soft spot for she , whereas you could not expect the Almighty to be unfair even to Anglicans . .   .   . at any rate up over the landscape , the hill , the sky , she feel the shadow of Father Consett , the arm extend as if on a gigantic cruciform — and then , above and behind that , an . an August Will ! 
 	 Gunning , his bloodshot eye fix on she , move his lip vindictively . she have , in face of those ghostly manifestation across hill and sky , a moment of real panic . such as she have feel when they have be shell near the hotel in France , when she have sit amidst palm with Christopher under a glass roof . .   .   . a mad desire to run — or as if your soul run about inside you like a parcel of rat in a pit await an unseen terrier . 
 	 what be she to do ? what the devil be she to do ? .   .   . she feel an itch . .   .   . she feel the very devil of a desire to confront at least Mark Tietjens .   .   . even if it should kill the fellow . surely God could not be unfair ! what be she give beauty for — the dangerous remain of beauty!—if not to impress it on the unimpressible ! she ought to be give the chance at least once more to try her irresistible ram against that immovable post before .   .   . she be aware . .   .   . 
 	 Gunning be say something to the effect that if she cause Mrs. Valentine to have a miscarriage or an idiot child , be Lordship woul flay all the flesh off er bone with be own ridin crop . be Lordship ad fair do it to I m , Gunning , isself when e lef be missis then eight and a arf munce go to live with old Mother Cressy ! the child be bear dead . 
 	 the word convey little to she . .   .   . she be aware . .   .   . she be aware . .   .   . what be she aware of ? .   .   . she be aware that God — or perhaps it be Father Consett that so arrange it , more diplomatically , the dear!—desired that she should apply to Rome for the dissolution of her marriage with Christopher , and that she should then apply to the civil court . she think that probably God desire that Christopher should be free as early as possible , Father . Consett suggest to he the less stringent course . 
 	 a fantastic object be descend at a fly - crawl the hill - road that go almost vertically up to the farm amongst the beech . she do not care ! 
 	 Gunning be say that that wer why be Lordship giv I m th sack . take away the cottage an ten bob a week that be Lordship allow to all as have be in his service thritty yeer . ' 
 	 she say : " what ! what ’s that I " .   .   . then it come back to she that Gunning have suggest that she might give Valentine a miscarriage . .   .   . her breath make a little clitter sound , like the trituration of barley ear , in her throat ; her gloved hand , rein and all , be over her eye , smell of morocco leather ; she feel as if within she a shelf drop away — as the platform drop away from beneath the foot of a convict they be hang . she say : " could . . . " then her mind stop , the clitter sound in her throat continue . Louder . louder . 
 	 descend the hill at the fly ’s pace be the impossible . a black basket - work pony phaeton : the pony — you always look at the horse first — four hand too big ; as round as a barrel , as shin as a mahogany dining - table , pace for all the world like a baut : école circus steed , and in a panic bump its behind into that black vehicle . it ease she to see . .   .   . but .   .   . fantastically horrible , behind that grotesque coward of a horse , hold the rein , be a black thing , like a funeral charger ; beside it a top hat , a white face , a buff waistcoat , black coat , a thin , jewish beard . in front of that a bare , blond head , the hair rather long — on the front seat , back to the view . trust Edith Ethel to be accompany by a boy — poet cicisbeo ! train Mr. Ruggles for his future condition as consort ! 
 	 she exclaim to Gunning : 
 	 " by God , if you do not let I pass , I will cut your face in half .   .   . . " 
 	 it be justify ! this in effect be too much - on the part of Gunning and God and Father Consett . all of a heap they have give her perplexity , immobility and a dreadful thought that be grip her vital . .   .   . dreadful ! dreadful ! 
 	 she must get down to the cottage . she must get down to the cottage . 
 	 she say to Gunning : 
 	 " you damn fool . .   .   . you damn fool . .   .   . I want to save . . . " 
 	 he move up — interminably — sweating and hairy , from the gate on which he have be lean , so that he no long bar her way . she trot smartly past he and canter beautifully down the slope . it come to she from the bloodshot glance that his eye give she that he would like to outrage she with ferocity . she feel pleasure . 
 	 she come off her horse like a circus performer to the sound of " Mrs. Tietjens ! Mrs. Tietjens , " in several voice from above . she let the chestnut go to hell . 
 	 it seem queer that it do not seem queer . a shed of log - paring set upright , the gate bang behind she . apple - branch spread down ; grass up to the middle of her grey breech . it be Tom Tiddler ’s ground ; it be near a place call Gemmenich on the Fourth of August , 1914 . ! .   .   . but just quietude : quietude . 
 	 Mark regard her boy ’s outline with beady , inquisitive eye . she bent her switch into a half hoop before she . she hear herself say : 
 	 " where be all these fool ? I want to get they out of here ! " 
 	 he continue to regard she : beadily : his head like mahogany against the pillow . an apple - bough catch in her hair . 
 	 she say : 
 	 " damn it all , I have Groby Great Tree cut down , not that tin Maintenon . but , as God be my Saviour , I would not tear another woman ’s child in the womb ! " 
 	 he say : 
 	 " you poor bitch ! you poor bitch ! the riding have do it ! " 
 	 she swear to herself afterwards that she have hear he say that , for at the time she have have too many emotion to regard his speaking as unusual . she take , indeed , a prolonged turn in the wood before she feel equal to face the other . Tietjens ’s have its wood onto which the garden give directly . 
 	 her main bitterness be that they have this peace . she be cut the painter , but they be go on in this peace ; her world be wan . it be the fact that her friend Bobbie ’s husband , Sir Gabriel Blantyre — formerly Bosenheim — be cut down expense like a lunatic . in her world there be the writing on the wall . here they could afford to call she a poor bitch — and be in the right of it , as like as not ! 
 
  chapter 3 


 
 
 	 VALENTINE be awaken by the shrill over - tone of the voice of the little maid come through the open window . she have fall asleep over the word : " Saepe te in sommnis vidi ! " to a vision of white limb in the purple Adriatic . eventually the child ’s voice say : 
 	 " we only sez ' mem ' to friend of the family ! " shrilly and self - assertively . 
 	 she be at the casement , dizzy and sickish with the change of position and the haste — and violently impatient of her condition . of humanity she perceive only the top of a three - cornered grey hat and a grey panniered skirt in downward perspective . the slop tile of the potting - shed hide the little maid ; align small lettuce plant , like rosette on the dark earth , run from under the window , close by a wall of stick pea , behind they the wood , slender grey ash trunk go to a great height . they be need for shelter . they would have to change their bedroom : they could not have a night nursery that face the north . the spring onion need prick out : she have mean to put the garden pellitory into the rock in the half - circle ; but the operation have daunt she . push the little root into crevice with her finger ; remove stone , trowel in artificial manure , stoop , dirty her finger would make her retch . .   .   . 
 	 she be suddenly intensely distressed at the thought of the lose coloured print . she have search the whole house — all imaginable drawer , cup - board , press . it be like their fate that , when they have at last get a good — an English — client , their first commission from she should go wrong . she think again of every imaginable , unsearched parallelogram in the house , stand erect , her head up , neglect to look down on the intruder . 
 	 she consider all their customer to be intruder . it be true that Christopher ’s gift lay in the way of old - furniture dealing — and farming . but farming be ruinous . obviously if you sell old furniture straight out of use in your own house , it fetch well price than from a shop . she do not deny Christopher ’s ingenuity — or that he be right to rely on her hardihood . he have at least the right so to rely . nor do she mean to let he down . only .   .   . 
 	 she passionately desire little Chrissie to be bear in that bed with the thin fine post , his blond head with the thin , fine hair on those pillow . she passionately desire that he should lie with blue eye gaze at those curtain on the low window . .   .   . 
 	 those ! with those peacock and globe . surely a child should lie gaze at what his mother have see , whilst she be await he ! 
 	 and , where be those print ? .   .   . four parallelogram of faint,‘silly colour . promise for tomorrow morning . the margin need bread - crumbing . .   .   . she imagine her chin brushing gently , gently back and forward on the floss of his head ; she imagine hold he in the air as , in that bed , she lay , her arm extend upwards , her hair spread on those pillow ! flower perhaps spread on that quilt . lavender ! 
 	 but if Christopher report that one of those dreadful people with querulous voice want a bedroom complete ? .   .   . 
 	 if she beg he to retain it for she . well , he would . he prize she above money . she think — ah , she know — that he prize the child within she above the world . 
 	 nevertheless , she imagine that she would go all on to the end with her longing unvoice . .   .   . because there be the game . .   .   . his game .   .   . oh , hang it , their game ! and you have to think whether it be bad for the unborn child to have a mother with unsatisfied longing , or a father beat at his .   .   . no , you must not call it a game . .   .   . still , rooster beat by other rooster lose their masculinity . .   .   . like rooster , man . .   .   . then , for a child to have a father lack masculinity .   .   . for the sake of some peacock and globe curtain , spindly bed - post , old , old glass tumbler with thumb - mark indentation . .   .   . 
 	 on the other hand , for the mother the soft feeling that those thing give ! .   .   . the room have a barrel - shape ceiling , follow the line of the roof almost up to the roof - tree ; dark oak beam , beeswaxed — ah , that beeswax ! tiny , low window almost down to the oaken floor . .   .   . you would say , too much of the show - place : but you live into it . you live yourself into it in spite of the Americans who take , sometimes embarrassed , peep from the doorway . 
 	 would they have to peek into the nursery ? oh , God , who know ? what would he decree ? it be an extraordinary thing to live with Americans all over you , drop down in aeroplane , seem to come up out of the earth . .   .   . there , all of a sudden , you do not know how . .   .   . 
 	 that woman below the window be one , now . how in the world have she get below that window ? .   .   . but there be so many entrance — from the spinney , from the Common , through the fourteen - acre , down from the road . .   .   . you never know who be come . it be eerie ; at time she shiver over it . you seem to be beset — with stealthy people , creep up all the path . .   .   . 
 	 apparently the little tweeny be dispute the right of that american woman to call herself a friend of the family and thus to be address as " Mem ! " the American be assert her descent from Madame de Maintenon . .   .   . it be astonish the descent they all have ! she herself be descend from the surgeon - butler to Henry VII - Henry the Somethingth . and , of course , from the great Professor Wannop , belove of lady - educator and by lady whom he have educate . .   .   . and Christopher be eleventh Tietjens of Groby — with an eventual burgomaster of Scheveningen or somewhere in some century or other : time of Alva . number one come over with Dutch William , the Protestant Hero ! .   .   . if he have not come , and if Professor Wannop have not educate she , Valentine Wannop — or educate she differently — she would not have .   .   . ah , but she would have ! if there have not be any he , look like a great dutch treckschluyt or whatever you call it — she would have have to invent one to live with in open sin . .   .   . but her father might have educate she so as to have — at least presentable underclothe . .   .   . 
 	 he could have educate she so as to be able to say — oh , but tactfully : 
 	 " look here , you . .   .   . examine my .   .   . my cache - corset . .   .   . would not some new one be well than a new pedigree sow ? " .   .   . the fellow never have look at she .   .   . cache - corset . Marie Léonie have . 
 	 Marie Léonie be of opinion that she would lose Christopher if she do not deluge herself with a perfume call Houbigant and wear pink silk next the skin . Elle ne demandait pas mieux — but she could not borrow twenty pound from Marie Léonie . nor yet forty . .   .   . because , although Christopher might never notice the condition of her all - wool , he jolly well would be strike by the ocean of Houbigant and the surf of pink . .   .   . she would give the world for they . .   .   . but he would notice — and then she might lose his love . because she have borrow the forty pound . on the other hand , she might lose it because of the all - wool . and heaven know in what condition the other pair would be when they come back from Mrs. Cramp ’s new laundry attention . .   .   . you could never teach Mrs. Cramp that wool must not be put into boiling water ! 
 	 oh God , she ought to lie between lavendere linen sheet with little Chrissie on soft , pink silk , aircushionish bosom ! .   .   . Little Chrissie , descend from surgeon - butler - surgeon - barber , to be correct!—and burgomaster . not to mention the world - famous Professor Wannop . .   .   . who be to become .   .   . who be to become , if it be as she wish it . .   .   . but she do not know what she wish , because she do not know what be to become of England or the world . .   .   . but if he become what Christopher wish he would be a contemplative parson farm his own tithe - field and with a Greek Testament in folio under his arm . .   .   . a sort of White of Selborne . .   .   . Selborne be only thirty mile away , but they have have never the time to go there . .   .   . as who should say : je n’ai jamais vu Carcassonne . .   .   . for , if they have never find time , because of pig , hen , pea - sticking , sale , selling , mend all - wool under - garment , sit with dear Mark — before little Chrissie come with the floss silk on his palpitating soft poll and his spinning pebble - blue eye : if they have never find time now , before , how in the world would there be time with , add on to all the other , the bottle , and the bandaging and the bathing before the fire with the warm , warm water , and feeling and the slubbing of the soap - saturate flannel on the adorable , adorable limb ? and Christopher look on . .   .   . he would never find time to go to Selborne , nor Arundel , nor Carcassonne , nor after the Strange Woman . .   .   . never . never ! 
 	 he have be away now for a day and a half . but it be know between they — without speaking!—that he would never be away for a day and a half again . now , before her pain begin he could seize the opportunity ! well , he have seize it with a vengeance . .   .   . a day and a half ! to go to Wilbraham sale ! with nothing much that they want . .   .   . she believe .   .   . she believe that he have go to Groby in an aeroplane . .   .   . he have once mention that . or she know that he have think of it . because the day before yesterday when he have be almost out of his mind about the letting of Groby , he have suddenly look up at an aeroplane and have remain look at it for long , silent . .   .   . another woman it could not be . .   .   . 
 	 he have forget about those print . that be dreadful . she know that he have forget about they . how could he , when they want to get a good , english client , for the sake of little Chrissie ? how could he ? how could he ? it be true that he be almost out of his mind about Groby and Groby Great Tree . he have begin to talk about that in his sleep , as for year , at time , he have talk , dreadfully , about the war . 
 	 " Bringt dem Hauptmann eine Kerze . .   .   . bring the Major a candle , " he would shout dreadfully beside she in the blackness . and she would know that he be remember the sound of pick in the earth beneath the trench . and he would groan and sweat dreadfully , and she would not dare to wake he . .   .   . and there have be the matter of the boy , Aranjuez ' , eye . it appear that he have run away over a shift landscape , scream and hold his hand to his eye . after Christopher have carry he out of a hole . .   .   . Mrs. Aranjuez have be rude to she at the Armistice night dinner . .   .   . the first time in her life that anyone - except of course Edith Ethel — have be ever rude to she . of course you do not count Edith Ethel Duchemin , Lady Macmaster ! .   .   . but it ’ queer : your man save the life of a boy at the desperate risk of his own . without that there would not have be any Mrs. Aranjuez : then Mrs. Aranjuez be the first person that ever in your life be rude to you . leave permanent trace that make you shudder in the night ! hideous eye ! 
 	 yet , but for a miracle there might have be no Christopher . little Aranjuez — it have be because he have talk to she for so long , praise Christopher , that Mrs. Aranjuez have be rude to her!—little Aranjuez have say that the german bullet have go over they as thick as the swarm of bee that come out when Gunning cut the leg of ? the skep with his scythe ! .   .   . well , there might have be no Christopher . then there would have be no Valentine Wannop ! she could not have live . .   .   . but Mrs. Aranjuez should not have be rude to she . the woman must have see with half an eye that Valentine Wannop could not live without Christopher . .   .   . then , why should she fear for her little , imploring , eyeless creature ! 
 	 it be queer . you would almost say that there be a Provvy who delight to torment you with : " if it have not be that . . . " Christopher probably believe that there be a Provvy or he would not dream for his little Chrissie a country parsonage . .   .   . he propose , if they ever make any money , to buy a living for he — if possible near Salisbury . .   .   . what be the name of the place ? .   .   . a pretty name . .   .   . buy a living where George Herbert have be parson . . 
 	 she must , by the by , remember to tell Marie Léonie that it be the Black Orpington label 42 not the Red 16 that she have put the setting of Indian Runners under . she have find that Red 16 be not really broody , though she have come on afterwards . it be queer that Marie Léonie have not the courage to put egg under broody hen because they peek she , whereas she , Valentine , have no courage to take the chicken when the setting hatch , because of the shell and gumminess that might be in the nest . .   .   . yet neither of they want courage . .   .   . hang it all , neither of they want courage , or they would not be live with tietjense . it be like be tie to buffalo ! 
 	 and yet .   .   . how you want they to change ! 
 	 Bremersyde . .   .   . no , that be the home of the Haigs . .   .   . tide what will and tide what tide , there shall be Haigs at Bremersyde . .   .   . perhaps it be Bemersyde ! .   .   . Bemerton , then . George Herbert , rector of Bemerton , near Wilton , Salisbury . .   .   . that be what Chrissie be to be like . .   .   . she be to imagine herself sit with her cheek on Chrissie ’s floss - silk head , look into the fire and see in the coal , Chrissie , walk under elm beside ploughland . Elle ne demandait , really , pas mieux . ' 
 	 if the country would stand it ! .   .   . 
 	 Christopher presumably believe in England as he believe in Provvy — because the land be pleasant and green and comely . it would breed true . in spite of shower of Americans descend from Tiglath Pileser and Queen Elizabeth , and the end of the industrial system and the statistic of the shipping trade , England with its pleasant , green comeliness would go on breed George Herberts with Gunnings to look after they . .   .   . of course with Gunnings ! 
 	 the Gunnings of the land be the rock on which the lighthouse be build — as Christopher see it . and Christopher be always right . sometimes a little previous . but always right . always right . the rock have be there a million year before the lighthouse be build : the lighthouse make a deuce of a movable flashing — but it be a mere butterfly . the rock would be there a million year after the light go for the last time out . 
 	 a Gunning would be , in the course of year , paint blue , a druid - worshipper , a Duke Robert of Normandy , illiterately burn town and beget bastard — and eventually — actually at the moment — a man of all work , half - full of fidelity , half blatant , hairy . a retainer you would retain as long as you be prosperous and dispense hard cider and overlook his peccadillo with woman . he would go on . .   .   . 
 	 the point be whether the time have come for another Herbert of Bemerton . Christopher think it have : he be always right ; always right . but previous . he have predict the swarm of Americans buy up old thing . offer fabulous price . 
 	 he be right . the trouble be they do not pay when they offer the fabulous price : when they do pay they be as mean as .   .   . she be go to say Job . but she do not know that Job be particularly mean . that lady down below the window would probably want to buy the sign cabinet of Barker of 1762 for half the price of one buy in a New York department store and manufacture yesterday . .   .   . and she would tell Valentine she be a blood - sucker , even if — to suppose the ridiculous!—valentine let she have it at her own price . on the other hand , Mr. Schatzweiler talk of fantastic price . .   .   . 
 	 oh , Mr. Schatzweiler , Mr. Schatzweiler , if you would only pay we ten per cent . of what you owe we — I could have all the pink fluffie , and three new gown , and keep the little old lace for Chrissie — and have a proper dairy and not milk goat . and cut the loss over the confounded pig , and put up a range of glass in the sunk garden where it would not be an eyesore . .   .   . as it be .   .   . 
 	 the age of fairy - tale be not , of course , past . they have have windfall : lovely windfall when infinite ease have seem to stretch out before they . .   .   . a great windfall when they have buy this place ; little one for the pig and old mare . .   .   . Christopher be the sort of fellow ; he have sow so many golden grain that he could not be always reap whirlwind . there must be some halcyon day .   .   . 
 	 only it be deucedly awkward now — with Chrissie come and Marie Léonie hint all day that , as she be lose her figure , if she could not get the grease stain out of her skirt she would lose the affection of Christopher . and they have not get a stiver . .   .   . Christopher have cable Schatzweiler . .   .   . but what be the use of that ? .   .   . Schatzweiler would be finely dished if she lose the affection of Christopher — because poor old Chris could not run any old junk shop without she . .   .   . she imagine cable Schatzweiler — about the four stain on the skirt and the necessity for elegant lying - in gown . or else he would lose Christopher ’s assistance . .   .   . 
 	 the conversation down below raise its tone . she hear the tweeny maid ask why if the american lady be a friend of the family she do not know Er Ladyship theere ? .   .   . of course it be easy to understand : these people come , all of they , with letter of introduction from Schatzweiler . ' then they insist that they be friend of the family . it be perhaps nice of they — because most english people would not want to know old - furniture dealer . 
 	 the lady below exclaim in a high voice : 
 	 " that Lady Mark Tietjens ! that ! mercy I , I think it be the cook ! " 
 	 she , Valentine , ought to go down and help Marie Léonie . but she be not go to . she have the sense that hostile presence be creep up the path and Marie Léonie have give she the afternoon off . .   .   . for the sake of the future , Marie Léonie have say . and she have say that she have once expect her own future to offer the reading of Aeschylus beside the aegean sea . then Marie Léonie have kiss she and say she know that Valentine would never rob she of her belonging after Mark die ! 
 	 an unsolicited testimonial , that . but of course Marie Léonie would desire she not to lose the affection of Christopher . Marie Léonie would say to herself that in that case Christopher might take up with a woman who would want to rob Marie Léonie of her possession after Mark die . .   .   . 
 	 the woman down below announce herself as Mrs. de Bray Pape , descendant of the Maintenon , and want to know if Marie Léonie do not think it reasonable to cut down a tree that overhang your house . Valentine desire to spring to the window : she spring to the old panel door and furiously turn the key in the lock . she ought not to have turn the key so carelessly : it have a knack of need five or ten minute manipulation before you could unlock the door again . .   .   . but she ought to have spring to the window and cry out to Mrs. de Bray Pape : " if you so much as touch a leaf of Groby Great Tree we will serve you with injunction that it will take half your life and money to deal with ! " 
 	 she ought to have do that to save Christopher ’s reason . but she could not : she could not ! it be one thing live with all the tranquillity of conscience in the world in open sin . it be another , confront elderly Americans who know the fact . she be determined to remain shut in there . an Englishman ’s house may no long be his castle — but an Englishwoman ’s castle be certainly her own bedroom . when once , four month or so ago , the existence of little Chrissie be manifest , she have express to Christopher the idea that they ought no long to go stodge along in penury , the case be so grave : they ought to take some of the Groby money — for the sake of future generation . .   .   . 
 	 well , she have be run down . .   .   . at that stage of parturition , call it , a woman be run down and hysterical . .   .   . it have seem to she overwhelmingly the iact that a breeding woman ought to have pink fluffy thing next her quiver skin and spraying of say , Houbigant , all over her shoulder and hair . for the sake of the child ’s health . 
 	 so she have let out violently at poor wretched old Chris , face with the necessity for deny his god , and have slam to and furiously lock that door . her castle have be her bedroom with a vengeance then — for Christopher have be unable to get in or she to get out . he have have to whisper through the keyhole that he give in : he be dreadfully concerned for she . he have say that he hop she would try to stick it a little long , but , if she would not , he would take Mark ’s money . 
 	 naturally she have not let he — but she have arrange with Marie Léonie for Mark to pay a couple of pound more a week for their board and lodging , and as Marie Léonie have perforce take over the housekeeping , they have find thing ease off a little . Marie Léonie have run the house for thirty shilling a week less than she , Valentine , have ever be able to do — and run it street well . street and street ! so they have have money at least nearly to complete their equipment of table linen and the layette . .   .   . the long and complicated annal ' . 
 	 it be queer that her heart be nearly as much in Christopher ’s game as be his own . as house - mother , she ought to have grab after the last penny — and goodness know the life be strain enough . why do woman back their man in unreasonable romanticism ? you might say that it be because , if their man have their masculinity abate — like defeat roosters!—the woman would suffer in intimacy . .   .   . ah , but it be n’t that ! nor be it merely that they want the buffalo to which they be attach to charge . it be really that she have follow the convolution of her man ’s mind . and ardently approve . she disapprove with he of rich , of the rich , of the frame of mind that rich confer . if the war have do nothing else for they — for those two of they — it have induce they , at least , to install frugality as a deity . they desire to live hard , even if it deprive they of the leisure in which to think high ! she agree with he that if a rule class lose the capacity to rule — or the desire!—it should abdicate from its privilege and get under - ground . 
 	 and have accept that as a principle , she could follow the rest of his cloudy obsession and obstinacy . 
 	 perhaps she would not have back he up in his long struggle with dear Mark if she have not consider that their main necessity be to live high . .   .   . and she be aware that why , really , she have spring to the door rather than to the window have be that she have not desire to make an unfair move in that long chess game . on behalf of Christopher . if she have have to see Mrs. de Bray Pape or to speak — to she it would have be disagreeable to have that descendant of a king ’s companion look at she with the accuse eye of one who think : " you live with a man without be married to he ! " Mrs. de Bray Pape ’s ancestress have be able to force the king to marry she . .   .   . but that she would have chance : they have pay penalty enough for have break the rule of the Club . she could carry her head high enough : not obtrusively high , but sufficiently ! for , in effect , they have surrender Groby in order to live together and have endure spray of obloquy that seem never to cease to splash over the garden hedge . 
 	 no , she would have face Mrs. de Bray Pape . but she would hardly , give Christopher ’s half — craze condition , have keep herself from threaten Mrs. Pape with dreadful legal consequence if she touch Groby Great Tree . that would have be to interfere in the silent northern struggle between the brother . that she would neverdo , even to save Christopher ’s reason — unless she be jump into it ! .   .   . that Mark do not intend to interfere between Mrs. Pape and the tree she know — for when she have read Mrs. i’ape ’s letter to he he have signify as much to she by mean of his eye . .   .   . Mark she love and respect because he be a dear - and because he have back she through thick and thin . without he .   .   . there have be a moment on that dreadful night .   .   . she pray God that she would not have to think again of that dreadful night . .   .   . if she have to see Sylvia again she would go mad , and the child within she . .   .   . deep , deep within she the blight would fall on the little thread of brain ! 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape , God be thank , provide a diversion for her mind . she be speak French with an eccentricity that could not be ignore . 
 	 Valentine could see , without look out of the window , Marie Léonie ’s blank face and the equal blankness with which she must have indicate that she do not intend to understand . she imagine her standing , motionless , pinafore and unmerciful before the other lady , who beneath the three - cornered hat be stutter out : 
 	 " Lady Tietjens , mwaw , Madam de Bray Pape , desire coo — pay la arbre .   .   . . " 
 	 Valentine could hear Marie Léonie ’s steely tone say : 
 	 " on dit ' 1’arbre , ' Madame ! " 
 	 and then the high voice of the little maid : 
 	 " call we ' the pore , ' she do , your ladyship . .   .   . ast we why we could not take example ! " 
 	 then a voice , soft for these people , and with modulation : 
 	 " Sir Mark seem to be perspire a great deal . I be so free as to wipe . . . " 
 	 as , above , Valentine say : " oh , Heaven ! " Marie Léonie cry out : " Mon Dieu ! " and there be a rush of skirt and pinafore . 
 	 Marie Léonie be rush past a white , breeched figure , say : 
 	 " vous , une étrangére , avez osé . .   .   . 
 	 a shin , red - cheeked boy be stumble slightly from before she . he say , after her back : 
 	 " Mrs. Lowther ’s handkerchief be the small , softest . . . " he add to the young woman in white : " we ’d well go away . .   .   . please let ’s go away . .   .   . it ’ not sport .   .   . . " a singularly familiar face ; a singularly move voice . " for God ’s sake let we go away .   .   . . " who say " for God ’s sake ! " like that — with star blue eye ! 
 	 she be at the door frantically twist at the great iron key ; the lock be of very old hammered iron work . the doctor ought to be telephone to . he have say that if Mark have fever or profuse sweat , he should be telephone to at once . Marie Léonie would be with he ; it be she , Valentine ’s , duty to telephone . the key would not turn ; she hurt her hand in the effort . but part of her emotion be due to that bright - check boy . why should he have say that it be not sport of they to be there ? why have he exclaim for God ’s sake to go away ? the key would not turn . it stay solid , like a piece of the old lock . .   .   . who be the boy like ? she ram her shoulder against the unyielding door . she must not do that . she cry out . 
 	 from the window — she have go to the window intend to tell the girl to set up a ladder for she , but it would be more sensible to tell she to telephone!—she could see Mrs. de Bray Pape . she be still harangue the girl . and then on the path , beyond the lettuce and the newly stick pea , arise a very tall figure . a very tall figure . portentous . by some trick of the slope figure there always appear very tall . .   .   . this appear leisurely : almost hesitant . like the apparition of the statue of the Commander in Don Juan , somehow . it appear to be preoccupy with its glove : undo its glove . .   .   . very tall , but with too much slightness of the leg . .   .   . a woman in hunting - breech ! Grey against the tall ash - stem of the spinney . you could not see her face because you be above she , in the window , and her head be bent down ! in the name of God ! .   .   . 
 	 there waft over she a sense of the dreadful darkness in the old house at Gray ’s Inn on that dreadful night . .   .   . she must not think of that dreadful night because of little Chrissie deep within she . she feel as if she hold the child cover in her arm , as if she be look upwards , bend down over the child . actually she be look downwards . .   .   . then she have be look up - ward — up the dark stair . at a marble statue : the white figure of a woman : the Nike .   .   . the Winged Victory . it be like that on the stair of the Louvre . she must think of the Louvre : not Gray ’s Inn . there be , in a pompeian anteroom , etruscan tomb , with guardian in uniform , their hand behind their back . stroll about as if they expect you to steal a tomb ! .   .   . 
 	 she have — they have — be star up the stair . the house have seem unnaturally silent when they have enter . unnaturally . .   .   . how can you seem more silent than silent . but you be I they have seem to tiptoe . she have , at least . then light have shine above — come from an open door above . in the light the white figure that say it have cancer ! 
 	 she must not think about these thing ! 
 	 such rage and despair have sweep over she as she have never before know . she have cry to Christopher , dark , beside she : that the woman lie . she have not get cancer . .   .   . 
 	 she must not think about these thing . 
 	 the woman on the path — in grey rid thing - approach slowly . the head still bend down . undoubtedly she have silk underthing beneath all that grey cloth . .   .   . well , they — Christopher and Valentine — give she they . 
 	 it be queer how calm she be . that of course be Sylvia Tietjens . let it be . she have fight for her man before and so she could again ; the Russians should not have .   .   . the old jingle run in her calm head . .   .   . 
 	 but she be desperately perturb : tremble . at the thought of that dreadful night . Christopher have want to go with Sylvia after she have fall down stair . a good theatre fall , but not good enough . but she have shout : no ! he be never go with Sylvia again . Finir Sylvia at magna . .   .   . in the black night .   .   . they have go on firing maroon . they could be hear ! 
 	 well , she be calm . the sight of that figure be not go to hurt the tiny brain that work deep within her womb . nor the tiny limb ! she be go to slub the warm , soap - transfuse flannel onto those little leg in the warm of the great hearth . .   .   . nine ham up that chimney ! Chrissie look up and laugh . .   .   . that woman would never again do that ! not to a child of Christopher ’s . not to any man ’s child , belike ! 
 	 that have be that woman ’s son ! with a girl in white breech ! . . well , who be she , Valentine , to prevent a son ’s see his father . she feel on her arm the weight of her own son . with that there she could confront the world ! 
 	 it be queer ! that woman ’s face be all blur . .   .   . blubberingly ! the feature swell , the eye red . .   .   . ah , she have be think , look at the garden and the stillness : " if I have give Christopher that I should have keep he ! " but she would never have keep he . have she be the one woman in all the world he would never have look at she . not after he have see she , Valentine Wannop ! 
 	 Sylvia have look up , contemplatively — as if into the ' very window . but she could not see into the window . she must have see Mrs. de Bray Pape and the girl , for it become apparent why she have take off her glove . she now have a gold vanity box in her hand : look in at the mirror and move her right hand swiftly before her face . .   .   . remember : it be we who give she that gold thing . remember ! remember it hard ! 
 	 sudden anger come over she . that woman must never come into their house - place , before whose hearth she be to bathe the little Chrissie ! never ! never ! the place would be pollute . ' she know , only by that , how she loathe and recoil from that woman . 
 	 she be at the lock . the key turn . .   .   . see what emotion at the thought of harm to your unborn child can do for you ! subconsciously her right hand have remember how you press the key upwards when you make it turn .   .   . she must not run down the narrow stair . the telephone be in a niche on the inner side of the great ingle . the room be dim : very long , very low . the Barker cabinet look very rich , with its green , yellow and scarlet inlay . she be lean sideways in the nook between the immense fireplace and the room wall , the telephone receiver at her car . she look down her long room — it open into the dining - room , a great beam between . it be dark , gleaming , rich with old beeswaxed wood . .   .   . Elle ne demandait par mieux .   .   . the phrase of Marie Léonie occur constantly to her mind . .   .   . she do not ask well — if only the thing be to be regard as theirs ! she look into the distant future when thing would spread out tranquilly before they . they would have a little money , a little peace . thing would spread out .   .   . like a plain see from a hill . in the meantime they have to keep all on go . .   .   . she do not , in effect , grumble at that .   .   . as long as strength and health hold out . 
 	 the doctor — she picture he , long , sandy and very pleasant , suffer too from an incurable disease and debt , life be like that!—the doctor ask cheerfully how Mark be . she say she do not know . he be say to have be profusely sweat . .   .   . yes , it be possible that he might have be have a disagreeable interview . the doctor say : " Tut ! tut ! and yourself ? " he have a Scotch accent , the sandy man . .   .   . she suggest that he might bring along a bromide . he say : " they ’ve be bother you . do not let they ! " she say she have be asleep — but they probably would . she add : " perhaps you would come quickly ! " .   .   . Sister Anne ! Sister Anne ! for God ’s sake , Sister Anne ! if she could get a bromide into she it would pass like a dream . 
 	 it be pass like a dream . perhaps the Virgin Mary exist . .   .   . if she do not we must invent she to look after mother who could not .   .   . but she could ! she , Valentine Wannop ! 
 	 the light from the doorway that be open onto the garden be obscure . a highwayman in skirt with pannier stand in the room against the light . it say : 
 	 " you ’re the saleswoman , I guess . this be a most insanitary place , and I hear you have no bath . show I some thing . in the Louie Kaator ’s style . " .   .   . it guess that it be go to refurnish Groby in Louis Quatorze style . do she , Valentine , as saleswoman , suppose that they — her employer — would meet she in the expense . Mr. Pape have have serious loss in Miami . they must not suppose that the pape could be bleed white . this place ought to be pull down as unfit for human habitation and a model workman ’s cottage build in its place . People who sell thing to rich Americans in this country be shark . she herself be descend spiritually from Madame de Maintenon . it would be all different if Marie Antoinette have treat the Maintenon well . she , Mrs. de Bray Pape , would have the authority in the country that she ought to have . she have be tell that she would be make to pay an immense sum for have cut down Groby Great Tree . of course the side wall of the house have fall in . these old house could not stand up to modern invention . she , Mrs. de Bray Pape , have employ the late australian form of tree - stump extractor — the Wee Whizz Bang . .   .   . but do she , as saleswoman but doubtless more intimate with her employer than be necessary , consider the reputation of that establishment .   .   . do she consider ? .   .   . 
 	 Valentine ’s heart start . the light from the doorway be again obscure . Marie Léonie run pant in . Sister Anne , in effect ! she say : " Le téléphone ! vite ! " 
 	 Valentine say : 
 	 " J’ai déja téléphoné . .   .   . Le docteur sera ici dans quelque minute . .   .   . Je te prie de rester 5 . cété de moi ! " .   .   . I beg you to remain beside I ! selfish ! Selfish ! but there be a child to be bear . .   .   . anyhow Marie Léonie could not have get out of that door . it be block . .   .   . ah ! 
 	 Sylvia Tietjens be look down on Valentine . you could hardly see her face against the light . .   .   . well , it do not amount to more than that . .   .   . she be look down because she be so tall ; you could not see her face against the light . Mrs. de Bray Pape be explain what spiritual descent from grand seigneur do for you . 
 	 she be bend her eye on Valentine . that be the phrase . she say to Mrs. de Bray Pape : 
 	 " for God ’s sake hold your damned tongue . get out of here ! " 
 	 Mrs. de Bray Pape have not understand . for the matter of that neither do Valentine take it in . a thin voice from a distance thrill : 
 	 " Mother ! .   .   . Mo .   .   . ther ! " 
 	 she — it — for it be like a statue . .   .   . marvellous how she have make she face up . three minute before it have be a mush ! .   .   . it be flawless now ; dark — shadow under the eye ! and sorrowful ! and tremendously dignified . and kind ! .   .   . damn ! damn ! damn ! 
 	 it occur to Valentine that this be only the second time that she have ever see that face . .   .   . its stillness now be terrible ! what be she wait for before she begin the Billingsgate that they be both go to indulge in before all these people ? .   .   . for she , Valentine , have she back against the wall ! she hear herself begin to say : 
 	 " you have spoil . . . " she could not continue . you can not very well tell a person that their loathsomeness be so infectious as to spoil your ' baby ’s bathing - place ! it be not do ! 
 	 Marie Léonie say in French to Mrs. de Bray Pape that Mrs. Tietjens do not require her presence . Mrs. de Bray Pape do not understand . it be difficult for a Maintenon to understand that her presence be not require 1 
 	 the first time that she , Valentine , have see that face , in Edith Ethel ’s drawing - room , she have think how kind .   .   . how blindingly kind it be . when the lip have approach her mother ’s cheek the tear have be in Valentine ’s eye . it have say — that face of a statue!—that it must kiss Mrs. Wannop for her kindness to Christopher . .   .   . damn it , it might as well kiss she , Valentine , now ! .   .   . there would have be no Christopher today but for she ! 
 	 it say — it be so perfectly expressionless that you could continue to call it " it”—it say , coldly and without halt , to Mrs. de Bray Pape : 
 	 " you hear ! the lady of the house do not require your presence . please go away ! " 
 	 Mrs. dc Bray Pape be explain that she have be tell the saleswoman that she intend to refurnish Groby in the Louie Kaator ’s style . 
 	 it occur to Valentine that this position have its comicality : Marie Léonie do not know that woman ; Mrs. de Bray Pape do not know she , Valentine . they would miss a good deal of the jam ! . . ' . but where be the jam ! Jam yesterday , jam tomorrow . .   .   . that figure have say " Mrs. Tietjens ! " in sarcasm , then ? in delicacy ? 
 	 she catch at the telephone shelf ; it be dark . the baby have move within she . .   .   . it want she to be call " Mrs. Tietjens ! " someone be call " Valentine ! " someone else be call " Mother ! " a soft voice say : " Mrs. Tietjens ! " what thing they choose to say ! the first voice be Edith Ethel ’s ! 
 	 Dark ! .   .   . Marie Léonie say in her ear : " tiens toi debout , ma chérie ! " 
 	 Dark , dark night ; cold , cold snow — harsh , harsh wind , and lo!—where shall we shepherd go , God ’s son to find ? 
 	 Edith Ethel be read to Mrs. de Bray Pape from a letter . she say : " as an American of culture , you will be interested . .   .   . from the great poet ! " .   .   . a gentleman hold a top - hat in front of his face , as if he be in church . thin , with dull eye and a jewish beard ! Jews keep their hat on in church . .   .   . 
 	 apparently she , Valentine Wannop , be go to be denounce before the congregation ! do they bring a scarlet letter . .   .   . they be Puritans enough , she and Christopher . the voice of the man with the jewish beard — Sylvia Tietjens have remove the letter from the finger of Edith Ethel . .   .   . not much change , Edith Ethel ! face a little lined . and pale . and suddenly reduce to silence — the voice of the man with the beard say : 
 	 " after all ' . it do make a difference . he be virtually Tietjens of . . . " he begin to push his way backwards , outward . a man try to leave through the crowd at the church door . he turn to say to she oddly : 
 	 " Madame .   .   . eh .   .   . Tietjens ! Pardon ! " 
 	 attempt a french accent . 
 	 Edith Ethel remark : 
 	 " I want to say to Valentine : if I effect the sale personally I do not see that the commission should be payable . " 
 	 Sylvia Tietjens say : they could discuss that outside . Valentine be aware that , some time before , a boy ’s voice have say : " Mother , be this sporting ? " it occur to Valentine to wonder if it be sport of people to call she " Mrs. Tietjens " under Sylvia Tietjens ' nose . of course she have to be Mrs. Tietjens before the servant . she hear herself say : 
 	 " I be sorry Mr. Ruggles call I Mrs. Tietjens before you ! " 
 	 the eye of the statue be , if possible , doubly bent on she ! 
 	 it say drily : 
 	 " an the King will ha’e my heid I care na what ye do wi ' my . . . " it be a saying common to both Mark and Christopher .   .   . that be bitter . she be remind she , Valentine , that she have previously enjoy Tietjens ' intimacy — before she , Valentine ! 
 	 but the voice go on : 
 	 " I want to get those people out . .   .   . and to see . . . " it speak very slowly . Marmo really . the flower in the jug on the fald - stool need more water . marigold . Orange . .   .   . a woman be upset when her child move within she . some - time more , sometimes less . she must have be very upset : there have be a lot of people in the room ; she know neither how they have come nor how they have go . she say to Marie Léonie : 
 	 " Dr. Span be bring some bromide . .   .   . I can not find those . . . " 
 	 Marie Léonie be look at that figure : her eye stick out of her head like Christopher ’s . she say , as still as a cat watch a mouse : 
 	 " Qui est elle ? C’est bien la femme ? " 
 	 it look queerly like a pilgrim in a ballet , now , that figure against the light — the long leg slightly bent give that effect . actually this be the third time she have see it — but in the dark house she have not really see the face . .   .   . the feature have be contort and thus not the real feature : these be the real feature . there be about that figure something timid . and noble . it say : 
 	 " Sporting ! Michael say : ' be sporting , mother ! ' .   .   . be sport .   .   . . " it raise its hand as if to shake a fist at heaven . the hand strike the beam across the ceiling : that roof be so low . and dear ! it say : " it be Father Consett really . .   .   . they can all , soon , call you Mrs. Tietjens . before God , I come to drive those people out . .   .   . but I want to see how it be you keep he .   .   . . " 
 	 Sylvia Tietjens be keep her head turn aside , droop . hide a tendency to tear , no doubt . she say to the floor : 
 	 " I say again , as God hear I , I never think to harm your child . .   .   . his child . .   .   . but any woman ’s . .   .   . not harm a child . .   .   . I have a fine one , but I want another . .   .   . their littleness . .   .   . the riding have do it .   .   . . " some - one sob ! 
 	 she look loweringly then at Valentine : 
 	 " it ’ Father Consett in heaven that have do this . Saint and martyr : desire soft thing ! I can almost see his shadow across these wall now it ’ grow dark . you hang he : you do not even shoot he , though I my you shoot he to save my feeling . .   .   . and it ’s you who will be go on through all the year .   .   . . " 
 	 she bite into a small handkerchief that she have in her hand , conceal . she say : " damn it , I ’m play pimp to Tietjens of Groby — leave my husband to you ! .   .   . . " 
 	 someone again sob . 
 	 it occur to Valentine that Christopher have leave those print at old Hunt ’s sale in a jar on the field . they have not want the jar . then Christopher have tell a dealer call Hudnut that he could have that jar and some other as against a little cart service . .   .   . he would be tired , when he get back , Christopher . he would have , nevertheless , to go to Hudnut ’s : Gunning could not be trust . but they must not disappoint Lady Robinson . .   .   . 
 	 Marie Léonie say : 
 	 " c’est lamentable qu’un seul homme puisse inspirer deux telles passion dans deux telle femme . .   .   . c’est le martyre de notre vie ! " 
 	 yes , it be lamentable that a man could inspire two such passion in two woman . Marie Léonie go to look after Mark . there be no Sylvia Tietjens . they say joy never kill . she fall straight down onto the ground , lumpishly ! .   .   . it be lucky they have the Bussorah rug , otherwise Chrissie .   .   . they must have some money . .   .   . poor .   .   . poor . .   .   . 
 
  chapter 4 


 
 
 	 MARK TIETJENS have lain consider the satisfaction of a great night he have lately pass . or perhaps not lately : at some time . lie out there in the black night , the sky seem enormous . you could understand how somewhere heaven could be conceal in it . and tranquil at time . then you feel the earth wheel through infinity . 
 	 night bird cry overhead : heron , duck , swan even : the owl keep close to the ground , beat along the hedgegrow . beast become busy in the long grass . they rustle busily ; then pause for long . no doubt a rabbit run till it find an attractive plantain . then it nibble for a long time without audible movement . now and then cattle low , or many lamb — frighten by a fox maybe . .   .   . 
 	 but there would be nevertheless long silence . .   .   . a stoat would get onto the track of the rabbit . they would run , run , run brush through the long grass , then out into the short meadow and round and round , the rabbit squealing . loudly at first . 
 	 in the dim illumination of his night - light , dormice would climb up the post of his shelter . they would remain regard he with bead of eye . when the rabbit squeal they would hunch themselves together and shiver . they know it mean S - t - o - a - t = stoat ! their turn soon ! 
 	 he despise himself a little for attend to these minutia — as if one be talk down to a child . .   .   . on his great night the whole cattle of the county have be strike with panic ; you hear they crash down through the hedge and mile down into the silent valley . 
 	 no ! he have never be one to waste his time and mind on small mammal and small bird . .   .   . the Flora and Fauna of Blankshire ! .   .   . not for he . it be big movement interest he : " wherein manifesteth itself the voice of God ! " .   .   . very likely that be true . transport . panic in cattle over whole county . in people over whole continent . 
 	 once , year — oh , year and year — ago , when he have be age twelve and on a visit to Grandfather , he have take a gun to Redcar sand from Groby , over the moor , and with one shot he have bring down two tern , a sandpiper and a herring gull . Grandfather have be so delighted with his prowess — though naturally the shot have be a fluke — that he have the thing stuff , and there they be in Groby Nursery to this day . the herring gull stiff on a mossy rock ; the sandpiper do obeisance before it , the tern fly , one on each side . 
 	 probably that be the only memorial to he , Mark Tietjens , at Groby . the young child have be will not to refer with awe to " Mark ’s bag " for long year afterwards . the paint background have shew Bamborough Castle with lashing of foam and blue sky . it be a far cry from Redcar to Bamborough — but that be the only background the bird - stuff chap in Middlesbrough could paint for sea - bird . for lark and the like he have a cornfield in the Vale of York ; for nightingale , poplar tree . .   .   . never hear that nightingale be particularly partial to poplar ! .   .   . nightingale disturb the majesty of great night . for two month out of the year , more or less , accord to the nature of the season . he be not decry the beauty of their voice . hear they you feel like see a good horse win the St. Leger . no other thing in the world could do it justice — there be no place in the world like Newmarket Heath on a breezy day . .   .   . but they limit the night . it be true that nightingale deep down in the spinney near where Gunning ’s hut must be — say a quarter of a mile away — could make you think of great distance , echo up through the deep wood . wood drip with dew beneath the moon . .   .   . and air - raid not so long ago ! the moon bring air - raid and its shining be discourage . .   .   . yes , nightingale make you think of distance , just as the night - jar for ever crepitate from twilight to dawn seem to measure a fragment of eternity . .   .   . but only fragment ! the great night be itself eternity and the in - finite . .   .   . the spirit of God walk on the firmament . .   .   . 
 	 cruel beggar , nightingale : they abuse one another with distend throat all through the night . between the gust of gale you could hear they shout on — tell their sitting hen that they — each one — be the devil of fellow , the other chap , down the hill by Gunning ’s hut , be a bedraggle , louse - eat braggart . .   .   . sex ferocity . 
 	 Gunning live in a bottom , in a squatter ’s cottage , they say . with a thatch like Robinson Crusoe ’s bonnet . a wise - woman ’s cottage . he live with the wise - woman , a chalk - white faced slattern . .   .   . and a granddaughter of the wise - woman whom , because she have a cleft palate and only half a brain , the parish , half out of commiseration , half for economy , have nominate mistress in the school up the hill . no one know whether Gunning sleep with the wise - woman or the granddaughter ; for one or the other he have leave his missus and Fittleworth have tan his hide and take his cottage from he . he thrash they both impartially with a hunting thong every Saturday night — to learn they , and to remind they that for they he have lose his cottage and the ten bob a week Fittleworth allow such hind as have be in his service thirty year . .   .   . sex ferocity again ! 
 	 " and how shall I thy true love know from another one ? 
 	 oh , by his cockle hat and staff and by his sandalled shoon ! " 
 	 an undoubted pilgrim have suggest irresistibly the line to he » ! .   .   . it be naturally that bitch Sylvia . wet eye she have ! .   .   . then some psychological crisis be go on inside she . good for she . 
 	 Good for Val and Chris , possibly . there be no real knowing . .   .   . oh , but there be . hear to that : the bitch - pack give tongue ! hear ye ever the like to that , sir ? she have have Groby Great Tree tear down . .   .   . but , as God be her maker , she would not tear another woman ’s child within she . .   .   . 
 	 he feel himself begin to perspire . .   .   . well , if Sylvia have come to that , his , Mark ’s , occupation be go . he would no long have to go on willing against she ; she would drop into the sea in the wake of their family vessel and be lose to view . .   .   . but , damn it , she must have suffer to be bring to that pitch . .   .   . poor bitch ! poor bitch ! the riding have do it . .   .   . she run away , a handkerchief to her eye . 
 	 he feel satisfaction and impatience . there be some place to which he desire to get back . but there be also thing to be do : to be think out . .   .   . if God be begin to temper the wind to these flay lamb .   .   . then .   .   . he could not remember what he want to think about . .   .   . it be — no , not exasperate . numb ! he feel himself responsible for their happiness . he want they to go rub along , smooth with the rough , for many long , unmarked year . .   .   . he want Marie Léonie to stay with Valentine until after her deliverance and then to go to the Dower House at Groby . she be Lady Tietjens . she know she be Lady Tietjens , and she would like it . besides , she would be a thorn in the flesh of Mrs. .   .   . he could not remember the name . .   .   . 
 	 he wish that Christopher would get rid of his jewish partner so as to addle a little brass . it be their failing as Tietjenses that they like toady . .   .   . he himself have bitch all their life by have that fellow ruggle share his room . because he could not have bear to share with an equal , and Ruggles be half Jew , half Scotchman . Christopher have have , for toady , firstly Macmaster , a Scot , and then this American Jew . otherwise he , Mark , be reconcile with thing . Christopher , no doubt , be wise in his choice . he have achieve a position in which he might — with just a little more to it - anticipate jog away to the end of time , leave descendant to carry on the country without swank . 
 	 ah . .   .   . it come to his mind to remember , almost with pain . he have accept nephew Mark as nephew Mark : a strong slip . a good boy . but there be the point .   .   . the point ! .   .   . the boy have the right sort of breech . .   .   . but if there be incest . .   .   . 
 	 crawl through a hedge after a rabbit be thinkable . Father have be in the churchyard to shoot rabbit to oblige the vicar . there be no doubt of that . he do not want rabbit . .   .   . but suppose he have mishit a bunny and the little beast have be throw gymnastic on the other side of the quickset ? Father would have crawl through then , rather than go all the way to the lychgate and round . decent man put their mishit out of their agony as soon as possible . then there be motive . and as for not put his gun out of action before crawl through the quickset . .   .   . many good , plucked man have die like that . .   .   . and father have grow absent - minded . ' .   .   . there have be farmer Lowther have so die ; and Pease of Lobhall ; and Pease of Cullercoats . all good pluck farmer . .   .   . crawl through hedge rather than go round , and with their gun at full cock ! and not absent - minded man . .   .   . but he remember that , just now , he have remember that father have grow absent — minded . he would put a paper in one of his waistcoat pocket and fumble for it in all his other pocket a moment after : he would push his spectacle up onto his forehead and search all the room for they ; he would place his knife and fork in his plate and , whilst talk , take another knife and fork from beside it and begin again to eat . .   .   . Mark remember that his father have do that twice during the last meal they have eat together — whilst he , Mark , have be present the fellow Ruggles ’s account of Christopher ’s misdeed . .   .   . 
 	 then it would not be incumbent on he , Mark , to go up to his father in Heaven and say : Hullo , sir . I understand you have a daughter by the wife of your good friend , she be now with child by your son . .   .   . rather ghostly so to introduce yourself to the awful ghost of your father . .   .   . of course you would be a ghost yourself . still , with your billycock hat , umbrella and racing - glass , not an awful ghost ! .   .   . and to say to your father : " I understand that you commit suicide ! " 
 	 against the rule of the Club . .   .   . for I consider it no grief to be go there where so many great man have precede I . sophocle that , be n’t it ? so , on his authority , it be a damn good club . .   .   . 
 	 but he do not have to anticipate that mauvai : quart d’beun ! Dad quite obviously do not commit suicide . he be n’t the man to do so . so Valentine be not his daughter and there be no incest . it be all very well to say that you care little about incest . the Greeks make a hell of a tragic row about it . .   .   . certainly it be a weight off the chest if you could think there have be none . he have always be able to look Christopher in the eye — but he would be able to do it well than ever now . comfortably ! it be uncomfortable to look a man in the eye and think : you sleep between incestuous sheet . .   .   . 
 	 that then be over . the bad of it roll up together . no suicide . no incest . no by — blow at Groby . .   .   . a Papist there . .   .   . though how you could be a Papist and a Marxian Communist pass his , Mark ’s , comprehension . .   .   . a Papist at Groby and Groby Great Tree down . .   .   . the curse be perhaps off the family ! 
 	 that be a superstitious way to look at it — but you must have a pattern to interpret thing by . you can not really get your mind to work without it . the blacksmith say : by hammer and hand all art doth stand ! .   .   . he , Mark Tietjens , for many year interpret all life in term of Transport . .   .   . transport , be thou my God . .   .   . a damn good God . .   .   . and in the end , after a hell of a lot of thought and of work , the epitaph of he , Mark Tietjens , ought by right to be : " here light : one when name war writ in sea - bird . ' " .   .   . as good an epitaph as another . 
 	 he must get it through to Christopher that Marie Léonie should have that case , with Bamborough and all , in her bedroom at Groby Dower House . it be the last permanent record of her man . .   .   . but Christopher would know that . .   .   . 
 	 it be come back . a lot of thing be come back . .   .   . he could see Redcar Sands run up towards Sunderland , grey , grey . not so many factory chimney then , work for he , Mark Tietjens ! not so many ! and the sand - piper run in the thin of the tide , bow as they run ; and the shoveller turn over stone and the tern float above the viscous sea . .   .   . ' 
 	 but it be great night to which he would now turn his attention . great black night above the purple moor . .   .   . great black night above the Edgware Road , where Marie Léonie live .   .   . because , above the blaze of light of the old Apollo ’s front , you have a sense of immense black space . .   .   . 
 	 who say he be perspire a great deal ? well , he be perspire ! 
 	 Marie Léonie , young , be bend over he . .   .   . young , young , as he have first see she on the stage of Covent Garden .   .   . in white ! .   .   . do agreeable thing to his face with a perfume like that of Heaven itself ! .   .   . and laugh sideways as Marie Léonie have laugh when first he present himself before she in his billycock hat and umbrella ! .   .   . the fine , fair hair ! the soft voice ! 
 	 but this be silly . .   .   . that be nephew Mark with his cherry - red face and star eye . .   .   . and this be his light of love ! .   .   . naturally . like uncle , like nephew . he would pick up with the same type of woman as his uncle . that make it certain that he be no by - blow ! pretty piece against the apple - bough ! 
 	 he want great night , then — Young Mark , though , should not pick up with a woman old than himself . Christopher have do that , and look ! 
 	 still : thing be take oop ! .   .   . do you remember the Yorkshireman who stand with his chin just out of the water on Ararat Top as Noah approach . and : " it ’ boon to tak oop ! " say the Yorkshireman . .   .   . it ’ bind to clear up ! 
 	 a great night , with room enough for Heaven to be hide there from our not too perspicacious eye . .   .   . it be say that an earthquake shock imperceptible to our sens set those cattle and sheep and horse and pig crash through all the hedge of the county . and it be queer : before they have so start low and move Mark be now ready to swear that he have hear a rush sound . he probably have not ! one could so easily self - deceive oneself ! the cattle have be panic because they have be sensible of the presence of the Almighty walk upon the firmament . .   .   . 
 	 damn it all : there be a lot of thing come back . he could have swear he hear the voice of Ruggles say : " after all , he be virtually Tietjens of Groby ! " .   .   . by no fault of your , old cock ! but now you will be cadge up to he . .   .   . now there speak Edith Ethel Macmaster ! a lot of voice pass behind his head . damn it all , could they all be ghost drift before the wind ! .   .   . or , damn it all , be he himself dead ! .   .   . no , you be probably not profane when you be dead . 
 	 he would have give the world to sit up and turn his head round and see . of course he could , but that would give the show away ! he credit himself with be too cunning an old fox for that ! to have throw dust in their eye for all these year ! he could have chuckle ! 
 	 Fittleworth seem to have come down into the garden and to be remonstrate with these people . what the devil could Fittleworth want ? it be like a pantomime . fittleworth , in effect , be look at he . he say : 
 	 " hello , old bean .   .   . . " Marie Léonie be look beside his elbow . he say : " I ’ve drive all these goat out of your hen - roost . " .   .   . good - look fellow Fittleworth . his Lola Vivaria have be a garden - peach . die in child - birth . no doubt that be why he have trouble to come . fittleworth say : Cammie say to give Mark her love for old tirne ’s sake . her dear love ! and as soon as he be well to bring her ladyship down . .   .   . , 
 	 damn this sweat . with its beastly tickling he would grimace and give the show away . but he would like Marie Léonie to go to the Fittleworth ’s . Marie Léonie say something to Fittleworth . 
 	 " yes , yes , I lady ! " say Fittleworth . damn it , he do look like a monkey as some people say . .   .   . but if the monkey we be descend from be as good — look .   .   . probably he have good - look leg . .   .   . how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of they that bring good tiding to Zion . .   .   . fittleworth add earnestly and distinctly that Sylvia — Sylvia Tietjens — beg Mark to understand that she have not send that flock of idiot down here . Sylvia also say that she be go to divorce his , Mark ’s , brother and dissolve her marriage with the sanction of Rome . .   .   . so they would all be a happy family down there , soon . .   .   . Anything Cammie could do . .   .   . because of Mark ’s unforgettable service to the nation . .   .   . 
 	 Name be write in .   .   . lett thou thy servant .   .   . divorce in peace ! 
 	 Marie Léonie beg Fittleworth to go away now . fittleworth say he would , but joy never kill ! so long , old .   .   . old friend ! 
 	 the club they have be in together . .   .   . but one go to a far well Club than .   .   . his breathing be a little troublesome . .   .   . it be darkish , then light again . 
 	 Christopher be at the foot of his bed . hold a bicycle and a lump of wood . aromatic wood : a chunk sawn from a tree . his face be white : his eye stick out . blue pebble . he gaze at his brother and say : 
 	 " half Groby wall be down . your bedroom ’ wreck . I find your case of sea - bird throw on a rubble heap . " 
 	 it be as well that one ’s service be unforgettable ! 
 	 Valentine be there , pant as if she have be run . she exclaim to Christopher : 
 	 " you leave the print for Lady Robinson in a jar you give to hudnut the dealer . how could you ? oh , how could you ? how be we go to feed and clothe a child if you do such thing ? " 
 	 he lift his bicycle wearily round . you could see he be dreadfully weary , the poor devil . Mark almost say : 
 	 " let he off ? : the poor devil ’ wear out ! " 
 	 heavily , like a dejected bull - dog , Christopher make for the gate . as he go up the green path beyond the hedge , Valentine begin to sob . 
 	 " how be we to live ? how be we ever to live ? " 
 	 " now I must speak , " Mark say . 
 	 he say : 
 	 " do ye ever hear tell o ' t ' Yorkshireman .   .   . on Mount Ara .   .   . Ara . . . " 
 	 he have not speak for so long . his tongue appear to fill his mouth ; his mouth to be twist to one side . it be grow dark . he say : 
 	 " put your ear close to my mouth .   .   . . " she cry out . he whisper : 
 	 " ' ' twas the mid o ' the night and the barnie grat 
 	 and the mither beneath the mauld hear that .   .   . . ' 
 	 an old song . my nurse sing it . .   .   . never thou let thy child weep for thy sharp tongue to thy good man . .   .   . a good man ! Groby Great Tree be down .   .   . " he say : " hold my hand ! " 
 	 she insert her hand beneath the sheet and his hand close on her . then it relax . 
 	 she nearly cry out for Marie Léonie . 
 	 the tall , sandy , much - like doctor come through the gate . 
 	 she say : 
 	 " he speak just now . .   .   . it have be a torturing afternoon . .   .   . now I ’m afraid .   .   . I ’m afraid he ’s .   .   . " 
 	 the doctor reach his hand beneath the sheet , lean sideways . he say : 
 	 " go get you to bed . .   .   . I will come and examine you . .   .   . 
 	 she say : 
 	 " perhaps it would be good not to tell Lady Tietjens that he speak . .   .   . she would like to have have his last word . . . . but she do not need they as much as I. " 
 	 the END 
