the ENGLISH GIRL 

 the amazing DEATH 

 the first thing he say when she come into the room be : 

 " my father be dead , " and the announcement stay she at the door , her hand fall to her side , 
 open , as if , though a moment before they would have know their place and have lie upon the 
 two shoulder of the man she be to marry , now , so new a creature do this announcement make 
 he seem , that she have , at least for a moment , to hesitate as to whether he could still belong to 
 she . it be under the definite spell of that feeling that she utter the word : 

 " oh dear ! " - word that imply more than anything else - " tell I all : tell I the bad ! " 

 and he be so sensitive to her mood that he , too , neither make to take she into his arm nor to 
 utter an endearment . 

 " I be the rich citizen in the world , for what it be worth , " he say , with a flavour of scorn , as if 
 he be quote the word of a man for whom he have an infinite contempt . 

 she sink down upon one of the hard - seat , fine , mahogany chair before she utter the word 
 " how - ! " but she be unable to furnish any adjective . the situation be beyond she : she could 
 say neither " how tremendous ! " " how terrible ! " nor yet " how magnificent ! " 

 you may guess at a person 's character very efficiently by consider his first abstract remark 
 upon any give happening . tall , rather dark , with rounded cheek , hair arrange high on her 
 head , tight - fit park dress , and a slow , elastic gait , and with her self - control and her clear line 
  - she be call Eleanor Greville - you could not deny the epithet " fine " to she , or to the room 
 or to the atmosphere that surround she . and four day before she would at least have be 
 ready to give as much insight into her personality : she would at least have be able to utter some 
 moralisation if she have hear that overwhelming wealth have fall to the share of any of her 
 intimate . 

 but , from the Monday on which the first news of his father 's death have be cable from across 
 the water , she have seem to be lift out of contact with her own personality . the death have 
 be deny on Tuesday , re - affirm on the Wednesday by indignant transatlantic journalist , 
 and redenie on the Thursday by vastly more indignant Wall Street authority , who claim to 
 have ' see he " the night before . so that she have not know whether it would be necessary for 
 she to face the new position , terrible or beneficent , till that moment . she have not face it : neither 
 have he give she any assistance . 

 he have explain to she that the report of his father 's death might be true : it might be just the 
 discovery of a genuine newspaper - writer anxious to provide his journal with the early report of 
 a good ' story . " or it might be a lie invent by his father 's enemy who desire to " bear " his 
 father 's interest . or it might be a lie spread abroad by his father himself . and he have explain 
 to she how it might be make to suit his father 's turn to " bear " his own interest . she be not 
 lack in intelligence sufficient to grasp the idea of such a manreuvre , if she have not an exact 
 knowledge , beforehand , of how it would be work . she be shut off by the necessity of her life 
 with a father who be call " try " by most people who know he - a father whose death , if it 
 might have cause some satisfaction to a world that send a certain class of learn book out for " 
 review , " would certainly not have send the price of varied stock tumble down all over the 
 world . 

 for the mere rumour of her lover 's father 's death - the rumour thus unconfirmed , deny , 
 re - affirm and re - deny with violent asseveration - have undoubtedly effect that . she know 
 it from her CousinAugustus , who , a solicitor with a too - limit capital , have , upon the very 
 Monday night , dash down from town to get from she , with cousinly force , some sort of what he 
 call " pointer . " thing , he say , be " fall " all over the place : they go down in London 
 and they go down in Yokohama . as for 

 what thing be do in the continent that lie westward , between London and Yokohama , he 
 say the report of it beggar description . it have give to her belief in human nature one severe 
 shake at least . her Aunt Emmeline , a lady of fifty - two , dessicate and thin - lipped , who more 
 than any of the family have be able to indicate by dogged silence a disapproval of her 
 engagement to " an american " - though to be sure you could not possibly have tell that this 
 particular American be anything but a very gentle and unassuming anybody else - her Aunt 
 Emmeline have come to she between tear and outraged indignation to assure she that if Eleanor 's 
 lover 's father be dead she would be literally beggar . 

 it put a new light upon the fact - she have discover it whilst her aunt have be spend last 
 Christmas with they - that her aunt receive by post a journal call the investor 's Guide . no 
 one have ever exactly known how her Aunt Emmeline 's money have be invest : one associate 
 she so definitely with a family solicitor 's advice : she take her need to be so small that it be 
 incredible that she should have try speculation - and speculation of the wild sort . 

 it come , in fact , to this quiet girl of thirty or so as a revelation - as the shock of an earthquake 
 might have do . it reveal to her her aunt as possess of a perfect abyss of cupidity - though 
 she could not in the least imagine what she would propose to do with money when she have it . it 
 have worry she , too - this revelation - because it seem to show that 



 the influence of her lover 's father have spread from the town with a queer name where he reside 
 even to the decorous and quite ordinary Red Hill , where her aunt 's creeper - bedeck villa offer 
 a small white drive to the impeccable suburban street . 

 for her aunt have announce that since Eleanor 's engagement she have decide to follow the 
 fortune of the Charles Collar Kelleg company : she have speculate in the shares1 of the 
 enterprise that - accord to the investor 's Guide - C. Collar Kelleg sustain with his voice 
 from Kellegville , Ma . it be not enough for she to say to her aunt that her lover dissociate 
 himself from his father , his father 's enterprise , and - as far as he decently could - from his 
 father 's State . it do not even mitigate her aunt 's wrath when Eleanor say that she herself , in the 
 course of her long intimacy with the son , have only four time hear he mention his father 's 
 name . her aunt have the crush reply that if her fianaf have not be his father 's son she would 
 never have let herself be draw into speculating - on the cover systejn - in the Kelleg group of 
 company . 

 that announcement have , in a sense , relieve the girl 's mind . it mean that her aunt might be a 
 solitary speculator on this side of the water . for of late so considerably have the name of Collar 
 Kelleg figure in the world as that of an engineer of combine , a breaker of american railway 
 law , or an amateur of the Fine Arts , that she have come to fear that each inhabitant of each 
 ivy - cover house that she call on in Canterbury , Kent , England , be concern in the fate of 
  - be certain to be ruin by - C. Collar Kelleg , of Kellegville , Ma . , U.S.A. only a fortnight 
 before she have take her lover to a garden - party at one of the Canons ' house . and when she have 
 introduce he to the Canon himself , the Canon - a weary - look cleric with side whisker 
 and a not too new coat , a clergyman report to be in difficulty even with his butcher - the 
 Canon have say : 

 " not really a relation of - of the Collar Kelleg ? " 

 and when her lover have wince , when make the confession of a relationship that he always leave 
 undefined , the Canon , exhibit at once a latent eagerness and an ostentatious official 
 indifference , have ask : 

 " and be it true that he . . . that your uncle , be it ? . . . meditate buy up ... acquire an interest in 
 ... all our railway line between . . . Liverpool and the Metropolis ? " 

 the young man have answer : 

 " why : you can not tell . I can not . of course there be so many thing that he control . he might 
 want to send they backwards and forwards between New York and London . and Liverpool 's on 
 the way between , of course . " 

 the Canon have choke in his throat at these word , to which he seem to accord a huge gravity , 
 and she have be conscious that , in and out among the clump of cedar on that sunny lawn , no 
 person ever speak to the Canon that afternoon without hurry away to another group of guest 
 with an announcement that cause head to turn in their direction . it affect she to a pitch of 
 nervousness - so that for a moment or two she be relieve when her lover be disengage by a 
 lady with a pink dress and a pleasant laugh . she stand alone by a clump of hydrangea wait 
 for he to rejoin she , and a voice behind her back utter : 

 " oh , I suppose he be come down to see if he will not   buy the cathedral . " 

 and another : 

 " oh , he could not   do that , could he ? do not   it belong to the state or something ? " 

 she feel herself grow warm from her foot to the root of her hair , and she hurry aimlessly away 
 as the first voice exclaim : 

 " yes . that be the point of my joke . thank goodness here be one thing these fellow can not   . . . " 

 she hurry away - aimlessly . the Canon 's garden have such high wall that it seem to she , 
 precisely , that what she want to do be to sink into the ground . if only her lover have not be 
 Collar Kelleg ! he have every other possible quality - stability , kindness , gentleness , the right 
 brown eye , the right full voice , the right brown moustache , the right great height . it be only his 
 portentous identity that jar on the perfection of the afternoon . for the grass be so green that 
 the tall cedar appear dark blue : the garden be full of pleasant people : the high , brick wall 
 give a comforting feeling of privacy ; the tall , square tower of the cathedral peer down upon 
 they , almost golden in the sunlight , benignly , like a great benediction from many tranquil age . it 
 ought to have be such a perfect afternoon , that on which she introduce her lover to her people , 
 for if they be not - the Canon 's guest - her own family , they be , very exactly , her clan ; 
 some very rich , some decently poor , some very clerical , some decently scholarly , some with great 
 estate , some with great mortgage - but all , down to the red - haired archdeacon from a northern 
 diocese , all quiet , unobtrusive and presentable after you make allowance . and she , if she be 
 the handsome girl there , be not very noticeably so . she would not have want more . 

 it be only her lover who stand out , by reason of a portentous name . and she find herself 
 explain to several intimately sympathetic lady that he be not really at all closely connect 
 to the Mr Collar Kelleg ; that they be not in communication with one another ; that her fiance 
 have not be in America for fifteen year ; that he all but make his own living ; that , in fact , you 
 could hardly call he american at all . and she try to put it , as unobtrusively as possible , that , if 
 his mean would run to it , they intend to settle down in one of the little , old , good house near 
 the City and live as a nice young couple should . to the objection that her father would miss she a 
 great deal she go even so far as to hazard that they might settle down with he at the end of the 
 two year or so that their engagement would last . only of course it be awkward that her fiancJ 
 need a studio . her father would not feel inclined to sacrifice a greenhouse or part of his garden 
 in which to build a shed with a north light . 

 it have not be through any lack of veracity that she have so paint the probable course of their 
 future . it have so present itself to she : her lover , even , have so project it . he too love that 
 simple , tranquil , fine life : he love , that be to say , the outward aspect of it : the broad , smooth 
 down , the gently - aged house , the dependable servant , the quiet , fill street , the soft colour . 
 it be he even who suggest that they might share the house with her father . he could not 
 imagine a betterordered type of life . there be only London that be fine - and they could go 
 up to London as often as they please . the only obstacle be that her father have a blind prejudice 
 against Americans - against the american point of view : against the american scholarship : 
 against the very name . he go so far - he , the politest of man , who have put no obstacle but 
 muteness against her engagement - go so far as to say that he would discharge . his servant , 
 pack up his book and go back to Cambridge before ever an American should take up permanent 
 lodging in his house . he have never meet an American before he meet her fiance ; but he change 
 none of his view when he do meet he . 

 nevertheless , until that fatal Monday when the paper have suddenly - with special cable - 
 announce the death of Charles Collar Kelleg , she have to herself , as to all her relation and 
 friend , mitigate her lover 's americanism , and she and he together have speculate upon which 
 of the many pleasing house near the ancient valley city should eventually hold they and witness 
 their unobtrusive joy . 



 II 

 the death of his father put all this in an entirely different light . she feel herself , vaguely , that his 
 inheritance of immense " interest " in the country across the water must render he infinitely 
 more american . you might mitigate the fact that he have be bear in Idaho and have live till he 
 be four in the town of Hut , Montana . the truth suggest itself at once that to be bear in a 
 stable do not make a man even a groom . but to have be bear there , and then , in addition , to 
 control the output of thirtyseven billion loaf of bread , three railway and eleven steamship line 
  - all these thing together would make it impossible for he to pass as one of " ourselves . " there 
 be , of course , the immense wealth , but that be a thing so invisible that it could not be call 
 any equivalent for the age , comfort and presentability of Cuddiford House - the small manor that 
 they have half decide to take . at the same time it render Cuddiford House impossible . you 
 could not live in it and be the wealthy commoner in England ! a week ago they have not be 
 certain that they could afford even Cuddiford ! now . . . sit on the edge of her chair in her 
 father 's dining - room , where he have await she , she say almost faintly : 

 " oh , it can not   be as bad as that ? " he look at she with his brow wrinkle . 

 " as bad as what ? " he ask . 

 " as that you be the rich citizen in the world ! " 

 his face clear , and from the rich enhancing of his colour it might have be say that he 
 blush with pleasure . 

 " you can not   tell how glad I be , " he answer , " that you call it bad ! " he hesitate , and then add : 
 " but I be determined to end it . to end it or mend it . I have   be think of that - if you agree , and 
 I be certain you would agree - all the way down from town . " 

 he have brown hair that wave a very little ; he have a straight nose ; he be dress in a very 
 perfect suit of brown , and you certainly could not have call he anything but a very perfectly 
 typical Englishman , if it have not be that , just at time , his brown , seal - like eye be a very 
 little too intelligent . he be so tall that his motion across the room be a noticeable fact : he be 
 so good to look upon that to be tower over by he be a pleasure : and the fact that he only 
 hold out to she both his hand to take both her be so exactly the right resealing of their bond of 
 union that , as his large , firm finger close upon her , she feel impel to utter the word : " oh , I 
 do not   like Americans ! " in an intermezzo of pleasure and relief . 

 it be the little intimacy that she allow herself - as another girl might whisper to her lover : " I 
 do not , as a rule , like roman nose - but the rest of you make up for your ! " 

 he have hear she say the same thing several time 

 before , so that he accept the compliment with a fine , friendly smile and revert to the first 
 question . 

 " it be the trick of my - my compatriot , " he say , " to call everything they possibly can the large 
 thing in the world . I suppose it be because they be - we be - idealist . " he press her hand 
 gently . " all the same those be the word of my father 's head agent in London - his very word . 
 and he happen to be an Englishman . " 

 whilst she walk erectly to the sofa his soft eye follow her firm figure , dwelt with 
 admiration on the dark hair that rise in the curve of a phrygian cap , and pass down to her 
 white , firm hand . his brown eye be indeed full of love and of trustfulness , to which there 
 be add a certain gladness . he have doubt that she would see eye to eye with he , but there 
 have be force from she , without any lead from he , the one word , " bad , " that he need . she 
 sit still and pliantly upon the edge of the long , red lounge . its walnut back above the velvet 
 cushion be carve into tiny , smile , cherub face ; above her head be a circular mirror that 
 reflect , with gracious distortion , in bow and curve , the long window and the silver 
 candlestick upon the table . it be exactly the place in which she should be ; if she have not choose 
 the furniture or the darkish , pleasant atmosphere of the not too old room , she have at least 
 inherit the right to fit into it . sit there , do nothing , wait for life to pass , she seem 
 exactly to represent what he most delight in . if she do not represent - if he do not feel for her 
  - passion , she do represent a feeling of the good . she hold all the charm of a life so order that , 
 if you do not inquire too closely into whether its domestic have a share in ideal and comfort , 
 represent something as near a perfect , a heavenly , peace as you could find on this earth . . . 

 " bad ! " he repeat , as he move to sit beside she . " it be so bad that it will mean an infinite 
 amount of worry for I - on the other side . I be quite determined - and you will be , when you 
 know , if you ever do , what it be like - to put thing straight . " and he clasp his hand over one 
 knee that he cross above the other . 

 she smile a little . 

 " yes . I suppose you will have the power to put some thing straight now , " she say . he gaze at the 
 blue and red pile of the carpet and his eye stray , musingly , up the flute , dark leg of the 
 dining - table . 

 " Heaven know , " he say , " it be not power that be give I . it be a burden ; it be a duty . " 

 she drop one of her hand affectionately upon his finger . 

 " oh , well , old boy , " she say , after a moment 's thought , " it be not much good try to redress the 
 burden of our ancestry . I be pretty certain I should not be sit here if it be not for the crying 
 injustice one of the Grevilles make his money by century ago . " 

 he clasp her hand with some of his long finger . 

 " oh , " he say , " that be vague and indefinite and long ago and undecipherable . besides , it be in 
 the spirit of the time of your ancestor . " 

 she laugh at he still . 

 " well , I suppose it would be pretty difficult to discover whom to give our money back to . " 

 he turn to she a face so full of earnestness and force that she do not laugh any more . his 
 voice , if it be tender , come from deep in his chest . 

 " it be precisely because it be not difficult to discover whom my father rob that I be go to stop 
 the robbery , " he say . " why , " he continue , " at this moment you be pay my father - you be 
 pay I - half as much again as you ought to for half the thing you wear and half the thing 
 you eat . it be bad for the poor people here : it be infinitely bad for the poor over there . they have 
 pay taxis to he - they be pay they to I - at this moment - on light , on house rent , on 
 locomotion , on bread , on salt . there be hardly a thing that my father have not make the starve 
 starve bad for need of . ice now be a necessity in the slum of New York - and you do not   know 
 what slum there be in New York . " his voice get deep : he be take breath for a new 
 outburst . " what do you think my father and his associate have do for ice ? they have   let the sun 
 into their blockhouse on the lakes : they have   keep back all the ice - fleet a whole month : they have   ... " 

 " but be not that , " she interrupt he with her slow , submissive and deep tone , " be not   that in the 
 spirit of the time - over there ? just as much as the peculation of our ancestor , here , be in the 
 spirit of their time ? " 



 he sweep back a heavy lock of hair from his forehead . 

 " good heaven , no ! " he say . " do you think that be what the Minute man die at Lexington for ? 
 do you think that be what humanity be come to ? it be not in the spirit of the time . it be a throwback : 
 it be a survival . it be not - it be not . what America be there for , be to carry the thing one step far : 
 to do what Europe be too tired to do : Heaven help we : what be America for in the scheme of thing 
 if it be not   for that ? " 

 she say , lightly and tenderly : 

 " I do not know you be as american as all that ! " 

 he bend his head close to her . 

 " it be just because I be not american : it be just because I be suspend between heaven and earth , 
 like Mahomet 's coffin , that I see thing so clearly . consider : you have   struggle up here , in Europe , 
 to a certain stage of justice , of peace , of goodness of heart . it be take you age to do it . but you 
 be at a fine pitch . over there they have   start from where you leave off : they have   have the freedom 
 you have   have to fight for : they have   have the wealth that it be be always so difficult to wring from the 
 earth here . do not   you see ? do not   you see ? it be not in the spirit of their time : it be not in the spirit 
 of your . he be an accident - a phenomenon such as my father and his fellow : it be due to the fact 
 that they have to handle such tremendous mass of thing . but I , just because I be not an 
 American , nor yet a European - I want , now I have   get the duty lay on I , to break up one of the 
 boulder that be in the way of their car . they need a fair chance : they need decent treatment from 
 Providence . it be too bad that , just because accident have place the power in the hand of a few 
 throwback , a whole , fine , generous step in the progress of humanity should be hinder . " 

 " you know you can talk , " she say . " but I really believe that they be all the same over there - 
 that it be in the spirit of the age to make trust . " 

 he come back from the state of mind in which he have allow himself to voice a great many 
 pen - up thought - thought that he have repress for year in order to come into line with his 
 undemonstrative environment . 

 " yes , " he laugh , " I have be treat you as if you be a public meeting . but whom be I to 
 talk to if I do not to you ? " 

 " oh , I quite like it , " she say almost shyly . " I do like to hear you say you will do thing . and I do not 
 doubt you be right . " 

 " it be not   a change in I , " he answer . " I do not   change . it would have be foolish to talk of do 
 thing when there do not seem the ghost of a chance that I would ever have any power . now it be 
 different . " he accept the shy tone of her voice then . " of course you would like I to do thing . I 
 daresay it be seem a defect in I that I be mild and ineffectual . but you will see a change ! " 

 she smile . 

 " I do not   mean to let you upset thing here . 

 there be nothing that really want change . but out there - if you do not   go away from I to do it 
  - it do not   seem to matter . " 

 he shake his head and put the tip of her ring finger to his lip . when his eye come back from 
 the carpet to her face he begin again : 

 " of course it be a mathematical absurdity , " he laugh , " that all the eighty million inhabitant of 
 the United States should be engage in found trust . it be the infinitely few that do it . " 

 " that be why it be not in touch with the spirit of the age ? ' she ask . 

 " that be why , " he nod . " the huge - the infinite - mass of the people be good , decent , 
 hardworking , and awfully idealist . think of their record ! they want Liberty , they want it as they 
 want the air they breathe . and that be fine . it be . why , it be a fine imagination - even if it be a 
 clumsilyexecute lump - the figure of Liberty that you will have to see for yourself before very 
 long . it be fine . only it be always so tremendously in evidence that you forget it - just as you would 
 forget the sun here if you ever see enough of it to make you get use to it . " 

 she muse . 

 " I suppose I shall have to go with you - out there - one day , for a time at least . " 

 " yes . " he catch at her thought . " it will make an incredible change all this . but only for a time . 
 I shall get rid of it all . it will not   be very difficult - only , there will be arrangement to make - 
 employee to settle . I have   an idea of co - operative factory - something large and fine . but of 
 course the ground will have to be study . it will take time - you will have to help I . and then , 
 when it be all fix up , we shall come back here as if nothing have happen - and no doubt we 
 shall be able to afford Cuddiford House . I do not   imagine that all my father 's money be make 
 nefariously . " 

 she startle he by say : 

 " I suppose your father be actually dead . " 

 his mind be so distinctly more upon the future than upon even the immediate present that it 
 be a moment before he could bethink he to draw from a side pocket a long slip of bluish 
 paper . 

 " here be the private cable , " he say . " Mackinnon decipher it . " 

 and whilst , with her eyebrow raise , she run her glance down the paper , he move beside she so 
 that his head nearly touch her shoulder , and give fragmentary explanation . 

 " Mackinnon , " he say , " be my father 's chief agent in London . he hold the secret cipher book . 
 the man who send it - Maginnis - be an Irishman . he be - so they say - my father 's dme damnte 
  - as remarkable a man as my father . at the head of all the combination . so that he speak with 
 the weight of about six hundred firm , there and here ... " 

 she interrupt he with : " be this possible ? " 

 " that my father control six hundred firm ? why , " he say , " I do not   know that the figure be an 
 exactly round number , but . . . " 

 she interrupt he again , a little impatiently : 

 " oh ! - that be possible . but that your father should . . . " and she point her white , little finger at 
 the line of a paper . 

 " oh ! - that " he say , " that be entirely likely . you may take it for gospel truth . " 

 " what a huge sum the cable must have cost ! " she say as a side issue . 

 " you have   get to revise all your idea , " he answer . " the cable may have cost a hundred pound . 
 but that be not even a drop in the bucket compare with what be always at stake . why , this 
 combination handle - I do not   know - a million dollar a day ! I do not   know . I do not   suppose they 
 know themselves - that anybody ever could know - because the circumstance of the business 
 be so vast and change so rapidly that everything might be something else before you could 
 possibly calculate where you stand at any give hour . " 

 she drop the consideration with : 

 " it make one feel giddy . " 

 and he with : " yes , it be like try to think what would become of you if you fall overboard in 
 midAtlantic . the depth be bottomless . " 

 they return to the consideration of the cable , when she say : 

 " but which be we to believe ? that your father die because the medicine he take be not 
 properly make up , or because he be drug himself to look ill for the sake of deceive the 
 reporter ? " 

 he remove the hand that hold her disengage finger to touch his moustache , a gesture that 
 aid his reflection . 

 " you can believe either , " he say . " or 



 both . or nothing . or even something quite different . " 

 her dark eye rest for a moment upon he , affectionately , seek further explanation , and he 
 add : 

 " my father certainly suffer from angina pcctoris . he certainly take nitrate of amyl for it . and a 
 chemist over there be equally capable of give he capsule without any nitrate of amyl in they . 
 no doubt , if the truth come to be know , the chemist 's shop be own by one of my father 's 
 own combination . in that case they would certainly have have instruction to run the business as 
 economically as possible . and nitrate of amyl cost money . in that case , not even a man as rich 
 as my father could have get the stuff pure . no one could in the whole continent . " 

 he consider again for a moment . 

 " but the whole thing with its ramification be so infinite that it make one tired . why , it do not 
 even begin to end there . the capsule my father take may really have be perfectly all right . he 
 may just have die . the whole story may be a lie . but his combination may be now intent on 
 form a combine of drug store . they may want to raise a storm of indignation against 
 druggist and then to buy up all the drug store in America at cheap rate because of the 
 discredit . " 

 " what a frightful people ! " she say . 

 " oh ! " he answer , " do not   believe that they be frightful . the only wonderful thing be that we be 
 only just begin to understand such manoeuvre . they have   be go on everywhere and 
 always . what be hopeful be that now we be begin to understand the method we shall arrive at a 
 mean of fight it soon . " 

 she do not answer that , but return to her paper . 

 " but why should your father have want to make himself appear ill ? " 

 " oh , " he answer , " that be simple . it be the only simple thing in the business - because , you see , 
 it be the only place in which a human figure stand alone and be visible . all the rest be combine 
 and numeral . this be a human dodge . it would be just like my father - who always be fond of a 
 joke . " 

 he reflect again for a moment . 

 " you have   get to think that my father really be a striking man . my mother , of course , teach I to 
 dislike his - his method so much that I have   shrink from talk about he much , even to you . " 

 " yes , " she answer , " I have   learn a great deal more of he from the paper than I ever hear from 
 you . " 

 he pat her hand deprecatingly . 

 " well , do not   bear a grudge against I for that , " he say . " I sort of hop that I should never have 
 to talk to you about he . and the paper - Heaven know ! - always have enough in they about 
 he for you to learn all you could possibly want to know - for the purpose of marry I . " 

 " you mean , " she say , " that you never expect to be he - as you be now . " 

 he smile a little wearily and then kiss she . 

 " never , " he answer , and then : " but of course I be not the man my father be . all the same . . . " 
 and he straighten himself by pull at the back seam of his coat , " I be go to stand up 
 against he now . I be go to fight the influence he be leave on the world . " 

 she consider this announcement for long enough to rejoin : 

 " it almost seem a pity ! " 

 he return to his parable . 

 " you see : my mother , for all she be only a lady's - maid when he marry she , be as English as 
 you - or your friend the Canon 's wife , or your father for that matter . she just hat his ` american 
 method ` as much as ever your father could . I expect it be as much that as the ` thing , ` whatever 
 it be , that my father have do that make she hate he so terribly . " 

 she pause before she ask he : 

 " what be the thing your father do ? " 

 he shake his head and answer : 

 " I do not   know . as I have   tell you two or three time , there be something . but my mother never 
 tell I . she have a sort of loyalty to my father after all . it may have be murder . . . " 

 " it have not   anything to do with another woman ? " she ask . 

 " oh , dear no , " he answer , " my mother have too much knowledge of life to expect my father to 
 be faithful to she . no : it may have be murder - my mother would not have like murder . but I 
 think it have to do with my father 's have be disloyal to a friend . once or twice before she die 
 she speak of a man call Kratzenstein . I think my father steal a mine from he . something like 
 that . my mother , you see , would not have be able to stand - she would not have be able to 
 understand - that sort of crime . " 

 Eleanor comment : " ah ! " 

 " but my father , " he continue , " my father , I imagine , would have consider it a good - or 
 sardonic - joke to rob a man who trust he . probably Kratzenstein be rob someone else 
 already . . . you can not   tell . " 

 she scratch her cheek reflectively . 

 " I think I understand your mother 's standpoint , " she say . 

 " oh , my father 's be absolutely simple , " he answer . " what he want be fun . if he diddle 
 Kratzenstein it be for the pure fun of diddling . if he be make the large fortune in the world it 
 be for the same reason . if he try to make himself appear ill to the reporter , that be because it 
 be a lark . no doubt the lark 's only huge if he actually kill himself over it . I would not   mind 
 bet that if he be leave his fortune to I it be because he see it would be a tremendous bother to 
 I . he be not the type of man who would want to found a dynasty . I guess he think I be a terrific 
 prig . " 

 " I think I be rather glad he do , " Eleanor answer . 

 he meditate upon the point as if he be not quite certain . 

 " I think my mother be glad of that too . you see , she have not   a sense of humour . I fancy my father 
 think she be a prig too . he use to be amuse at she - and at I . I suppose I have not   any 
 sense of humour . " 

 " I be glad of that too , " she say softly . she consider once more . 

 " I be sometimes sorry , in a sneaking way , " he say . " it make I seem less of a man . " 

 she say , with a little wounded intonation : 

 " then you do not   care what I care ! " 

 " oh , for goodness ' sake , " he say , " do not   say that . if I do not care what you care should I be 
 here consult you ? " 

 in a swift access of tenderness she put she cheek against his . 

 " you dear ! " she say in soft tone of emotion . then she draw back and look into his eye from 
 quite close . " at the same time I do not   see what we be consult about . " 

 he kneel down suddenly and kiss first one foot and then the other , that she hold a little out as if 
 to a shoe - black , pull her skirt a little back and peer over . 

 " we be not consult about thing , " he say , from his knee , " we be get to know each other 
 well and well . we be consult about our point of view . " as he kneel she put her hand upon 
 his head . " that be why we can not   keep to any straight line , " he conclude . 

 " at the same time , " she say , " we ought to talk about something . there seem to be such a 
 tremendous lot to do " 



 " oh - to do " he say , with a touch of deprecation . " the only thing to do be for I to show you 
 how I worship you . " 

 " that be very american , be not   it ? " she ask , as if she be inclined to take advantage of both 
 people 's trait . he be to behave like a european and to be as devoted as the Transatlantic be 
 suppose to be . he rise , however , to his foot . 

 " yes , I suppose we have   get to settle on some line of action , " he say . " where be we ? " he take a 
 little pencil from his waistcoat pocket and run it through the hair above his brow . 

 " I have not ascertain a single thing , " she say . " not one that be definite . here be this telegram ? 
 who be it from ? what do it really mean ? what be you go to do ? " 

 " I will write that down , " he say , and when he have take from his pocket an old envelope he jot 
 down upon his knee the three heading . " we need , " he conclude , ' some sort of anchor to hold 
 we to the ground . " 

 he take from she the copy of the decipher cable and tap it with the back of his pencil . 

 " where do it come from ? " he quote . " New York . and from Patrick C. Maginnis . that be fairly 
 certain , because it be send in a code that only Maginnis us . my father , even , be not 
 acquaint with it . that be their safeguard . Maginnis , in the combine , represent the head of 
 business who be not my father . that settle where it come from . " he wrinkle his brow . 
 " now , as for what it mean ? " he reflect for a moment . " let us read the cable word for word . " 
 she nod and he go on : " ' John Collar Kelleg die on Sunday at 4.30 in the afternoon . " 
 there be a definite statement . it may be a lie . my father may have get Maginnis to cable it for his 
 own purpose . " 

 " what sort of purpose ? " she ask . 

 " well , " he answer , " consider the rest of the cable . " he clear his throat and read far . " ` it 
 be urgent that this news be authoritatively deny and re - affirm in ail London paper until after 
 Monday , when associate of all the Kelleg interest will meet and determine on plan . ' that may 
 be true : it may be a dodge . " he read on again . " ` use all your influence with advertising staff of 
 London journal to give the matter prominence ` " 

 he draw in a deep breath . 

 " now , there be a pretty straight proposition at last , " he say . 

 she move her hand across her dark eyebrow . 

 " I be an owl , I suppose , " she say , " for I do not   see it . " 

 he pat she on the hand . 

 " I would hate it if you do , " he answer . " it be a blighting sort of knowledge that I wish I have not get to 
 have myself . but there it be ! " 

 he tap her knuckle with his pencil . 

 " it be like this , " he explain . " what be want be to keep Kelleg share in the public eye . they go 
 down when it be report that Kelleg 's dead ; they go up when it be report that he be alive . well 
 now , someone make something out of each of those up and down . but what be want be a 
 downward tendency - not too swift just now , because they be not ready . " 

 " but why ? " she ask . " why a downward tendency ? they would lose , would not   they ? " 

 " you dear ! " he answer . 

 after a moment he continue : 

 " now , let us read the next sentence . ` on Monday you will declare unofficially that J. C. K. die by 
 his own hand . upon fall of share in London market you will purchase every purchasable cent 's 
 worth . ` " 

 " I be an owl , " she say again . but , hold her head on one side , she touch suddenly her dark , 
 smooth hair at the back . " why ! " she ejaculate . 

 he utter : " yes : you see the key . ` on Tuesday we shall declare the dividend of 17   per cent , 
 for 
 the year of the whole combine . you will realise , upon the rise market , at your own discretion . ` " 

 " oh ! ' she say , and a certain light come into her dark eye . he take it for anger , and tenderly 
 stroke her hand he whisper : 

 " of course it be abominable to bring you into contact with these thing . . . " 

 he look round upon the comfortable , severe , darken scholar 's dining - room . he touch the 
 red velvet of the sofa : his artist 's eye be gladden with the grecian bust of Aphrodite upon 
 the black marble mantelpiece , by the large photograph of the Forum and by the shin clock 
 that stand , as if dubiously hide , against the light , between the two tall window . it be 
 symbolic - because Time , there , be not the important matter : the last thing you do be to look 
 at the clock . and it shock he subconsciously that he should be bring she into level with the 
 time . but after all , as he consider , if they be make acquaintance with that sort of thing 
 they be do it in order to fight in the interest of this sort of thing . 

 " it be degrade . . ."he be begin , but she interrupt he with animation and gratitude . 

 " it be very interesting , " she say . " it be not exactly the thing for a lady to understand . but so many 
 woman have to look out for themselves nowadays . " 

 " your Aunt Emmeline ? " he suggest . 

 she nod and add : " let I see if I really understand it . " 

 she refer again to the paper . " your father 's associate be not - be not simply interested in 
 the sale of what they manufacture , as one would expect of they . they be more interested in the 
 price of their own share . then they do not hold all their share ? " 

 " Heaven know what they hold , " he say . " perhaps not three penn'orth at this moment . " 

 " but if . . . " and she lay her hand on his as the luminous idea come to she , " if they can make a 
 fuss about your father they will call attention to the share . and if they can put it about that your 
 father commit suicide , the people who hold the share will think he do it because the - the 
 company be ruin and he know it . " he nod at her reasoning . " and these people will sell 
 their share for very little money . and your father 's associate , who know that a very big profit 
 have be make last year , will buy these share for almost nothing ? " he nod again 
 enthusiastically . " so that , when your father 's associate declare that dividend the share will go 
 up to huge price , and they will hold the share , and they will take nearly all the huge profit of the 
 dividend and then sell the share again at a very high price . . . " 

 " you make I frightened , " he laugh at she . " you have   a perfect genius for finance . " 

 " so that " - she ignore his sarcasm - " they will have make a large amount of money and do 
 nothing , and have just as many share as before . " 

 she be silent for a moment , take in the vastness of the idea . 

 " so that be the sort of thing that go on , " she say . 

 " that sort of thing go on , year in , year out . my father do nothing else all his life after he would 
 make his first start . " 

 " but the little speculator - they will find out now , " she say . 

 " the little speculator never find out , " he answer . " it be do every year : it be be do every 
 year in full view of everybody and nobody ever grow wise . " 

 she reflect again for a moment , and then she say : " what be to become of Aunt Emmeline ? " 

 " I shall have to lend she something to carry on with , " he say . 

 she make a quick movement of repulsion . 

 " you can not ! she be a lady . I can not   have my relation sponge on you for money . " 



 " my dear , " he answer gravely , " that be the whole thing . she be a lady - but she be a fool . I shall not 
 be lend to the lady but to the fool . " he pause again for a moment . " it be inevitable . do not   you 
 see ? she have not be buy share . if she have she could hold on to they till they rise . but she 
 have not . she be get nothing to hold on to . she will have to go on drop money into this well until 
 its water rise and come back to her reach again . " 

 " it be degrade , " she answer . 

 he say , gravely still : 

 " yes , everything 's degrade - to a lady . but I daresay she do not   understand . " and , after a 
 moment , he add : " you say , a moment ago , that with so many woman about who have   get to look 
 after themselves it be time woman understand this sort of thing . it be . " 

 " but if they understand - they be degrade , " she say . 

 he catch she up with : 

 " that be the question of the whole theory of education . do the degradation come with the 
 knowledge or with the action ? it be like a cheap debating society 's thesis . but if your aunt have 
 understand what she be up to she probably would not have be the fool she have be . . . 

 " you see , my dear , " he add , " it be a question of a whole social side . this sort of thing . . . " and 
 he wave his hand abroad to the clock , the silver candlestick , the bust on the mantelpiece and 
 the beautifully polished steel fireiron that stand in the high steel fender . " this sort of thing be 
 beautiful , but it be expensive . if woman have to have this sort of thing , to lead -thi splendid , 
 cloistral life , someone be get to provide the investment in Consols to do it on . it be a divine ideal : 
 it be you . but you represent all that your father have scrap together - or a pretty good share of 
 it . . . " 

 " I do not   see what you be get at , " she say . 

 " we be get at the fact that you be the most beautiful thing the world 's produce , " he say . 

 " but the world 's change so fast , " she say , with her little mouthing of pleasure . 

 " no , no , " he say quickly . " an ideal do not change . " 

 she kiss he for that , but while she kiss he she say : 

 " but I be change . I have   learn an infinite amount this very afternoon . " 

 with his arm round her fine waist he utter his confession of faith : 

 " no : you have not   change . it can not affect you . you be cast in too hard a mould . " it be , literally , 
 the hardness of her clean draw figure , her stay beneath his hand , that have suggest the idea to 
 he . she give exactly that impression of perfection that could not be damage . her bust with its 
 fine rounding , her skirt with their fine , long line , she clearly mould cheek with their fine , 
 dark colour , the clear outline of her hair - all these thing that he so much admire make he 
 eloquent to say : " it be not   you that be in any danger . you will always see the ugliness of what my 
 father stand for . it be your business to be a shin example ; it be your business to teach the Aunt 
 Emmelines of this world what to avoid . you have   teach I so much . . . " 

 she deny , with a happy and credulous blush , that she have ever teach he anything . 

 " not in word , " he concede . " but merely to look at you be enough ! " 

 he move away from she and leant back in the corner of the sofa , his hand clasp behind his 
 head . he look at she . " that be enough , " he say , " to teach I volume and volume ! " 

 she make a little , obvious , pleased retort , and he continue speculatively : 

 " I would be an absolute fool if I do not learn from be with you how to live the good sort of life . just 
 as we should be fool if we could not learn from that Venus " - and he point to the Aphrodite 
 that , with vacant , dream eye and clear - cut , vaguely smile lip , confront a whole vision 
 world from the black polished mantel - " a whole side of beauty in art and life . " 

 " all the same , " she say , " I be corrupt . I be perfectly itching to know more about your father - 
 and what he do - and what you be go to do , and all the sort of thing that people like that do 
 do . " 

 he unclasp his hand a little unwillingly and , lean forward , use they to emphasise his 
 meaning . 

 " no , that be not corruption in you , " he say . " it be the call of duty . if there be not man in the 
 world like my father , and if there be not affair like my father 's , people like you would be able 
 to live your beautiful cloistral life without have to bother about american business method . 
 well , it be our affair - your and mine - to drive that sort of thing out of the world . " 

 with a sudden access of fury he slap one fist into the palm of his other hand . 

 " and , by Jove , " he say , " I have   get a chance to cripple one Trust , and I be - go - to - do - it ! " 

 the animation drop from his voice , and he lean once more in his corner of the large sofa . 

 " after that be do , " he say , " we shall come back here and pick up - no , not the piece but the 
 whole - of the life we intend to lead , and you will forget everything of this , and I shall be able 
 again to do , as I be desperately want to do now - just to look at you lead your beautiful life 
 as if nothing have ever happen to it . " 

 " but do not everything that happen modify one 's life for ever ? " she ask . 

 " only in novel , " he say . " you have   get to look at it in a different way . there be one 's life - and 
 there be the accidental life that go on all round one . if you go to a garden - party it do not   affect 
 your life in this house : you go out for an hour and a half , that be all . if I be paint a picture and I 
 find the canvas be not quite properly stretch I go down into the basement and borrow a hammer 
 from the caretaker of the studio . I come back and tap in the wedge of the stretcher behind the 
 canvas . but that do not modify the picture . it be an excursion . and our excursion to the new 
 world be just go 

 down into the basement to borrow a hammer . " he c 

 pause to survey her unconvinced face . " only , my love , " he say , " I have   get the hammer . my 
 father 's leave it I . all I have   to do be tap the wedge ! " 

 she take up again the cable that lie upon the sofa between they . she do not wish to continue 
 the argument , either as to whether she remain uncorrupted or as to whether you can change 
 and not change . she say : 

 " you have   explain ` who it be from ? ` and a good deal of ` what it really mean ? ` but you have not 
 at all tell I ` what be you go to do ? ` " 

 he have a great deal of patience even in a contest of will like this with she , but he plead for 
 grace at this . 

 " it will bore you to hear it twice , " he say . " I shall have to tell it all to your father . let us wait till 
 then . " it be her father 's polite practice at halfpast six to enter the dining - room when his 
 daughter 's suitor be there , and to address to he a certain number of remark . if , on the other 
 hand , the young couple wish to be alone they retire to a room more private , and Mr Greville , 
 after peep through the half - open door , would , in his turn , retire once more to his study till 
 dinner - time . it be with reference to this establish custom that she say : 

 " shall not   we go to my sitting - room ? " 

 but he answer : 

 " no : your father 's get to be face and enlighten and render hostile - and the soon it be do 
 the well . " and then , resume his pleading : " only , till then " - and his eye seek the 
 decorous 



 clock - " we have   get ten minute . let us be desultory . we shall have to be businesslike enough . 
 you will have it all and to spare . but till then let us just talk . you have   get to hear - and I can not   tell it 
 you often enough - that you be the most beautiful thing in the world . " 

 she leant back now against her end of the long couch , and she have an air of complacent 
 resignation : he be so tall , so brown , so gentle and so fluent , that even eat muffin by a good 
 fire in November , after come in from the rain , be not more pleasant than be tell in his 
 endless digression that he love she . 

 " you see , " he begin his flow of word that be to last for ten minute , " when you be at leisure 
 you taste life - and it be just because this life here be the fine flower of leisure that it be the most 
 perfect thing in the world . it be bring up to its high pitch . now you . . . " 

 Ill 

 it be not only a forecast of his plan that the young man have to offer to Mr Greville , it be also 
 a detailed biography . Mr Greville be of an extreme height and meagreness : he wear always a 
 black frock coat - he have never explain why - he be clean shaven , and , because his beard 
 grow with extravagant thickness and speed , he shave always twice a day - before breakfast and 
 before dinner , which he take at nine . the apparent keenness of his black eye - though he be 
 actually extremely shortsighted - the forward tilt of his head and a habit of listen to every 
 speech with his lip part and his head a little avert , give to his whole bear an air of deaf 
 obstinacy . he have have no history : a young son of a huge family it give one the idea that his 
 people must have be of a fabulous richness , that he have never do anything to add to his 
 patrimony : he have marry a woman of no particular dowry , he have always eat the good thing 
 in the world , buy the well print and the well bind book , and have the good servant . he 
 seek in life for an extreme accuracy of mind , and have , whilst at college , contract a habit 
 of review book for a magazine start in his day by the undergraduate , he have continue to 
 review book until that day - consecrate his labour to the service of a journal chiefly 
 distinguish for its staff of reviewer , who be unequalled in discover minute error in 
 work of encyclopaedic length . he discover error in book on every conceivable subject , and 
 because this sedentary occupation be unnatural to one of his physical robustness he have 
 cultivate the habit of stand at most time when other people sit down . thus , he stand all 
 through such church service as he attend ; it be his custom to take his breakfast standing , and 
 at dinner he remain upon his leg until he have finish his soup . it be , nevertheless , 
 characteristic of the society in which he live that although he do everything that be possible 
 differently from everybody else , and although he differ in his view from almost every soul 
 that he meet , no one seriously consider that he be at all extraordinary , and his opinion be 
 seek for with anxiety by the high clergy of the diocese when they be troubled in matter of 
 ritual , or by the conservative candidate of the county when they be prepare electioneering 
 speech . 

 it be part of his routine of studied politeness to Kelleg that every time the young man din 
 with they he should deem it his duty to pass exactly fifty minute in the society of the young 
 couple . it be his habit on those occasion to ask the young man what story he be illustrate 
 for the magazine , and , have hear the plot , he would analyse the idea , state what story it 
 resemble , and carry back the analogy to Grecian , indian or prehistoric original . 

 on this occasion , have shake the young man 's hand beside the sofa , he retreat to the other 
 side of the dining - table , and so far depart from precedent as to say that he trust the young 
 man have receive less disquieting report as to the state of his father 's health from across the 
 Atlantic . he then turn his face to one side and , rest his knuckle upon the table , prepare to 
 listen . his daughter 's suitor reply by pass the cable across the table . 

 " it will save time , sir , " he say , " if you read this . it will make , you will see , a great deal of 
 difference to everything . " 

 Mr Greville , with a slightly distasteful expression , fumble for his pince - nez . he dislike be 
 see to wear glass anywhere : he particularly dislike to have to put they on outside his study . 
 nevertheless , hold the tortoiseshell rim a little over to one side , he read down the paper . his 
 first word be : " I trust you will present my condolence to any survive relative of your 
 father 's . " 

 the young man laugh friendlily . the dislike of his fiancee 's father could not   inspire his 
 indefatigable optimism with the belief that they would not   one day hit it off together . besides , Mr 
 Greville 's presence act to such an extent as a tonic upon his mental faculty that he feel always 
 a pleasant hardening of his own backbone when they be together . 

 " my father have not   a relative in the world , " he say . " he be bom in the workhouse at Rydale in 
 Yorkshire - not a quarter of a mile from where I have   hear you say you be bear . " 

 Mr Greville gaze straight in front of he . 

 " that explain his extraordinary name , " he say . " I recollect that two of the guardian of the poor 
 in our parish in the year 1840 be call , the one Collar and the other Kelleg . " 

 the young man laugh again . 

 " I guess , " he say , " that most of the extraordinary american name have some such european 
 beginning . and most of the extraordinary american custom too ! " 

 Mr Greville store the remark in his memory that he might , at a later moment , demonstrate its 
 inaccuracy . immediately he ask : 

 " and your own name ? it be not an american perversion of John ? " 

 " oh , I be call Don , " the young man answer , " because my mother be lady's - maid in the 
 family of ' the something Don ' - an irish family , you know . my mother have a great feeling of 
 gratitude to her employer . they treat she very kindly . " 

 Mr Greville supply the name of the irish family in question and add a slight - and a slightly 
 favourable - " Hum ! " it distinctly please he that Don 's mother should , in spite of the fact that 
 she become an American , have retain so proper a sentiment of respect for the ancient european 
 family in whose service she have be . 

 the young Don be so fortified by this sign and so stimulate by his future father - in - law 's 
 presence that he could come straight to the mark . 

 " if you do not   object , " he say , " I be go to tell you all about myself . it have not   seem necessary 
 till now to trouble you , beyond assure you , as I have   try to do by the sight of I , that I be a 
 decent sort 



 of citizen and properly devoted to Eleanor . now it be different , and if you do not   mind I will take up so 
 much of your time . " 

 Mr Greville assent , as much by move his clench fist an inch or two far along the edge 
 of the tablecloth as by any other sign that he give . Eleanor settle herself more comfortably in 
 the cushion at the end of the lounge . she be complacently aware that her lover be about to 
 utter an immense flow of word , and if she be afraid that he might , in the course of they , 
 irritate her father by inaccuracy in his generalisation , she know her father well enough to 
 beware that this would not increase his personal dislike of her lover . he be so nice , so pleasant , 
 and so ingenuous , and he have make that much of a good impression on her father as to make he 
 take in the fact that , although Don 's father have be bear in a workhouse and his mother have be 
 a lady's - maid , you could not really call either of they Americans . Mr Greville have never listen 
 to she upon the subject . he have accept , in grim silence , the fact that she have engage herself to 
 " an american " : he have be marvellously polite to her lover because he owe that to the future 
 husband of his daughter . but he have not once bring himself to talk the matter over . she have 
 accept this as she have accept his obstinacy of drink his soup standing . it be not a thing 
 you could argue about . in the same way she accept her lover 's decree that he be go to talk , 
 and she let her mind wander away upon the point of what sort of mourning she must wear for his 
 father whilst she 

 keep an attentive ear for any new fact that might appear in a biography that she have already hear 
 more than once . for decidedly she must wear some sort of mourning as soon as the fact of the 
 death should become officially know . 

 Don begin his story with the succinct statement that he have be bear exactly thirty - one year 
 before , to a day , in the then uncharted territory of Idaho . Mr Greville receive this exact 
 statement with satisfaction , but the young man could not remain in a rigour of precision . he have 
 at once to introduce his impression and his memory . of his first three year he have not any 
 memory at all , but his mother have tell he that they have bear hardship , and his father have 
 since tell he that his mother have bear these hardship with a courage that be admirable in a 
 woman who have be bring up as she have . 

 " and indeed , " Don hazard the digression , " it be one of the wonderful thing about America that 
 you will find there literally multitude of such woman , put up with a heat , squalor and hard 
 work that they would not stand here for the promise of any rich . " 

 " I suppose you live in waggon ? " Mr Greville pursue his search for the definite . 

 Eleanor , for her part , have arrive at the conclusion that she approve of mourn for the 
 relative of a girl 's fiance . it be a formality : a definite and clear assertion of recognition . and 
 after next Monday there would not be any getting out of have the relationship with the late 
 Collar Kelleg force upon they . she have be able to avoid the subject when fence with she 
 less intimate friend before . now Mr Kelleg , by the nature of his death , would create such a 
 splutter that they could not possibly avoid the notoriety . it would have to be face . . . 

 " oh , I do not   know that it run even to a waggon , " Don be answer her father . " I know my 
 people arrive after three year in the State of Montana . copper be the actual attraction , I think 
  - or it may have be gold . . . " 

 " no : copper be the cause of the growth of the State of Montana , " Mr Greville say . 

 " I daresay , " Don reply easily . " my father 's energy have be so multifarious since then that 
 I be certainly a little vague . " 

 " you may take it that it be copper , " Mr Greville repeat . 

 " no doubt ! " Don reply , and Eleanor shiver a little . this indifference to fact be precisely the 
 thing to irritate her father : and indeed Mr Greville , stand sideways at the table , purse his lip 
 and move his hand upon the cloth . " anyhow , " Don continue , " my father 's actual beginning 
 be not in copper . he use to say that they live for the first year upon the price for his vote - 
 pay by both party and for a vote he have not get , because he be not yet on the register . " 

 " that must have be an exaggeration , " Mr Greville say , " for it be give in evidence that the 
 high average amount pay even for the vote at the senatorial election in Montana be 
 sixty - eight dollar per head of the population of the State . now , if your father have receive 
 sixty - eight dollar from each side the total amount would not have be more than twenty - seven 
 pound - so that they could not have live for a year on the proceed . " 

 " he might have receive more than the average , " Don answer blandly . " it would have be 
 like my father . anyhow , " he add , " I be only try to give you an idea of the sort of thing that 
 go on round my cradle . but I guess , as you seem to know ten time as much about the State of 
 Montana 's history as I do , I may as well drop that part of it . " 

 he consider for a moment , whilst Mr Greville be say that the fact connect with the 
 Montana election have come under his notice because he have review for the journal he aid 
 the report of the United States Government inquiry into the contest . 

 " and the fact , " he say , " be sufficiently singular to remain in one 's memory . " 

 this conclusion give the young man his opening . 

 " yes , " he say , " you take the total bribery as so much per head of the population . but you do not 
 take into account the fact that all the population do not receive bribe . . . . oh , I know " - he be 
 quick to countersign of protest in Mr Greville - " a pretty large proportion do . I be not try to 
 whitewash the State of Montana . the return be there , certify by our Government . but " - and 
 he grow more earnest - " my father be not the man to lie much , even when he be boast of a 
  - a successful misdemeanour . no doubt my father be speak figuratively when he say that 
 he live for a whole year on the bribe . he mean he get a pretty good whack - above the 
 average , and a pretty good lot of what be to be account for by the citizen who would not be 
 bribe . " 

 " your father , " Mr Greville say , " receive 362 dollar from one side and 379 from the other . " 

 " Father , " Eleanor say , " how could you remember that ? " 

 " it be the most notorious instance cite by the Commission in their report , " her father answer . 

 " there you be ! " Don closure the matter triumphantly . " I tell you my father would be the most 
 notorious case . he always be . " 

 the discussion at that point be so distinctly " up to " her father that Eleanor await his next 
 attack . but Mr Greville remain silent and she recognise that he be not fight an 
 argumentative battle ; he be try to pin his young interlocutor down to definite statement . 
 thus , so far , they both triumph , and Eleanor be not certain to which to accord the more , or 
 the more affectionate applause . 

 " you say " - Don 's pleasant organ take up the tale after he have have time to recover himself - " 
 that copper be the distinguish characteristic of the State of Montana ; my impression of it be 
 dust and petroleum . I do not in the least remember what the town of Hut , Ma . , may have look 
 like when I be four . " but he do know that when , by any chance , he nowadays get on a country 
 road and an automobile pass , in the summer time , it make he feel four year old again . there 
 be dust everywhere and paraffin in most place . and perhaps that 



 be why - as he put it - he pass most of his early recollect year in the barber 's shop . it 
 have linoleum side decorate with the portrait of lady , whom he remember as supremely 
 beautiful , and portrait of gentleman lather up to the ear . and it have , above all , a heavenly 
 odour ! the oil of the essence and perfume must so have pervade the hot air that the dust could 
 not there find entrance . he must have see several thousand man shave there - and half of they 
 have since be hang and half have cottage at Newport . he could not remember they - but he 
 could remember Miss Judie Cole , who be now Princess Abucatti . she have be the most 
 disagreeable and the dirty child of four he have ever know , and they have fight a desperate 
 battle in the barber 's saloon , use the pot of massage cream and the essence bottle for missile . 
 " I remember , " he conclude , and he suppose that the remembrance be typical of the sort of 
 thing that impress he , " a pot of cold cream be break against a chair by we and we sprawl 
 in it - Judie Cole and I - and I claw the blue bow out of her dirty yellow pigtail . " 

 he pause to take breath and to light a cigarette . 

 " that , " he say , " be the sort of infancy I have . imagine the frail child amongst desperado and 
 swindler - and Jews ! I remember the german voice of the barber - I can not   remember his face or 
 his name or what his figure be - but his way of accent ` Ach ! Der Goods ! ' I suppose they 
 try to beat down his price ! " 

 he pause again . 

 " and positively the next thing I remember be - Bournemouth ! " he look round at Eleanor 
 and interject : " I tell you all this part on top of a ' bus . do you remember ? in Tottenham Court 
 Road ? yes , " he continue to Mr Greville . " not Bournemouth , Mass. , nor Bournemouth , Fla. , but 
 Bournemouth , Hants , Eng . , and a preparatory school - for the son of gentleman . " 

 he become speculative once more . 

 " it be odd how absurd coincidence - silly synchronisation - get into one 's life . I relate my 
 biography to you in Canterbury , England , exactly thirty year later , on the very day of the year on 
 which I be bear in a nameless spot in Idaho , U.S.A. and on the very day on which I break the 
 pot of cold cream in the barber 's shop my father strike oil , or copper , or whatever it be that he 
 do strike . I suppose that be why I can not   remember be strap for wreck the barber 's . 
 perhaps my father be too engross with his success to attend to I . " 

 he reflect again . 

 " but no ! " he say , " that be not accurate . my father would not have strap I for wreck a 
 barber 's shop . he would have give I share in his mine instead . he would have applaud the outbreak . " 
 he once more reflect and then add eagerly : " yes , that be it . I get to Bournemouth precisely 
 because my father do applaud that sort of thing . " 

 Mr Greville turn his face interrogatively towards his prospective son - in - law . 

 " do not   you understand ? " the young man ask . " that be where my mother come in . and no 
 doubt that be why I love my mother and never bother about my father . " 

 " you be awfully obscure , Don dear , " Eleanor interject . " you must remember that my father 
 have not   hear all this as often as I have . " 

 " that be true ! " Don say . " I want to be clear . the fact be that my mother be fond enough of I to 
 use the strap mighty often - and my father be fond enough of I to prevent she as often as he 
 could . " 

 it be at this point that Mr Greville astonish they both by sit down - a thing he have not 
 be know to do , save when he be " read for review , " for thirty year . he set both his hand 
 upon his thin knee , and with the two tail of his frock - coat drop behind his shin , and his 
 face for the first time turn to Don , he utter , with an accent of hollow attention : 

 " let I understand . how do these fact conduce to your arrive at Bournemouth ? " 

 as a matter of fact Don 's involved unfolding of his biography so nearly affect he as a very 
 inferior but interesting book for review would have do ; it give he so much necessity for 
 think that , as he always think sit , he now find it necessary to sit . 

 " but it be as plain as Domesday Book , " Don say with exasperation . " my mother take I to 
 Bournemouth , England , so as to be able to clout I as much as she think fit ! " 

 Mr Greville ejaculate a deep - lunge " ah ! " which give Don Kelleg a moment to find contrition 
 in . 

 " no , that be not a fair statement ! " he utter . " but there be too many aspect . it be difficult . the 
 coincidence come in again here . " he pass his hand up his forehead . when he , as it be , 
 emerge , it be to state that his break loose in the barber 's shop have so exactly synchronise 
 with his father 's first fortune that it have precipitate the break between his parent . for , on the 
 one hand , his mother have direfully proclaim that such a day of outrage must be end with a 
 thrashing . his father have declare that such a day of good fortune would be celebrate by an 
 absolute amnesty . " he simply would not let she wallop I , " Don conclude . " he have suffer it no 
 doubt in silence before or argue against it . but that day he obstruct it actually . " 

 Mr Greville nod . 

 " and on that day particularly my mother feel 

 sore . " 

 Mr Greville interject the one word , " why ? " as if he know the answer . 

 " because " - Don Kelleg falter a little - " I suppose because on that day he would find immense 
 deposit - or whatever the word be - of copper on his mine . " 

 " but your mother , " Mr Greville continue without passion , " your mother must have be aware , 
 before that day , that your father have steal the mine ... " 

 it be at this point that Eleanor lean forward and exclaim , " Father ! " for it occur to she , 
 though it miss Don 's perception altogether , that her lover have tell she that his father have steal 
 a mine before her father have come into the room . 

 " the late Mr Kelleg have steal the mine at least three month before the day on which he 
 discover the great store of copper that it contain . your mother must therefore have be 
 aware of the theft ! " 

 Don scratch his head . 

 " upon my word , " he say , " you be right ! I do not   see how it work out . " he halt , discomfit for 
 a minute , and then he jump at it . " why , it be plain enough , " he say , " she could not stand the 
 two thing . she might have stand his steal a worthless mine , but she could not stand that the 
 mine should be valuable and that I - I should be corrupt as well . the two together be too 
 much for she . " 

 Mr Greville move his hand from his knee and fold his arm . his gesture remind Eleanor 
 for some vague reason of the Duke of Wellington at Waterloo . it be as if he have really utter , 
 whilst he close up his telescope : " order the whole line to advance ! " 

 " my dear Don , " he say , " that be what I have   be want to get at all along . you have   have a decent 
 upbringing . " 

 he pause and look at Eleanor . 

 " you will do I the justice to say , " he continue , " that I have not oppose your freedom of choice . 
 I have not , till now , sanction your engagement . now ... " 

 with a swift rush Eleanor be already half way round the table . 

 " you inscrutable person ! " she say , and by that 



 time she have her arm on his shoulder . " why in the world should you do it now that you have 
 discover his father be a thief ? " 

 " I have   know that all along , " Mr Greville say , expressionlessly . Eleanor shrink back from he . 

 " you be incredibly mysterious ! " she say . " have you be use detective ? how do you know ? 
 Don do not . " 

 " Don certainly do not , " her suitor echo she . " that be because , " Mr Greville say , " Don have not   as 
 much desire to know about his antecedent as I have . " he repeat , after Eleanor have kiss he : 
 " Don be not go to marry his own daughter . he be go to marry mine . he may not   want to know 
 the bad about himself : I do . " 

 Don utter : " by Jove ! it be true . " but Eleanor , put she cheek against his as she lean over his 
 stoop figure , point at her lover . 

 " you could see for yourself , " she say , " that he be the dearest and good and gentle person in the 
 world . be not that enough ? " 

 Mr Greville , who have an air of be politely discomforte by her embrace , lift his head so 
 that his pierce glance appear hotly to challenge the young man whilst his word correct she 
 inexact superlative . 

 " he appear , " he say to she , " to be excellent and gentle - and no doubt he be dear to you . but 
 that do not provide settlement for you or a good strain for future generation . " 

 Eleanor leave he , to sit down on the chaij- that face his across the window space . with her hand 
 on her knee , imitate his attitude , she have the air of make , with he , a pair of warden of a 
 gateway . 

 " then let us have something definite from you I " she challenge he affectionately . " you do not 
 mean - you do not   mean to say that you have   write about settlement to his father . " 

 " I certainly write , " Mr Greville say , " as soon as I have have time to consider what it be my duty to 
 do - about a couple of month after you have tell I of your engagement and when I have have the 
 chance to satisfy myself that - that Don be not entirely unpresentable . " 

 Eleanor say : 

 " I shall kiss you because you call he Don . it mean that you be not go to be very horrid . " 

 " it mean that you do accept I , " Don utter joyfully . 

 " I write , " Mr Greville say , when he once more emerge from his daughter 's embrace , " to Mr 
 Charles Collar Kelleg and ask he what settlement he propose to make upon the occasion of 
 his son 's marriage with my daughter . " 

 " how could you ? " Eleanor say , but her reasonable nature , which be so like his , come almost 
 immediately to her rescue , she add in the same breath : " but of course it be exactly what you 
 ought to have do . " 

 " I understand , " Mr Greville say , " that Don have from his mother an income of about two hundred 
 a year invest in english railway . he make about another two hundred a year by illustrate 
 story in magazine . I tell he that you have about as much as Don from your mother 's estate . 
 and I give he to understand that you might live comfortably and decently upon twelve hundred 
 a year as a certainty . I be ready to secure my daughter , after my death , another four hundred a 
 year if he be prepared to do the same for his son . I tell he that large income be rather a curse 
 than the reverse in this country . of course Don might go on make money by illustration . but 
 he be not very persevering and magazine be precarious thing to have to do with . " 

 " what in the world , " Eleanor ask Don , " would your father have think at receive such a 
 letter ? " 

 " oh , heaven , " Don say , " there be not the least mean of know . I guess he will have like it 
 though , if he be not   in one of his spread - eagle fit when everything English be hell to he . " 
 he stick his head on one side . " but no : I be pretty certain he would like any straight business 
 proposition . " 

 " he answer in about twelve word upon his business paper , write by a typewriter , " Mr 
 Greville continue . 

 " but what?- " Eleanor ask . Mr Greville erect his head to make an effort of memory . 

 " his exact word be : ` dear Sir : I shall leave my son all my enterprise . but I think he be get too 
 much conscience to make a good husband or anything else . he will worry your daughter to death . ` " 

 Eleanor let forth a long peal of laughter . 

 " well , that be a prophecy ! " Don say slowly . " my father be not so muddy witte . " 

 " oh , you think about yourself a great deal too much , " Eleanor soothe he . " it be all rot ! " 

 Mr Greville appear to be reflect absently and deeply . 

 " in return , " he finally continue , " I write to Mr Kelleg that , consider the transient nature of 
 american fortune , I should infinitely prefer he to settle a definite four hundred a year in 
 English Consols . " 

 Eleanor interject : 

 " oh , I say ! " Mr Greville face she then : he have be look at young Kelleg . 

 " I do not mean to say that he be not   to leave your fiancf his interest too , " he say , " but I want 
 to secure something definite . " 

 " I know what you mean , " his daughter say . " I be not   afraid you would not do your good for we . I 
 be think of Mr Kelleg 's feeling . " 

 " my dear child " - Don himself have a flash of inspiration - " your father 's point of view be just 
 right . if my father be a reasonable man his feeling would not be hurt by your father 's do his 
 good for you . if he be not a reasonable man his feeling , in Mr Greville 's eye , would not matter 
 a cent . " 

 Mr Greville move his head rigidly up and down . 

 " I have   exactly hit it , " Don appeal to he . " and of course my father would not mind . it be the sort 
 of thing he would have to put up with every day over there . distrust ! obviously no one ever trust 
 he except when they have to . and he would never trust anybody but the sort of person he would think a 
 fool . " he leant his head back against the sofa cushion with a little air of be desert now that 
 Eleanor have go over to her father 's side of the room . " after all , " he utter , " the american 
 business spirit in the matter of trustfulness be exactly that of the English lawyer . you do not trust 
 anybody . you do not waste as much time over seal and tape   an english lawyer would not if it 
 be not the way he make his money , but you put a mighty deal of mistrust into a half sheet of 
 notepaper . and there be a deal of a million dollar conclude . " 

 he be proceed to speculate upon how this state of mind have arise in the Transatlantic 
 continent when he suddenly pull himself up with : 

 " but I be try to tell you my past - and to find out what my future 's likely to be ! " he look 
 appealingly at Mr Greville . " do " he say , " tell we what my past have be . you do it so much 
 well than i. let we hear something definite . " 

 at this appeal Mr Greville do take the matter in hand . have pause for precisely two minute 
 by the solemn clock at his back he then have the subject as well arrange in his head as would 
 have be one of his review of a contemporary book . in the meanwhile Eleanor have have time to 
 think that Don really be too self - conscious . a man ought not to be so much aware of his own 
 mental attitude . it be not exactly healthy . and she have a vague sense that she must work he 
 out of the habit and a vague sense that that employment would afford she in the future many 
 delightful opportunity for intimate self - revelation - for those splendid " you be " and 



 " I be " that be , after all , the very food and staple of all love - scene . 

 " I have " - Mr Greville commence his review of the situation - " two thing to settle in my 
 mind : the first , whether this young man be materially fit to support my daughter : the second , 
 whether he be altogether sane and of well - form character . as to the first you have hear part 
 of what I do . I write to Mr Kelleg those two letter . one ask he what he intend to do for 
 his son ; upon his replying that he intend to leave all his ' interest ' to Don , I reply that I 
 should prefer he to put at least a small portion of it immediately into Consols so that his son 
 should be certain of a sure income . Mr Kelleg 's reply to that letter be in these word : ` I do not   see 
 what my son have do for I . why should I give he up part of my capital ? he have not be son 
 enough for I to want to assure he peace of mind for ever in England . ` " 

 at this point Don lean eagerly forward . he be about to offer a long comment . but when Mr 
 Greville pause to let he speak , he seem , to Eleanor 's eye , to check himself violently , and 
 her father , have wait for a sufficient interval , take up his own tale again . 

 he have reply to Mr Kelleg 's second letter that he himself be not interested in his prospective 
 sonin - law 's peace of mind , but he be in his daughter 's . he propose that Mr Kelleg should settle 
 upon Eleanor just the sum that he himself be prepared to settle at his death - about four 
 hundred pound a year . Mr Kelleg have reply that that seem a pretty square proposition , but he 
 do not see why he should be concern for Mr Greville 's daughter 's peace of mind . if she want 
 his son she might take he with all his disadvantage . 

 " but he add in a postscript " - Mr Greville conclude this part of his review - " that he would see 
 that Eleanor should be properly provide for , quite outside any fluctuation of his or his son 's 
 fortune . he say that , for fear the matter might slip his memory , he would already put into proper 
 hand a sum of money - he do not say how much - for the benefit of Eleanor . " 

 it be at this point that Eleanor make her protest . 

 " do not   you think , " she say to her father , " that you ought to have speak to I before put I 
 upon the market ? " 

 " do not   you think , " Mr Greville ask , " that you ought to have speak to I before fall in 
 love ? " 

 " but I could not   help fall in love ! " 

 " and I could not   help be interested in your future , " her father echo she . " I have   leave you , as 
 you will allow , a perfect liberty to dispose of your share of your personality . but there be my share 
 too . " 

 his level and quite passionless tone indicate a so great depth of affection for his daughter that 
 Don be move to exclaim : " Bravo ! " 

 and this indication of a fact that he have be indulge in a style of psychology - a style that be 
 apparent even to Don , although , indeed , it be no more than a quite definite statement - this 
 indication bring Mr Greville very sharply back to the necessity for stick to definite thing . 
 he be quite convinced that , when it come to psychological analysis , he be well at it than his 
 young friend , but he be not for the moment in the least inclined to make even so much 
 concession to his young friend as to show a man of his own dignity indulge in anything at all so 
 trifle as psychological speculation . 

 " so that here " - he resume his review - " we have two definite fact . " Mr Collar Kelleg have 
 announce his intention of leave all his " interest " to Don : he have make , too , a deliberate 
 statement that he have settle something - something probably handsome - upon Eleanor .   " I 
 do not   imagine the man be lie . " Mr Greville put his reason for rely on Mr Kelleg 's word . 
 " he would probably not have an imagination that go beyond try to surprise I with his 
 generosity . " 

 upon the whole this relieve his doubt as to the pecuniary future of Eleanor and Don . there 
 remain the question of the young man 's mental and moral fitness for partnership with his 
 daughter . and Mr Greville once more unfold his arm and , place his knuckle upon his 
 knee , survey the young man with direfully pierce eye that , nevertheless , hardly see the 
 American 's face . 

 " oh , do not   be very hard on Don , " Eleanor say . 

 " my dear , " Mr Greville say , " if I be go to be very hard on Don I should not be sit here . 
 I trust I be always polite . " 

 " you be always frightfully just , " Eleanor say . " no doubt that be true politeness . " 

 " what have always alarm I " - Mr Greville ignore her interruption - " what have always 
 make I uncomfortable in deal with American . . . manifestation be the American 's singular 
 want of system . and it have strike I - it strike I at the very first when I make Don 's 
 acquaintance - that he have a remarkably develop moral sense . I have   notice on several 
 occasion that he be be unreasonably kind . . . " 

 " he be much too kind , " Eleanor say , and Mr Greville utter the solitary word : 

 " precisely ! " 

 " and that mean , " he pursue triumphantly , " that he have not   any kind of system in his morality . " 
 he turn definitely upon Don . " you can not   get through life like that ! " he say seriously and with 
 an air of shake his head ever so minutely . 

 " you mean , " Don say , " that Eleanor will never know where to have I ? " 

 " that be what your father mean , " Mr Greville answer , " when he say that you will make eleanor 
 unhappy . I think you will myself , " he add . " Eleanor 's my daughter - and I know you would give I 
 the fidget if I have much to do with you . " 

 Don say : " oh ! " in a grievous tone . 

 " the only chance , " Mr Greville pursue compassionately , " be that you may develope a backbone 
 under her hand . after all you be not   american . your father be not , neither be your mother . 
 your father obviously have character enough . I have   study his history carefully and I have   discover 
 that ... oh ! " he turn upon Eleanor , " I have not   be employ detective to look up the career of 
 Mr Kelleg . but I have subscribe to a press - cut agency . the american magazine be full of 
 biography of Mr Kelleg , and portrait , and demand for his indictment or suggestion for 
 raise temple to he as the representative of the american frame of mind . " he turn his sharp 
 feature again upon the young man . " it be astonish how equally they be divide in opinion . 
 I have   collect 642 cutting relate to your father . of these , 340 clamour for his indictment and 
 302 eulogise his calmness in ` crisis . ` " 

 " well I guess , " Don say , " he have not   any nerve at all . I have hear he talk to my mother , 
 who be a formidable proposition . " 

 " I will get you , " Mr Greville say , " to resume your own biography in a minute . in the meantime I will 
 just put the dot upon some of your I be . " he pause to recollect himself . 

 " you be bear in Idaho . you do go to Hut . Montana . you do spend most of your time , very 
 possibly , in the shop of a german barber . " 

 Don say : " well , it be fine to be corroborate ! " 

 " the barber 's name be Kratzenstein , " Mr Greville say . " and he be your father 's most intimate 
 friend . and it be he that your father relieve of the Great Cevanza Mine . " 

 Don leap to his foot . 

 " by Jove , " he say , " the very first thing I have   get to do be to make some sort of restoration to 
 Kratzenstein . " 

 Mr Greville 's face assume a remote air of disfavour and even Eleanor say : 

 " but surely there be more urgent thing . " 




 " only think of poor Kratzenstein ! " Don say , " wait for all these year . " 

 " we shall never get anywhere at this rate , " Mr Greville say , and he positively turn his head to 
 look at the clock . Don be instantly full of contrition . 

 " oh , let I get on with my biography , " he say . " I will be ever so short . " and he hurry out a great 
 many fact . when his mother have separate from his father she have take he to Bournemouth . 
 that be because the child of her former master , the O'Something Don , have go to a private 
 school at Bournemouth . she want her son to become a gentleman - like the young something 
 don . he have do very well at the private school : he have have the time of his life too . when he 
 be fourteen his mother have make a last attempt to live again with her husband . his father have 
 come over from the States : they have travel in a desultory way half over Europe , his mother 
 quarrel with his father all the way . Don have have a private allowance of fifty dollar a week 
 and permission to buy anything that he want in Rome , Paris or Vienna . it seem to he that 
 there have not be a single thing he want in Rome or Paris . in Vienna he have want to buy a 
 dancing gipsy to travel with they . but his mother have not allow it . when they get back to New 
 York his father have begin to build his famous palace , no . 1912 Fifth Avenue . and whilst it be 
 in the building they have live in a great hotel . they have have the whole of the first floor . that time 
 Don consider to have be the most miserable he have ever spend . he have have no one to play 
 with but the bell - boy and lift - attendant in the great , marble lounge . and the lift - boy have 
 always be too busy to play any decent game . in the middle they would be call away to whirl 
 up to the twentythird floor . he could not , he say , to that day see a lift go up in a hotel without 
 feel miserable - so many of his game have be spoil . at last his father have hire lift - boy 
 to do nothing but play with he . then he have discover that he do not like lift - boy . 

 and his father and mother have quarrel incessantly . at least his mother have upbraid his 
 father all day long : his father have always seem to sit still with a twinkle smile and to catch 
 his mother out in passionately - inaccurate statement . 

 " it be unbearable ! " Don say . " at least I could not stand it . our storey of the hotel be 
 furnish with no stuff that have not belong to Marie Antoinette ! and those continual row 
 go on all the time ! " 

 there have , at that time apparently , be another woman in the case - a Countess Canzano . her 
 husband do work for his father . but he remember the Countess - a kind , delightful woman 
 who could sit on the Marie Antoinette chair and look comfortable and in place ! he like she 
 very much . . . . and finally his mother have become pettish with he too . 

 there have come a day when he simply could not stand it any long . 

 " I could not : I could not ! " he say , full of emotion . he have have but one idea , to get back to 
 Bournemouth . his mother would not come away . she have say that it be her duty to defend his 
 interest against the Countess . so he have run off . " there be not   any heroism in it , " he say , " it 
 be simply run away from something intolerable to something that could not possibly be 
 bad . " he have stow himself away on board a cattle - liner - with one of the liftboy , who have 
 want to run away too and who have show he how to do it . 

 " it be not a bad time that , " Don say . " some of the cattle hand belt we : some be quite 
 decent and show we how to catch the bird that live in the hold on the steer ' back . little 
 chap with dab of yellow on their head , like fire . " he add the inconsequential detail that he 
 still remember the Minnehaha whenever he smell a stable , and that he seem to smell a stable 
 whenever he see a golden - crest wren . 

 but he have arrive at Bournemouth : the proprietor of the private school there have take he in 
 with a kindness that he have consider to be romantic - until , as year go on , he have argue 
 out the fact that they , too , must have know that he be the son of one of the rich man on 
 earth . 

 " there be not , I suppose , anything romantic in the world , " Don commence to speculate . " it be 
 odd . on the face of it my run away on a cattle - ship be romantic . actually it be not . it be 
 just necessity . . . " 

 " your mother eventually rejoin you in Bournemouth ? " the sharp tone of Mr Greville cut into 
 his rather dreamy drawl . 

 Don draw himself together and , unwillingly enough , resume his dutifully direct narration . 

 his mother have rejoin he at Bournemouth . she have give up the struggle with the Countess - 
 she have , in fact , divorce her husband , but she have not do so very well out of it . Mr Kelleg have 
 have to make she an allowance , not absolutely princely . she have want to do thing in the style of 
 an english lady because she want her son to have the upbringing of an english gentleman . she 
 have keep rather a good house - she know how , because she have be a lady's - maid in rather a 
 good house - and she want he to be able to bring home his young friend from Harrow and 
 Oxford . 

 " I suppose it be not much good to try to make I exactly that sort , " Don say . " I want to be 
 an artist - there be aesthetic chap at New College in my day . she want I to go into 
 Parliament . she would , of course . I probably should have , " he continue . " I should have be 
 some nice , friendly chap 's nice , friendly private secretary at this moment , I daresay , if she have 
 live . " 

 he sigh for a moment , regret perhaps that he have not be force into those discipline and 
 order path . for the father of Oxley , who have be his special chum at Harrow , be now 
 Postmaster - General , and who know .... however , he have be set on be an artist . it be , after 
 all , the visual side of thing that always appeal to he - or rather , he correct himself , it be 
 the psychological , the poetic atmosphere suggest by anything that he see . 

 " for instance , " he say , point at Mr Greville , " when I look at you it almost invariably suggest 
 to my mind - " but he draw himself together suddenly and close the digression with : " I wish 
 you would let I make a study of your head . it be so tremendously characteristic ! " 

 Mr Greville rigidify the muscle of his neck as if he hardly know what to do with that 
 compliment , and Eleanor stroke his hand to give he patience . 

 " yes , " he say grimly , " I suppose that have always be your trouble - the fact that you can not 
 stick to the point . " 

 " it do seem as if I never shall settle what I be go to do , " Don utter plaintively . " and yet , 
 Heaven know , time press . my boat - a boat - leaf on the 16th and that be only six day 
 from now . " 

 " I shall finish my book to - night , " Mr Greville say , as if he be announce that his tailor would 
 be send he home a suit , and whilst Eleanor , with a little gasp of compunction , be actually 
 say : " 

 " oh , how I have   neglect you lately ! I think you be month off the end of it ! " he bring out 
 in the same monotonous tone : 

 " I do not   see why we can not   get our packing do in the five day that will leave we . " 



 IV 

 it be into the flurry of thought cause by this tremendous announcement that Mr Augustus 
 Greville 's dark , small , delicately - make and querulous figure be suddenly introduce . because 
 he dislike ceremony of any kind he greet no one with more than a nod , although he have just 
 make the journey down from town , and have not see either his uncle or Don Kelleg for quite a 
 number of month . he walk determinedly to the fireplace , turn smartly on his little polished 
 heel , and , his hand encumber by his bowler hat , brown glove and thin , silver - mount cane , 
 say with an aggrieved air that no girl , nowadays , seem to want to get marry . 

 Mr Greville rise stiffly to his foot . 

 " I gather , Augustus , " he utter , and he carefully avert his face from the young man , " that 
 some of your female client have prove insusceptible to your charm . " 

 " Insusceptible ! " Augustus meet his formidable uncle with saturnine impatience . " I have   spend the 
 whole morning - the whole morning - in a Shoreditch County Court with two nice girl . " 

 " two nice , fair , well - bring - up girl ! " he repeat , as though indeed the time be out of 

 joint . 

 " we will finish that discussion in my study . " Mr Greville address the gently fidget Don . 
 " now , at once . " and with his instinct for courtesy he throw over his shoulder to the ruffle 
 Augustus : " I do not see what more a rise young solicitor can want . " and with his afterthought 
 of kindness he turn round to say to Eleanor , who , in her eagerness , have stretch forth her 
 hand to balance herself for rise from her chair : 

 " we shall not   settle upon anything you will not   like , my dear . " 

 " then I shall go too , " Eleanor inform he pleadingly , as he lay his large , long , scholar 's hand 
 upon Don 's shoulder to conduct he from the room . 

 " the trouble be , " Augustus Greville throw at the black tail of his uncle 's frock coat , " that they 
 would not philander with I . " 

 " or with any other man , " he add in a low voice , for the door have close , without noise , but 
 peremptorily . 

 Eleanor make swift reflection whilst her cousin caress his drooping , silky moustache - he have 
 lay his hat , stick and glove upon the dining - table . its long , fine , black hair droop downwards , 
 like a tuft of maidenhair fern , and , veil his little mouth , it mask his expression , or add , 
 with its droop , to his air of gloom . 

 " he be think of go to America ! " Eleanor utter to herself . " but why ? " for if Mr Greville 
 be think of a thing he be certain to have unanswerable reason . the thing that he do 
 appear at time incredible . she could not , ten minute before , more easily have imagine she 
 friend the Canon preach a sermon against the ThirtyNine Articles . but now he be go to 
 do it ! then there must be excellent reason . it might be merely the desire to see the thing with 
 his own eye . she remember that he have once , for a week , go to stay with a quite incredible 
 Lady Felix , during a shoot , where they play kiss - in - the - ring in the drawing - room at one at 
 night . he have want to see , then , with his own eye , though it have appear wildly unthinkable 
 before . or he might merely want to guide Don Kelleg . Don certainly need a guide . or he might 
 merely want a change . you could not imagine a change more complete . 

 so she remain , lose between amazement at her father 's action - between that and a perfect trust 
 in the sanity of his motif - whilst her cousin talk about the two girl in the Shoreditch 
 County Court . they be quite nice girl , he keep on in his aggrieved monotone : their people 
 be good people . but what do they do ? look after their home ; marry , or anything of the sort ? 
 not at all . they run a Woman 's Trade Union Federation in the interest of match - girl . there 
 be about twenty nice girl interested in that thing . that be what they be about in Shoreditch 
  - a sweat employer have get a girl as apprentice on iniquitous term . well , he would so arrange 
 the case that the Judge call for a pair of scissor and cut up the deed of apprenticeship . but be 
 that the sort of thing for nice girl to be employ on ? 

 Eleanor come out of her reverie about the american voyage for a sufficient interval to keep the 
 conversation decently roll . do he , she ask negligently , talk to his client , the Woman 's 
 T.U.F. , in that way ? 

 he give one of his sudden , surprisingly radiant and sweet smile that she like so much in he - 
 a smile that make she think , half wistfully , that if the right woman have get hold of he his 
 petulant expression - what they call in the family the scowl that would not   come off - would 
 never have appear on his face at all . but poor Augustus have be so crush in his youth by his 
 father , the intolerable Bishop , and so worried in his after youth by his mother , who still , after his 
 father 's death , have keep , as it be , the great verbose spirit of his father as an immense wet 
 blanket for ever before his eye , that now at thirty - three , whilst he be still a baby he be also a 
 perpetually mutinous old man . he have all the spirit and ideal of extreme youth together with the 
 old man 's - and particularly the old clergyman 's - habit of ineffectually bewail the 
 disjointedness of his time . 

 and whilst , still smile , he tell she that it be not of course a solicitor 's duty to express to his 
 client his view of the Activity of Women and their " proper field , " any more than it be his 
 duty to explain to his client , the R.C. Bishop of Chichester , what he think of " Rome , " because 
 it be his business to get a practice , and his business lie mostly with Federations and Societies 
 and the Trustees of roman Catholic Dioceses , who , by - thebye , do want a deuce of a lot of 
 interest on their investment . . . whilst he be explain to she , in fact , that he be 
 uncommonly fueilte and acute as a solicitor , she be wonder what he would have be like by 
 now if she have accept he the first time he have propose to she . he have , indeed , in his 
 negligent , gloomy and aggrieved manner , propose to she since then innumerable time ; 
 practically he have say , " look here : why do not   you marry I ? " every time they have meet for the 
 last ten year . she have not ever be very certain of his seriousness : she have not much trouble 
 about it at all . only from the fact that he have not , latterly , come near they at all , and from the 
 other fact that her Aunt Emmeline occasionally let drop some of she wing shafts against the 
 " inexplicable conceit of poor eleanor , " have she be able to gather that her refusal really 
 rankle . Aunt Emmeline , of course , have , when they be quite young , always keep a watchful eye 
 upon they : she do not , she say , approve of the marriage of cousin , and she have never , after 
 they be seventeen , allow they to , say , skate alone together . but of course , in those day , 
 Augustus be the son of a real , live - and very roaring - Bishop : since then he have become the 
 son only of a remarkably extinct volcano , with a mother who , have render herself impossible 
 to all the inhabitant of their " close , " have come to live in a villa - if a very big villa - at 
 Reading , from whence it be poor Augustus 's fate to run daily up to town like a blackbird let out 
 at regular interval to the length of a very short piece of string . but though Aunt Emmeline might 
 really object to the 



 marriage of cousin it be pretty certain that she would object still more to the refusal , by a 
 cousin , of her son . 

 it would not much have surprise she if , at that moment , he have say once more : " look here : why 
 do not   you marry I ? " in his tone which be half masterful and half querulous . instead his , 
 " look here ! " - for he do utter the word - be follow by : 

 " be that man dead ? " 

 and it bring she sharply back to the fact that she do not really know whether Mr Collar 
 Kelleg , in his distant and unrealisable city across the water - whether he be actually dead . it 
 be what you would call a moral certainty that he be . but she feel that she would never be 
 actually - as you might say , physically - certain unless she have actually touch his corpse . she 
 answer he , however , with : 

 " have you be speculate ? " 

 he answer quickly : 

 " God forbid ! " as if the mere suspicion be one more insult . 

 " then why , " she ask he , " be you so frightfully anxious to know ? you come all the way down 
 from town yesterday to ask : and you have   come again to - day . " 

 he reply only : 

 " it be not at all the sort of thing that I should have to do with . " 

 she quite realise that the minute shrug attend his word be as much as to say : " you have 
 engage yourself to this man . you can not expect to have my confidence as you use to . " for she 
 have follow the building up of his practice from the very young day , when he have be 
 employ by a great and respectable firm of conveyancer , to the day when , with a small but 
 reputable band of client of his own , he have launch his own little boat . with each new client he 
 have , as it be , bid she , imperiously , to rejoice - and , in a gentle way , she have rejoice . he 
 have always " propose " when he get a new client too . 

 she be not , however , go to accept his rebuff . it seem ridiculous that he should want to 
 shut she out merely because she be go to marry Don - for it would not , that event , in the 
 least affect her accessibility to he . there never have be a time when she would not have burst 
 out laugh at the very idea of it . as she put it to herself : one would not marry Oggie any more 
 than one would marry one 's brother or one 's spaniel . 

 " not at all the sort of thing , " Augustus repeat , refer still to the idea that he should speculate 
 in the enterprise of Mr Charles Collar Kelleg . 

 " oh , well , Oggie , " she say , ' such extraordinary people do seem to have speculate ... " 

 she have in her mind her Aunt Emmeline , and he , who much dread that his mother - she keep a 
 flintily hard hand upon her own purse - string - might be the person she have in mind , ask 
 swiftly : 

 " whom d'you mean ? " 

 her own " no one in particular " - for it be not her business to give away her aunt - have all the 
 effect that she have intend - the effect of make he think that it be ridiculous that there 
 should be secret between cousin . and she hold out to he an olive branch by say : 

 " everyone I know seem to have be dabble - I dare not go near Canon Dearmer 's , for 
 instance . " 

 he smile at that confidence , and in a grateful return give she his own - for it pain he to 
 keep a wall up against she if he could decently throw it down . 

 " they do it on both side , then , " he say . 

 " ah , it be your client you be concerned for ! " she take his meaning . " the very Reverend one ! " 

 he make a little gesture with his noticeably delicate , pale , dark hand . 

 " my friend , " he say , " think that assuredly Providence will be on their side in the stock market . 
 they think - they really seem to think - that the saint or archangel will contrive to bull their 
 share . " 

 " I can not imagine the poor dear Canon think anything but that his gambling be sin , " Eleanor 
 retort . " he be probably dreadfully ashamed of do it . " 

 " there be the difference , " Augustus chime in , " that your Canon do it to enrich himself . my 
 client do it for the furtherance of their faith . " the communion with Eleanor , upon any term , 
 thaw he swiftly , and the detail of his predicament come out of he now in a rush . she 
 listen so well : she be so receptive and yet she be not , as he put it , any sort of a humbug . it 
 be not , however , what he get out of she , but the manner in which he get thing out of himself , 
 that make he think that he never enjoy anything so much in life as talk to Eleanor . 

 " it be like this , " he say : " the late Mr - it do not matter about his name - leave a certain sum 
 towards build a church and a mission in a place where there be a number of irish factory 
 hand . this sum be leave to the Bishop and trustee to hold in trust till sufficient money have be 
 raise by subscription to complete the whole thing . " Augustus have be make the solicitor to this 
 Trust , mainly because , although he be the son of an Anglican Bishop - a Bishop particularly 
 hostile to the other persuasion - he have manage to help one of the other Bishop 's trustee to 
 several very profitable investment . " they would prefer , " Augustus say , " a solicitor of their own 
 persuasion , but it be one of their maxim , you know , that the godly grow fat at the expense of the 
 unrighteous . " and Sir George - the trustee in question - have persuade the Monsignor to come 
 to Augustus for advice . the Monsignor - a foreign prelate - have reveal to Augustus a mind of 
 a wholly pleasing natvete . he have say to Augustus that there certainly exist in the world of 
 stock and share certain thing that would increase any give sum of money tenfold without the 
 motion of a hand . it be true that the original money be sometimes lose ; but with Providence on 
 one 's side - and Providence be very good to they - the idea of loss might be negative . he 
 want the Church and Mission money invest in one of these security . 

 and Augustus have suggest that they should follow the fortune of Charles Collar Kelleg . they 
 be the sort of thing , those paper , and he hop to get some tip occasionally from Eleanor . he 
 do not say that he have never really believe that Don be as much estranged from his father as 
 he and Eleanor have pretend . " but now , " he say , " kelleg be fall as if the bottom have come 
 out of a bucket . and they be say in the City that Kelleg commit suicide . " 

 it come into Eleanor 's head to wonder how in the world " in the City " they have already come to 
 say that . for the rumour be not to have be spread abroad by Kelleg 's agent till the Monday . 
 or it might have be the Saturday . she could not precisely remember the day mention in the 
 cable : but it be some day ahead still . she say : 

 " I do not   see how it will affect your pocket . it be only the Catholics who will lose . " 

 " my dear child , " he say sententiously , " it will make all the difference in the world to my 
 pocket . " 

 she wonder for a moment and then say : 

 " but surely a solicitor be not responsible for money a client lose . " 

 he say darkly : 

 " that be it . you always remember that I be a solicitor . you forget that I be a gentleman too , " and 
 she know that his tone mean : " that be why you have   always refuse to marry I . " 

 " oh dear , " she say , " the trouble be always be that I forget you be a solicitor . you be much more 
 like a big baby when you get on the high horse . " 

 he choke angrily for a moment , and then remember that you could not expect from a member 



 of your family the aloof politeness that you ought to receive from the rest of the world . 

 " this be intimacy , " he say bitterly . 

 " oh , Oggie , " she say quickly , " I wish you be not   so sensitive . one always forget that you 
 have not   grow out of it . " 

 " you always forget that I be in love with you , " he answer grimly . 

 it bob up so quickly that , to retain her selfpossession , she could not say anything well than : 

 " I have   never be in the least sure of it ! " but she have master her desire to laugh - a discourtesy 
 that would have shock her father 's daughter - sufficiently to add : " and of course , in that case 
 the less I go out of my way to spare your feeling the well . " 

 " for we both ? " he ask saturninely . 

 " for you , " she rejoin determinedly . 

 " then perhaps you will explain , " he say , with a business - like disagreeableness , " why you say I be 
 more like a baby than a solicitor . " 

 she tell he - to show he that she do not fear that he would resent it enough to break with she - 
 that he could not in the least withstand his infantile temper . he could be shrewd enough whilst 
 he keep collect . take this case in point : there be not the least moral call upon he to 
 guarantee the Bishop from loss . on his own show the Monsignor have want a gamble - 
 well , Augustus have give he a gamble for his money . but at the suggestion that he should let 
 the church and mission suffer , Augustus get on his high horse and say he be a gentleman ! 

 " well , I be , " Augustus say . " it be a moral duty in I to advise the Bishop against chuck his 
 money away . I let he do it . if I can not discover whether this chap 's dead - if I can not discover it 
 in time and he be dead - I shall consider myself as in honour bind to pay the money back out of 
 my own pocket . " 

 " my dear Oggie , " she say sharply , " I doubt whether you be a gentleman at all . I really do . " 

 and at his gasp of outraged astonishment she go on : 

 " it be romantic , what you propose to do . and a gentleman be never romantic . it be not   fair to other . 
 it be not fair even to the Bishop . he need a lesson , and if you stand between he and his lesson 
 you be do he no end of harm . " she feel that she speak with the robust commonsense of her 
 Tory father : she know that she be perfectly right and speak like a man , not a woman . " it be a 
 gentleman 's business - it be a decent man 's business - to be normal . you have   get to play the game 
 and do what be expect of you ; anything else be not fair . " 

 she wish that Don have ever give her occasion to advise he , as she could always advise 
 Augustus . but Don 's problem be always too nebulous for she : he be not a person who give 
 way to passion : he be always , on the contrary , give way to scruple . 

 " I wonder , " Augustus sneer , " that you do not ask I why I should ` throw away my money . ` 
 upon my word , at time you speak just like a desiccated solicitor yourself . " 

 " well , I hope I have   get some commonsense . " she answer his gibe composedly . 

 " oh , you have   get a little , for a woman , " he say , " but you have not   a grain of imagination - any 
 more than any other solicitor . " 

 he smile deviously and continue : 

 " I be not such a fool as you think , " he say . " I have   get it in my head to play the game of get 
 together a large practice . and I shall not   do it if , like one of your sort of dry practitioner , I cut my 
 client 's loss - especially if he be the first client of a large and unbusiness - like class . " 

 he look at she with a little perky air of triumph at the close of this speech . for his little " game " 
 be simply this : that if he indemnify his Bishop against loss when all the world , very markedly , 
 be lose its all , he would , in the little , reverberate , gossip hill of that communion in 
 England , attract to himself the faith - and the custom - of half a dozen , a dozen , a score - nay , 
 of every Bishop in England . " for they be all the same , " he conclude , " desperately greedy - or 
 desperately in need of fund if you like . " 

 he open his lip again to shoot at she : 

 " so I be not the fool you take I for and , in the language of your bridegroom , it be up to you . I 
 score one . " 

 " oh , " she say amiably , " if it be a question of cadge for business it be all the way up to I . I 
 think it be a question of a gentleman . " 

 a sudden gloom have descend upon he though he have not listen to her retort . he raise his 
 head suddenly to bring out , with a good deal of passion : 

 " look here , Ellie , do the decent thing . give I a pointer . I have   insure at Lloyd 's against the 
 chance of the Bishop 's loss . but it will cripple I to keep up the premium . I can not   do it at the pace . 
 you can take my word for it that I will not   use the knowledge to make any movement in the 
 market . but just save I personally . " 

 the deeply - plead note of his voice , his dark , search eye , his graceful , small presence that 
 seem to move into sympathy with his word - his whole atmosphere and her remembrance of 
 which he make so large and innocent a part , move she deeply . 

 " I can not   do it , Oggie , " she say - and she remember when she have run to help he land a huge 
 conger , on Deal pier , on a wet , blowy day twenty year ago . 

 " if I lose the Bishop and the chance of what he will bring I , " he plead on , " I may as well shut 
 up shop . " 

 " ask Don himself , " she say in a low voice , and her eye wander to the table . the private cable 
 that she and Don have read together an hour before lie creased and blur where her father have 
 leave it after peruse it . 

 " that sentimental ass ! " he say negligently , and resume his deep tone with : 

 " look here , Ellie . " he stumble and halt and then go on . " it be not the money . it be the - the - 
 my theory - my idea of how a practice be to be make . I have   have to back my own idea - I have not 
 go on in the old humdrum way . I have   tell no end of the old , conveyancing , horn - spectacle 
 dodger that they be fool . if I have to shut up shop mother will keep I : I shall not   starve . . . . but . 
 . . " and a minute shudder of violence go all over his dark being , " those other beggar will laugh 
 at I , I will not   stand it . by God , I will not   stand it ... " 

 his eye go to the paper , towards which her hand be already reach out . from where he 
 stand he could read , positively , the first word : " Mr Charles Collar Kelleg . . . " and with a deep , 
 sudden passion his hand race her for it . she sink back in her chair nervelessly and without it . 
 his sigh be almost like a sob and he hold it close to his eye , with a cat - like fierceness , for he 
 have inherit the shortness of sight of her father 's family . his head in a minute come up from his 
 reading , his eye seek her face , dilate and wide - lidde . 

 " by heaven ! " he say . " what a scheme ! I can make a hundred thousand if I be cautious . " 

 she say , as if now she seek guidance from he - as if , in her grief , she be ask he how 
 far a man - who must in the end know more of what a gentleman could do - how far a man 
 could go - just the one word : 

 " Oggie ! " 

 he answer a non - comprehending : 

 " well ? " and then slowly he fold the piece of paper into a little strip . 

 " yes , " he say slowly , " of course it come to that . 



 if you do not feel inclined to give I the pointer I have not   read this precious message . " 

 she say , with pause between each word : 

 " I only half understand . what do you mean ? " 

 " I mean , " he say , with a deep bitterness , " that if you do not   care enough to tell I - know that 
 I shall be ruin - if you do not   care enough to say that you would have tell I in any case , I do not   care 
 enough about life to use the knowledge the paper have give I . " 

 " you mean that you be too decent a man , " she say . " say that that be what you mean . " 

 " I do not   mean anything of the sort , " he say pitilessly . " your American 's fair game , paper and all . 
 if a man 's fool enough to leave such a paper on a table he be . . . " he stop and say : " I mean 
 literally that if you do not care for I - at least enough to save I from ruin - I do not   care 
 enough about life to keep my end up . " 

 " you be ask I , in fact , for permission to use your knowledge , " she utter . 

 " look here , " he say , and she know that the moment for his stereotyped form of word have come , 
 " why do not   you marry I ? " he go on swiftly : " I can make enough with this to keep we for ever 
 and ever . you can make what you like out of I . you know it . you can not make a man out of 
 that - that sponge . you can not   marry he . you can not . he be like the tame sort of cat . he be an 
 incredible ass . . . . why , the other day I be walk up Buckingham Street with he and a loafer 
 come and offer he a box of match - one of those wastrel that ought to be hang : one of 
 the curse of the day . and what do your Don say to he ? - ' no , I thank you ! ' " Augustus 
 spurt out the word with a bitter contempt . " he be polite : he be sweet , like that , to the very pest , 
 the cancer of Society . you can not marry such a man . not you ! you ! " 

 " why do not   you marry I ? " he repeat , " why - do not   - you - marry - I ? " 

 it be whilst the word be vibrate in the air that Don come smile into the room . he have , in 
 her eye , an air of blind greatness , a vast , credulous benevolence that make he approach 
 Augustus with his hand stretch out and the word : 

 " who be go to marry you ? " 

 he have hear only the last two word . 

 and it be the feeling that he ought to be warn that there be traitor in the world that she 
 bring out the word : 

 " Augustus have be read the cable . " 

 but all the stress die out of the room with Don 's next word . 

 " well , that be famous , I be just go to tell he myself , " and Eleanor , with all her sense of sane 
 equity , could not bring herself to explain to he , at least at that moment , precisely how 
 overbearing and outside all bound her cousin have be . perhaps it relieve she to escape the 
 necessity ; at anyrate , next moment it be too late . for Don 's succeed word be : 

 " it work out at this : we be all go to New York , and Aunt Emmeline be to be of the company ! " 

 and into the gasp that seem to come to both of they he throw : 

 " your father be of opinion " - he address himself to Eleanor - " that you need a chaperon . I 
 try to persuade he that those institution be not   modern necessity . but he put it that if you 
 become ill - which he consider the likeli thing in the world consider what American 
 cooking be - it would be the most awkward thing in the world to have no other woman in the 
 party . " he waive , characteristically , their desire to know more fact by diverge into : " it be 
 astonish how your father can , in a commonsense way , prove that a convention be a 
 convenience . personally I be all for kick convention overboard . but there it be : there be no 
 doubt that in american hotel - for you can not , he say , very decently quarter yourself in any 
 of my half - dozen palace - the only decent servant be the negro bell - boy , who be not , 
 obviously , adapt for wait upon a sick lady . which show you , once more , " he be 
 continue , " how the New World do redress . . . " 

 " but what be go to be do ? " Eleanor ask , and for a moment she wish that her lover might 
 at time dispense with his tremendous flow of word . " you forget that whilst you have   be settle 
 it with dad we have   be sit here . " 

 Don 's eloquent bronzed face express a sudden contrition and concern . 

 " it all seem so simple , now that your father 's arrange it , " he say , " that I have   sort of get the 
 impression it be so obviously the one thing to do - so obviously , that of course you would know it for 
 yourself ! " 

 " I be to go with you ? " she ask . " Next Wednesday ? " and whilst her mind quickly run to 
 preparation , he be answer : 

 " oh , it be principally you that go . but there will also be I and your father , and Augustus here as my 
 chaperon , and your Aunt Emmeline as your , and your father 's man to valet Augustus and he , 
 and your aunt 's maid for she and you . suppose of course that there be accommodation on the 
 boat . " 

 he add reflectively : 

 " though , as the boat all practically belong to I , there do not   seem to be much difficulty . for 
 your father say - I do not   know how he know it - that my father always keep a sort of prior 
 claim for himself on a suite of state - room for every boat of his line ... " 

 " it will cost a tremendous lot of money , " Eleanor say . 

 " oh , money ! " Don say vaguely . " it do not   exist any more . there be nothing leave for I but 
 action . " 

 and whilst she be wonder whether she could altogether like a state of thing , a physical 
 condition , in which , as it be , the force of gravity be leave out and you just float , he say 
 himself : 

 " it be a most extraordinary feeling ! it be as if you could fly and do not want to , " so that Eleanor have 
 a quick feeling of delight at their thought be so much in unison , as if , by mental telepathy , 
 she have send he that very image . . . 

 Augustus say : 

 " but surely Uncle Greville be not   go to let you pay for himself and Eleanor . or have he too ... " 

 for he could not think of his uncle as affect by such a cataclysm , though he feel its effect upon 
 his own self . he know , in his bone , that he too be go to fly - but his uncle be such a 
 determined pedestrian . 

 " oh , " Don answer , " at the rate your uncle can come to resolution we have   have time to settle that 
 too . he pay for Eleanor and himself and your mother and the servant . he will do it because , with 
 Eleanor so well ` settle , ` from that point of view he can afford to sacrifice his economy of 
 some 
 year to his desire to see for himself what the place be like . . . " 

 Augustus say : " ah ! " his uncle certainly be a pedestrian . he dislike motor - car : he would not 
 bicycle : he do not keep a trap : he would not even sit down save when it be necessary - so you 
 certainly could not think of he as fly with another man 's wing in the face of the tory 
 propriety . 

 " I guess , " Don be go on , " that he would not approve of let the fact that Eleanor be to 
 be well settle help he to make an excursion if it be not   that he think I need someone to 
 give I backbone . what he take from I in the one obligation he will restore several hundredfold 
 by save I from make , as he think , an irrevocable ass of myself . I do not mean that he 
 want to keep I from make reparation . . . " 

 " Don dear , " Eleanor interrupt he , " do dad say that you be to take Augustus ? " 



 the fact that the conversation have , under Augustus 's auspex , take a monetary turn , shock 
 her sense of the propriety - though she herself have provoke it . money , in her scale of thing , 
 be a thing you do not talk about . you might say : " it would be too expensive ! " but , once you 
 have receive the opinion that it would not , you do not , in well - arrange circle , proceed to 
 discuss the share of the expenditure . that settle itself because the people engage be decent 
 people ; and she be so touch with coldness at Augustus 's contribution to the discussion-1 - he 
 ought to have know her father would do the right thing ! - that she be anxious even to indicate 
 to Don that Augustus be not the person to take with they , though she see what a tremendously 
 " good thing " it would be for he if Don take he up . . . . she could not , moreover , conceive of 
 her father as recommend his nephew as a solicitor or as a travel companion for himself . 
 Don , however , could not conceive of anybody else . 

 " oh ! " he answer her question . " your father say that I must take a lawyer with I - not that 
 the law of the United States be the same as our - yours - but simply because I need a train 
 intelligence . . . . no , he do not tell I to take Augustus : he tell I to take my solicitor . and " - 
 he put his hand upon Augustus 's shoulder , a gesture that Eleanor feel to be wholly " american " - 
 " Augustus be my solicitor . " 

 Augustus be his solicitor : he have write , for Don , two solicitor 's letter to two magazine 
 own by the same gentleman . the two magazine have calmly appropriate two landscape 
 illustration that Don have exhibit at a Black and white exhibition . Don would not have 
 worry about it if it have not be that the thing have be so vilely reproduce . the proprietor of 
 the magazine have reply that the 

 mere advertisement of appear in the p and the 

 W ought to be payment enough for a person like 

 Don . but Augustus 's threat that his client would apply for an order to suppress the issue of the 
 magazine have bring tumbling in two cheque for fifteen pound - which Don really have not 
 know what to do with - and a commission for further illustration from the proprietor , who , if 
 he do not like to be best , conceive a tremendous respect for an artist who would care to stand 
 up to he . a success so considerable - it be all the more considerable in Don 's eye in that the 
 proprietor have give an assurance that all Don 's subsequent work should be reproduce just 
 exactly as Don desire - have fill poor Don with an immense respect for Augustus 's power . it 
 be not   everybody who could make a magazine proprietor careful as to reproduction . 

 this would not , perhaps , have matter to Don so much if Don have not be a lonely soul and if 
 Augustus have not be Eleanor 's cousin . one might even go so far as to say that Don have 
 invent the occasion of the lawyer 's letter - he would not normally have bother even about 
 the bad reproduction - especially that he might come in contact with Eleanor 's relation . he 
 want relation : he want , with all his affection , a family feeling . and if it be not that , in the 
 least , that have make he fall in love with Eleanor - he have meet she as a solitary figure when she 
 have be live in lodging in Paris 

 to attend the L School of Design , so that she do 

 not seem to have any relation at all - it be part of an add charm to find that she have so 
 splendid and so typical - so comfortable - an atmosphere of belong to a family . he have not 
 himself , since his mother be dead and he have quarrel with his father , the ghost of a person to 
 feel affectionate towards : but on .Eleanor 's side he discover he would be able to sink , as it 
 be , luxuriously and warmly , into all sort of connectionship . it do not matter that , as he 
 gradually discover , Eleanor have not very much opportunity to see the member of her father 's 
 and mother 's family . she do not , indeed , seem ever very much inclined to make at all strenuous 
 effort to keep up these connection . she need not , as he put it , because she have such a 
 tremendous wealth of they that as she have never know the lack - the feeling of be alone in 
 the world - she could not be blame for not feel how precious the possession be . but there 
 they be , hundred and hundred of aunt and cousin and uncle : and blood be thick than 
 water . he feel himself at last about to slip into place somewhere on the edge of a ring . he would 
 not any more be without some sort of circle . 

 he would , in fact , have call Augustus " his solicitor " even if he have be the veriest of muff . 
 he have so much need of something that be " his " that he would have proclaim Augustus one 
 of the most remarkable practitioner in England though Augustus have have nothing but a lack of 
 opportunity . as it be it be splendid , because Augustus be solicitor to the Woman 's T.U.F. 
 and to the Diocese 

 of ; and he have so efficiently conduct Don 's 

 own affair . so that , with his general excitement , with the feeling that he have that it be 
 necessary to act - then and there , under the very nose of Mr Greville , and actually under the eye 
 of Eleanor , Don irrevocably engage Augustus to be his man of affair . 



 PART II 
 between SHORES 

 the wave beneath their eye sway out from the vessel 's side ; the sea be dark and metallic , 
 like slate with white furring . it be astonishing because the sky be an unbroken pale blue , and 
 in the sweep arch of the heaven the sun , hide somewhere by the smoke stack , have a sway 
 unhindered by any cloud . it affect the girl hostilely , this hard surface , in spite of the pure white 
 paint of the boat , in spite of the fresh feel of the air on her face , in spite of the bouillon in 
 handleless cup , the neat dress that fill all the nook of the pleasant deck , in spite of the 
 accent that make you laugh , because , faint as it mostly be , it be , undoubtedly , as allpervade 
 as the faint smell of tar that exhale from every cranny of the immense boat . 

 the first bugle be sound for dinner : the two bless little interval of their day have 
 commence ; for though you never observe any noticeable change in their attire , and though they 
 could not possibly have be any clean than they always be , they , all of they , except a pallid 
 lady who be say to be " very ill , " disappear into their cabin to do , in half an hour , what 
 eleanor - it be , she be aware , inconsiderate to the steward - contrive 



 with deft swiftness to get do in five minute after the second bugle " have go . " Don apparently 
 do not " do " anything at all , for he be always discreetly in his chair opposite her by the time 
 that , sway just a little to what be undoubtedly the inconsiderate motion of such an hotel , she 
 make her way between the fill chair . 

 but Don , apparently , never have any need to " do " anything . he be always astonishingly neat : in 
 England , she remember , he have always stand out , in this way , from all the other man she have 
 know . here , among what she could not help call to herself his compatriot - though his 
 mother have actually make he naturalise himself - he do not stand out at all . it be something 
 that , there in the shadow of a slung boat in the sea air , puzzle she a little . it puzzle she even 
 while Don talk , as he always be talk , in pleasant undertone , about thing that she never 
 very well remember . or rather , yes , when she bring her mind back to it , he be talk about 
 what it would feel like to drown just where they be . the night before they have desultorily make 
 out in the great gilt - bind volume of chart that be in the great gilt - and - white lady 's 
 drawing - room , that the sea there be 1400 fathom deep - or 16,000 foot , or 1842 foot - or some 
 number that do not convey anything to she , and at that moment Don be vaguely speculate as 
 to how it would differ be drown in that depth of water from be drown in a pond . it 
 must , he be of opinion , make an enormous psychological difference , to sink and sink . whereas 
 she simply feel that if you drown , you drown , though she admit the pleasantness of his 
 allegory . . . 

 but what really occupy her mind be the riddle of his odd identity with all these other young 
 man here . for here , somehow , he do not stand out - as Augustus certainly do . there be here 
 perhaps seventy young Americans out of the 400 of their centre of the ship - seventy young man , 
 all gentle , low - voice , extremely well wash - you would not somehow call it well - groom - 
 and with uncreased coat rather long in the back . it be not that the coat be not make in 
 Regent Street - they all be . but they have , precisely , an uncreased look ; you could not tell why . 
 it be not that they be extravagantly new ; it be rather as if they have be build - build be 
 precisely the word - for people who would never put they to any physical us out of door . 
 and yet it be not that the young man never go out of door or never indulge in violent 
 exercise ; for ten of those young man be return - a college team - from compete with a 
 Cambridge band of athlete ; and two other , at least , have , as war correspondent , do quite 
 astonishing thing with rough - rider in some war . nevertheless , Augustus , who could not tell one 
 end of an oar from the other , who have never be on a horse , who hat cricket , never walk a 
 yard if he could help it , and regard footballer as " muddied oafs " who infinitely contribute to 
 our national decay - Augustus give the idea that he could punch all their head by sheer force of 
 passion . Don do not ; yet Don have , she know , pull a very creditable oar in his college eight 
 and , tuck away somewhere amongst his other accomplishment , have the gift of shoot out all 
 the pip of a five of spade at twenty foot with an army revolver - and Don stand over six foot in 
 his stocking . yet you never notice he , unless you be in love with he , when , after breakfast 
 and before dinner , he join in the frenzied swift rush round the promenade deck . 

 the problem , not the fact , worry she a great deal : for , approach as she do those new shore 
 with a singular curiosity , she be anxious to discover what be the difference . she be not 
 incline to believe - at first she have not be - that she be go to trouble her head in the least 
 about the difference . there be not , she have be ready to advance , any difference . the 
 people would prove just englishman who rush a little fast perhaps but who want much the 
 same thing . 

 but , in spite of herself , she be , she be aware , wonder all the time what make her feel 
 different from anything she have ever feel before . she realise , of course , that she be , really , 
 try to make discovery about her lover : she try to think that he be not an American . but 
 she feel , in spite of herself , that he certainly be what those people call an unAmerican 
 American . - he be voyage , indeed , under the pseudonym of " Greville " and pass vaguely for 
 her father 's nephew . it be not Don that be in question . but the lady who sit at her elbow at 
 meal - a dark person with an odd variety of german accent who spend all her summer in 
 " Yurup " - have tell she that another American , who pass most of his year in Liverpool , be 
 unamerican . it be , apparently , undemocratic , if it be not absolutely unpatriotic , to have any 
 tie at all with any of the several old country that they all , now they be hasten towards 
 Sandy Hook , affect contentedly to despise . 

 Don , therefore , be undemocratic and unamerican . she feel , in her loyalty to he , that she would 
 not have minded if he have be both . and yet he fit in so well with all the other . and she feel 
 so differently among they . she have be but two day on board and she try to assure herself 
 that it be the unfamiliarity of her surrounding - the private sitting - room with the 
 vast - blossom flower , the yellow velvet with gold - work on it , the green marble wash - hand 
 basin in her berth with its silver fitting , or the nickel handle of all kind and shape that her 
 Aunt Emmeline in the next berth be perpetually strain her wrist to manipulate for 
 improbable purpose . her Aunt Emmeline have day of fad when she would not allow herself to 
 be " wait on . " or it might have be the fact of eat with 400 other people at once that make 
 she feel strange . . . 

 but though she try to assure herself that it be this , she be aware that it be not . what at 
 bottom be strange be to be among 400 people and not to attract from any man any of the 
 unsanctioned attention - ceillade or mere dropping of the eye - that anywhere else would 
 have make she comfortably uncomfortable . Augustus , of course , be always eye she , but that 
 do not count , and she have , as it be , a definite prospect of a sort of loneliness that stretch out 
 before her eye . it be a loneliness , for somehow the woman . . . . they be not . . . . they be . 
 . . 

 she could not somehow size it up . when they come into the dining - room in crowd they look 
 all right : but when you take they in detail . . . . perhaps it be only the voice , the accent . and 
 yet it be not the accent - one have allow for that . it be rather a sort of intonation - a faint 
 something - a querulousness ! that be it . they seem all , always , to be complain , not so 
 much in word as in the tone of their voice . it remind she - with a quite startling vividness - 
 of lady at home who could not get servant " to stay . " they do not interest she somehow : not 
 any one of they make she feel the possibility that she would ever come to a thrill of intimacy . 
 they have not the complexion : they certainly have not the voice : they have not the look in the 
 eye . they could not ever be her rival ! 

 it be that , to her astonishing discovery - for it come to she in a flash - that make she for many 
 day drop entirely the habit of speculating as to her companion , and they sink for she to the 
 almost permanent condition of moderately well - dress automata . she do not care how they 
 dress : for the way they dress would not certainly interest any man who could interest she : 
 she do not care to hear about their friend , for they certainly would not be her friend ; she do 
 not care to hear their view of Europe and its cathedral . it do not bother she to have to listen : 
 they simply do not excite her 



 curiosity - not any one of they . and by this second of the very long day she have resign 
 herself , for all of the time that she could not have Don to herself , to a future of lie in the deck 
 chair and pass remark about the weather , or the bouillon , or about who be ill ... 

 it be from a reverie upon one of these subject that Don arouse she , whilst they leant , before 
 dinner , over the rail together , by offer she two cent for her thought . he drop immediately 
 into the digression that she would have to get use to consider - over there - that though two cent 
 be in value the equal of one penny , actually the Americans call a cent " a penny , " just as a 
 good many of they call a quarter " a shilling " - so that she would have to get use to consider 
 that a shilling consist of twenty - five penny . she answer that she do not suppose that she would 
 ever get use to anything of the sort . and why should she ? she would have he and her father , not to 
 mention Augustus and Aunt Emmeline , to look after she . she do not suppose she would ever have to 
 come into contact with " it . " 

 he have a little touch of disappointment in his voice - of a deep disappointment than she care 
 to have give he - as he say : 

 " oh , I hope you will take some of the problem seriously when you come to see . " 

 " but be not , " she say , " what we be go for , just to give you an opportunity to get rid of your 
 father 's affair and to pay a good deal of money away to some poor people and then . . . ? " 

 their attention be mutually distract by the silvery , wedge - like form of a dolphin that , reduce 
 by the height they be up to the apparent size of a mackerel , dive , in a swift curve , in the hurry 
 of water just below their nose . . . 

 " and then ... " she take up her sentence again . " then ? why , nothing . we go back and it will be 
 all over . " 

 with his hand upon the rail , sway with the sway of the vessel , he consider this proposition 
 for long than he would ever consider before any proposition of her - for a space of time that 
 appear unnatural to she , consider how short be the precious minute that be really 
 theirs before the next bugle would blow . 

 " be not   that it ? " she ask at last that he might waste no more . 

 " that be it , " he say at last . " but what you have   get to consider be that to do the thing - 
 conscientiously ! - will be a thing that will call for an immense study . it will not   be - I do not   want it to 
 be if I can help it - and , if you approve . . . " his voice have in it an almost appealing note . " it 
 will not   be just sell a business - as you might sell a shop in the Marylebone High Street . we be 
 not , in fact - you and I and your father and Augustus - go out to see how I may retire from 
 business . we be go out as reformer . " 

 " dearest boy , " she say , and a note of deep tenderness in her tone answer his pleading , " I be 
 not go to hinder you . " 

 " I know , I know , " he say gratefully . " but the whole point be - the point that worry I be that 
 you will have to take an interest - you will have at least to study the circumstance . you can not   go in 
 and out as we do this morning when we pay a visit to the emigrant ' quarter . I have   get to plunge 
 right into this eighty million of people as I might plunge into this water here . . . . " he wave his 
 hand downward . " right down , to the very bottom almost . and if you do come with I , 
 Heaven know when we shall get out again . " 

 this be , as Don would have call it , a proposition that , in turn , make eleanor pause for a space 
 during which they might have be carry a mile towards the invisible coast . she meet it 
 seriously enough with : 

 " I be ready to do anything that be really necessary . " she be not , however , even in her most loyal 
 mood , a person to encourage he in exact boundless promise . " would not   it be enough , " she 
 ask , " if you just shake the whole thing off ? be it really necessary to accept the responsibility ? " 

 he do not pause at all with his answer . 

 " I tell you at the very first that it be not   a power give to I . it be a duty . I have   get to do my good 
 with these people ... " he stop to make the confession . " come into contact with so many of 
 they have make I tremendously in earnest . I hear so many old phrase : I have   get to face , at every 
 word that I overhear , something that represent an old hope , an old inspiration . I have   get to do 
 something . " 

 " you be not , you know , " she say , ' so exceedingly in earnest the Wednesday before last . " 

 he rub his hand up his brow . 

 " perhaps I be not , " he say slowly . " but it do come back to I - the national feeling . I do not 
 know where it come from . perhaps from the day when I play with the bell - boy in the hall of 
 the hotel . I do not know where else . but . . . " he pause , and a look of positive appalment in his 
 face overwhelm she . 

 " my dear thing ! " he bring out , " I have   be dreadfully unfair to you . if you do not expect . . . . it be 
 shameful , " he say ; " of course you could not expect that I would drag you into such an affair . " 

 to calm he she put her hand upon his where it rest on the rail , as she be in the habit of 
 do for her father in church when the sermon irritate he beyond bear . but the contact do 
 not calm Don . he look up at the canvas screen of the bridge where , silhouette against the pale 
 sky , a man , bearded and blonde , with a gilt line round his cap , be hold at the moment a glass 
 to his eye . his own , mechanically , follow its direction . 

 " there be a ship ! " he utter , and then : " of course I can not   turn the boat round - or I might perhaps , 
 only it would be hard on the passenger . but the very minute we get to New York , if you wish it 
 ... " 

 " dear ! " she say , " do not   you understand ? " 

 he bring out , almost hysterically , it be so swift , a " yes , but ... " 

 " when I accept you as my responsibility , " she say , with an attempt at a smile to calm he , " I 
 take you with all your responsibility . I shall not   funk the slum of New York when I come to 
 they . only ... " 

 " Heavens , " he interrupt , " it need not come to that ! " 

 " only " - she be determined to finish her speech - " I do not want you to assume more 
 responsibility than you have   get to do for your peace of mind . " 

 " my peace of mind be irrevocably bind up with yours and your comfort , " he say . and she 
 accept the obvious sincerity of his speech in lieu of the kiss that she feel she have deserve . 

 " and mine be so entirely bind up in your , " she say , " that if I think there be a single thing 
 you feel you really ought to do , and if you do not do it for my sake , I should be irrevocably 
 miserable . " 

 the shrill note of the second bugle make he move backwards from the rail . 

 " only , " she repeat , as they squeeze close together to enter the companion door at the stern 
 end of the deck , " I do want you to make up your mind what will satisfy you . " 

 " and you will stand the racket ? " he ask , support himself above she with a hand on the 
 panelling as the slow pitch of the creak vessel elevate he right above her coil hair . " you 
 be a brick . " and she look back and up at he with an ingenuous pleasure upon her fresh 
 cheek , so that they remain at gaze until , in revenge , the dropping sternward of the ship make 
 the stairway almost horizontal and bring she face up to his level . he do not kiss she even then 
 because he be lose in the consideration of whether he ought to accept the sacrifice . 



 this problem occupy he during the great part of dinner , inordinate though - the second 
 dinner of the voyage be one upon which the resource of the kitchen be strained to show 
 what , as against the compete line , the ship could do - inordinate though the dinner prove in 
 length to be . the problem of whether he ought really to take she with he any far 
 accompany he through the indifferent soup , the excellent oyster , the hor d'ceuvre ; it spoil 
 his appreciation of the mousse of westphalian ham ; it make he so inattentive to the need of 
 Aunt Emmeline that it be positively Augustus who have to reach across the table to fill her glass 
 with Apollinaris . it cast such a blight , this problem , upon he that he would almost gladly have 
 take refuge in the belief that it be the motion of the vessel affect his spirit . but he be too 
 excellent a sailor , and in spite of his dejection his appetite be too good to let he have that 
 solace . and almost he come to the conclusion , since the matter so much affect he , that that 
 alone be proof that he ought not to bring Eleanor into contact , however willing , with his 
 Responsibility . 

 he contrive to be drag out of his brooding by hear the lady at his elbow exclaim , in tone 
 too triumphant for the most preoccupied to miss : 

 " now , there be a great man . " 

 the remark be address to Mr Greville , who raise his thin , aquiline face and pierce eye 
 immediately opposite to she across the table . and Don , in spite of his preoccupation , be 
 subconsciously aware that the subject of her eulogy be his own father . 

 Mr Greville 's politeness , ask as if for information of an extreme ignorance , come across to 
 she . 

 " in what significance do you use the word ` great ` ? " 

 " consider , " the lady cry out - she have massive , strike red hair and a massive and very 
 striking pale face of a mealy whiteness - " all the money he be make . " 

 Mr Greville utter : " ah ! " 

 " and consider , " she go on , " his charity . " 

 " now what proportion , " Mr Greville ask , " do you consider that his charity bear to his 
 income ? " 

 " ah , " the lady say , " I know you be sneer at we . but tell I how many member of your 
 corrupt aristocracy have found a university ? " 

 Aunt Emmeline lean across Don to almost groan : 

 " ah , too true ! " 

 she have find herself in singular accord with the red - haired lady . she have not ever anywhere meet 
 people who so intimately agree with her view of life as she discover most of the people on 
 board do . she lean , however , still far across Don , so that the aigrette in her hair 
 discommode he , to remark that Mrs Sargent be not to take it for grant that all their upper 
 class be unmindful of their responsibility ; though too few , altogether , recognise what - 
 for instance in their relation to the Church - their duty be ; and Mr Greville in turn beg 
 Mrs Sargent to realise that he be not sneer at she . he be travel for the sole purpose of 
 inform his mind . 

 " so that you be really come for pleasure ? " and the lady , in her agreeable surprise , pull still 
 far back the glove that dangle from her white and very plump forearm . " now that be real 
 nice . you be come to see we as we really be ? so few british do . " 

 Aunt Emmeline say that it be indeed lamentable that the well class of her island have so little 
 curiosity : it be one of the symptom , it be probably one of the cause , of british national 
 decay . 

 " but do not   you think , " Mr Greville ask Mrs Sargent , " that if we do not come it be because we 
 believe - we be probably very mistaken - that there be nothing to see ? " 

 " you do not believe anything of the sort , " Mrs Sargent cry triumphantly . " go down to the 
 Battery any afternoon and you will not   be able to move for the crowd of british rubber - neck with 
 Baedekers look at the sky - scraper and the historic monument . you do not   find they like that 
 at the Tower of London ! " 

 her triumph - and the incomprehensible word that you have to wait to work out its meaning - 
 cause a momentary silence , into which Augustus be able to introduce the virulent statement : 

 " so that you get we both way ! " and to Mrs Sargent 's puzzled expression he vouchsafe the 
 contemptuous explanation that she have say , first , that we be such fool that we never come at 
 all ; and secondly , that the sight of New York do attract we so much that we abandon our own 
 to an extent that impede the native - bear American . . . 

 Mr Greville turn his head towards his nephew for sufficiently long to say , over the head of 
 Eleanor , who sit between they : 

 " we do not come here to convict people of inaccuracy . we come to hear their view . " 

 and Mrs Sargent roll bread triumphantly between her white finger and thumb of both hand , 
 accept Mr Greville 's championing and reflect upon an effective retort . it come after a 
 decent interval : 

 " I guess we Americans get you - both way - all the time ! " and Mr Greville gallantly but 
 enigmatically bow his head . Mrs Sargent say brightly then she guess they be the very 
 nice party of English she would ever come across - and she herself have be bear in County Cork , 
 so she might claim to know both side of the water and speak with authority . Augustus , she say , 
 would learn well before he be three month old : he would find american woman very bright , and 
 she reflect with satisfaction upon her retort , repeat , to lose none of its effect , that Americans 
 do get they both way all the time . she hop she would be able to take they round Springfield , 
 Illinois , and show they something of the prettiest town in the world . . . 

 Don from this , to he , rather painful scene - in his amphibious existence he have hear so much 
 of this yankee - baiting - retire , a little strengthen , to the consideration of the problem of 
 whether he ought to take Eleanor any far into these depth . it occupy he so fully , the 
 problem , that of the rest of the conversation he only catch Mrs Sargent inform the silent 
 Eleanor that she would find american gurrl vurry bright , and that english woman do not know how 
 to put their clothe on , a remark to which Eleanor only smile a little deafly and bow with an 
 odd likeness to her father . and he catch Eleanor replying in trenchant undertone to a whisper 
 from Augustus : 

 " why , there be ridiculous people everywhere . " if he have be near her chair last night , instead of 
 be in his berth sea - sick , he would have hear a drunken english country gentleman hold forth to 
 a lot of perfectly silent Yankees about the incorruptibility of English J.P.s and the perfection of 
 the british system . she have ask herself just the very word that Augustus have just ask she . 
 " be it possible that people really talk like that ? " for , as against Mrs Sargent 's " corrupt 
 aristocracy " the Englishman have allege that you could get a verdict from the United States 
 Supreme Court - as all the world know - by bribe any one of the judge . 

 " you do not believe people talk such rot till you hear it , " she finish trenchantly . " but they do . 
 and it would be cruel of dad to draw that poor woman out if he have not get a good reason for it . " 

 the unfortunate Augustus open his moustachehidden mouth to retort , but a slow movement 
 that seem to take the whole place , band , gallery , fern on the table , and waiter , in one 
 gigantic hand and wave it through the air , make he at first appear to 



 reflect wildly and then to close his mouth . in spite of the fact that he be assure of Ě 10,000 a 
 year for the next five year and sit next to his cousin , so that he could speak to she in undertone , 
 he be not yet have anything like what Mrs Sargent assure he be to be the time of his life . 

 it be probably the contact with Mrs Sargent that tip Don 's waver scale upwards . for he 
 have to face the eternal problem of how much a king owe to his people , how much to his wife : of 
 how much the same king be pledge by promise that he have give before he come to the throne 
 in face of the suffering of his tributary that he discover after his accession . for he could not 
 disguise from himself the fact that he have pledge himself to let Eleanor lead the orderly , 
 shelter , almost august life that have seem to be all that the future promise they . 

 it be a definite promise that he have make , and , to his scrupulosity , you can not be relieve from 
 a promise however will the other party may be . at the same time he could not be certain that 
 he be not bind by a former promise , contract not by he , but , as it be , by his ancestor - 
 a promise of which Mrs Sargent be , in her vulgar ignorance , a dismal symptom . for 
 undoubtedly his father - and the man of his father 's kidney who have precede he - be 
 responsible for that poor woman . it be they who be responsible for her candid utterance that 
 Greatness be the power to trick coin out of the breech pocket of the poor or that have you 
 both way be the ideal of life . his father distinctly be the great prototype of extraction just as 
 his whole life have be a matter of have everybody not both way , but in every possible way . 

 and it seem to he that it be a duty he have bring with he into the world to re - act against 
 his father . he have , as far as he could , to show that poor woman with the red hair , pasty face , and 
 untidy , flabby , blue cotton shirt waist - who tell his Eleanor that she do not know how to put 
 her clothe on and hold up to Mr Greville a swindler like his own father as a type of what a 
 corrupt aristocracy should emulate - it be his duty to show that poor woman and the million 
 that she represent , the million that his father have tax , swindle and present with false 
 ideal , to show they that Greatness be something great than the habit of accumulation . and 
 perhaps because of the optimistic sensation induce by the immense dinner , by the time the 
 sparkle wine , provide by the Company , and the nickel - silver souvenir pocket - book in which 
 you be to keep a diary of the run   provide also by the Company , have be arrive at , he have 
 momentarily square the circle of his thought . it be the old solution . 

 for be not he go to the United States to strike a deathblow at what his father represent ? 
 be he not go to cripple all his father 's enterprise ? be not he go to - as far as he could 
  - set up a different standard ? and would not that standard be the standard of Eleanor ? 

 II 

 the sun that night go down leave a pink - and golden splendour that put new heart into Mrs 
 Sargent . there lie Mrs Greville , with Eleanor by her side , green and brown rug wrap almost 
 up to their nose , their foot render glorious by the light from the low sky , which give to all 
 outline a soft , luminous enhancing . a never - cease procession , silhouette against the light - 
 of lean man 's figure , stout woman , child whose little pigtail cut diagonally the line of the 
 cordage - pass before their face , the note of a harmonium , the clashing of pail - handle to 
 simulate cymbal , laugh and endless , monotonous song from the emigrant , invisible below 
 their foot , go up to mingle in the brilliant heaven with the rush of the water . it seem , the 
 darkness down there , to enshroud and to accentuate the jaunty indifference , the squalor , the 
 ferocity or the mere listless , eastern dejection with which , through the day , the fore - part of the 
 ship , with its kerchiefe , orientally - drape crowd , seem to confront the serene castle of luxury 
 that rise , white and embattle , half way between stem and stern . 

 the sky be a flat , impenetrable pink , and from just to the right of the bow a single backbone of 
 gilt , feathery cloud glow and slant , like a vast spruce tree about to fall transversely , up into 
 the pale blue peak of the heaven . it have , the sky , something of a garish splendour , to which the 
 slatey - blue , unchangeable sea seem to offer a saturnine comment , and from time to time Mrs 
 Sargent lead to their foot , for presentation to these extraordinary Europeans who be travel to 
 the other side " for pleasure , " small band of what they have come to call " they . " they make in 
 this way the acquaintance of a scottish presbyterian minister from an aristocratic suburb of 
 Philadelphia , who tell they that there be no coal smoke in New York ; of a lady whose husband 
 own a button factory in Froudeville , Connecticut ; of a judge from Decatur , Illinois ; of the son 
 of a distinguished family call Callum of Pittsburg , Pennsylvania , and of a Mr Houston of 
 Brooklyn , who tell they , in gentle and despondent tone , that whatever they do they be to 
 avoid the 

 Hotel in a street whose number he could not 

 just remember . and each of these people cordially endorse the remark with which , successively , 
 Mrs Sargent introduce they - that they be go to the land to see sunset . the lady from 
 Froudeville add the rider that they would find New York very strange but that they would like it 
 immensely when they get use to it . to which the judge 's son add that they be not to think 
 that N'York be America , it be just a sink . it appear afterwards that by this image he have 
 mean to imply nothing opprobrious , but merely that New York , in its cosmopolitan character , 
 be merely the channel - or , as you might say , the funnel into which the wealth of the 
 transatlantic continent force itself in its way eastward . but all these silhouette with querulous 
 voice wave their arm towards the invisible sun and the western sky . the sunset , indeed , they 
 assure she be but a first note of what , hospitably and charmingly , they be go to do for 
 they . and Eleanor 's protest , wring from she at the fifth repetition , that they be not thirty - six 
 hour out from Europe so that the sunset might as well be call the last taste of what Europe 
 could do for they - Eleanor 's protest , for which she feel a certain contrition , be summarily 
 quash by her Aunt Emmeline . she be inclined to put the sunset down to the sturdy 
 Protestantism and the energy of the transatlantic race . they go , she explain , together : sky 
 and energy be synonymous , for be not it a scientific fact that climate have a vast influence 
 upon character ? and invite the gentle Mr Houston and Mrs Sargent to take the dark , vacant 
 chair next her own , she send Augustus , who happen at the moment to pass at Don 's side , down 
 to her maid 's cabin to inquire for a volume of his father 's sermon , in which , by a coincidence , 
 that idea of transatlantic vigour and the occidental sky be rhetorically foreshadow . and 
 Don , be roundly accuse by Aunt Emmeline of unsociability , be constrain amiably to 
 hook one of his long arm round an iron stay and to hoist himself into a sit posture upon the 
 hard rail ; where , silhouette , too , against the pal sky - the gigantic gilt spruce tree have 
 become a roisterous old man 's head - he listen to Mrs Sargent 's upbraiding of Mr Houston , 
 who , in the light of the electric lamp that glow by now from the ceiling above the chair , 



 have reveal himself as a small , old , tired - look gentleman in a Homburg hat and with a short 
 goat 's beard . he repeat that he have not be able to sleep in the hotel in 2gth Street , and to Mrs 
 Sargent 's reprimand that it be unpatriotic and altogether un - american to let an Englishman 
 imagine that the bad american hotel could be bad than the very good english hotel , he 
 repeat once more that he suppose , under correction , it be not the good way to give English 
 visitor a good impression of the States to direct they to an hotel under which they be blast 
 a tunnel . and whilst Mrs Sargent be demonstrate that to sleep over a tunnel in preparation 
 would be just the thing to give english visitor an idea of the overflow industry and energy of 
 New York   " so that you get they again both way ! " Don could not help interject   Mrs 
 Greville have turn the topic into that of the social organisation attach to american church . 

 in that , too , Mrs Sargent assure she , America be exceedingly " live . " after slightly sketch 
 the relative position , socially , of the congregation attach to various church - it remotely 
 shock Don , for Aunt Emmeline 's sake , to hear she say that the Protestant Episcopal 
 congregation mostly consist of kitchenmaids - Mrs Sargent give instance of this activity : 
 instance the fact that at hey don , N.J. , the Christian Scientists have , in the vestibule of their new 
 church , a barber 's saloon , so that gentlemen - and lady too - might appear as seemly as 
 possible at the service : and conclude with the triumphant fact that the Rev. Mr Campbell , the 
 scottish minister to whom they have be present and whom they remember as have tell 
 they that there be no coal smoke in New York , have erect in his vestryhouse a quick - lunch 
 bar , a tape machine in direct contact with Wall Street , and a telephone , telegraph and 
 messenger - boy service . 

 " Mr Campbell , " Mrs Sargent say , " have in his congregation some of the wealthy man in the 
 city , man to whom the delay of a minute might mean the loss of a fortune . " 

 and whilst Mrs Greville be , approvingly , say that the only inefficient parallel that her 
 church have have be the habit of call doctor out of service if anyone be ill , Mrs Sargent 
 be say that it prove her own broadmindedness , inasmuch as , whilst she thus eulogise the 
 Rev. Campbell , she herself be a Catholic . 

 " you will not   find in America , " she say , " any of the narrow intolerance that there be on the other 
 side . " 

 and Mr Houston 's timid " no , indeed ! " which resemble more than anything else a clearing of 
 his thin brown throat , be emphasise by a much more audible " no , indeed ! " from Aunt 
 Emmeline . 

 Don lose himself in conjecture as to what exactly could be Mrs Greville 's little game . and as he 
 average it out she must imagine herself at last in a milieu where her social , ecclesiastical and 
 organising excellence would enable she to shine as they have not - even in the good day of her 
 husband 's episcopacy - enable she to shine anywhere yet . as she would see it , he muse , she 
 be amongst an infinite number - the representative of eighty million - of absolutely 
 middle - class people . not one of the individual that she see around she could be reasonably 
 " place " at all in her mind . so that she have only , whilst pay a purely temporary deference to 
 their odd opinion , to reveal herself as a real Bishop 's wife , to stand forth as an absolute dictator 
 of manner , district - visit and the disciplining of minor clergy . 

 and she confirm he in this speculation - just as Eleanor , by stir in her chair , exhibit 
 the symptom that he so much desire , to join he - by suddenly tell he to go and see what 
 have become of Augustus and the volume of her husband 's sermon . for she have remember - 
 with regard to Mrs Sargent 's claim for a height of tolerance in the United States - a certain 
 sermon of her husband 's preach before a ruri - diaconal conference . in this she have herself 
 force the bishop to say that if the Roman Catholics would abandon some of their heresy , and 
 the Nonconformists be to abandon some of their stiffneckedness , how exceedingly good it 
 would be for the Church . for , as Don realise , it be extremely difficult to inform a lady who will 
 not listen to you that you be the wife of a Bishop . whereas a titlepage can not   be ignore . 

 in the course of long wandering in the deep stage of the ship , with their slight but persistent 
 odour , their slight but insistent creaking of polished wood and , their perspective that seem 
 infinite , Don several time lose his way . it be indeed one of the most difficult thing in the world , 
 when you have turn a number of corner , go down and up a number of oscillate staircase , 
 to retain in your mind just where you be or even to realise whether you be go towards the 
 stem or the stern . and have discover that Aunt Emmeline 's maid be too overcome to begin 
 to consider the problem of find where in the world Aunt Emmeline 's copy of her husband 's 
 treatise might be   she address instead , through the crack of her door , to Don and the 
 stewardess the unanswerable riddle : why have she ever leave read ? , Don be face with the 
 problem of discover what have become of Augustus . he have , the stewardess say , show , poor 
 gentleman , half an hour before , unmistakable sign of wish that he have never come to that 
 atmosphere . from there he vanish . 

 Don in his kind - heartedness could not think of take his valet away from a vastly congenial and 
 just - learn game of poker in the smoking - room , as indeed he would not have think of leave 
 poor Augustus to a mere valet . and , his heart fill with concern , and dominate too with a 
 dread that Eleanor might have turn in , Don course through what appear to be mile of 
 passage of shin white paint , shin mahogany and stifle creaking , up to a region where the 
 white paint give way to fumed oak and paint panel represent cornucopia , bird of 
 paradise or nymph . he course out along wind - sweep promenade deck , peep at familiar face 
 of the prostrate occupier of deck chair . he find , in their private saloon with the yellow and 
 gilt velvet , Mr Greville , lean , rigid and attentive , and in the socratic manner , extract from the 
 captain , who be a blaze of gilt binding , red face and golden , harsh hair , fact as to the 
 condition of service in the United States mercantile marine . 

 because the captain be stiffly anxious to make the acquaintance of Don , whom he call " Mr 
 Ke - Greville , " Don be force to stay and admire the aster head , each as large as a mop , that the 
 captain have do himself the pleasure of send in for the lady of the party . there be not , 
 indeed , anything fulsome about the captain , though , upon hear the cause of Don 's concern , he 
 offer to place at his disposal one of his mate to find Augustus . but it be minutely 
 disagreeable to Don to be call " Mr Ke - Greville . " and he seem to read into the captain 's 
 hard - bite , defensive blue eye the fact that with each word he utter Captain Mulock be 
 say really : " look here , you be my owner . but you can not   promote I for you have   nothing big 
 in this line to give . and you can not , if you be a decent man , deprive I of the ship , for I be 
 impeccable . " 

 " oh , well " - Don be drive to take the bull by the horn - " I trust you will respect my desire for 
 secrecy . I have   get reason that I be sure you would approve yourself . " and when the captain lay a great 
 red hand upon the evening shirt - front that give to his gild broadcloth a final and tremendous 
 finish , and assure he that he have take to America two duchess , a french Ambassador and an 
 English Cabinet Minister without a soul 's even have learn that they have be in the States , Don 
 follow his advice and seek for Augustus in the extreme bow and the extreme stern . 

 " it be what they all want , " he say . " darkness 



 and privacy , " and he laugh a cordial and jovial laugh . he have cross the Atlantic , he say , man 
 and boy , three hundred time . 

 the episode arouse in Don a vague disquiet , for it remind he again that he own all this . . . 
 all this ! he have not remember the fact half a dozen time in the course of the two day . yet to 
 all intent and purpose it be true . he own it and it be only an infinitesimal part of his 
 possession that he know each minute grow and grow . it be bad , the feeling , when he come 
 among the emigrant , with whom the warm , still night have fill the dark chasm of the 
 encumber deck . they sit on great iron disc , they hang on to steel rope , they lie on the 
 smoothed board , half invisible and wholly unrealisable . you could not distinguish they by 
 name any more than you could tell where one class of the ship begin and the other end once 
 you be out of the central castle . and the feeling dominate he when he have find Augustus 
 lean beside the flagstaff at the stern and have be simply damn for suggest that there the 
 motion of the vessel be at its bad . and in that darkness , where Augustus appear nothing but 
 a huddled , disagreeable black mass , lift up and down against the horizon , it strike Don that he 
 could not even understand Augustus ! 

 in the half way between the stern and the central elevation , where the steerage passenger be 
 mass , some of they have get hold of a storm lamp and have hang it from a bridge that span 
 the dark deck . and to the sound of a concertina jerkily wheeze out the air of a parisian waltz , a 
 pair of Tyrolese - the man in a wide hat with a black cock 's plume , drag his leg as a 
 barnyard cock do , and with a bearded face and ferociously glisten tooth , the woman in short 
 skirt with white stocking - dance , he intermittently send out a volley of hand - smacking 
 from his knee , his thigh , his ankle , and even his heel , to the rhythm which be mark by the 
 clapping of a pail handle . in the same ring the sombre - skirt figure of a solitary man , 
 Roumanian , Wallachian or Cypriote , be turn reservedly as if in a very slow Highland Fling , 
 his hand above his head . and in the dusky niche around they face indistinguishable - jewish , 
 oriental , italian , blonde , red - haired , or eager like those of London street arabs - peer out and 
 mutter . Don ask in German of a shawled figure , half distinguishable near he , where she 
 come from and where she be go . she draw the shawl close over her head and move an inch 
 or two away . not one of all these people notice he - and obviously in this crowd of strange 
 figure nothing could be noticeable . not even the dusky Roumanian in his skirt . and he would 
 never know where one of they come from or what they come out to seek . what could he - who , 
 after all , have immense power - do for these people ? he might make one - he might make they 
 all - rich ! but what good would that do ? the good that they need be to be teach that good 
 do not come with rich . yet in all probability they be fly from the tangible ill of hunger , 
 cold , oppression , rapine and even butchery . they seek , perhaps , some of they , Liberty . yet 
  ocr error 

 most of they probably be attract by deed such as those of his father 's , who have be bear in 
 a workhouse to die with an infinite power - to do what ? to drink wine ? buy woman ? purchase 
 vote ? what , in the inscrutable depth of these poor mind , do immense wealth signify ? there 
 might be - there probably be - in the thousand or so of they great artist , great thinker , who 
 go to seek the purely idealistic . how , if he set himself the task - if he interpret his mission 
 as that of help those who come first to his hand - how be he to ascertain whose ideal be 
 infinite freedom , whose be infinite opportunity for bestiality , or whose simply the desire for 
 opportunity to live and think ? what could he do ? - what could he do for any of they ? 

 a profound discouragement overcome he . he remember the mile of white and mahogany 
 passage in the centre of the ship . what ideal have all the people who , in the warmth and 
 tranquillised security , sleep in those innumerable precisely similar cell ? and this ship that to all 
 intent and purpose he own be only an infinitesimal fragment of the whole of his problem . 
 for his problem embrace all humanity . he be at that moment the wealthy - and to that 
 extent the most powerful - of all the man in the world . but what he want to do be to use his 
 power to influence mind . otherwise he could give all these people an extravagantly good dinner , 
 a circus entertainment , or present each one of they with an Old Glory in satin star and stripe . 
 he might give every tenth man a hundred thousand dollar and see what come of it . 

 and although that sort of thing do not appeal to he he could not be certain - he have insight 
 enough to be uncertain - that that sort of thing precisely be not   the good thing that he could do . 
 he might , in that way , form the basis of a fortune for some poet or some thinker great enough to 
 influence all the United States , all these cartload of emigrant , all the world . in the sort of 
 semi - socialist ideal in which he have be bring up , which dominate pretty well the whole 
 world , the panacea be undoubtedly something in the way of examination , scholarship , 
 investigation of some sort . then ought he to hold some sort of examination of all the population 
 of the ship ? but what sort of examination ? have any good really come to the world with the 
 prevalence of that school of thought ? be the United States any the well for it - or humanity ? 
 he think it be . 

 but , on the other hand , have not all his ideal come from past age when certainly examination 
 have not even be discover . be not , at bottom , the feeling that dominate all these mile of 
 corridor loathsome , dull , uniform , materialistic ? be there in all this miracle of modernity a 
 single touch of poetry or of the fine feeling ? if there be - and he do not deny it - he have not 
 yet discover it . and if he could not discover even the spark of it how be he - he ! - to fire it 
 into a blaze ? 

 before his eye that central castle rise up , dark , but glow through many porthole , so that it 
 appear to have inside a glowing and radiant centre - like the turnip - head ghost of a country 
 churchyard ! he stand among the nameless crowd and it rise up inaccessible to they . 

 but be it like a castle ? no , it be square , it be obviously of iron plate : at the top the monstrous 
 form of huge ventilator turn to right and leave . the gallery that be form by the layer of 
 deck make it have a little the air of a chinese pagoda . but it be not even like a chinese 
 pagoda ; it have not any quaintness , any grace of outline . it be not like part of a seafaring vessel ; 
 it be not like anything . or yes ! it be like a gigantic packing - case jam down on to the 
 gracious line of a vessel . that be what they have do for ship - he and his . they have fill its 
 real deck with a huddled , nameless crowd : they have jam a packing - case down upon its hold . 

 and yet , he be aware , ship have be fine , graceful , air - sweep vehicle for the Finer Spirit . but 
 it seem to he that this ship - this ship of his - be nothing but an offence , with its trail of 
 smoke to the august , black heaven and the vast swarm of blaze star . there be not , 
 probably , on that whole vessel a person that you could " place " : there be not a name that 
 matter . 

 the deck of the packing - case be nearly deserted now . in the topmost gallery but one a single 
 figure move round and round , appear in the light of one side , disappear in that of the 
 other . they be go to sleep there . here around he the sound of the concertina , the clapping 
 of the pail handle , still go up ... 

 perhaps the fact that the people in the packing 



 case have not any name and could not be place - perhaps the very fact that they be all so 
 hopelessly middle - class and fluctuating would make his task easy . it be , after all , easy to 
 destroy a packingcase than a feudal castle or even a chinese pagoda . there be not there any 
 caste , any rank , any class to whom the shedding of blood have give an almost moral 
 significance and stability . it might then be easy to infuse into these people a great ideal - an 
 ideal of solidarity , of self - sacrifice , of cooperation - an ideal of a Greatness distinct from the 
 acquisition of rich or of the power to " bluff ! " they could not , those two national ideal , have 
 take a very deep hold . it be a matter of such very recent history , this tradition of evil that have 
 be found by man like his father . he be not very strong in history : but be not the 
 " millionaire " the product of the half century since ' 49 ? be not he a figure that another half 
 century might consign to oblivion ? because , precisely , you could not place they . they have not 
 the prescriptive right of have do a service to the community that , in the old world , make one 
 tender to a certain gen , to certain family . it be , be it not ? the transatlantic social mill , just 
 one ant - heap in which any ant struggle through the mass to the outside on the top . you could 
 pull down an ant - heap . you could clear away that central packing - case and the line of the ship 
 would be once more reveal . after all , what be the sense of write up first " class " or second 
 " class " on a vessel that go towards the West ? it be not a matter of class : it be a 

 matter of a few more coin out of the breech pocket . 

 then assuredly these class limit could be sweep away from the vessel with a very small struggle . 
 you would perhaps be able to do it by utter the , to the american , damn word 
 " undemocratic . " for assuredly that ideal be very strong even with the Mrs Sargents . 

 suppose he be to inaugurate his sway of this " line " by utter a manifesto that all class 
 distinction be precisely anti - national . suppose he be to build steamer without that 
 central mass , but clean , roomy , fine from stem to stern . and then he might issue a bold challenge 
 to all american user of boat , dare they to travel by any other at the risk of be call 
 un - american . would not that be a great step ? and would not the example of it bear fruit even in 
 Europe : would not it cause , even there , a further stage in the gradual euthanasia of class 
 distinction that be go on all over the world . example ! be not that really the thing that 
 count ? his father 's wide example have do much harm : might not his , by that device , create a 
 new standard ? for he have hear it advance again and again against his countryman that what 
 they need , what they absolutely lack , be precisely standard ! 

 and then - because he have not go to school at Harrow or mix with Tories for nothing - 
 there come into his head the discouraging idea that no law ever act as it be intend to do . you 
 pass a law to restrict the number of drink - shop and the child see their parent drink at home 
 and the street be fill with female drunkard - so that Heaven know what would be the effect 
 of abolish the class on his ship . he could not see that any evil would result : but it might 
 mean the disappearance for ever of any mingling of european and american culture . decent 
 people might refuse to travel . you simply could not tell how it would influence ideal ! you 
 could not   tell anything . he want to help the people pen up before he to a purer type of ideal ; 
 he want intensely to help all these poor people round he . 

 he feel for his watch : it seem to he that he must have lose hour - that Eleanor would be in 
 bed by now . but his watch be not   there . he suppose he must have leave it in his berth . yet his 
 pocket - book be not   there : his cigarette - case be go - even his handkerchief . it annoy he - 
 because his pocketbook contain one of Eleanor 's letter . however , he have Eleanoi . . . 

 of course there would be criminal go to the United States . and he wonder what their 
 ideal be . 

 up on the third deck in front of he there appear , at the angle , beneath the light , the figure of 
 Mr Houston . small , his Homburg hat on the back of his head , his hand deep in the pocket of 
 his smooth black overcoat , his little beard point nearly horizontally , he appear to gaze at 
 something far off in the night . 

 and suddenly it occur to Don that it be absurd to say you can not   " place " Americans . this 
 gentle and tolerant old man with the low , trustable voice be Mr Houston of Brooklyn . half the 
 people on the packing - case would know he as come of a good family who have live in 
 Columbia Road for generation . Mr Houston have " retire , " which be not   quite american , but it 
 be condone by the ill - health that show in every line of his figure . it do not   count at all that 
 the Houstons for generation have make their money by manufacturing stovepipe elbow . what 
 matter , even to the people of the packing - case , be that the Houstons have be distinguish 
 for probity , gentleness and benevolence - for character , in short . and be not   that just as much a 
 class distinction as anything else ? would not   it be as cruel not to provide a little privacy for this 
 poor old man with his need for quiet as to force Eleanor to mix with the people who have pick 
 his pocket ? 

 Mr Houston move his head round on his thin neck and utter some inaudible word , and 
 immediately afterwards Eleanor , muffle to the eye in a golf cape , come to stand beside he and 
 to follow the direction of his hand into the night . 

 and whilst in rejoin they Don once more lose himself in the maze of the packing - case , 
 come out in a bewildering way where , beneath a rather dim light , the second - class passenger 
 lie about under undistinguished - look shawl , find the grille draw along the long deck and 
 mount more corridor stair , utterly unable to locate the particular gallery upon which he have 
 see they , Don be wonder in his mind whether actually Eleanor have any more claim to 
 consideration than Mr Houston . he be quite aware that she would not   nowadays get it . modern 
 philosophy would have it that to manufacture stove - pipe elbow be as glorious a thing as to 
 crack they - and be not   mediaeval warfare a matter of crack with a steel bar a stove pipe on 
 another man 's head ? so that consider an individual to be no more than a link in the chain of 
 his family , be not   Mr Houston as precious metal as be Eleanor and her father ? be he or 
 be not   he ? he represent the manufacture of stove pipe , she only their destruction . 

 every modern creed would give the answer that he be well : Mrs Sargent would say so : his 
 fabian friend would say so - even Eleanor might be sufficiently move by the life all round she , 
 or by the enunciation of her friend the Canon to say that Peace hath her victory and the rest of 
 it . but be it true ? be it true in the sense of the Eternal Verities and apart from modern 
 accept ideal ? be not Eleanor , as represent people who have really act in their own 
 person , of a more vital tradition than Mr Houston , whose ancestry have merely take the profit 
 of poor wretch ' toil ? 

 before he could feel himself equipped to do anything he would have to settle in his mind all 
 these mere first principle . he feel it himself , but it be forcibly put to he in these very word 
 by Mr Greville ten minute later . he have find Eleanor hang on to Mr Houston 's gentle 
 support and walk very slowly along the cover deck , from above which the globular lamp 
 send down a soft 



 glow on their figure . Mr Houston seem to have discover a soft , ancient elective affinity for 
 she . with his black - gloved , thin hand he be fend their roll from the side - rail , and he be 
 tell she , as a good joke , how he have take a row - boat full of orange to the lighthouse man of 
 the most northerly lighthouse in the world . he have see from the North Cape the tower on the 
 horizon and he have say : Hullo , he suppose those fellow would like some orange . he have 
 start on his voyage round the world with a truck load of California orange - and he still have 
 some leave in the steamer 's refrigerator . and as he lean back , small , brown - face , 
 white - bearded and gentle - eye , promise she , as he resign she to Don , to send she a few for 
 herself to - morrow morning , he seem to be offer she the homage due from the representative 
 of one fine tradition to another . noble nature , after all , leap to each other across the age as 
 across the water ship salute ship . . . . and Eleanor , catch her arm into Don 's , remark , as 
 she watch the old man 's figure timidly disappear into the narrow saloon doorway , that he 
 be a rather charming old person . he have , it seem , be offer his tribute of California 
 orange to elect nature all over the globe . and what more , Don ask himself , could he demand 
 of his countryman ? 

 but the young people have not   make more than one turn of the quarter - mile deck - they have not 
 indeed dismiss Mr Houston and his adventure from their conversation before they be join 
 by Mr Greville , who , with his lean feature , his frock - coat and soft , wide - awake - like scholar 's 
 hat , resemble , extraordinarily in the light and shade , Uncle Sam himself . as Eleanor , salute 
 he gaily , say : " you could not   have tell he be not   an American . " 

 " ah , wait till you hear he speak , " Don answer gaily too . 

 for , link to Eleanor , who in turn link herself to her father , he seem to feel that they have a 
 solidarity - perhaps it come from their add surefootedness now that the wind be freshen . 
 it be as if they be indeed a family , he and they ; as if he have acquire their point of view . he 
 do not   seem any more to float , lose and alone . the water roar past they , an infinitely little space 
 of white dimly see , an infinitely vast space of solid black ; the wind , catch they , cause they 
 to pause a little at the forward corner and send they hurry a little down the other side , where , 
 at the far angle , a man in a grotesquely - shape ear - cap lean over the rail , gaze at the blurred 
 star . the light and the noise have die away in the inscrutable blackness of the ship 's forward 
 deck . there be nothing any long visible save the black fantastic form of windlass and 
 spar , add with their deep shadow to shadow already black . and as the ship speed on , 
 leave in the mind the impression of something immense , trustworthy and intent on its end , 
 through the night , trackless and enigmatic , it seem to Don - it be an impression rather than 
 any reason evolution - that all these people , far beneath his foot now , have sink literally into 
 still deep depth of unimportance . they do not   matter , they be the raw material , the ore with 
 which one work - without name , without tradition , with nothing but a future that he should 
 have to mould . 

 it be then that Mr Greville deliver himself of his apothegm , after Don have deliver himself 
 of a tranquillised version of his searching of the soul - a version that in relation to his former 
 vividness of feeling be as the packing - case on which he stand be to the depth from which he 
 have look up . 

 " what you ought to do , " Mr Greville say , " be to find yourself . " 

 he have not   get to bother about train of thought , but about what he want . and Mr Greville 
 hazard the further speech : 

 " if a man be determined to inflict himself on his time it be his duty first to consider what he be ! for 
 what be criminal be to wobble once you have begin . a man have to define what his ideal be and 
 then to make for it . " 

 " ah , " Don say , " that be what people have be tell I all my life ... " 

 " study , if you have   get the brain " - Mr Greville cut he short - " or if you have not , and have the 
 temperance , let thing alone . you will do less harm if you let thing alone . but you will do infinitely 
 more if , once you have   begin to meddle , you change your mind ! " he speak without any passion . it 
 be not , assuredly , any business of his to meddle with other people . 

 it be Eleanor who impart the personal note . 

 " whatever you do be so certain to be kind that . - . " 

 " that I be rather to strain after effect that seem cruel ? " Don ask she . " I be to strain for such 
 effect as drown new - bear puppy if they be likely to prove mongrel . " 

 she do not   quite follow his image , and , under cover of her pause for reflection , he get away into 
 the reminiscence he be determine upon . 

 " when I be in Paris , " he say , " I work in an atilier where Whistler use to visit . he make I 
 his monitor . I have to call silence for he and turn round canvas on easel . I think I be rather 
 fine . but when the atelier break up , principally because he would not   visit it regularly , he tell I 
 to come and see he . ` look here , ` he say , ` you think I make you monitor because I think you 
 be promise . you be not . you be a hopeless duffer . but you be pleasant . that be why I choose 
 you ! ` " and when Don , crush but valiant , have ask the master what he mean , the master have 
 turn , wasplike , upon a sketch of his own . ` look there , ` he say , ` that be paint . that be a 
 masterpiece . look at that spade ! but you will never paint . you never will see . you be a poet . go 
 and write little verse . go and moon about . ` and when he be still far press he have 
 bring 
 out : ` you can not   paint a spade because you can not   see the thing that the light play on ; you see the 
 hunger in the entrail of the peasant who be go to dig with it ! you can not   paint hunger ! ` " 

 and whilst Eleanor bring out : " what a rude bear he always be ! " Mr Greville formulate : 

 " do you ever reflect on those word ? " 

 he cut , however , Don 's flow of protest that he never think about anything else short with the 
 word that whilst he always see so many aspect of everything he could not   ever expect to do 
 anything . it be a form of laziness . 

 " and I do not   see , " he finish , " why you can not   be content to go on be lazy . " 

 and whilst Don be protest that the thought of people who talk like Mrs Sargent goad 
 he to desperation , Mr Greville again cut he short . 

 " if all you be go to do in throw your money away be to attempt to change Mrs Sargent and 
 her people , it be sheer waste of effort ; she will be an odious fool whatever you give she for example . 
 you will not   change their heart or give they intellect . that class of intellect be the same in 
 England or America . they will always be the same whether you gather the wealth of your country 
 into two hand or distribute it to the eighty million . " 

 and have deliver this staggerer he unlinke his arm from Eleanor 's and announce that he 
 be go to fetch his book . he have already erect a custom to suit his new environment , that of 
 sit in a deck chair in the evening and study a United States Baedeker for an hour before 
 turn in . he be intent on get for himself the lie of the street in several american town , 
 so that he would never have to ask the way suppose that - which he doubt - the inscription 
 on american street corner be to be find or trust . 

 at the mere mention of this desire Don have spring forward to the deck door and be fetch 

 
 
 
 
 Page image 
 
 PDF 
 
 epub 

 the Baedeker . and Eleanor , up in the darkness with her father , fence the question that she really 
 want to ask by ask another . 

 " Father , " it come , " why do not   you ever like to ask your way ? " 

 he survey she with what , in his affectionate gaze , be almost surprise , as if she ought to have 
 understand . 

 " I be sure , " she continue , " you be always ask people other question . " 

 " my dear , " he say , " if you will observe you will see that I never ask for information as to fact . " 

 " you only collect foolish point of view ? " she say , think of the red - haired lady . 

 " I collect point of view , " he answer , avoid her adjective . " if I want information - fact 
 upon which I be go to act myself - I find out for myself . I should advise you to pursue the 
 same course . " 

 she button the golf cape more closely under her chin as a gust of wind from out of the 
 gleaming and black void take the two of they , whirl her white skirt about his leg . 

 " of course it make one tremendously sure , " she say musingly . " but it leave one a frightfully 
 narrow field . " 

 he be look at the in visible windward of the ship . 

 " what do one want to do a lot of thing for ? " he ask , and descend from his impossible 
 generality to his affection and politeness he ask once more : " Don and you know the 
 Yorkshire say : ` a little farm well till , a little wife well willed , a little purse well fill ` ? - 
 that be all you want ! " 

 " but there be great idea , be not   there ? " she counter he absently - intent on defend Don . 

 " there be not   - great - fact ! " he say slowly . 

 and suddenly she bring out her real question : " what be we go for ? " 

 he go slowly to his deck chair , pick up his dark plaid shawl and drape it round the 
 shoulder of his frock coat . he return to she , and stand before she , although he strongly 
 dislike answer question , he give it her full in the face . 

 " to look after Don ! " 

 " but , dear , " she say , as she begin to digest this statement , " you know I be provide for whatever 
 he do . " 

 her father lean back against the ship 's rail and extract one hand from the rug that shroud 
 his shoulder . 

 " so that " - she pursue her commentary on his word - " you be not   look after my interest . 
 it be he ! " 

 she reflect and then say softly : 

 " he be rather a dear , be not   he ? you do like he ? " 

 her father , lean , drape , back against the rail , still do not   answer she . but at last he say : 

 " probably pickpocket could not   strip he fast enough to leave he naked . but tell I what he be 
 pay Augustus ten thousand a year for ? " 

 this hit Eleanor so closely that she start . 

 " it be really great folly , " she say , " all the same , if Augustus appeal to he ... " 

 " yes ! " her father catch she up . " it be the thing that appeal to he that will play the mischief with 
 everything he attempt . he will never do anything . he be like every manifestation of his country - 
 hysterical . " 

 she say softly : 

 " if you like he so much , dear , be not   you a little hard on he ? " 

 he crook his large forefinger at she from somewhere near his hip . 

 " you know I be not , " he say . " and do not   run away with any false idea , I be not in love with Don . 
 but if he be go to do a certain piece of work I want he to do it cleanly . I should not   have give 
 myself all this trouble and derangement for the sake of what he would call his beaux yeux . " he look 
 at she solemnly , but with a certain trouble in his eye . " it amount to this : he be bind , in the 
 nature of event , to be bring up against I , with all his trouble , for as long as I have   get to live . 
 he will constantly be depress you : you will constantly be come to I . I do not   want to meddle 
 with he or his problem . but I shall have to . " 

 " you mean , " she ask , " that he will be lose his money foolishly and ask you , through I , to 
 retrieve it . " 

 " child , " he say , " you be astonishingly naive still . it be not   the money he will lose that will distress 
 he . he can not   lose money enough . he will find his father 's tie it up too well . it be the silly thing 
 he will do every time anything appeal to he . he will find Institutions and find they breed beastly 
 chap than ever . he will raise co - operative factory and find the hand will dissipate all their profit 
 in shove halfpenny . I would not   mind wager that he will try to purify the municipal politic of 
 some wretched town , and he will find that his money be be use by his reforming , lieutenant to 
 bribe into existence the bad tammany that be ever be know . and I shall be force to pay 
 attention to all these muddle . that be why I be come with you . " 

 " you poor old dad ! " Eleanor say softly , " you think that you will be able to guide he . " 

 he stir uneasily . 

 " no , you do not , " she say quickly , " you think that the companionship of a sensible man may 
 harden his backbone a little at the start . " 

 and she add as swiftly , whilst Don appear a long way away with the Baedeker in his hand : 

 " do not   you think we be both of we agitate ourselves , possibly for nothing ? be not   it just as likely as 
 not he will see so many aspect of misanthropy that he will never make up his mind to do anything at 
 all , ever ? " 

 as Mr Greville draw himself to an erect posture on the deck he utter , almost with tone of 
 misgiving : 

 " you talk as if you be an old married woman . " 

 " well , you make we understand that you want a long engagement , " she answer . " I have   have 
 time to get use to he by now . " 
