this be the saddest STORY I have ever hear . we have know the 
 Ashburnhams for nine season of the town of Nauheim with an extreme 
 intimacy - or , rather , with an acquaintanceship as loose and easy and yet 
 as close as a good glove 's with your hand . my wife and I know Captain and 
 Mrs. Ashburnham as well as it be possible to know anybody , and yet , in 
 another sense , we know nothing at all about they . this be , I believe , a 
 state of thing only possible with english people of whom , till today , 
 when I sit down to puzzle out what I know of this sad affair , I know 
 nothing whatever . six month ago I have never be to England , and , 
 certainly , I have never sound the depth of an english heart . I have know 
 the shallow . 
  I do not   mean to say that we be not acquaint with many english 
 people . live , as we perforce live , in Europe , and be , as we perforce 
 be , leisure Americans , which be as much as to say that we be 
 un - american , we be throw very much into the society of the nice 
 English . Paris , you see , be our home .  somewhere between Nice and Bordighera provide yearly winter quarter 
 for we , and Nauheim always receive we from July to September . you will 
 gather from this statement that one of we have , as the saying be , a " heart , " 
 and , from the statement that my wife be dead , that she be the sufferer . 
  Captain Ashburnham also have a heart . but whereas a yearly month or 
 so at Nauheim tune he up to exactly the right pitch for the rest of the 
 twelvemonth , the two month or so be only just enough to keep poor 
 florence alive from year to year . the reason for his heart be , 
 approximately , polo , or too much hard sportsmanship in his youth . the 
 reason for poor Florence 's break year be a storm at sea upon our first 
 crossing to Europe , and the immediate reason for our imprisonment in 
 that continent be doctor ' order . they say that even the short Channel 
 crossing might well kill the poor thing . 
  when we all first meet , Captain Ashburnham , home on sick leave from 
 an India to which he be never to return , be thirty - three ; Mrs. 
 Ashburnham - Leonora - be thirty - one . I be thirty - six and poor Florence 
 thirty . thus to - day Florence would have be thirty - nine and Captain 
 Ashburnham forty - two ; whereas I be forty - five and Leonora forty . you 
 will perceive , therefore , that our friendship have be a young - middle - aged 
 affair , since we be all of we of quite quiet disposition , the 
 Ashburnhams be more particularly what in England it be the custom to 
 call " quite good people . " 
 they be descend , as you will probably expect ,  from the Ashburnham who accompany Charles I to the scaffold , and , as 
 you must also expect with this class of english people , you would never 
 have notice it . Mrs. Ashburnham be a Powys ; Florence be a Hurlbird of 
 Stamford , Connecticut , where , as you know , they be more old - fashioned 
 than even the inhabitant of Cranford , England , could have be . I myself 
 be a Dowell of Philadelphia , Pa. , where , it be historically true , there be 
 more old english family than you would find in any six english county 
 take together . I carry about with I , indeed - as if it be the only thing 
 that invisibly anchor I to any spot upon the globe - the title deed of 
 my farm , which once cover several block between Chestnut and Walnut 
 Streets . these title deed be of wampum , the grant of an indian chief to 
 the first Dowell , who leave Farnham in Surrey in company with William 
 Penn . Florence 's people , as be so often the case with the inhabitant of 
 Connecticut , come from the neighbourhood of Fordingbridge , where the 
 Ashburnhams ' place be . from there , at this moment , I be actually write . 
  you may well ask why I write . and yet my reason be quite many . 
 for it be not unusual in human being who have witness the sack of a 
 city or the fall to piece of a people to desire to set down what they 
 have witness for the benefit of unknown heir or of generation 
 infinitely remote ; or , if you please , just to get the sight out of their 
 head . 
  someone have say that the death of a mouse from cancer be the whole 
 sack of Rome by the Goths , and I swear to you that the breaking up of our 
 little  four - square coterie be such another unthinkable event . suppose that you 
 should come upon we sit together at one of the little table in front of 
 the club house , let we say , at Homburg , take tea of an afternoon and 
 watch the miniature golf , you would have say that , as human affair 
 go , we be an extraordinarily safe castle . we be , if you will , one of 
 those tall ship with the white sail upon a blue sea , one of those thing 
 that seem the proud and the safe of all the beautiful and safe thing 
 that God have permit the mind of man to frame . where well could one 
 take refuge ? where well ? 
  permanence ? stability ! I can not   believe it be go . I can not   believe that 
 that long , tranquil life , which be just step a minuet , vanish in four 
 crashing day at the end of nine year and six week . upon my word , yes , 
 our intimacy be like a minuet , simply because on every possible occasion 
 and in every possible circumstance we know where to go , where to sit , 
 which table we unanimously should choose ; and we could rise and go , all 
 four together , without a signal from any one of we , always to the music of 
 the Kur orchestra , always in the temperate sunshine , or , if it rain , in 
 discreet shelter . no , indeed , it can not   be go . you can not   kill a minuet de la 
 cour . you may shut up the music - book , close the harpsichord ; in the 
 cupboard and press the rat may destroy the white satin favour . the 
 mob may sack Versailles ; the Trianon may fall , but surely the minuet - the 
 minuet itself be dance itself away into the furth star , even as our 
 minuet of the Hessian bathing place must be step itself still . be not  
 there  any heaven where old beautiful dance , old beautiful intimacy prolong 
 themselves ? be not   there any Nirvana pervade by the faint thrilling of 
 instrument that have fall into the dust of wormwood but that yet have 
 frail , tremulous , and everlaste soul ? 
  no , by God , it be false ! it be not   a minuet that we step ; it be a 
 prison - a prison full of scream hysteric , tie down so that they might 
 not outsound the rolling of our carriage wheel as we go along the 
 shade avenue of the Taunus Wald . 
  and yet I swear by the sacred name of my creator that it be true . it 
 be true sunshine ; the true music ; the true plash of the fountain from 
 the mouth of stone dolphin . for , if for I we be four people with the 
 same taste , with the same desire , acting - or , no , not act - sit 
 here and there unanimously , be not   that the truth ? if for nine year I have 
 possess a goodly apple that be rotten at the core and discover its 
 rottenness only in nine year and six month less four day , be not   it true to 
 say that for nine year I possess a goodly apple ? so it may well be with 
 Edward Ashburnham , with Leonora his wife , and with poor dear Florence . 
 and , if you come to think of it , be not   it a little odd that the physical 
 rottenness of at least two pillar of our four - square house never 
 present itself to my mind as a menace to its security ? it do not   so 
 present itself now though the two of they be actually dead . I do not   know . 
 . . 
  I know nothing - nothing in the world - of the heart of man . I only 
 know that I be alone - horribly alone . no hearthstone will ever again 
 witness , for I ,  friendly intercourse . no smoking - room will ever be other than people 
 with incalculable simulacrum amidst smoke wreath . yet , in the name of 
 God , what should I know if I do not   know the life of the hearth and of the 
 smoking - room , since my whole life have be pass in those place ? the 
 warm hearthside ! - well , there be Florence : I believe that for the twelve 
 year her life last , after the storm that seem irretrievably to have 
 weaken her heart - I do not   believe that for one minute she be out of my 
 sight , except when she be safely tuck up in bed and I should be 
 downstairs , talk to some good fellow or other in some lounge or 
 smoking - room or take my final turn with a cigar before go to bed . I 
 do not , you understand , blame Florence . but how can she have know what 
 she know ? how could she have get to know it ? to know it so fully . 
 heaven ! there do not   seem to have be the actual time . it must have 
 be when I be take my bath , and my swedish exercise , be 
 manicure . lead the life I do , of the sedulous , strained nurse , I have to 
 do something to keep myself fit . it must have be then ! yet even that 
 can not   have be enough time to get the tremendously long conversation 
 full of worldly wisdom that Leonora have report to I since their death . 
 and be it possible to imagine that during our prescribe walk in Nauheim 
 and the neighbourhood she find time to carry on the protract 
 negotiation which she do carry on between Edward Ashburnham and his 
 wife ? and be not   it incredible that during all that time Edward and Leonora 
 never speak a word to each other in private ? what be one to think of 
 humanity ?   for I swear to you that they be the model couple . he be as 
 devote as it be possible to be without appear fatuous . so well set 
 up , with such honest blue eye , such a touch of stupidity , such a warm 
 good - heartedness ! and she - so tall , so splendid in the saddle , so fair ! yes , 
 Leonora be extraordinarily fair and so extraordinarily the real thing that 
 she seem too good to be true . you do not , I mean , as a rule , get it all so 
 superlatively together . to be the county family , to look the county family , 
 to be so appropriately and perfectly wealthy ; to be so perfect in 
 manner - even just to the save touch of insolence that seem to be 
 necessary . to have all that and to be all that ! no , it be too good to be 
 true . and yet , only this afternoon , talk over the whole matter , she say 
 to I : " once I try to have a lover but I be so sick at the heart , so 
 utterly wear out , that I have to send he away . " that strike I as the most 
 amazing thing I have ever hear . she say : " I be actually in a man 's arm . 
 such a nice chap ! such a dear fellow ! and I be say to myself , fiercely , 
 hiss it between my tooth , as they say in novel - and really clench 
 they together - I be say to myself : ` now , I be in for it and I will really 
 have a good time for once in my life - for once in my life ! ` it be in the 
 dark , in a carriage , come back from a hunt ball . eleven mile we have to 
 drive ! and then suddenly the bitterness of the endless poverty , of the 
 endless acting - it fall on I like a blight , it spoil everything . yes , I have 
 to realize that I have be spoil even for the good time when it come . and I 
 burst out cry and I cry and I cry for the whole eleven mile . just 
 imagine I cry ! and just imagine I make a fool of  the poor dear chap like that . it certainly be not   play the game , be it , 
 now ? " 
  I do not   know ; I do not   know ; be that last remark of hers the remark 
 of a harlot , or be it what every decent woman , county family or not county 
 family , think at the bottom of her heart ? or think all the time , for the 
 matter of that ? who know ? 
  yet , if one do not   know that at this hour and day , at this pitch of 
 civilization to which we have attain , after all the preaching of all the 
 moralist , and all the teaching of all the mother to all the daughter in 
 saeculum saeculorum . . . but perhaps that be what all mother teach all 
 daughter , not with lip but with the eye , or with heart whisper to 
 heart . and if one do not   know as much as that about the first thing in the 
 world , what do one know and why be one here ? 
  I ask Mrs. Ashburnham whether she have tell Florence that and 
 what Florence have say , and she answer : " Florence do not   offer any 
 comment at all . what could she say ? there be not   anything to be say . 
 with the grind poverty we have to put up with to keep up appearance , 
 and the way the poverty come about - you know what I mean - any woman 
 would have be justify in take a lover and present too . Florence once 
 say about a very similar position - she be a little too well - breed , too 
 American , to talk about mine - that it be a case of perfectly open riding 
 and the woman could just act on the spur of the moment . she say it in 
 American of course , but that be the sense of it . I think her actual word 
 be : ` that it be up to she to take it or leave it .... ` "   I do not   want you to think that I be write Teddy Ashburnham down a 
 brute . I do not   believe he be . God know , perhaps all man be like that . for , 
 as I have   say , what do I know even of the smoking - room ? fellow come in 
 and tell the most extraordinarily gross story - so gross that they will 
 positively give you a pain . and yet they would be offend if you suggest that 
 they be not   the sort of person you could trust your wife alone with . and 
 very likely they would be quite properly offend - that be , if you can trust 
 anybody alone with anybody . but that sort of fellow obviously take more 
 delight in listen to or in tell gross story - more delight than in 
 anything else in the world . they will hunt languidly and dress languidly and 
 dine languidly and work without enthusiasm and find it a bore to carry on 
 three minute ' conversation about anything whatever and yet , when the 
 other sort of conversation begin , they will laugh and wake up and throw 
 themselves about in their chair . then , if they so delight in the narration , 
 how be it possible that they can be offend - and properly offend - at the 
 suggestion that they might make attempt upon your wife 's honour ? or 
 again : Edward Ashburnham be the cleanest - looking sort of chap ; an 
 excellent magistrate , a first - rate soldier , one of the good landlord , so 
 they say , in Hampshire , England . to the poor and to hopeless drunkard , as 
 I myself have witness , he be like a painstaking guardian . and he never 
 more than once or twice in all the nine year of my know he tell a 
 story that could not   have go into the column of the Field . he do not   even 
 like hear they ; he would fidget  and get up and go out to buy a cigar or something of that sort . you would 
 have say that he be just exactly the sort of chap that you could have 
 trust your wife with . and I trust mine - and it be madness . 
  and yet again you have I . if poor Edward be dangerous because of 
 the chastity of his expression - and they say that that be always the 
 hall - mark of a libertine - what about myself ? for I solemnly avow that not only 
 have I never so much as hint at an impropriety in my conversation in the 
 whole of my day ; and more than that , I will vouch for the cleanness of my 
 thought and the absolute chastity of my life . at what , then , do it all 
 work out ? be the whole thing a folly and a mockery ? be I no well than a 
 eunuch or be the proper man - the man with the right to existence - a rag 
 stallion forever neigh after his neighbour 's womenkind ? 
  I do not   know . and there be nothing to guide we . and if everything be so 
 nebulous about a matter so elementary as the moral of sex , what be there 
 to guide we in the more subtle morality of all other personal contact , 
 association , and activity ? or be we mean to act on impulse alone ? it 
 be all a darkness . 
 
 I don't know how it be good to put this thing down - whether it would be 
 well to try and tell the story from the beginning , as if it be a story ; or 
 whether to tell it from this distance of time , as it reach I from the 
 lip of Leonora or from those of Edward himself .   so I shall just imagine myself for a fortnight or so at one side of the 
 fireplace of a country cottage , with a sympathetic soul opposite I . and I 
 shall go on talk , in a low voice while the sea sound in the distance and 
 overhead the great black flood of wind polish the bright star . from 
 time to time we shall get up and go to the door and look out at the great 
 moon and say : " why , it be nearly as bright as in Provence ! " and then we 
 shall come back to the fireside , with just the touch of a sigh because we 
 be not in that Provence where even the sad story be gay . consider 
 the lamentable history of Peire Vidal . two year ago Florence and I 
 motor from Biarritz to Las Tours , which be in the Black Mountains . in the 
 middle of a tortuous valley there rise up an immense pinnacle and on the 
 pinnacle be four castle - Las Tours , the Towers . and the immense mistral 
 blow down that valley which be the way from France into Provence so 
 that the silver - grey olive leaf appear like hair fly in the wind , and 
 the tuft of rosemary creep into the iron rock that they might not be tear 
 up by the root . 
  it be , of course , poor dear Florence who want to go to Las Tours . 
 you be to imagine that , however much her bright personality come from 
 Stamford , Connecticut , she be yet a graduate of Vassar . I never could 
 imagine how she do it - the queer , chattery person that she be . with the 
 faraway look in her eye - which be not , however , in the least romantic - I 
 mean that she do not   look as if she be see poetic dream , or look 
 through you , for she hardly ever do look at you ! - hold up one hand as if 
 she wish to silence any objection - or any comment for the matter of  that - she would talk . she would talk about William the Silent , about 
 gustave the loquacious , about Paris frock , about how the poor dress in 
 1337 , about Fantin Latour , about the Paris - Lyons - Mediterranee 
 train - de - luxe , about whether it would be worth while to get off at Tarascon and go 
 across the windswept suspension - bridge over the Rhone to take another 
 look at beaucaire . 
  we never do take another look at Beaucaire , of course - beautiful 
 Beaucaire , with the high , triangular white tower , that look as thin as a 
 needle and as tall as the Flatiron , between Fifth and Broadway - Beaucaire 
 with the grey wall on the top of the pinnacle surround an acre and a 
 half of blue iris , beneath the tallness of the stone pine . what a 
 beautiful thing the stone pine be ! . . . 
  no , we never do go back anywhere . not to Heidelberg , not to 
 Hamelin , not to Verona , not to Mont Majour - not so much as to Carcassonne 
 itself . we talk of it , of course , but I guess Florence get all she want 
 out of one look at a place . she have the seeing eye . 
  I have not , unfortunately , so that the world be full of place to which 
 I want to return - town with the blind white sun upon they ; stone 
 pine against the blue of the sky ; comer of gable , all carve and paint 
 with stag and scarlet flower and crow - step gable with the little 
 saint at the top ; and grey and pink palazzi and walled town a mile or so 
 back from the sea , on the Mediterranean , between Leghorn and Naples . not 
 one of they do we see more than  once , so that the whole world for I be like spot of colour in an immense 
 canvas . perhaps if it be not   so I should have something to catch hold of 
 now . 
  be all this digression or be not   it digression ? again I do not   know . you , 
 the listener , sit opposite I . but you be so silent . you do not   tell I 
 anything . I be , at any rate , try to get you to see what sort of life it 
 be I lead with Florence and what Florence be like . well , she be bright ; 
 and she dance . she seem to dance over the floor of castle and over 
 sea and over and over the salon of modiste and over the plage of the 
 Riviera - like a gay tremulous beam , reflect from water upon a ceiling . 
 and my function in life be to keep that bright thing in existence . and it 
 be almost as difficult as try to catch with your hand that dance 
 reflection . and the task last for year . 
  Florence 's aunt use to say that I must be the lazy man in 
 Philadelphia . they have never be to Philadelphia and they have the New 
 England conscience . you see , the first thing they say to I when I call 
 in on Florence in the little ancient , colonial , wooden house beneath the 
 high , thin - leave elm - the first question they ask I be not how I do 
 but what do I do . and I do nothing . I suppose I ought to have do 
 something , but I do not   see any call to do it . why do one do thing ? I just 
 drift in and want Florence . first I have drift in on Florence at a 
 brown tea , or something of the sort in Fourteenth Street , which be 
 then still residential . I do not   know why I have go to New York ; I do not  
 know why I have go to the tea . I do not   see why Florence should have go  to that sort of spelling bee . it be not   the place at which , even then , you 
 expect to find a Poughkeepsie graduate . I guess Florence want to raise 
 the culture of the Stuyvesant crowd and do it as she might have go in 
 slum . intellectual slumming , that be what it be . she always 
 want to leave the world a little more elevated than she find it . poor 
 dear thing , I have hear her lecture Teddy Ashburnham by the hour on the 
 difference between a Franz Hats and a Woovermans and why the 
 Pre - mycenaic statue be cubical with knob on the top . I wonder what he 
 make of it . perhaps he be thankful . 
  I know I be . for do you understand my whole attention , my whole 
 endeavour be to keep poor dear Florence on to topic like the find at 
 Gnossos and the mental spirituality of Walter Pater . I have to keep she at 
 it , you understand , or she might die . for I be solemnly informed that if 
 she become excited over anything or if her emotion be really stir 
 her little heart might cease to beat . for twelve year I have to watch every 
 word that any person utter in any conversation and I have to head it off 
 what the english call " thing " - off love , poverty , crime , religion , and the 
 rest of it . yes , the first doctor that we have when she be carry off the 
 ship at Havre assure I that this must be do . good God , be all these 
 fellow monstrous idiot , or be there a freemasonry between all of they 
 from end to end of the earth ? . . . that be what make I think of that 
 fellow Peire Vidal . 
  because , of course , his story be culture and I have to head she towards 
 culture and at the same time it be so  funny and she have not   get to laugh , and it be so full of love and she be not   to 
 think of love . do you know the story ? Las Tours of the Four Castles have for 
 chatelaine Blanche somebody - or - other who be call as a term of 
 commendation La Louve - the She - Wolf . and Peire Vidal the Troubadour 
 pay his court to La Louve . and she would not   have anything to do with he . 
 so , out of compliment to she - the thing people do when they be in love ! - 
 he dress himself up in wolfskin and go up into the Black Mountains . 
 and the shepherd of the Montagne Noire and their dog mistook he for a 
 wolf and he be tear with the fang and beat with club . so they carry 
 he back to Las Tours , and La Louve be not   at all impressed . they polish 
 he up and her husband remonstrate seriously with she . vidal be you 
 see , a great poet and it be not proper to treat a great poet with 
 indifference .. 
  so Peire Vidal declare himself Emperor of Jerusalem or somewhere 
 and the husband have to kneel down and kiss his foot though La Louve 
 would not . and Peire set sail in a rowing boat with four companion to 
 redeem the Holy Sepulchre . and they strike on a rock somewhere , and , at 
 great expense , the husband have to fit out an expedition to fetch he back . 
 and Peire Vidal fall all over the lady 's bed while the husband , who be a 
 most ferocious warrior , remonstrate some more about the courtesy that 
 be due to great poet . but I suppose La Louve be the more ferocious of the 
 two . anyhow , that be all that come of it . be not   that a story ? 
  you have not   an idea of the queer old - fashionedness of Florence 's 
 aunt - the Misses Hurlbird - nor yet of  her uncle . an extraordinarily lovable man , that Uncle John . thin , gentle , 
 and with a " heart " that make his life very much what Florence 's afterwards 
 become . he do not   reside at Stamford ; his home be in Waterbury , where 
 the watch come from . he have a factory there which , in our queer 
 american way , would change its function almost from year to year . for 
 nine month or so it would manufacture button out of bone . then it would 
 suddenly produce brass button for coachman 's livery . then it would take 
 a turn at embossed tin lid for candy box . the fact be that the poor old 
 gentleman , with his weak and flutter heart , do not   want his factory to 
 manufacture anything at all . he want to retire . and he do retire when he 
 be seventy . but he be so worried at have all the street boy in the 
 town point after he and exclaim : " there go the lazy man in 
 Waterbury ! " that he try take a tour round the world . and Florence and a 
 young man call Jimmy go with he . it appear from what Florence 
 tell I that Jimmy 's function with Mr. Hurlbird be to avoid exciting 
 topic for he . he have to keep he , for instance , out of political 
 discussion . for the poor old man be a violent Democrat in day when you 
 might travel the world over without find anything but a Republican . 
 anyhow , they go round the world . 
  I think an anecdote be about the good way to give you an idea of what 
 the old gentleman be like . for it be perhaps important that you should 
 know what the old gentleman be ; he have a great deal of influence in 
 form the character of my poor dear wife . 
 just before they set out from San Francisco for the  South Seas old Mr. Hurlbird say he must take something with he to make 
 little present to people he meet on the voyage . and it strike he that the 
 thing to take for that purpose be orange - because California be the 
 orange country - and comfortable fold chair . so he buy I do not   know 
 how many case of orange - the great cool California orange , and half a 
 dozen fold chair in a special case that he always keep in his cabin . 
 there must have be half a cargo of fruit . 
  for , to every person on board the several steamer that they 
 employ , to every person with whom he have so much as a nodding 
 acquaintance , he give an orange every morning . and they last he right 
 round the girdle of this mighty globe of our . when they be at North 
 Cape , even , he see on the horizon , poor dear thin man that he be , a 
 lighthouse . " hello , " say he to himself , " these fellow must be very lonely . 
 let us take they some orange . " so he have a boatload of his fruit out and 
 have himself row to the lighthouse on the horizon . the fold chair he 
 lend to any lady that he come across and like or who seem tired and 
 invalidish on the ship . and so , guard against his heart and have his 
 niece with he , he go round the world .... 
  he be not   obtrusive about his heart . you would not   have know he have 
 one . he only leave it to the physical laboratory at Waterbury for the benefit 
 of science , since he consider it to be quite an extraordinary kind of 
 heart . and the joke of the matter be that when , at the age of eighty - four , 
 just five day before poor Florence , he die of bronchitis , there be find 
 to be  absolutely nothing the matter with that organ . it have certainly jump or 
 squeak or something just sufficiently to take in the doctor , but it 
 appear that that be because of an odd formation of the lung . I do not  
 much understand about these matter . 
  I inherit his money because Florence die five day after he . I 
 wish I have not . it be a great worry . I have to go out to Waterbury just after 
 Florence 's death because the poor dear old fellow have leave a good many 
 charitable bequest and I have to appoint trustee . I do not   like the idea of 
 their not be properly handle . 
  yes , it be a great worry . and just as I have get thing roughly 
 settle I receive the extraordinary cable from Ashburnham beg I to 
 come back and have a talk with he . and immediately afterwards come one 
 from Leonora say : " yes , please do come . you could be so helpful . " it be 
 as if he have send the cable without consult she and have afterwards tell 
 she . indeed , that be pretty much what have happen , except that he have 
 tell the girl and the girl tell the wife . I arrive , however , too late to be of 
 any good if I could have be of any good . and then I have my first taste of 
 english life . it be amazing . it be overwhelming . I never shall forget the 
 polished cob that Edward , beside I , drive ; the animal 's action , its 
 highstepping , its skin that be like satin . and the peace ! and the red 
 cheek ! and the beautiful , beautiful old house . 
  just near Branshaw Teleragh it be and we descend on it from the 
 high , clear , windswept waste of the New Forest . I tell you it be amazing 
 to arrive  there from Waterbury . and it come into my head - for Teddy Ashburnham , 
 you remember , have cable to I to " come and have a talk " with he - that 
 it be unbelievable that anything essentially calamitous could happen to 
 that place and those people . I tell you it be the very spirit of peace . and 
 Leonora , beautiful and smile , with her coil of yellow hair , stand on the 
 top doorstep , with a butler and footman and a maid or so behind she . and 
 she just say : " so glad you have   come , " as if I would run down to lunch from a town 
 ten mile away , instead of have come half the world over at the call of 
 two urgent telegram . 
 the girl be out with the hound , I think . 
  and that poor devil beside I be in an agony . absolute , hopeless , 
 dumb agony such as pass the mind of man to imagine . 
 
 it be a very hot summer , in August 1904 ; and Florence have already 
 be take the bath for a month . I do not   know how it feel to be a patient 
 at one of those place . I never be a patient anywhere . I dare say the 
 patient get a home feeling and some sort of anchorage in the spot . they 
 seem to like the bath attendant , with their cheerful face , their air of 
 authority , their white linen . but , for myself , to be at Nauheim give I a 
 sense - what shall I say ? - a sense almost of nakedness - the nakedness 
 that one feel on the sea - shore or in any great open space . I have no 
 attachment , no  accumulation . in one 's own home it be as if little , innate sympathy draw 
 one to particular chair that seem to enfold one in an embrace , or take one 
 along particular street that seem friendly when other may be hostile . 
 and , believe I , that feeling be a very important part of life . I know it 
 well , that have be for so long a wanderer upon the face of public 
 resort . and one be too polished up . Heaven know I be never an untidy 
 man . but the feeling that I have when , whilst poor Florence be take she 
 morning bath , I stand upon the carefully sweep step of the Englischer Hof , 
 look at the carefully arrange tree in tub upon the carefully arrange 
 gravel whilst carefully arrange people walk past in carefully 
 calculate gaiety , at the carefully calculate hour , the tall tree of the 
 public garden , go up to the right ; the reddish stone of the bath - or 
 be they white half - timber chalet ? upon my word I have forget , I 
 who be there so often . that will give you the measure of how much I be 
 in the landscape . I could find my way blindfold to the hot room , to the 
 douche room , to the fountain in the centre of the quadrangle where the 
 rusty water gush out . yes , I could find my way blindfold . I know the 
 exact distance . from the Hotel Regina you take one hundred and 
 eighty - seven pace , then , turn sharp , lefthanded , four hundred and twenty take 
 you straight down to the fountain . from the Englischer Hof , start on the 
 sidewalk , it be ninety - seven pace and the same four hundred and 
 twenty , but turn righthande this time . 
 and now you understand that , have nothing in  the world to do - but nothing whatever ! - I fall into the habit of count 
 my footstep . I would walk with Florence to the bath . and , of course , she 
 entertain I with her conversation . it be , as I have say , wonderful 
 what she could make conversation out of . she walk very lightly , and her 
 hair be very nicely do , and she dress beautifully and very 
 expensively . of course she have money of her own , but I should not   have 
 minded . and yet you know I can not   remember a single one of her dress . or 
 I can remember just one , a very simple one of blue figure silk - a chinese 
 pattern - very full in the skirt and broaden out over the shoulder . and 
 her hair be copper - colour , and the heel of her shoe be exceedingly 
 high , so that she trip upon the point of her toe . and when she come to 
 the door of the bathing place , and when it open to receive she , she would 
 look back at I with a little coquettish smile , so that her cheek appear 
 to be caress her shoulder . 
  I seem to remember that , with that dress , she wear an immensely 
 broad Leghorn hat - like the Chapeau de Paille of Rubens , only very white . 
 the hat would be tie with a lightly knot scarf of the same stuff as her 
 dress . she know how to give value to her blue eye . and round her neck 
 would be some simple pink , coral bead . and her complexion have a perfect 
 clearness , a perfect smoothness . . . 
  yes , that be how I most exactly remember she , in that dress , in that 
 hat , look over her shoulder at I so that the eye flash very 
 blue - dark pebble blue ....   and , what the devil ! for whose benefit do she do it ? for that of the 
 bath attendant ? of the passer - by ? I do not   know . anyhow , it can not   have 
 be for I , for never , in all the year of her life , never on any possible 
 occasion , or in any other place , do she so smile to I , mockingly , 
 invitingly . ah , she be a riddle ; but then , all other woman be riddle . and 
 it occur to I that some way back I begin a sentence that I have never 
 finish .... it be about the feeling that I have when I stand on the step of 
 my hotel every morning before start out to fetch Florence back from 
 the bath . Natty , precise , well - brush , conscious of be rather small 
 amongst the long English , the lank Americans , the rotund Germans , and the 
 obese russian Jewesses , I should stand there , tap a cigarette on the 
 outside of my case , survey for a moment the world in the sunlight . but 
 a day be to come when I be never to do it again alone . you can imagine , 
 therefore , what the coming of the Ashburnhams mean for I . 
  I have forget the aspect of many thing but I shall never forget 
 the aspect of the dining - room of the Hotel Excelsior on that evening - and 
 on so many other evening . whole castle have vanish from my memory , 
 whole city that I have never visit again , but that white room , 
 festoon with papi - mache fruit and flower ; the tall window ; the 
 many table ; the black screen round the door with three golden crane 
 fly upward on each panel ; the palm tree in the centre of the room ; the 
 swish of the waiter 's foot ; the cold expensive elegance ; the mien of the 
 diner as they come in every evening - their air of earnestness as if they  must go through a meal prescribe by the Kur authority and their air of 
 sobriety as if they must seek not by any mean to enjoy their meal - those 
 thing I shall not easily forget . and then , one evening , in the twilight , I 
 see Edward Ashburnham lounge round the screen into the room . the head 
 waiter , a man with a face all grey - in what subterranean nook or corner 
 do people cultivate those absolutely grey complexion ? - go with the 
 timorous patronage of these creature towards he and hold out a grey ear 
 to be whisper into . it be generally a disagreeable ordeal for 
 newcomer but Edward Ashburnham bear it like an Englishman and a 
 gentleman . I could see his lip form a word of three syllable - remember I 
 have nothing in the world to do but to notice these nicety - and 
 immediately I know that he must be Edward Ashburnham , Captain , 
 Fourteenth Hussars , of Branshaw House , Branshaw Teleragh . I know it 
 because every evening just before dinner , whilst I wait in the hall , I 
 use , by courtesy of Monsieur Schontz , the proprietor , to inspect the little 
 police report that each guest be expect to sign upon take a room . 
  the head waiter pilot he immediately to a vacant table , three 
 away from my own - the table that the Grenfalls of Falls River , N.J. , have 
 just vacate . it strike I that that be not a very nice table for the 
 newcomer , since the sunlight , low though it be , shine straight down 
 upon it , and the same idea seem to come at the same moment into 
 Captain Ashburnham 's head . his face hitherto have , in the wonderful english 
 fashion , express nothing whatever . nothing . there  be in it neither joy nor despair ; neither hope nor fear ; neither boredom 
 nor satisfaction . he seem to perceive no soul in that crowded room ; he 
 might have be walk in a jungle . I never come across such a perfect 
 expression before and I never shall again . it be insolence and not 
 insolence ; it be modesty and not modesty . his hair be fair , 
 extraordinarily , order in a wave , run from the left temple to the 
 right ; his face be a light brick red , perfectly uniform in tint up to the 
 root of the hair itself ; his yellow moustache be as stiff as a toothbrush 
 and I verily believe that he have his black smoking jacket thicken a little 
 over the shoulder - blade so as to give himself the air of the slight 
 possible stoop . it would be like he to do that ; that be the sort of thing 
 he think about . martingale , Chiffney bit , boot ; where you get the good 
 soap , the good brandy , the name of the chap who ride a plater down the 
 Khyber cliff ; the spread power of number - three shot before a charge 
 of number - four powder . . . by heaven , I hardly ever hear he talk of 
 anything else . not in all the year that I know he do I hear he talk of 
 anything but these subject . oh , yes , once he tell I that I could buy my 
 special shade of blue tie cheap from a firm in Burlington Arcade than 
 from my own people in New York . and I have buy my tie from that firm 
 ever since . otherwise I should not remember the name of the Burlington 
 Arcade . I wonder what it look like . I have never see it . I imagine it to be 
 two immense row of pillar , like those of the Forum at Rome , with 
 Edward Ashburnham stride down between they . but it probably  be not   - the least like that . once also he advise I to buy Caledonian 
 Deferred , since they be due to rise . and I do buy they and they do rise . 
 but of how he get the knowledge I have not   the faint idea . it seem to 
 drop out of the blue sky . 
  and that be absolutely all that I know of he until a month 
 ago - that and the profusion of his case , all of pigskin and stamp with 
 his initial , E. F. a. there be guncase , and collar case , and shirt case , 
 and letter case , and case each contain four bottle of medicine ; and 
 hat case and helmet case . it must have need a whole herd of the 
 Gadarene swine to make up his outfit . and if I ever penetrate into his 
 private room , it would be to see he stand with his coat and waistcoat 
 off and the immensely long line of his perfectly elegant trouser from 
 waist to boot heel . and he would have a slightly reflective air and he 
 would be just open one kind of case and just close another . 
  good God , what do they all see in he ? - for I swear that be all 
 there be of he , inside and out ; though they say he be a good soldier . 
 yet Leonora adore he with a passion that be like an agony , and hat 
 he with an agony that be as bitter as the sea . how could he rouse 
 anything like a sentiment , in anybody ? 
  what do he even talk to they about - when they be under four 
 eye ? - ah , well , suddenly , as if by a flash of inspiration , I know . for all 
 good soldier be sentimentalist - all good soldier of that type . their 
 profession , for one thing , be full of the big word - " courage , " " loyalty , " 
 " honor , " " constancy . " and I  have give a wrong impression of Edward Ashburnham if I have make you 
 think that literally never in the course of our nine year of intimacy do he 
 discuss what he would have call " the graver thing . " even before his 
 final outburst to I , at time , very late at night , say , he have blurt out 
 something that give an insight into the sentimental view of the cosmo 
 that be his . he would say how much the society of a good woman could do 
 towards redeem you , and he would say that constancy be the fine of 
 the virtue . he say it very stiffly , of course , but still as if the statement 
 admit of no doubt . 
  Constancy ! be not   that the queer think ? and yet I must add that poor 
 dear Edward be a great reader - he would pass hour lose in novel of a 
 sentimental type - novel in which typewriter girl marry marquis and 
 governess earl . and in his book , as a rule , the course of true love run 
 as smooth as buttered honey . and he be fond of poetry , of a certain type - 
 and he could even read a perfectly sad love story . I have see his eye 
 fill with tear at reading of a hopeless parting . and he love , with a 
 sentimental yearning , all child , puppy , and the feeble generally .... 
  so , you see , he would have plenty to gurgle about to a woman - with 
 that and his sound common sense about martingale and his - still 
 sentimental - experience as a county magistrate ; and with his intense , 
 optimistic belief that the woman he be make love to at the moment 
 be the one he be destine , at last , to be eternally constant to .... well , I 
 fancy he  could put up a pretty good deal of talk when there be no man around to 
 make he feel shy . and I be quite astonish , during his final burst - out 
 to I - at the very end of thing , when the poor girl be on her way to that 
 fatal Brindisi and he be try to persuade himself and I that he have 
 never really care for she - I be quite astonished to observe how literary 
 and how just his expression be . he talk like quite a good book - a 
 book not in the least cheaply sentimental . you see , I suppose he regard 
 I not so much as a man . I have to be regard as a woman or a solicitor . 
 anyhow , it burst out of he on that horrible night . and then , next morning , 
 he take I over to the Assizes and I see how , in a perfectly calm and 
 business - like way he set to work to secure a verdict of not guilty for a 
 poor girl , the daughter of one of his tenant who have be accuse of 
 murder her baby . he spend two hundred pound on her defence .... well , 
 that be Edward Ashburnham . 
  I have forget about his eye . they be as blue as the side of a 
 certain type of box of match . when you look at they carefully you see 
 that they be perfectly honest , perfectly straightforward , perfectly , 
 perfectly stupid . but the brick pink of his complexion , run perfectly 
 level to the brick pink of his inner eyelid , give they a curious , sinister 
 expression - like a mosaic of blue porcelain set in pink china . and that 
 chap , come into a room , snap up the gaze of every woman in it , as 
 dexterously as a conjuror pocket billiard ball . it be most amazing . you 
 know the man on the stage who throw up sixteen ball at once and  they all drop into pocket all over his person , on his shoulder , on his 
 heel , on the inner side of his sleeve ; and he stand perfectly still and 
 do nothing . well , it be like that . he have rather a rough , hoarse voice . 
  and there he be , stand by the table . I be look at he , with 
 my back to the screen . and , suddenly , I see two distinct expression 
 flicker across his immobile eye . how the deuce do they do it , those 
 unflinche blue eye with the direct gaze ? for the eye themselves never 
 move , gaze over my shoulder towards the screen . and the gaze be 
 perfectly level and perfectly direct and perfectly unchanging . I suppose 
 that the lid really must have round themselves a little and perhaps the 
 lip move a little too , as if he should be say : " there you be , my dear . " 
 at any rate , the expression be that of pride , of satisfaction , of the 
 possessor . I see he once afterwards , for a moment , gaze upon the sunny 
 field of Branshaw and say : " all this be my land ! " 
  and then again the gaze be perhaps more direct , hard if 
 possible - hardy too . it be a measure look ; a challenging look . once when 
 we be at Wiesbaden watch he play in a polo match against the 
 Bonner Hussaren I see the same look come into his eye , balance the 
 possibility , look over the ground . the German Captain , Count Baron 
 Idigon von Leloffel , be right up by their goal post , come with the ball 
 in an easy canter in that tricky german fashion . the rest of the field be 
 just anywhere . it be only a scratch sort of affair . Ashburnham be quite 
 close to the rail not five yard from we and I hear he say to himself :  " might just be do ! " and he do it . goodness ! he swing that pony round 
 with all its four leg spread out , like a cat drop off a roof .... 
  well , it be just that look that I notice in his eye : " it might , " I 
 seem even now to hear he mutter to himself , " just be do . " 
  I look round over my shoulder and see , tall , smile brilliantly , 
 and buoyant - Leonora . and , little and fair , and as radiant as the track of 
 sunlight along the sea - my wife . 
  that poor wretch ! to think that he be at that moment in a perfect 
 devil of a fix , and there he be , say at the back of his mind : " it might 
 just be do . " it be like a chap in the middle of the eruption of a volcano , 
 say that he might just manage to bolt into tumult and set fire to a 
 haystack . madness ? predestination ? who the devil know ? 
  Mrs. Ashburnham exhibit at that moment more gaiety than I have 
 ever since know she to show . there be certain class of english 
 people - the nice one when they have be to many spa , who seem to 
 make a point of become much more than usually animate when they be 
 introduce to my compatriot . I have notice this often . of course , they 
 must first have accept the Americans . but , that once do , they seem to 
 say to themselves : " Hallo , these woman be so bright . we be not   go to be 
 outdo in brightness . " and for the time be they certainly be not . but it 
 wear off . so it be with Leonora - at least until she notice I . she 
 begin , Leonora do - and perhaps it be that that give I the idea of a 
 touch of insolence  in her character , for she never afterwards do any one single thing like 
 it - she begin by say in quite a loud voice and from quite a distance : 
  " do not   stop over by that stuffy old table , Teddy . come and sit by 
 these nice people ! " 
  and that be an extraordinary thing to say . quite extraordinary . I 
 could not   for the life of I refer to total stranger as nice people . but , of 
 course , she be take a line of her own in which I at any rate - and no one 
 else in the room , for she too have take the trouble to read through the list 
 of guest - count any more than so many clean bull terrier . and she sit 
 down rather brilliantly at a vacant table , beside our - one that be 
 reserve for the Guggenheimers . and she just sit absolutely deaf to the 
 remonstrance of the head waiter with his face like a grey ram 's . that 
 poor chap be do his steadfast duty too . he know that the 
 Guggenheimers of Chicago , after they have stay there a month and have 
 worry the poor life out of he , would give he two dollar fifty and 
 grumble at the tipping system . and he know that Teddy Ashburnham and 
 his wife would give he no trouble whatever except what the smile of 
 Leonora might cause in his apparently unimpressionable bosom - though you 
 never can tell what may go on behind even a not quite spotless 
 plastron ! - and every week Edward Ashburnham would give he a solid , 
 sound , golden english sovereign . yet this stout fellow be intent on save 
 that table for the Guggenheimers of Chicago . it end in Florence say : 
 " why should not   we all eat out of the same trough -  that be a nasty New York say . but I be sure we be all nice quiet people and 
 there can be four seat at our table . it be round . " 
  then come , as it be , an appreciative gurgle from the Captain and I 
 be perfectly aware of a slight hesitation - a quick sharp motion in Mrs. 
 Ashburnham , as if her horse have check . but she put it at the fence all 
 right , rise from the seat she have take and sit down opposite I , as 
 it be , all in one motion . 
  I never think that Leonora look she good in evening dress . she 
 seem to get it too clearly cut , there be no ruffling . she always 
 affect black and her shoulder be too classical . she seem to stand 
 out of her corsage as a white marble bust might out of a black Wedgwood 
 vase . I do not   know . 
  I love Leonora always and , to - day , I would very cheerfully lay down 
 my life , what be leave of it , in her service . but I be sure I never have the 
 beginning of a trace of what be call the sex instinct towards she . and I 
 suppose - no , I be certain that she never have it towards I . as far as I be 
 concerned I think it be those white shoulder that do it . I seem to 
 feel when I look at they that , if ever I should press my lip upon they , 
 they would be slightly cold - not icily , not without a touch of human heat , 
 but , as they say of bath , with the chill off . I seem to feel chilled at the 
 end of my lip when I look at she .... 
  no , Leonora always appear to I at she good in a blue tailor - make . 
 then her glorious hair be not   deaden by her white shoulder . certain 
 woman 's line guide your eye to their neck , their eyelash , their  lip , their breast . but Leonora 's seem to conduct your gaze always to 
 her wrist . and the wrist be at its good in a black or a dogskin glove and 
 there be always a gold circlet with a little chain support a very small 
 golden key to a dispatch box . perhaps it be that in which she lock up 
 her heart and her feeling . 
  anyhow , she sit down opposite I and then , for the first time , she 
 pay any attention to my existence . she give I , suddenly , yet 
 deliberately , one long stare . her eye too be blue and dark and the 
 eyelid be so arched that they give you the whole round of the iris . 
 and it be a most remarkable , a most moving glance , as if for a moment a 
 lighthouse have look at I . I seem to perceive the swift question 
 chase each other through the brain that be behind they . I seem to 
 hear the brain ask and the eye answer with all the simpleness of a 
 woman who be a good hand at take in quality of a horse - as indeed 
 she be . " stand well ; have plenty of room for his oats behind the girth . not 
 so much in the way of shoulder , " and so on . and so her eye ask : " be this 
 man trustworthy in money matter ; be he likely to try to play the lover ; be 
 he likely to let his woman be troublesome ? be he , above all , likely to 
 babble about my affair ? " 
  and , suddenly , into those cold , slightly defiant , almost defensive 
 china - blue orb , there come a warmth , a tenderness , a friendly recognition 
 . . . oh , it be very charming and very touching - and quite mortifying . it 
 be the look of a mother to her son , of a sister to her brother . it imply 
 trust ; it imply the want of any necessity for barrier . by God , she look 
 at I as if I  be an invalid - as any kind woman may look at a poor chap in a bath 
 chair . and , yes , from that day forward she always treat I and not 
 Florence as if I be the invalid . why , she would run after I with a rug 
 upon chilly day . I suppose , therefore , that her eye have make a favourable 
 answer . or , perhaps , it be not   a favourable answer . and then Florence say : 
 " and so the whole round table be begin . " again Edward Ashburnham gurgle 
 slightly in his throat ; but Leonora shiver a little , as if a goose have 
 walk over her grave . and I be pass she the nickel - silver basket of 
 roll . Avanti . . . 
 
 so begin those nine year of uninterrupted tranquillity . they be 
 characterize by an extraordinary want of any communicativeness on the 
 part of the Ashburnhams , to which we on our part reply by leave out 
 quite as extraordinarily , and nearly as completely , the personal note . 
 indeed , you may take it that what characterize our relationship be an 
 atmosphere of take everything for grant . the give proposition be 
 that we be all " good people . " we take for grant that we all like beef 
 underdone but not too underdone ; that both man prefer a good liqueur 
 brandy after lunch ; that both woman drink a very light rhine wine 
 qualified with Fachingen water - that sort of thing . it be also take for 
 grant that we be both sufficiently well off to afford anything that we 
 could  reasonably want in the way of amusement fitting to our station - that we 
 could take motor car and carriage by the day ; that we could give each 
 other dinner and dine our friend and we could indulge if we like in 
 economy . thus , Florence be in the habit of have the Daily Telegraph 
 send to she every day from London . she be always an Anglomaniac , be 
 Florence ; the Paris edition of the New York Herald be always good enough 
 for I . but when we discover that the Ashburnhams ' copy of the London 
 paper follow they from England , Leonora and Florence decide between 
 they to suppress one subscription one year and the other the next . 
 similarly it be the habit of the Grand Duke of Nassau Schwerin , who 
 come yearly to the bath , to dine once with about eighteen family of 
 regular Kur guest . in return he would give a dinner to all the eighteen at 
 once . and , since these dinner be rather expensive   you have to take the 
 Grand Duke and a good many of his suite and any member of the 
 diplomatic body that might be there   - Florence and Leonora , put 
 their head together , do not   see why we should not   give the Grand Duke his 
 dinner together . and so we do . I do not   suppose the Serenity mind that 
 economy , or even notice it . at any rate , our joint dinner to the Royal 
 Personage gradually assume the aspect of a yearly function . indeed , it 
 grow large and large , until it become a sort of closing function for the 
 season , at any rate , as far as we be concern . 
  I do not   in the least mean to say that we be the sort of person who 
 aspire to mix " with royalty . " we do not ; we have not   any claim ; we be 
 just " good  people . " but the Grand Duke be a pleasant , affable sort of royalty , like the 
 late King Edward VII , and it be pleasant to hear he talk about the race 
 and , very occasionally , as a bonne bouche , about his nephew , the Emperor ; 
 or to have he pause for a moment in his walk to ask after the progress of 
 our cure or to be benignantly interested in the amount of money we have 
 put on Leloffel 's hunter for the Frankfurt Welter Stakes . 
  but upon my word , I do not   know how we put in our time . how do one 
 put in one 's time ? how be it possible to have achieve nine year and to 
 have nothing whatever to show for it ? nothing whatever , you understand . 
 not so much as a bone penholder , carve to resemble a chessman and with 
 a hole in the top through which you could see four view of Nauheim . and , 
 as for experience , as for knowledge of one 's fellow being - nothing either . 
 upon my word , I could not   tell you offhand whether the lady who sell the so 
 expensive violet at the bottom of the road that lead to the station be 
 cheat I or no ; I can not   say whether the porter who carry our trap 
 across the station at Leghorn be a thief or no when he say that the 
 regular tariff be a lira a parcel . the instance of honesty that one come 
 across in this world be just as amazing as the instance of dishonesty . 
 after forty - five year of mix with one 's kind , one ought to have 
 acquire the habit of be able to know something about one 's fellow 
 being . but one do not . 
  I think the modern civilized habit - the modern English habit - of 
 take everyone for grant be a good  deal to blame for this . I have observe this matter long enough to know 
 the queer , subtle thing that it be ; to know how the faculty , for what it be 
 worth , never let you down . 
  Mind , I be not say that this be not the most desirable type of life 
 in the world ; that it be not an almost unreasonably high standard . for it be 
 really nauseate , when you detest it , to have to eat every day several 
 slice of thin , tepid , pink india rubber , and it be disagreeable to have to 
 drink brandy when you would prefer to be cheer up by warm , sweet 
 Kummel . and it be nasty to have to take a cold bath in the morning when 
 what you want be really a hot one at night . and it stir a little of the faith 
 of your father that be deep down within you to have to have it take for 
 grant that you be an Episcopalian when really you be an old - fashioned 
 Philadelphia Quaker . 
  but these thing have to be do ; it be the cock that the whole of 
 this society owe to Aesculapius . 
  and the odd , queer thing be that the whole collection of rule apply 
 to anybody - to the anybodie that you meet in hotel , in railway train , to 
 a less degree , perhaps , in steamer , but even , in the end , upon steamer . 
 you meet a man or a woman and , from tiny and intimate sound , from the 
 slight of movement , you know at once whether you be concern with 
 good people or with those who will not   do . you know , that be to say , whether 
 they will go rigidly through with the whole programme from the underdone 
 beef to the Anglicanism . it will not   matter whether they be short or tall ; 
 whether the voice squeak like a marionette or  rumble like a town bull 's ; it will not   matter whether they be Germans , 
 Austrians , french , Spanish , or even Brazilians - they will be the Germans 
 or Brazilians who take a cold bath every morning and who move , roughly 
 speak , in diplomatic circle . 
  but the inconvenient - well , hang it all , I will say it - the damnable 
 nuisance of the whole thing be , that with all the taking for grant , you 
 never really get an inch deep than the thing I have catalogue . 
  I can give you a rather extraordinary instance of this . I can not  
 remember whether it be in our first year - the first year of we four at 
 Nauheim , because , of course , it would have be the fourth year of 
 Florence and myself - but it must have be in the first or second year . and 
 that give the measure at once of the extraordinariness of our discussion 
 and of the swiftness with which intimacy have grow up between we . on the 
 one hand we seem to start out on the expedition so naturally and with so 
 little preparation that it be as if we must have make many such 
 excursion before ; and our intimacy seem so deep .... 
  yet the place to which we go be obviously one to which florence 
 at least would have want to take we quite early , so that you would 
 almost think we should have go there together at the beginning of our 
 intimacy . Florence be singularly expert as a guide to archaeological 
 exception and there be nothing she like so much as take people round 
 ruin and show you the window from which someone look down upon 
 the murder of someone else . she only do it once ; but she do it quite 
 magnificently . she could find she  way , with the sole help of Baedeker , as easily about any old monument as 
 she could about any american city where the block be all square and the 
 street all number , so that you can go perfectly easily from 
 twenty - fourth to Thirtieth . 
  now it happen that fifty minute away from Nauheim , by a good 
 train , be the ancient city of M - , upon a great pinnacle of basalt , girt with 
 a triple road run sideways up its shoulder like a scarf . and at the top 
 there be a castle - not a square castle like Windsor - but a castle all slate 
 gable and high peak with gilt weathercock flash bravely - the castle 
 of St. Elizabeth of Hungary . it have the disadvantage of be in Prussia ; and 
 it be always disagreeable to go into that country ; but it be very old and 
 there be many double - spire church and it stand up like a pyramid out 
 of the green valley of the Lahn . I do not   suppose the Ashburnhams want 
 especially to go there and I do not   especially want to go there myself . but , 
 you understand , there be no objection . it be part of the cure to make an 
 excursion three or four time a week . so that we be all quite unanimous 
 in be grateful to Florence for provide the motive power . Florence , of 
 course , have a motive of her own . she be at that time engage in 
 educate Captain Ashburnham - oh , of course , quite pour le bon motif ! she 
 use to say to Leonora : " I simply can not   understand how you can let he live 
 by your side and be so ignorant ! " Leonora herself always strike I as 
 be remarkably well educate . at any rate , she know beforehand all that 
 Florence have to tell she . perhaps she get it up out of  Baedeker before Florence be up in the morning . I do not   mean to say that 
 you would ever have know that Leonora know anything , but if Florence 
 start to tell we how Ludwig the Courageous want to have three wife 
 at once - in which he differ from Henry VIII , who want they one after 
 the other , and this cause a good deal of trouble - if Florence start to 
 tell we this , Leonora would just nod her head in a way that quite 
 pleasantly rattle my poor wife . 
  she use to exclaim : " well , if you know it , why have not   you tell it all 
 already to Captain Ashburnham ? I be sure he find it interesting ! " and 
 Leonora would look reflectively at her husband and say : " I have an idea 
 that it might injure his hand - the hand , you know , use in connection with 
 horse ' mouth .... " and poor Ashburnham would blush and mutter and would 
 say : " that be all right . do not   you bother about I . " 
  I fancy his wife 's irony do quite alarm poor Teddy ; because one 
 evening he ask I seriously in the smoking - room if I think that 
 have too much in one 's head would really interfere with one 's quickness 
 in polo . it strike he , he say , that brainy Johnnies generally be rather 
 muff when they get on to four leg . I reassure he as well I could . I tell 
 he that he be not   likely to take in enough to upset his balance . at that 
 time the Captain be quite evidently enjoy be educate by Florence . 
 she use to do it about three or four time a week under the approve 
 eye of Leonora and myself . it be not , you understand , systematic . it come 
 in burst . it be Florence clear up one of the dark place of the earth , 
 leave the world a little  light than she have find it . she would tell he the story of Hamlet ; 
 explain the form of a symphony , hum the first and second subject to 
 he , and so on ; she would explain to he the difference between 
 Armenians and Erastians ; or she would give he a short lecture on the 
 early history of the United States . and it be do in a way well 
 calculate to arrest a young attention . do you ever read Mrs. Markham ? 
 well , it be like that .... 
  but our excursion to M - be a much large , a much more full - dress 
 affair . you see , in the archive of the Schloss in that city there be a 
 document which Florence think would finally give she the chance to 
 educate the whole lot of we together . it really worry poor Florence that 
 she could not , in matter of culture , ever get the well of Leonora . I do not  
 know what Leonora know or what she do not   know but certainly she be 
 always there whenever Florence bring out any information . and she 
 give , somehow , the impression of really know what poor Florence give 
 the impression of have only pick up . I can not   exactly define it . it be 
 almost something physical . have you ever see a retriever dashing in play 
 after a greyhound ? you see the two run over a green field , almost side 
 by side , and suddenly the retriever make a friendly snap at the other . and 
 the greyhound simply be not   there . you have not   observe it quicken its speed 
 or strain a limb ; but there it be , just two yard in front of the retriever 's 
 outstretche muzzle . so it be with Florence and Leonora in matter of 
 culture . 
 but on this occasion I know that something be  up . I find Florence some day before , read book like Ranke 's history 
 of the Popes , symond ' Renaissance , Motley 's rise of the Dutch Republic , 
 and Luther 's Table Talk . 
  I must say that , until the astonishment come , I get nothing but 
 pleasure out of the little expedition . I like catch the two - forty ; I like 
 the slow , smooth roll of the great big train - and they be the good train 
 in the world ! I like be draw through the green country and look at it 
 through the clear glass of the great window . though , of course , the 
 country be not   really green . the sun shin , the earth be blood red , and 
 purple and red , and green and red . and the oxen in the ploughland be 
 bright varnish brown and black and blackish purple ; and the peasant be 
 dress in the black and white of magpie ; and there be great flock of 
 magpie too . or the peasant ' dress in another field where there be 
 little mound of hay that will be greygreen on the sunny side and purple in 
 the shadow - the peasant ' dress be vermilion with emerald - green 
 ribbon and purple skirt and white shirt and black velvet stomacher . 
 still , the impression be that you be draw through brilliant green 
 meadow that run away on each side to the dark purple fir - wood ; the 
 basalt pinnacle ; the immense forest . and there be meadowsweet at the 
 edge of the stream , and cattle . why , I remember on that afternoon I see a 
 brown cow hitch its horn under the stomach of a black and white animal 
 and the black and white one be throw right into the middle of a narrow 
 stream . I burst out laugh . but Florence be impart information so 
 hard  and Leonora be listen so intently that no one notice I . as for I , I 
 be pleased to be off duty ; I be pleased to think that Florence for the 
 moment be indubitably out of mischief - because she be talk about 
 Ludwig the Courageous   I think it be Ludwig the courageous but I be not 
 an historian , about Ludwig the Courageous of Hessen , who want to have 
 three wife at once and patronize Luther - something like that ! - I be so 
 relieved to be off duty , because she could not   possibly be do anything to 
 excite herself or set her poor heart a - flutter - that the incident of the 
 cow be a real joy to I . I chuckle over it from time to time for the 
 whole rest of the day . because it do look very funny , you know , to see a 
 black and white cow land on its back in the middle of a stream . it be so 
 just exactly what one do not   expect of a cow . 
  I suppose I ought to have pity the poor animal ; but I just do not . I 
 be out for enjoyment . and I just enjoy myself . it be so pleasant to be 
 draw along in front of the spectacular town with the peaked castle and 
 the many double spire . in the sunlight , gleam come from the 
 city - gleam from the glass of window ; from the gilt sign of 
 apothecary ; from the ensign of the student corp high up in the 
 mountain ; from the helmet of the funny little soldier move their 
 stiff little leg in white linen trouser . and it be pleasant to get out in 
 the great big spectacular prussian station with the hammered bronze 
 ornament and the painting of peasant and flower and cow ; and to hear 
 Florence bargain energetically with the driver of an ancient droshky draw 
 by two lean horse . of course , I  speak german much more correctly than Florence , though I never could rid 
 myself quite of the accent of the Pennsylvania Duitsch of my childhood . 
 anyhow , we be draw in a sort of triumph , for five mark without any 
 trinkgeld , right up to the castle . and we be take though the museum 
 and see the fireback , the old glass , the old sword , and the antique 
 contraption . and we go up winding corkscrew staircase and through 
 the Rittersaal , the great paint hall where the Reformer and his friend 
 meet for the first time under the protection of the gentleman that have 
 three wife at once and form an alliance with the gentleman that have 
 six wife , one after the other   I be not really interested in these fact but 
 they have a bearing on my story . and we go through chapel , and music 
 room , right up immensely high in the air to a large old chamber , full of 
 press , with heavily shutter window all round . and Florence become 
 positively electric . she tell the tired , bored custodian what shutter to 
 open ; so that the bright sunlight stream in palpable shaft into the dim 
 old chamber . she explain that this be Luther 's bedroom and that just 
 where the sunlight fall have stand his bed . as a matter of fact , I believe 
 that she be wrong and that Luther only stop , as it be , for lunch , in 
 order to evade pursuit . but , no doubt , it would have be his bedroom if he 
 could have be persuade to stop the night . and then , in spite of the 
 protest of the custodian , she throw open another shutter and come 
 trip back to a large glass case . 
 " and there , " she exclaim with an accent of  gaiety , of triumph , and of audacity . she be point at a piece of paper , 
 like the half - sheet of a letter with some faint pencil scrawl that might 
 have be a jotting of the amount we be spend during the day . and I 
 be extremely happy at her gaiety , in her triumph , in her audacity . captain 
 Ashburnham have his hand upon the glass case . " there it be - the protest . " 
 and then , as we all properly stage - manage our bewilderment , she 
 continue : " do not   you know that be why we be all call protestant ? 
 that be the pencil draft of the protest they draw up . you can see the 
 signature of Martin Luther , and Martin Bucer , and Zwingli , and Ludwig the 
 Courageous .... " 
  I may have get some of the name wrong , but I know that Luther and 
 Bucer be there . and her animation continue and I be glad . she be 
 well and she be out of mischief . she continue , look up into Captain 
 Ashburnham 's eye : " it be because of that piece of paper that you be honest , 
 sober , industrious , provident , and clean - lived . if it be not   for that piece 
 of paper you would be like the Irish or the Italians or the Poles , but 
 particularly the Irish .... " 
 and she lay one finger upon Captain 
 Ashburnham 's wrist . 
  I be aware of something treacherous , something frightful , 
 something evil in the day . I can not   define it and can not   find a simile for it . it 
 be not   as if a snake have look out of a hole . no , it be as if my heart have 
 miss a beat . it be as if we be go to run and cry out ; all four of we 
 in separate direction , avert our head . in Ashburnham 's face I know 
 that there  be absolute panic . I be horribly frightened and then I discover that 
 the pain in my left wrist be cause by Leonora 's clutch it . 
  " I can not   stand this , " she say with a most extraordinary passion ; " I 
 must get out of this . " 
  I be horribly frightened . it come to I for a moment , though I 
 have not   time to think it , that she must be a madly jealous woman - jealous 
 of Florence and Captain Ashburnham , of all people in the world ! and it be 
 a panic in which we flee ! we go right down the wind stair , across 
 the immense Rittersaal to a little terrace that overlook the Lahn , the 
 broad valley and the immense plain into which it open out . 
  " do not   you see ? " she say , " do not   you see what be go on ? " the panic 
 again stop my heart . I mutter , I stutter - I do not   know how I get the 
 word out : 
 " no ! what be the matter ? whatever be the matter ? " 
  she look I straight in the eye ; and for a moment I have the 
 feeling that those two blue disc be immense , be overwhelming , 
 be like a wall of blue that shut I off from the rest of the world . I 
 know it sound absurd ; but that be what it do feel like . 
  " do not   you see , " she say , with a really horrible bitterness , with a 
 really horrible lamentation in her voice , " do not   you see that that be the 
 cause of the whole miserable affair ; of the whole sorrow of the world ? 
 and of the eternal damnation of you and I and they . . . . " 
  I do not   remember how she go on ; I be too frightened ; I be too 
 amazed . I think I be think of  run to fetch assistance - a doctor , perhaps , or Captain Ashburnham . or 
 possibly she need Florence 's tender care , though , of course , it would 
 have be very bad for Florence 's heart . but I know that when I come out of 
 it she be say : " oh , where be all the bright , happy , innocent being in 
 the world ? where 's happiness ? one read of it in book ! " 
  she run her hand with a singular clawing motion upwards over her 
 forehead . her eye be enormously distend ; her face be exactly that 
 of a person look into the pit of hell and see horror there . and then 
 suddenly she stop . she be , most amazingly , just Mrs. Ashburnham 
 again . her face be perfectly clear , sharp , and define ; her hair be 
 glorious in its golden coil . her nostril twitch with a sort of contempt . 
 she appear to look with interest at a gypsy caravan that be come 
 over a little bridge far below we . 
  " do not   you know , " she say , in her clear hard voice , " do not   you know 
 that I be an irish Catholic ? " 
 
 those word give I the great relief that I have ever have in my life . 
 they tell I , I think , almost more than I have ever gather at any one 
 moment - about myself . I do not   think that before that day I have ever want 
 anything very much except Florence . I have , of course , have appetite , 
 impatience .... why , sometimes at a table d'hote , when there would be , say , 
 caviare hand round , I have be absolutely full of  impatience for fear that when the dish come to I there should not be a 
 satisfying portion leave over by the other guest . I have be exceedingly 
 impatient at miss train . the belgian State Railway have a trick of 
 let the french train miss their connection at Brussels . that have 
 always infuriate I . I have write about it letter to the Times that the 
 Times never print ; those that I write to the Paris edition of the New 
 York Herald be always print , but they never seem to satisfy I 
 when I see they . well , that be a sort of frenzy with I . 
  it be a frenzy that now I can hardly realize . I can understand it 
 intellectually . you see , in those day I be interested in people with 
 " heart . " there be Florence , there be Edward Ashburnham - or , perhaps , 
 it be Leonora that I be more interested in . I do not   mean in the way of 
 love . but , you see , we be both of the same profession - at any rate as I 
 see it . and the profession be that of keep heart patient alive . 
  you have no idea how engross such a profession may become . just 
 as the blacksmith say : " by hammer and hand all Art doth stand , " just as 
 the baker think that all the solar system revolve around his morning 
 delivery of roll ; as the postmaster general believe that he alone be the 
 preserver of society - and surely , surely , these delusion be necessary to 
 keep we go - so do I and , as I believe , Leonora imagine that the whole 
 world ought to be arrange so as to ensure the keeping alive of heart 
 patient . you have no idea how engross such a profession may  become - how imbecile , in view of that engrossment , appear the way of 
 prince , of republic , of municipality . a rough bit of road beneath the 
 motor tire , a couple of succeed " thank'ee - marm " with their quick 
 jolt , would be enough to set I grumble to Leonora against the Prince 
 or the Grand Duke or the Free City through whose territory we might be 
 pass . I would grumble like a stockbroker whose conversation over the 
 telephone be incommode by the ringing of bell from a city church . I 
 would talk about mediaeval survival , about the taxis be surely high 
 enough . the point , by the way , about the missing of the connection of the 
 Calais boat train at Brussels be that the shortest possible sea journey 
 be frequently of great importance to sufferer from the heart . now , on the 
 Continent , there be two special heart - cure place , Nauheim and Spa , and 
 to reach both of these bath from England if , in order to ensure a short sea 
 passage , you come by Calais - you have to make the connection at Brussels . 
 and the Belgian train never wait by so much as the shade of a second for 
 the one come from Calais or from Paris . and even if the french train 
 be just on time , you have to run - imagine a heart patient run ! - along 
 the unfamiliar way of the Brussels station and to scramble up the high 
 step of the moving train . or , if you miss the connection , you have to wait 
 five or six hour .... I use to keep awake whole night curse that abuse . 
  my wife use to run - she never , in whatever else she may have 
 mislead I , try to give I the impression that she be not a gallant 
 soul . but , once in the  German Express , she would lean back , with one hand to her side and her 
 eye close . well , she be a good actress . and I would be in hell . in hell , I 
 tell you . for in Florence I have at once a wife and an unattained 
 mistress - that be what it come to - and in the retaining of she in this 
 world I have my occupation , my career , my ambition . it be not often that 
 these thing be unite in one body . Leonora be a good actress too . by 
 Jove she be good ! I tell you , she would listen to I by the hour , evolve 
 my plan for a shock - proof world . it be true that at time I use to notice 
 about her face an air of inattention as if she be listen , a mother , to 
 the child at her knee , or as if , precisely , I be myself the patient . 
  you understand that there be nothing the matter with Edward 
 Ashburnham 's heart - that he have throw up his commission and have leave 
 India and come half the world over in order to follow a woman who have 
 really have a " heart " to Nauheim . that be the sort of sentimental ass he 
 be . for you understand , too , that they really need to live in India , to 
 economize , to let the house at Branshaw Teleragh . 
  of course , at that date , I have never hear of the Kilsyte case . 
 Ashburnham have , you know , kiss a servant girl in a railway train and it 
 be only the grace of God , the prompt functioning of the communication 
 cord , and the ready sympathy of what I believe you call the Hampshire 
 bench that keep the poor devil out of Winchester Gaol for year and year . I 
 never hear of that case until the final stage of Leonora 's revelation ....   but just think of that poor wretch . . . I , who have surely the right , 
 beg you to think of that poor wretch . be it possible that such a luckless 
 devil should be so torment by blind and inscrutable destiny ? for there be 
 no other way to think of it . none . I have the right to say it , since for year 
 he be my wife 's lover , since he kill she , since he break up all the 
 pleasantness that there be in my life . there be no priest that have the 
 right to tell I that I must not ask pity for he , from you , silent listener 
 beyond the hearthstone , from the world , or from the God who create in 
 he those desire , those madness .... 
  of course , I should not hear of the Kilsyte case . I know none of their 
 friend ; they be for I just good people - fortunate people with broad 
 and sunny acre in a southern county . just good people ! by heaven , I 
 sometimes think that it would have be well for he , poor dear , if the 
 case have be such a one that I must need have hear of it - such a one as 
 maid and courier and other Kur guest whisper about for year after , 
 until gradually it die away in the pity that there be knock about here 
 and there in the world . suppose he have spend his seven year in 
 Winchester Gaol or whatever it be that inscrutable and blind justice allot 
 to you for follow your natural but ill - timed inclination - there would 
 have arrive a stage when nodding gossip on the Kursaal terrace would 
 have say " poor fellow , " think of his ruined career . he would have be 
 the fine soldier with his back now bent .... well for he , poor devil , if his 
 back have be prematurely bent .   why , it would have be a thousand time well .... for , of course , the 
 Kilsyte case , which come at the very beginning of his find Leonora cold 
 and unsympathetic , give he a nasty jar . he leave servant alone after that . 
  it turn he , naturally , all the more loose amongst woman of his 
 own class . why , Leonora tell I that Mrs. Maidan , the woman he follow 
 from Burma to Nauheim , assure she he awaken her attention by 
 swear that when he kiss the servant in the train he be drive to it . 
 I dare say he be drive to it , by the mad passion to find an ultimately 
 satisfy woman . I dare say he be sincere enough . Heaven help I , I dare 
 say he be sincere enough in his love for Mrs. Maidan . she be a nice little 
 thing , a dear little dark woman with long lash , of whom Florence grow 
 quite fond . she have a lisp and a happy smile . we see plenty of she for the 
 first month of our acquaintance , then she die , quite quietly - of heart 
 trouble . 
  but you know , poor little Mrs. Maidan - she be so gentle , so young . 
 she can not have be more than twenty - three and she have a boy husband 
 out in Chitral not more than twenty - four , I believe . such young thing 
 ought to have be leave alone . of course Ashburnham could not leave she 
 alone . I do not believe that he could . why , even I , at this distance of time , 
 be aware that I be a little in love with her memory . I can not   help smile 
 when I think suddenly of she - as you might at the thought of something 
 wrap carefully away in lavender , in some drawer , in some old house 
 that you have long leave . she be so - so submissive .  why , even to I she have the air of be submissive - to I that not the 
 young child will ever pay heed to . yes , this be the sad story .... 
  no , I can not help wish that Florence have leave she alone - with she 
 playing with adultery . I suppose it be ; though she be such a child that 
 one have the impression that she would hardly have know how to spell 
 such a word . no , it be just submissiveness - to the importunity , to the 
 tempestuous force that push that miserable fellow on to ruin . and I do 
 not suppose that Florence really make much difference . if it have not be 
 for she that Ashburnham leave his allegiance for Mrs. Maidan , then it would 
 have be some other woman . but still , I do not know . perhaps the poor 
 young thing would have die - she be bind to die , anyhow , quite 
 soon - but she would have die without have to soak her noonday pillow 
 with tear whilst Florence , below the window , talk to Captain 
 Ashburnham about the Constitution of the United States .... yes , it would 
 have leave a well taste in the mouth if Florence have let she die in peace .... 
  Leonora behave well in a sense . she just box Mrs. Maidan 's 
 ear - yes , she hit she , in an uncontrollable access of rage , a hard blow on 
 the side of the cheek , in the corridor of the hotel , outside Edward 's room . 
 it be that , you know , that account for the sudden , odd intimacy that 
 spring up between Florence and Mrs. Ashburnham . 
  because it be , of course , an odd intimacy . if you look at it from the 
 outside nothing could have be more unlikely than that Leonora , who be 
 the proud  creature on God 's earth , would have strike up an acquaintanceship with 
 two casual Yankees whom she could not really have regard as be 
 much more than a carpet beneath her foot . you may ask what she have to be 
 proud of . well , she be a Powys married to an Ashburnham - I suppose that 
 give she the right to despise casual Americans as long as she do it 
 unostentatiously . I do not   know what anyone have to be proud of . she might 
 have take pride in her patience , in she keep her husband out of the 
 bankruptcy court . perhaps she do . 
  at any rate that be how Florence get to know she . she come round a 
 screen at the corner of the hotel corridor and find Leonora with the gold 
 key that hang from her wrist catch in Mrs. Maidan 's hair just before 
 dinner . there be not a single word speak . little Mrs. Maidan be very 
 pale , with a red mark down her left cheek , and the key would not come out 
 of her black hair . it be Florence who have to disentangle it , for Leonora 
 be in such a state that she could not have bring herself to touch Mrs. 
 Maidan without grow sick . 
  and there be not a word speak . you see , under those four eye - her 
 own and Mrs. Maidan 's - Leonora could just let herself go as far as to box 
 Mrs. Maidan 's ear . but the moment a stranger come along she pull 
 herself wonderfully up . she be at first silent and then , the moment the 
 key be disengage by Florence , she be in a state to say : " so awkward of 
 I . . . I be just try to put the comb straight in Mrs. Maidan 's hair .... "   Mrs. Maidan , however , be not a Powys marry to an Ashburnham ; 
 she be a poor little o'flaherty whose husband be a boy of 
 country - parsonage origin . so there be no mistaking the sob that she let go as she 
 go desolately away along the corridor . but Leonora be still go to 
 play up . she open the door of Ashburnham 's room quite ostentatiously , so 
 that Florence should hear her address Edward in term of intimacy and 
 like . " Edward , " she call . but there be no Edward there . 
  you understand that there be no Edward there . it be then , for the 
 only time of her career , that Leonora really compromise herself - she 
 exclaim : " how frightful ! . . . poor little Maisie ! . . . " 
  she catch herself up at that , but of course it be too late . it be a 
 queer sort of affair .... 
  I want to do Leonora every justice . I love she very dearly for one 
 thing , and in this matter , which be certainly the ruin of my small 
 household cockleshell , she certainly trip up . I do not believe - and 
 Leonora herself do not believe - that poor little Maisie Maidan be ever 
 Edward 's mistress . her heart be really so bad that she would have 
 succumb to anything like an impassioned embrace . that be the plain 
 English of it , and I suppose plain English be good . she be really what the 
 other two , for reason of their own , just pretend to be . Queer , be not   it ? 
 like one of those sinister joke that Providence play upon one . add to 
 this that I do not suppose that Leonora would much have mind , at any 
 other moment , if Mrs. Maidan have be her husband 's mistress . it might 
 have be a relief from  Edward 's sentimental gurgling over the lady and from the lady 's 
 submissive acceptance of those sound . no , she would not have mind . 
  but in box Mrs. Maidan 's ear Leonora be just strike the face 
 of an intolerable universe . for that afternoon she have have a frightfully 
 painful scene with Edward . 
  as far as his letter go , she claim the right to open they when 
 she choose . she arrogate to herself that right because Edward 's affair 
 be in such a frightful state and he lie so about they that she claim 
 the privilege of have his secret at her disposal . there be not , indeed , 
 any other way , for the poor fool be too ashamed of his lapse ever to 
 make a clean breast of anything . she have to drag these thing out of he . 
  it must have be a pretty elevate job for she . but that afternoon , 
 Edward be on his bed for the hour and a half prescribe by the Kur 
 authority , she have open a letter that she take to come from a Colonel 
 Hervey . they be go to stay with he in Linlithgowshire for the month 
 of September and she do not know whether the date fix would be the 
 11th or the 18th . the address on this letter be , in handwriting , as like 
 Colonel Hervey 's as one blade of corn be like another . so she have at the 
 moment no idea of spy on he . 
  but she certainly be . for she discover that Edward Ashburnham 
 be pay a blackmailer of whom she have never hear something like 
 three hundred pound a year .... it be a devil of a blow ; it be like  death ; for she imagine that by that time she have really get to the bottom 
 of her husband 's liability . you see , they be pretty heavy . what have 
 really smash they up have be a perfectly commonplace affair at Monte 
 Carlo - an affair with a cosmopolitan harpy who pass for the mistress of 
 a russian Grand Duke . she exact a twenty - thousand - pound pearl tiara 
 from he as the price of her favour for a week or so . it would have pip 
 he a good deal to have find so much , and he be not in the ordinary way 
 a gambler . he might , indeed , just have find the twenty thousand and the 
 not slight charge of a week at an hotel with the fair creature . he must 
 have be worth at that date five hundred thousand dollar and a little 
 over . 
  well , he must need go to the table and lose forty thousand 
 pound .... forty thousand solid pound , borrow from shark ! and even 
 after that he must - it be an imperative passion - enjoy the favour of 
 the lady . he get they , of course , when it be a matter of solid bargaining , 
 for far less than twenty thousand , as he might , no doubt , have do from 
 the first . I dare say ten thousand dollar cover the bill . 
  anyhow , there be a pretty solid hole in a fortune of a hundred 
 thousand pound or so . and Leonora have to fix thing up ; he would have run 
 from money - lender to money - lender . and that be quite in the early day of 
 her discovery of his infidelity - if you like to call they infidelity . and 
 she discover that one from public source . God know what would have 
 happen if she have not discover it from public source . I suppose he 
 would have conceal it from she until  they be penniless . but she be able , by the grace of God , to get hold of 
 the actual lender of the money , to learn the exact sum that be need . 
 and she go off to England . 
  yes , she go right off to England to her attorney and his while he 
 be still in the arm of his Circe - at Antibes , to which place they have 
 retire . he get sick of the lady quite quickly , but not before Leonora have 
 have such lesson in the art of business from her attorney that she have her 
 plan as clearly draw up as be ever that of General Trochu for keep 
 the Prussians out of Paris in 1870 . it be about as effectual at first , or it 
 seem so . 
  that would have be , you know , in 1895 , about nine year before the 
 date of which I be talk - the date of Florence 's get she hold over 
 Leonora ; for that be what it amount to .... well , Mrs. Ashburnham have 
 simply force Edward to settle all his property upon she . she could force 
 he to do anything ; in his clumsy , good - nature , inarticulate way he be 
 as frightened of she as of the devil . and he admire she enormously , and he 
 be as fond of she as any man could be of any woman . she take advantage 
 of it to treat he as if he have be a person whose estate be be 
 manage by the court of bankruptcy . I suppose it be the good thing for 
 he . 
  anyhow , she have no end of a job for the first three year or so . 
 unexpected liability keep on crop up - and that afflict fool do not 
 make it any easy . you see , along with the passion of the chase go a 
 frame of mind that make he be extraordinarily  ashamed of himself . you may not believe it , but he really have such a sort 
 of respect for the chastity of Leonora 's imagination that he hat - he be 
 positively revolt - at the thought that she should know that the sort of 
 thing that he do exist in the world . so he would stick out in an agitated 
 way against the accusation of ever have do anything . he want to 
 preserve the virginity of his wife 's thought . he tell I that himself 
 during the long talk we have at the last - while the girl be on the way to 
 Brindisi . 
  so , of course , for those three year or so , Leonora have many 
 agitation . and it be then that they really quarrel . 
  yes , they quarrel bitterly . that seem rather extravagant . you 
 might have think that Leonora would be just calmly loathe and he 
 lachrymosely contrite . but that be not it a bit .... along with Edward 's 
 passion and his shame for they go the violent conviction of the duty 
 of his station - a conviction that be quite unreasonably expensive . I trust 
 I have not , in talk of his liability , give the impression that poor 
 Edward be a promiscuous libertine . he be not ; he be a sentimentalist . 
 the servant girl in the Kilsyte case have be pretty , but mournful of 
 appearance . I think that , when he have kiss she , he have desire rather to 
 comfort she . and if she have succumb to his blandishment I dare say he 
 would have set she up in a little house in Portsmouth or Winchester and 
 would have be faithful to she for four or five year . he be quite 
 capable of that . 
 no , the only two of his affair of the heart that cost  he money be that of the Grand Duke 's mistress and that which be the 
 subject of the blackmailing letter that Leonora open . that have be a 
 quite passionate affair with quite a nice woman . it have succeed the one 
 with the Grand Ducal lady . the lady be the wife of a brother officer and 
 Leonora have know all about the passion , which have be quite a real 
 passion and have last for several year . you see , poor Edward 's passion 
 be quite logical in their progression upwards . they begin with a 
 servant , go on to a courtesan and then to a quite nice woman , very 
 unsuitably mat . for she have a quite nasty husband who , by mean of 
 letter and thing , go on blackmail poor Edward to the tune of three 
 or four hundred a year - with threat of the divorce court . and after this 
 lady come Maisie Maidan , and after poor Maisie only one more affair and 
 then - the real passion of his life . his marriage with Leonora have be 
 arrange by his parent and , though he always admire she immensely , he 
 have hardly ever pretend to be much more than tender to she , though he 
 desperately need her moral support too .... 
  but his really try liability be mostly in the nature of 
 generosity proper to his station . he be , accord to Leonora , always 
 remit his tenant ' rent and give the tenant to understand that the 
 reduction would be permanent ; he be always redeem drunkard who 
 come before his magisterial bench ; he be always try to put 
 prostitute into respectable place - and he be a perfect maniac about 
 child . I do not   know how many ill - use people he do not pick  up and provide with career - Leonora have tell I , but I dare say she 
 exaggerate and the figure seem so preposterous that I will not put it 
 down . all these thing , and the continuance of they , seem to he to be 
 his duty - along with impossible subscription to hospital and boy scout 
 and to provide prize at cattle show and antivivisection society .... 
  well , Leonora see to it that most of these thing be not 
 continue . they could not possibly keep up Branshaw Manor at that rate 
 after the money have go to the Grand Duke 's mistress . she put the rent 
 back at their old figure , discharge the drunkard from their home , and 
 send all the society notice that they be to expect no more 
 subscription . to the child she be more tender ; nearly all of they she 
 support till the age of apprenticeship or domestic service . you see , she 
 be childless herself . 
  she be childless herself , and she consider herself to be to blame . 
 she have come of a penniless branch of the Powys family , and they have 
 force she upon poor dear Edward without make the stipulation that the 
 child should be bring up as Catholics . and that , of course , be 
 spiritual death to Leonora . I have give you a wrong impression if I have 
 not make you see that Leonora be a woman of a strong , cold conscience , 
 like all English Catholics .   I can not , myself , help dislike this religion ; 
 there be always , at the bottom of my mind , in spite of Leonora , the feeling 
 of shudder at the Scarlet Woman , that filter in upon I in the 
 tranquillity of the little old Friends ' Meeting House in Arch Street , 
 Philadelphia .   so I do set down  a good deal of Leonora 's mismanagement of poor dear Edward 's case to the 
 peculiarly english form of her religion . because , of course , the only thing 
 to have do for Edward would have be to let he sink down until he 
 become a tramp of gentlemanly address , have , maybe , chance love 
 affair upon the highway . he would have do so much less harm ; he 
 would have be much less agonized , too . at any rate , he would have have 
 few chance of ruin and of remorse . for Edward be great at 
 remorse . 
  but Leonora 's english Catholic conscience , her rigid principle , her 
 coldness , even her very patience , be , I can not help think , all wrong in 
 this special case . she quite seriously and naively imagine that the Church 
 of Rome disapprove of divorce ; she quite seriously and naively believe 
 that her church could be such a monstrous and imbecile institution as to 
 expect she to take on the impossible job of make Edward Ashburnham a 
 faithful husband . she have , as the English would say , the Nonconformist 
 temperament . in the United States of North America we call it the New 
 England conscience . for , of course , that frame of mind have be drive in 
 on the English Catholics . the century that they have go 
 through - century of blind and malignant oppression , of ostracism from 
 public employment , of be , as it be , a small beleaguered garrison in a 
 hostile country , and therefore have to act with great formality - all 
 these thing have combine to perform that conjure trick . and I suppose 
 the Papists in England be even technically nonconformist .   Continental Papists be a dirty , jovial , and unscrupulous crew . but 
 that , at least , let they be opportunist . they would have fix poor dear 
 Edward up all right .   forgive my writing of these monstrous thing in this 
 frivolous manner . if I do not I should break down and cry .   in Milan , say , or 
 in Paris , Leonora would have have her marriage dissolve in six month for 
 two hundred dollar pay in the right quarter . and Edward would have 
 drift about until he become a tramp of the kind I have suggest . or he 
 would have marry a barmaid who would have make he such frightful 
 scene in public place and would so have tear out his moustache and leave 
 visible sign upon his face that he would have be faithful to she for the 
 rest of his day . that be what he want to redeem he .... 
  for along with his passion and his shame there go the dread of 
 scene in public place , of outcry , of excited physical violence ; of 
 publicity , in short . yes , the barmaid would have cure he . and it would 
 have be all the well if she drank ; he would have be keep busy look 
 after she . 
  I know that I be right in this . I know it because of the Kilsyte case . 
 you see , the servant girl that he then kiss be nurse in the family of the 
 Nonconformist head of the county - whatever that post may be call . and 
 that gentleman be so determined to ruin Edward , who be the chairman 
 of the Tory caucus , or whatever it be - that the poor dear sufferer have the 
 very devil of a time . they ask question about it in the House of 
 Commons ; they try to get the Hampshire magistrate degrade ; they 
 suggest to the War  Ministry that Edward be not the proper person to hold the King 's 
 commission . yes , he get it hot and strong . 
  the result you have hear . he be completely cure of philander 
 amongst the low class . and that seem a real blessing to Leonora . it 
 do not revolt she so much to be connect - it be a sort of 
 connection - with people like Mrs. Maidan , instead of with a little 
 kitchenmaid . 
  in a dim sort of way , Leonora be almost content when she 
 arrive in Nauheim , that evening .... 
  she have get thing nearly straight by the long year of scrap in 
 little station in Chitral and Burma - station where living be cheap in 
 comparison with the life of a county magnate , and where , moreover , 
 liaison of one sort or another be normal and inexpensive , too . so that , 
 when Mrs. Maidan come along - and the Maidan affair might have cause 
 trouble out there because of the youth of the husband - Leonora have just 
 resign herself to come home . with push and scrap and with 
 let Branshaw Teleragh , and with sell a picture and a relic of 
 Charles I or so , she have get - and , poor dear , she have never have a really 
 decent dress to she back in all those year and year - she have get , as she 
 imagine , her poor dear husband back into much the same financial 
 position as have be his before the mistress of the Grand Duke have 
 happen along . and , of course , Edward himself have help she a little on 
 the financial side . he be a fellow that many man like . he be so 
 presentable and quite ready to lend you his cigar puncher - that sort of 
 thing . so every  now and then some financier whom he meet about would give he a good , 
 sound , profitable tip . and Leonora be never afraid of a bit of a gamble - 
 English Papists seldom be , I do not know why . 
  so nearly all her investment turn up trump , and Edward be 
 really in fit case to reopen Branshaw Manor and once more to assume his 
 position in the county . thus Leonora have accept Maisie Maidan almost 
 with resignation - almost with a sigh of relief . she really like the poor 
 child - she have to like somebody . and , at any rate , she feel she could trust 
 Maisie - she could trust she not to rook Edward for several thousand a 
 week , for Maisie have refuse to accept so much as a trinket ring from he . 
 it be true that Edward gurgle and rave about the girl in a way that she 
 have never yet experience . but that , too , be almost a relief . I think she 
 would really have welcome it if he could have come across the love of his 
 life . it would have give she a rest . 
  and there could not have be anyone well than poor little Mrs. 
 Maidan ; she be so ill she could not want to be take on expensive 
 jaunt .... it be Leonora herself who pay Maisie 's expense to Nauheim . 
 she hand over the money to the boy husband , for Maisie would never have 
 allow it ; but the husband be in agony of fear . poor devil ! 
  I fancy that on the voyage from India Leonora be as happy as ever 
 she have be in her life . Edward be wrap up , completely , in his 
 girl - he be almost like a father with a child , trot about with rug 
 and physic and thing , from deck to deck . he behave ,  however , with great circumspection , so that nothing leak through to the 
 other passenger . and Leonora have almost attain to the attitude of a 
 mother towards Mrs. Maidan . so it have look very well - the benevolent , 
 wealthy couple of good people , act as saviour to the poor , dark - eye , 
 die young thing . and that attitude of Leonora 's towards Mrs. Maidan no 
 doubt partly account for the smack in the face . she be hit a 
 naughty child who have be steal chocolate at an inopportune moment . 
  it be certainly an inopportune moment . for , with the opening of 
 that blackmail letter from that injure brother officer , all the old 
 terror have redescende upon Leonora . her road have again seem to 
 stretch out endless : she imagine that there might be hundred and 
 hundred of such thing that Edward be conceal from she - that they 
 might necessitate more mortgaging , more pawning of bracelet , more 
 and always more horror . she have spend an excruciating afternoon . the 
 matter be one of a divorce case , of course , and she want to avoid 
 publicity as much as Edward do , so that she see the necessity of 
 continue the payment . and she do not so much mind that . they could 
 find three hundred a year . but it be the horror of there be more such 
 obligation . 
  she have have no conversation with Edward for many year - none that 
 go beyond the mere arrangement for take train or engage 
 servant . but that afternoon she have to let he have it . and he have be 
 just the same as ever . it be like open a book after a decade to find the 
 word the same . he have the same  motif . he have not wish to tell she about the case because he have not 
 wish she to sully her mind with the idea that there be such a thing as 
 a brother officer who could be a blackmailer - and he have want to protect 
 the credit of his old light of love . that lady be certainly not concerned 
 with her husband . and he swear , and swore , and swear that there be 
 nothing else in the world against he . she do not believe he . 
  he have do it once too often - and she be wrong for the first time , 
 so that he act a rather creditable part in the matter . for he go right 
 straight out to the post - office and spend several hour in cod a 
 telegram to his solicitor , bid that hard - head man to threaten to 
 take out at once a warrant against the fellow who be on his track . he 
 say afterwards that it be a bit too thick on poor old Leonora to be 
 ballyrag any more . that be really the last of his outstanding account 
 and he be ready to take his personal chance of the divorce court if the 
 blackmailer turn nasty . he would face it out - the publicity , the paper , 
 the whole bally show . those be his simple word .... 
  he have make , however , the mistake of not tell Leonora where he 
 be go , so that , have see he go to his room to fetch the code for 
 the telegram , and see , two hour later , Maisie Maidan come out of his 
 room , Leonora imagine that the two hour she have spend in silent agony 
 Edward have spend with Maisie Maidan in his arm . that seem to she to be 
 too much . 
  as a matter of fact , Maisie 's be in Edward 's room have be the 
 result partly of poverty , partly of  pride , partly of sheer innocence . she could not , in the first place , afford a 
 maid ; she refrain as much as possible from send the hotel servant 
 on errand , since every penny be of importance to she , and she fear to 
 have to pay high tip at the end of her stay . Edward have lend her one of his 
 fascinating case contain fifteen different size of scissor , and , 
 have see , from her window , his departure for the post - office , she have 
 take the opportunity of return the case . she could not see why she 
 should not , though she feel a certain remorse at the thought that she have 
 kiss the pillow of his bed . that be the way it take she . 
  but Leonora could see that , without the shadow of a doubt , the 
 incident give Florence a hold over she . it let Florence into thing and 
 Florence be the only create being who have any idea that the 
 Ashburnhams be not just good people with nothing to their tail . she 
 determine at once , not so much to give Florence the privilege of her 
 intimacy - which would have be the payment of a kind of blackmail - as to 
 keep Florence under observation until she could have demonstrate to 
 Florence that she be not in the least jealous of poor Maisie . so that be 
 why she have enter the dining - room arm in arm with my wife , and why she 
 have so markedly plant herself at our table . she never leave we , indeed , for 
 a minute that night , except just to run up to Mrs. Maidan 's room to beg she 
 pardon and to beg she also to let Edward take she very markedly out into 
 the garden that night . she say herself , when Mrs. Maidan come rather 
 wistfully down into the lounge where we be all sit : " now , Edward , 
 get  up and take Maisie to the Casino . I want Mrs. Dowell to tell I all about 
 the family in Connecticut who come from Fordingbridge . " for it have be 
 discover that Florence come of a line that have actually own Branshaw 
 Teleragh for two century before the Ashburnhams come there . and there 
 she sit with I in that hall , long after Florence have go to bed , so that I 
 might witness her gay reception of that pair . she could play up . 
  and that enable I to fix exactly the day of our go to the town 
 of M - . for it be the very day poor Mrs. Maidan die . we find she dead 
 when we get back - pretty awful , that , when you come to figure out what it 
 all mean .... 
  at any rate the measure of my relief when Leonora say that she be 
 an Irish Catholic give you the measure of my affection for that couple . it 
 be an affection so intense that even to this day I can not think of Edward 
 without sigh . I do not believe that I could have go on any more 
 without they . I be get too tired . and I verily believe , too , that if my 
 suspicion that Leonora be jealous of Florence have be the reason she 
 give for her outburst I should have turn upon Florence with the mad 
 kind of rage . Jealousy would have be incurable . but Florence 's mere silly 
 gibe at the Irish and at the Catholics could be apologize out of 
 existence . and that I appear to fix up in two minute or so . 
  she look at I for a long time rather fixedly and queerly while I 
 be do it . and at last I work myself up to say :   " do accept the situation . I confess that I do not like your religion . 
 but I like you so intensely . I do not   mind say that I have never have anyone 
 to be really fond of , and I do not believe that anyone have ever be fond of 
 I , as I believe you really to be . " 
  " oh , I be fond enough of you , " she say . " fond enough to say that I wish 
 every man be like you . but there be other to be consider . " she be 
 think , as a matter of fact , of poor maisie . she pick a little piece of 
 pellitory out of the breast - high wall in front of we . she chafe it for a 
 long minute between her finger and thumb , then she throw it over the 
 cop . 
  " oh , I accept the situation , " she say at last , " if you can . " 
 
 I remember laugh at the phrase " accept the situation , " which she 
 seem to repeat with a gravity too intense . I say to she something like : 
  " it be hardly as much as that . I mean , that I must claim the liberty of 
 a free american citizen to think what I please about your co - religionist . 
 and I suppose that Florence must have liberty to think what she please 
 and to say what politeness allow she to say . " 
  " she have well , " Leonora answer , " not say one single word against 
 my people or my faith . " 
  it strike I , at the time , that there be an unusual , an almost 
 threaten , hardness in her voice . it be almost as if she be try to 
 convey to Florence ,  through I , that she would seriously harm my wife if Florence go to 
 something that be an extreme . yes , I remember think at the time that 
 it be almost as if Leonora be say , through I , to Florence : 
  " you may outrage I as you will ; you may take all that I personally 
 possess , but do not you dare to say one single thing in view of the 
 situation that that will set up - against the faith that make I become 
 the doormat for your foot . " 
  but obviously , as I see it , that could not be her meaning . good 
 people , be they ever so diverse in creed , do not threaten each other . so 
 that I read Leonora 's word to mean just no more than : 
  " it would be well if Florence say nothing at all against my 
 co - religionist , because it be a point that I be touchy about . " 
  that be the hint that , accordingly , I convey to Florence when , 
 shortly afterwards , she and Edward come down from the tower . and I want 
 you to understand that , from that moment until after Edward and the girl 
 and Florence be all dead together , I have never the remotest glimpse , not 
 the shadow of a suspicion , that there be anything wrong , as the saying 
 be . for five minute , then , I entertain the possibility that Leonora might 
 be jealous ; but there be never another flicker in that flame - like 
 personality . how in the world should I get it ? 
  for , all that time , I be just a male sick nurse . and what chance have 
 I against those three harden gambler , who be all in league to conceal 
 their hand from I ? what earthly chance ? they be three to  one - and they make I happy . oh , God , they make I so happy that I doubt 
 if even paradise , that shall smooth out all temporal wrong , shall ever 
 give I the like . and what could they have do well , or what could they 
 have do that could have be bad ? I do not   know .... 
  I suppose that , during all that time , I be a deceived husband and 
 that Leonora be pimp for Edward . that be the cross that she have to 
 take up during her long Calvary of a life .... 
  you ask how it feel to be a deceive husband . just heaven , I do not 
 know . it feel just nothing at all . it be not hell , certainly it be not 
 necessarily heaven . so I suppose it be the intermediate stage . what do they 
 call it ? Limbo . no , I feel nothing at all about that . they be dead ; they have 
 go before their Judge , who , I hope , will open to they the spring of his 
 compassion . it be not my business to think about it . it be simply my 
 business to say , as Leonora 's people say : " Requiem aeternam dona eis , 
 domine , et lux perpetua luceat per eis . in memoriam aeternam erit .... " but 
 what be they ? the just ? the unjust ? God know ! I think that the pair of 
 they be only poor wretch creep over this earth in the shadow of an 
 eternal wrath . it be very terrible .... 
  it be almost too terrible , the picture of that judgment , as it appear 
 to I sometimes , at night . it be probably the suggestion of some picture 
 that I have see somewhere . but upon an immense plain , suspend in 
 mid - air , I seem to see three figure , two of they clasp close in an intense 
 embrace , and one intolerably solitary . it be in black and white , my picture  of that judgment , an etch , perhaps ; only I can not tell an etch from a 
 photographic reproduction . and the immense plain be the hand of God , 
 stretch out for mile and mile , with great space above it and below 
 it . and they be in the sight of God , and it be Florence that be alone .... 
  and , do you know , at the thought of that intense solitude I feel an 
 overwhelming desire to rush forward and comfort she . you can not , you see , 
 have act as nurse to a person for twelve year without wish to go on 
 nursing she , even though you hate she with the hatred of the adder , and 
 even in the palm of God . but , in the night , with that vision of judgment 
 before I , I know that I hold myself back . for I hate Florence . I hate 
 Florence with such a hatred that I would not spare she an eternity of 
 loneliness . she need not have do what she do . she be an American , a 
 New Englander . she have not the hot passion of these Europeans . she cut 
 out that poor imbecile of an Edward - and I pray God that he be really at 
 peace , clasp close in the arm of that poor , poor girl ! and , no doubt , 
 Maisie Maidan will find her young husband again , and Leonora will burn , 
 clear and serene , a northern light and one of the archangel of God . and 
 I .... well , perhaps they will find I an elevator to run .... but Florence .... 
  she should not have do it . she should not have do it . it be 
 play it too low down . she annex poor dear Edward from sheer vanity ; 
 she meddle between he and Leonora from a sheer , imbecile spirit of 
 district visit . do you understand that , whilst she be Edward 's 
 mistress , she be perpetually try to  reunite he to his wife ? she would gabble on to Leonora about 
 forgiveness - treat the subject from the bright , american point of view . 
 and Leonora would treat she like the whore she be . once she say to 
 Florence in the early morning : 
  " you come to I straight out of his bed to tell I that that be my 
 proper place . I know it , thank you . " 
  but even that could not stop Florence . she go on say that it be 
 her ambition to leave this world a little bright by the passage of her 
 brief life , and how thankfully she would leave Edward , whom she think 
 she have bring to a right frame of mind , if Leonora would only give he a 
 chance . he need , she say , tenderness beyond anything . 
  and Leonora would answer - for she put up with this outrage for 
 year - Leonora , as I understand , would answer something like : 
  " yes , you would give he up . and you would go on writing to each 
 other in secret , and commit adultery in hire room . I know the pair of 
 you , you know . no . I prefer the situation as it be . " 
  half the time Florence would ignore Leonora 's remark . she would 
 think they be not quite ladylike . the other half of the time she would 
 try to persuade Leonora that her love for Edward be quite spiritual - on 
 account of her heart . once she say : 
  " if you can believe that of Maisie Maidan , as you say you do , why 
 can not you believe it of I ? " 
  Leonora be , I understand , do her hair at that time in front of the 
 mirror in her bedroom . and she look round at Florence , to whom she do 
 not usually  vouchsafe a glance - she look round coolly and calmly , and say : 
  " never do you dare to mention Mrs. Maidan 's name again . you 
 murder she . you and I murder she between we . I be as much a scoundrel 
 as you . I do not   like to be remind of it . " 
  Florence go off at once into a babble of how could she have hurt a 
 person whom she hardly know , a person whom , with the good intention , in 
 pursuance of her effort to leave the world a little bright , she have try 
 to save from Edward . that be how she figure it out to herself . she 
 really think that .... so Leonora say patiently : 
  " very well , just put it that I kill she and that it be a painful 
 subject . one do not like to think that one have kill someone . naturally 
 not . I ought never to have bring she from India . " 
  and that , indeed , be exactly how Leonora look at it . it be state a 
 little baldly , but Leonora be always a great one for bald statement . 
  what have happen on the day of our jaunt to the ancient city of 
 M - have be this : 
  Leonora , who have be even then fill with pity and contrition for 
 the poor child , on return to our hotel have go straight to Mrs. Maidan 's 
 room . she have want just to pet she . and she have perceive at first only , 
 on the clear , round table cover with red velvet , a letter address to 
 she . it run something like : 
  " oh , Mrs. Ashburnham , how could you have do it ? I trust you so . 
 you never talk to I about I and Edward , but I trust you . how could 
 you buy I  from my husband ? I have just hear how you have - in the hall they be 
 talk about it , Edward and the american lady . you pay the money for I 
 to come here . oh , how could you ? how could you ? I be go straight back 
 to Bunny .... " 
 Bunny be Mrs. Maidan 's husband . 
  and Leonora say that , as she go on read the letter , she have , 
 without look round she , a sense that that hotel room be clear , that 
 there be no paper on the table , that there be no clothe on the hook , 
 and that there be a strained silence - a silence , she say , as if there be 
 something in the room that drink up such sound as there be . she have to 
 fight against that feeling , whilst she read the postscript of the letter . 
  " I do not know you want I for an adulteress , " the postscript 
 begin . the poor child be hardly literate . " it be surely not right of you 
 and I never want to be one . and I hear Edward call I a poor little rat 
 to the american lady . he always call I a little rat in private , and I do 
 not mind . but if he call I it to she , I think he do not love I any 
 more . oh , Mrs. Ashburnham , you know the world and I know nothing . I 
 think it would be all right if you think it could , and I think you 
 would not have bring I if you do not , too . you should not have do it , 
 and we out of the same convent .... " 
 Leonora say that she scream when she read that . 
  and then she see that Maisie 's box be all pack , and she begin 
 a search for Mrs. Maidan herself - all over the hotel . the manager say that 
 Mrs. Maidan pay her bill , and have go up to the station  to ask the Reiseverkehrsbureau to make she out a plan for her immediate 
 return to Chitral . he imagine that he have see she come back , but he be 
 not quite certain . no one in the large hotel have bother his head about the 
 child . and she , wander solitarily in the hall , have no doubt sit down 
 beside a screen that have Edward and Florence on the other side . I never 
 hear then or after what have pass between that precious couple . I fancy 
 Florence be just about begin her annexing of poor dear Edward by 
 address to he some word of friendly warning as to the ravage he 
 might be make in the girl 's heart . that would be the sort of way she 
 would begin . and Edward would have sentimentally assure she that there 
 be nothing in it ; that Maisie be just a poor little rat whose passage to 
 Nauheim his wife have pay out of her own pocket . that would have be 
 enough to do the trick . 
  for the trick be pretty efficiently do . Leonora , with panic 
 grow and with contrition very large in her heart , visit every one of 
 the public room of the hotel - the dining - room , the lounge , the 
 Schreibzimmer , the winter garden . God know what they want with a 
 winter garden in a hotel that be only open from May till October . but there 
 it be . and then Leonora run - yes , she run up the stair - to see if Maisie 
 have not return to her room . she have determine to take that child right 
 away from that hideous place . it seem to she to be all unspeakable . I do 
 not mean to say that she be not quite cool about it . Leonora be always 
 Leonora . but the cold justice of the thing demand that she should play 
 the part of mother to this child  who have come from the same convent . she figure it out to amount to that . 
 she would leave Edward to Florence - and to I - and she would devote all 
 her time to provide that child with an atmosphere of love until she could 
 be return to her poor young husband . it be naturally too late . 
  she have not care to look round Maisie 's room at first . now , as soon 
 as she come in , she perceive , stick out beyond the bed , a small pair of 
 foot in high - heeled shoe . Maisie have die in the effort to strap up a great 
 portmanteau . she have die so grotesquely that her little body have fall 
 forward into the trunk , and it have close upon she , like the jaw of a 
 gigantic alligator . the key be in her hand . her dark hair , like the hair of a 
 Japanese , have come down and cover her body and her face . 
  Leonora lift she up - she be the mere featherweight - and lay 
 she on the bed with her hair about she . she be smile , as if she have just 
 score a goal in a hockey match . you understand she have not commit 
 suicide . her heart have just stop . I see she , with the long lash on the 
 cheek , with the smile about the lip , with the flower all about she . the 
 stem of a white lily rest in her hand so that the spike of flower be 
 upon her shoulder . she look like a bride in the sunlight of the mortuary 
 candle that be all about she , and the white coif of the two nun that 
 knelt at her foot with the face hide might have be two swan that 
 be to bear she away to kissing - kindness land , or wherever it be . Leonora 
 show she to I . she would not let either of the other see she .  she want , you know , to spare poor dear Edward 's feeling . he never 
 could bear the sight of a corpse . and , since she never give he an idea that 
 Maisie have write to she , he imagine that the death have be the most 
 natural thing in the world . he soon get over it . indeed , it be the one 
 affair of his about which he never feel much remorse .    the death of MRS . MAIDAN occur on the 4th of August 1904 . and then 
 nothing happen until the 4th of August 1913 . there be the curious 
 coincidence of date , but I do not know whether that be one of those 
 sinister , as if half - jocular and altogether merciless proceeding on the 
 part of a cruel providence that we call a coincidence . because it may just 
 as well have be the superstitious mind of Florence that force she to 
 certain act , as if she have be hypnotize . it be , however , certain that the 
 4th of August always prove a significant date for she . to begin with , she 
 be bear on the 4th of August . then on that date , in the year 1899 , she set 
 out with her uncle for the tour round the world in company with a young 
 man call Jimmy . but that be not merely a coincidence . her kindly old 
 uncle , with the supposedly damaged heart , be , in his delicate way , 
 offer she , in this trip , a birthday present to celebrate she come of 
 age . then , on the 4th of August 1900 , she yield to an action that 
 certainly colour her whole life - as well as mine . she have no luck .  she be probably offer herself a birthday present that morning .... 
  on the 4th of August 1901 , she marry I , and set sail for Europe 
 in a great gale of wind - the gale that affect her heart . and no doubt 
 there , again , she be offer herself a birthday gift - the birthday gift of 
 my miserable life . it occur to I that I have never tell you anything 
 about my marriage . that be like this : I have tell you , as I think , that I 
 first meet Florence at the Stuyvesants ' , in Fourteenth Street . and , from 
 that moment , I determine with all the obstinacy of a possibly weak 
 nature , if not to make her mine , at least to marry she . I have no 
 occupation - I have no business affair . I simply camp down there in 
 Stamford , in a vile hotel , and just pass my day in the house , on the 
 verandah of the Misses Hurlbird . the Misses Hurlbird , in an odd , obstinate 
 way , do not like my presence . but they be hamper by the national 
 manner of these occasion . Florence have her own sitting - room . she could 
 ask to it whom she like , and I simply walk into that apartment . I be 
 as timid as you will , but in that matter I be like a chicken that be 
 determined to get across the road in front of an automobile . I would walk 
 into Florence 's pretty , little , old - fashioned room , take off my hat , and sit 
 down . 
  Florence have , of course , several other fellow , too - strap young 
 New Englanders , who work during the day in New York and spend only the 
 evening in the village of their birth . and , in the evening , they would 
 march in on Florence with almost as much determination as I myself 
 show . and I be bind to  say that they be receive with as much disfavour as be my 
 portion - from the Misses Hurlbird .... 
  they be curious old creature , those two . it be almost as if they 
 be member of an ancient family under some curse - they be so 
 gentlewomanly , so proper , and they sigh so . sometimes I would see 
 tear in their eye . I do not know that my courtship of Florence make much 
 progress at first . perhaps that be because it take place almost entirely 
 during the daytime , on hot afternoon , when the cloud of dust hang like 
 fog , right up as high as the top of the thin - leave elm . the night , I 
 believe , be the proper season for the gentle feat of love , not a 
 Connecticut July afternoon , when any sort of proximity be an almost 
 appalling thought . but , if I never so much as kiss Florence , she let I 
 discover very easily , in the course of a fortnight , her simple want . and I 
 could supply those want .... 
  she want to marry a gentleman of leisure ; she want a european 
 establishment . she want her husband to have an English accent , an 
 income of fifty thousand dollar a year from real estate and no ambition 
 to increase that income . and - she faintly hint - she do not want much 
 physical passion in the affair . american , you know , can envisage such 
 union without blink . 
  she give out this information in flood of bright talk - she would pop 
 a little bit of it into comment over a view of the Rialto , Venice , and 
 whilst she be brightly describe Balmoral Castle , she would say that 
 her ideal husband would be one who could get she  receive at the british court . she have spend , it seem , two month in 
 Great Britain - seven week in tour from Stratford to Strathpeffer , and 
 one as pay guest in an old english family near Ledbury , an impoverished , 
 but still stately family , call Bagshawe . they be to have spend two 
 month more in that tranquil bosom , but inopportune event , apparently in 
 her uncle 's business , have cause their rather hurried return to Stamford . 
 the young man call Jimmy have remain in Europe to perfect his 
 knowledge of that continent . he certainly do : he be most useful to we 
 afterwards . 
  but the point that come out - that there be no mistaking - be that 
 Florence be coldly and calmly determine to take no look at any man who 
 could not give she a european settlement . her glimpse of English home life 
 have effect this . she mean , on her marriage , to have a year in Paris , and 
 then to have her husband buy some real estate in the neighbourhood of 
 Fordingbridge , from which place the Hurlbirds have come in the year 1688 . 
 on the strength of that she be go to take her place in the rank of 
 English county society . that be fix . 
  I use to feel mightily elevate when I consider these detail , for 
 I could not figure out that , amongst her acquaintance in Stamford , there 
 be any fellow that would fill the bill . the most of they be not as 
 wealthy as I , and those that be be not the type to give up the 
 fascination of Wall Street even for the protract companionship of 
 Florence . but nothing really happen during the month of July . on the 1st 
 of  August Florence apparently tell her aunt that she intend to marry I . 
  she have not tell I so , but there be no doubt about the aunt , for , 
 on that afternoon , Miss Florence Hurlbird , Senior , stop I on my way to 
 Florence 's sitting - room and take I , agitatedly , into the parlour . it be a 
 singular interview , in that old - fashioned colonial room , with the 
 spindle - legged furniture , the silhouette , the miniature , the portrait of General 
 Braddock , and the smell of lavender . you see , the two poor maiden lady 
 be in agony - and they could not say one single thing direct . they would 
 almost wring their hand and ask if I have consider such a thing as 
 different temperament . I assure you they be almost affectionate , 
 concerned for I even , as if Florence be too bright for my solid and 
 serious virtue . 
  for they have discover in I solid and serious virtue . that might 
 have be because I have once drop the remark that I prefer General 
 Braddock to General Washington . for the Hurlbirds have back the lose 
 side in the War of Independence , and have be seriously impoverished and 
 quite efficiently oppress for that reason . the Misses Hurlbird could 
 never forget it . 
  nevertheless they shudder at the thought of a european career for 
 myself and Florence . each of they really wail when they hear that that 
 be what I hop to give their niece . that may have be partly because 
 they regard Europe as a sink of iniquity , where strange laxity 
 prevail . they think the  Mother Country as Erastian as any other . and they carry their protest 
 to extraordinary length , for they .... 
  they even , almost , say that marriage be a sacrament ; but neither 
 Miss Florence nor Miss Emily could quite bring herself to utter the word . 
 and they almost bring themselves to say that Florence 's early life have 
 be characterize by flirtation - something of that sort . 
 I know I end the interview by say : 
  " I do not   care . if Florence have rob a bank I be go to marry she 
 and take she to Europe . " 
  and at that Miss Emily wail and faint . but Miss Florence , in 
 spite of the state of her sister , throw herself on my neck and cry out : 
  " do not   do it , John . do not   do it . you be a good young man , " and she 
 add , whilst I be get out of the room to send Florence to her aunt 's 
 rescue : 
  " we ought to tell you more . but she be our dear sister 's child . " 
  Florence , I remember , receive I with a chalk - pale face and the 
 exclamation : 
  " have those old cat be say anything against I ? " but I assure 
 she that they have not and hurry she into the room of she strangely 
 afflict relative . I have really forget all about that exclamation of 
 Florence 's until this moment . she treat I so very well - with such 
 tact - that if I ever think of it afterwards I put it down to her deep 
 affection for I . 
 and that evening , when I go to fetch she for a  buggy - ride , she have disappear . I do not lose any time . I go into New 
 York and engage berth on the " Pocahontas , " that be to sail on the 
 evening of the 4th of the month , and then , return to Stamford , I track 
 out , in the course of the day , that Florence have be drive to Rye Station . 
 and there I find that she have take the car to Waterbury . she have , of 
 course , go to her uncle 's . the old man receive I with a stony , husky 
 face . I be not to see Florence ; she be ill ; she be keep her room . 
 and , from something that he let drop - an odd biblical phrase that I have 
 forget - I gather that all that family simply do not intend she to 
 marry ever in her life . 
  I procure at once the name of the near minister and a rope 
 ladder - you have no idea how primitively these matter be arrange in 
 those day in the United States . I dare say that may be so still . and at one 
 o'clock in the morning of the 4th of August I be stand in Florence 's 
 bedroom . I be so one - minded in my purpose that it never strike I there 
 be anything improper in be , at one o'clock in the morning , in 
 Florence 's bedroom . I just want to wake she up . she be not , however , 
 asleep . she expect I , and her relative have only just leave she . she 
 receive I with an embrace of a warmth . . . well , it be the first time I 
 have ever be embrace by a woman - and it be the last when a woman 's 
 embrace have have in it any warmth for I .... 
  I suppose it be my own fault , what follow . at any rate , I be in 
 such a hurry to get the wedding over , and be so afraid of her relative 
 find I there , that  I must have receive her advance with a certain amount of absence of 
 mind . I be out of that room and down the ladder in under half a minute . 
 she keep I wait at the foot an unconscionable time - it be certainly 
 three in the morning before we wake up that minister . and I think that 
 that wait be the only sign Florence ever show of have a conscience 
 as far as I be concern , unless her lie for some moment in my arm 
 be also a sign of conscience . I fancy that , if I have show warmth then , 
 she would have act the proper wife to I , or would have put I back 
 again . but , because I act like a Philadelphia gentleman , she make I , I 
 suppose , go through with the part of a male nurse . perhaps she think 
 that I should not mind . 
  after that , as I gather , she have not any more remorse . she be only 
 anxious to carry out her plan . for , just before she come down the ladder , 
 she call I to the top of that grotesque implement that I go up and 
 down like a tranquil jumping - jack . I be perfectly collect . she say to 
 I with a certain fierceness : 
  " it be determined that we sail at four this afternoon ? you be not 
 lie about have take berth ? " 
  I understand that she would naturally be anxious to get away from 
 the neighbourhood of she apparently insane relative , so that I readily 
 excuse she for think that I should be capable of lie about such a 
 thing . I make it , therefore , plain to she that it be my fix determination 
 to sail by the " Pocahontas . " she say then - it be a moonlit morning , and 
 she be  whisper in my ear whilst I stand on the ladder . the hill that surround 
 Waterbury show , extraordinarily tranquil , around the villa . she say , 
 almost coldly : 
  " I want to know , so as to pack my trunk . " and she add : " I may be 
 ill , you know . I guess my heart be a little like Uncle Hurlbird 's . it run in 
 family . " 
  I whisper that the " Pocahontas " be an extraordinarily steady 
 boat .... 
  now I wonder what have pass through Florence 's mind during the 
 two hour that she have keep I wait at the foot of the ladder . I would 
 give not a little to know . till then , I fancy she have have no settle plan in 
 her mind . she certainly never mention her heart till that time . perhaps 
 the renew sight of her Uncle Hurlbird have give she the idea . certainly 
 her Aunt Emily , who have come over with she to Waterbury , would have 
 rub into she , for hour and hour , the idea that any accentuated 
 discussion would kill the old gentleman . that would recall to her mind all 
 the safeguard against excitement with which the poor silly old 
 gentleman have be hedge in during their trip round the world . that , 
 perhaps , put it into her head . still , I believe there be some remorse on 
 my account , too . Leonora tell I that Florence say there be - for Leonora 
 know all about it , and once go so far as to ask she how she could do a 
 thing so infamous . she excuse herself on the score of an overmaster 
 passion . well , I always say that an overmaster passion be a good excuse 
 for feeling . you can not help they . and it be a good excuse for straight 
 action - she might have bolt with the fellow , before or  after she marry I . and , if they have not enough money to get along 
 with , they might have cut their throat , or sponge on her family , though , 
 of course , Florence want such a lot that it would have suit she very 
 badly to have for a husband a clerk in a drygood store , which be what 
 old Hurlbird would have mad z of that fellow . he hat he . no , I do not 
 think that there be much excuse for Florence . 
  God know . she be a frightened fool , and she be fantastic , and I 
 suppose that , at that time , she really care for that imbecile . he certainly 
 do not   care for she . poor thing .... at any rate , after I have assure she that 
 the " Pocahontas " be a steady ship , she just say : 
  " you will have to look after I in certain way - like Uncle Hurlbird be 
 look after . I will tell you how to do it . " and then she step over the 
 sill , as if she be step on board a boat . I suppose she have burn her ! 
  I have , no doubt , eye - opener enough . when we reentere the Hurlbird 
 mansion at eight o'clock the Hurlbirds be just exhausted . Florence have a 
 hard , triumphant air . we have get marry about four in the morning and have 
 sit about in the wood above the town till then , listen to a 
 mocking - bird imitate an old tom - cat . so I guess Florence have not find get 
 married to I a very stimulating process . I have not find anything much 
 more inspiring to say than how glad I be , with variation . I think I be 
 too daze . well , the Hurlbirds be too daze to say much . we have 
 breakfast together , and then Florence go to pack  her grip and thing . Old Hurlbird take the opportunity to read I a 
 full - blooded lecture , in the style of an american oration , as to the peril for 
 young american girlhood lurking in the european jungle . he say that Paris 
 be full of snake in the grass , of which he have have bitter experience . he 
 conclude , as they always do , poor , dear old thing , with the aspiration 
 that all american woman should one day be sexless - though that be not 
 the way they put it .... 
  well , we make the ship all right by one - thirty - and there be a 
 tempest blowing . that help florence a good deal . for we be not ten 
 minute out from Sandy Hook before Florence go down into her cabin and 
 her heart take she . an agitated stewardess come run up to I and I 
 go run down . I get my direction how to behave to my wife . Most of 
 they come from she , though it be the ship doctor who discreetly 
 suggest to I that I have well refrain from manifestation of 
 affection . I be ready enough . 
  I be , of course , full of remorse . it occur to I that her heart 
 be the reason for the Hurlbirds ' mysterious desire to keep their young 
 and dearest unmarried . of course , they would be too refined to put the 
 motive into word . they be old - stock New Englanders . they would not 
 want to have to suggest that a husband must not kiss the back of his 
 wife 's neck . they would not like to suggest that he might , for the matter 
 of that . I wonder , though , how Florence get the doctor to enter the 
 conspiracy - the several doctor . 
  of course her heart squeak a bit - she have the same configuration 
 of the lung as her Uncle Hurlbird .  and , in his company , she must have hear a great deal of heart talk from 
 specialist . anyhow , she and they tie I pretty well down - and Jimmy , 
 of course , that dreary boy - what in the world do she see in he ? he be 
 lugubrious , silent , morose . he have no talent as a painter . he be very 
 sallow and dark , and he never shave sufficiently . he meet we at Havre , and 
 he proceed to make himself useful for the next two year , during which 
 he live in our flat in Paris , whether we be there or not . he study 
 painting at Julien 's , or some such place .... 
  that fellow have his hand always in the pocket of his odious , 
 square - shoulder , broad - hippe , american coat , and his dark eye be 
 always full of ominous appearance . he be , besides , too fat . why , I be 
 much the well man .... 
  and I dare say Florence would have give I the well . she show 
 sign of it . I think , perhaps , the enigmatic smile with which she use to 
 look back at I over her shoulder when she go into the bathing place 
 be a sort of invitation . I have mention that . it be as if she be 
 say : " I be go in here . I be go to stand so stripped and white and 
 straight - and you be a man .... " perhaps it be that ... 
  no , she can not have like that fellow long . he look like sallow 
 putty . I understand that he have be slim and dark and very graceful at the 
 time of her first disgrace . but , loaf about in Paris , on her pocket money 
 and on the allowance that old Hurlbird make he to keep out of the United 
 States , have give he a stomach like a man of forty , and dyspeptic 
 irritation on top of it .   God , how they work I ! it be those two between they who really 
 elaborate the rule . I have tell you something about they - how I have to 
 head conversation , for all those eleven year , off such topic as love , 
 poverty , crime , and so on . but , look over what I have write , I see that 
 I have unintentionally mislead you when I say that Florence be never out 
 of my sight . yet that be the impression that I really have until just now . 
 when I come to think of it she be out of my sight most of the time . 
  you see , that fellow impress upon I that what Florence need 
 most of all be sleep and privacy . I must never enter her room without 
 knock , or her poor little heart might flutter away to its doom . he say 
 these thing with his lugubrious croak , and his black eye like a crow 's , so 
 that I seem to see poor Florence die ten time a day - a little , pale , frail 
 corpse . why , I would as soon have think of enter her room without 
 her permission as of burgle a church . I would soon have commit 
 that crime . I would certainly have do it if I have think the state of her 
 heart demand the sacrilege . so at ten o'clock at night the door close 
 upon Florence , who have gently , and as if reluctantly , back up that 
 fellow 's recommendation and she would wish I good night as if she 
 be a cinque cento italian lady say good - bye to her lover . and at ten 
 o'clock of the next morning there she would come out the door of her room 
 as fresh as Venus rise from any of the couch that be mention in 
 greek legend . 
  her room door be lock because she be nervous about thief ; 
 but an electric contrivance on a cord  be understand to be attach to her little wrist . she have only to press a 
 bulb to raise the house . and I be provide with an axe - an axe ! - great 
 god , with which to break down her door in case she ever fail to answer 
 my knock , after I knock really loud several time . it be pretty well 
 think out , you see . 
  what be not   so well think out be the ultimate 
 consequence - our be tie to Europe . for that young man rub it so 
 well into I that Florence would die if she cross the Channel - he 
 impress it so fully on my mind that , when later Florence want to go to 
 Fordingbridge , I cut the proposal short - absolutely short , with a curt no . 
 it fix she and it frighten she . I be even back up by all the doctor . I 
 seem to have have endless interview with doctor after doctor , cool , 
 quiet man , who would ask , in reasonable tone , whether there be any 
 reason for our go to England - any special reason . and since I could not 
 see any special reason , they would give the verdict : " well not , then . " I 
 dare say they be honest enough , as thing go . they probably imagine 
 that the mere association of the steamer might have effect on 
 Florence 's nerve . that would be enough , that and a conscientious desire to 
 keep our money on the continent . 
  it must have rattle poor Florence pretty considerably , for , you see , 
 the main idea - the only main idea of her heart , that be otherwise 
 cold - be to get to Fordingbridge and be a county lady in the home of her 
 ancestor . but Jimmy get she , there : he shut on her the door of the 
 Channel ; even on the fairest day of blue  sky , with the cliff of England shin like mother of pearl in full view of 
 Calais , I would not have let she cross the steam gangway to save her 
 life . I tell you it fix she . 
  it fix she beautifully , because she could not announce herself as 
 cure , since that would have put an end to the lock - bedroom 
 arrangement . and , by the time she be sick of Jimmy - which happen in 
 the year 1903 - she have take on Edward Ashburnham . yes , it be a bad fix 
 for she , because Edward could have take she to Fordingbridge and , though 
 he could not give her Branshaw Manor , that home of her ancestor be 
 settle on his wife , she could at least have pretty considerably queen it 
 there or thereabout , what with our money and the support of the 
 Ashburnhams . her uncle , as soon as he consider that she have really 
 settle down with I - and I send he only the most glowing account of 
 her virtue and constancy - make over to she a very considerable part of his 
 fortune , for which he have no use . I suppose that we have , between we , 
 seventy - five thousand dollar a year , though I never quite know how much 
 of hers go to Jimmy . at any rate , we could have shine in Fordingbridge . 
  I never quite know , either , how she and Edward get rid of Jimmy . I 
 fancy that fat and disreputable raven must have have his six golden front 
 tooth knock down his throat by Edward one morning whilst I have go 
 out to buy some flower in the Rue de la Paix , leave Florence and the 
 flat in charge of those two . and serve he very right , be all that I can say . 
 he be a bad sort  of blackmailer ; I hope Florence do not have his company in the next 
 world . 
  as God be my Judge , I do not believe that I would have separate 
 those two if I have know that they really and passionately love each 
 other . I do not know where the public morality of the case come in , and , 
 of course , no man really know what he would have do in any give case . 
 but I truly believe that I would have unite they , observe way and 
 mean as decent as I could . I believe that I should have give they money 
 to live upon and that I should have console myself somehow . at that date 
 I might have find some young thing , like Maisie Maidan , or the poor girl , 
 and I might have have some peace . for peace I never have with Florence , and I 
 hardly believe that I care for she in the way of love after a year or two of 
 it . she become for I a rare and fragile object , something burdensome , 
 but very frail . why , it be as if I have be give a thin - shelled pullet 's egg 
 to carry on my palm from Equatorial Africa to Hoboken . yes , she become 
 for I , as it be , the subject of a bet - the trophy of an athlete 's 
 achievement , a parsley crown that be the symbol of his chastity , his 
 soberness , his abstention , and of his inflexible will . of intrinsic value as 
 a wife , I think she have none at all for I . I fancy I be not even proud of 
 the way she dress . 
  but her passion for Jimmy be not even a passion , and , mad as the 
 suggestion may appear , she be frightened for her life . yes , she be 
 afraid of I . I will tell you how that happen . 
 I have , in the old day , a dark servant , call Julius ,  who valet I , and wait on I , and love I , like the crown of his 
 head . now , when we leave Waterbury to go to the " Pocahontas , " Florence 
 entrust to I one very special and very precious leather grip . she tell 
 I that her life might depend on that grip , which contain her drug 
 against heart attack . and , since I be never much of a hand at carry 
 thing , I entrust this , in turn , to Julius , who be a grey - haired chap of 
 sixty or so , and very picturesque at that . he make so much impression on 
 Florence that she regard he as a sort of father , and absolutely refuse 
 to let I take he to Paris . he would have inconvenience she . 
  well , Julius be so overcome with grief at be leave behind that he 
 must need go and drop the precious grip . I see red , I see purple . I fly at 
 Julius . on the ferry , it be , I fill up one of his eye ; I threaten to 
 strangle he . and , since an unresiste Negro can make a deplorable noise 
 and a deplorable spectacle , and , since that be Florence 's first adventure 
 in the married state , she get a pretty idea of my character . it affirm in 
 she the desperate resolve to conceal from I the fact that she be not 
 what she would have call " a pure woman . " for that be really the 
 mainspring of her fantastic action . she be afraid that I should murder 
 she .... 
  so she get up the heart attack , at the early possible opportunity , 
 on board the liner . perhaps she be not so very much to be blame . you 
 must remember that she be a New Englander , and that New England no 
 long idealize darky as it do formerly . whereas ,  if she have come from even so little south as Philadelphia , and have be of 
 an oldish family , she would have see that for I to kick Julius be not 
 so outrageous an act as for her cousin , Reggie Hurlbird , to say - as I have 
 hear he say to his english butler - that for two cent he would bat he 
 on the pant . besides , the medicine - grip do not bulk as largely in her eye 
 as it do in mine , where it be the symbol of the existence of an adore 
 wife of a day . to she it be just a useful lie .... 
  well , there you have the position , as clear as I can make it - the 
 husband an ignorant fool , the wife a cold sensualist with imbecile 
 fear - for I be such a fool that I should never have know what she be 
 or be not - and the blackmail lover . and then the other lover come 
 along .... 
  well , Edward Ashburnham be worth have . have I convey to you 
 the splendid fellow that he be - the fine soldier , the excellent landlord , 
 the extraordinarily kind , careful , and industrious magistrate , the upright , 
 honest , fair - deal , fair - thinking , public character ? I suppose I have not 
 convey it to you . the truth be that I never know it until the poor girl 
 come along - the poor girl who be just as straight , as splendid , and as 
 upright as he . I swear she be . I suppose I ought to have know . I suppose 
 that be , really , why I like he so much - so infinitely much . come to 
 think of it , I can remember a thousand little act of kindliness , of 
 thoughtfulness for his inferior , even on the continent . look here , I know 
 of two family of dirty , unpicturesque , hessian pauper that that fellow , 
 with an infinite patience , root up , get their police report ,  set on their foot , or export to my patient land . and he would do it quite 
 inarticulately , set in motion by see a child cry in the street . he 
 would wrestle with dictionary , in that unfamiliar tongue .... well , he 
 could not bear to see a child cry . perhaps he could not bear to see a woman 
 and not give she the comfort of his physical attraction . 
  but , although I like he so intensely , I be rather apt to take these 
 thing for grant . they make I feel comfortable with he , good towards 
 he ; they make I trust he . but I guess I think it be part of the 
 character of any english gentleman . why , one day he get it into his head 
 that the head waiter at the Excelsior have be cry - the fellow with the 
 grey face and grey whisker . and then he spend the good part of a week , in 
 correspondence and up at the british consul 's , in get the fellow 's wife 
 to come back from London and bring back his girl baby . she have bolt with 
 a swiss scullion . if she have not come inside the week he would have go 
 to London himself to fetch she . he be like that . 
  Edward Ashburnham be like that , and I think it be only the duty 
 of his rank and station . perhaps that be all that it be - but I pray God to 
 make I discharge mine as well . and , but for the poor girl , I dare say that 
 I should never have see it , however much the feeling might have be 
 over I . she have for he such enthusiasm that , although even now I do not 
 understand the technicality of english life , I can gather enough . she be 
 with they during the whole of our last stay at Nauheim . 
 Nancy Rufford be her name ; she be Leonora 's  only friend 's , child , and Leonora be her guardian , if that be the correct 
 term . she have live with the Ashburnhams ever since she have be of the 
 age of thirteen , when her mother be say to have commit suicide 
 owe to the brutality of her father . yes , it be a cheerful story .... 
  Edward always call she " the girl , " and it be very pretty , the 
 evident affection he have for she and she for he . and Leonora 's foot she 
 would have kiss - those two be for she the good man and the good 
 woman on earth - and in heaven . I think that she have not a thought of evil in 
 her head - the poor girl .... 
  well , anyhow , she chant Edward 's praise to I for the hour 
 together , but , as I have say , I could not make much of it . it appear that 
 he have the d.s.o. , and that his troop love he beyond the love of man . you 
 never see such a troop as his . and he have the Royal Humane Society 's 
 medal with a clasp . that meant , apparently , that he have twice jump off 
 the deck of a troop - ship to rescue what the girl call " tommie , " who have 
 fall overboard in the Red Sea and such place . he have be twice 
 recommend for the V.C. , whatever that might mean , and , although owe 
 to some technicality he have never receive that apparently coveted 
 order , he have some special place about his sovereign at the coronation . or 
 perhaps it be some post in the beefeater ' . she make he out like a cross 
 between Lohengrin and the Chevalier Bayard . perhaps he be .... but he be 
 too silent a fellow to make that side of he really decorative . I remember  go to he , at about that time , and ask he what the d.s.o. be , and 
 he grunt out : 
  " it be a sort of a thing they give grocer who have   honourably supply 
 the troop with adulterate coffee in wartime " - something of that sort . 
 he do not quite carry conviction to I , so , in the end , I put it directly to 
 Leonora . I ask she fully and squarely - preface the question with some 
 remark , such as those that I have already give you , as to the difficulty 
 one have in really get to know people when one 's intimacy be conduct 
 as an english acquaintanceship - I ask she whether her husband be not 
 really a splendid fellow - along at least the line of his public function . 
 she look at I with a slightly awaken air - with an air that would 
 have be almost startled if Leonora could ever have be startle . 
  " do not   you know ? " she ask . " if I come to think of it there be not a 
 more splendid fellow in any three county , pick they where you 
 will - along those line . " and she add , after she have look at I 
 reflectively for what seem a long time : 
  " to do my husband justice there could not be a well man on the 
 earth . there would not be room for it - along those line . " 
  " well , " I say , " then he must really be Lohengrin and the Cid in one 
 body . for there be not any other line that count . " 
 again she look at I for a long time . 
  " it be your opinion that there be no other line that count ? " she ask 
 slowly . 
 " well , " I answer gayly , " you be not go to  accuse he of not be a good husband , or of not be a good guardian to 
 your ward ? " 
  she speak then , slowly , like a person who be listen to the sound 
 in a sea - shell hold to her ear , and - would you believe it ? - she tell I 
 afterwards that , at that speech of mine , for the first time she have a vague 
 inkling of the tragedy that be to follow so soon - although the girl have 
 live with they for eight year or so : 
  " oh , I be not think of say that he be not the good of husband , or 
 that he be not very fond of the girl . " 
 and then I say something like : 
  " well , Leonora , a man see more of these thing than even a wife . 
 and , let I tell you , that in all the year I have   know Edward he have never , 
 in your absence , pay a moment 's attention to any other woman - not by the 
 quivering of an eyelash . I should have notice . and he talk of you as if you 
 be one of the angel of God . " 
  " oh , " she come up to the scratch , as you could be sure Leonora would 
 always come up to the scratch , " I be perfectly sure that he always speak 
 nicely of I . " 
  I dare say she have practice in that sort of scene - people must have 
 be always compliment she on her husband 's fidelity and adoration . for 
 half the world - the whole of the world that know Edward and 
 Leonora - believe that his conviction in the Kilsyte affair have be a 
 miscarriage of justice - a conspiracy of false evidence , get together by 
 Nonconformist adversary . but think of the fool that I be ....  let I think where we be . oh , yes . . . that conversation take place on 
 the 4th of August 1913 . I remember say to she that , on that day , 
 exactly nine year before , I have make their acquaintance , so that it have 
 seem quite appropriate and like a birthday speech to utter my little 
 testimonial to my friend Edward . I could quite confidently say that , though 
 we four have be about together in all sort of place , for all that length 
 of time , I have not , for my part , one single complaint to make of either of 
 they . and I add that that be an unusual record for people who have be 
 so much together . you be not to imagine that it be only at Nauheim that 
 we meet . that would not have suit Florence . 
  I find , on look at my diary , that on September the 4th 1904 
 Edward accompany Florence and myself to Paris , where we put he up 
 till the 21st of that month . he make another short visit to we in December 
 of that year - the first year of our acquaintance . it must have be during 
 this visit that he knock Mr. Jimmy 's tooth down his throat . I dare say 
 Florence have ask he to come over for that purpose . in 1905 he be in 
 Paris three time - once with Leonora , who want some frock . in 1906 
 we spend the good part of six week together at Mentone , and Edward 
 stay with we in Paris on his way back to London . that be how it go . 
 the fact be that in Florence the poor wretch have  get hold of a Tartar , compare with whom Leonora be a sucking kid . he 
 must have have a hell of a time . Leonora want to keep he for - what shall 
 I say - for the good of her church , as it be , to show that catholic woman 
 do not lose their man . let it go at that , for the moment . I will write more 
 about her motif later , perhaps . but Florence be stick on to the 
 proprietor of the home of her ancestor . no doubt he be also a very 
 passionate lover . but I be convinced that he be sick of Florence within 
 three year of even interrupted companionship and the life that she lead 
 he .... 
  if even Leonora so much as mention in a letter that they have have a 
 woman stay with they - or if she so much as mention a woman 's name 
 in a letter to I - off would go a desperate cable in cipher to that poor 
 wretch at Branshaw , command he on pain of an instant and horrible 
 disclosure to come over and assure she of his fidelity . I dare say he would 
 have face it out ; I dare say he would have throw over Florence and take 
 the risk of exposure . but there he have Leonora to deal with . and Leonora 
 assure he that , if the minute fragment of the real situation ever get 
 through to my sens , she would wreak upon he the most terrible 
 vengeance that she could think of . and he do not have a very easy job . 
 Florence call for more and more attention from he as the time go 
 on . she would make he kiss she at any moment of the day ; and it be only 
 by his make it plain that a divorced lady could never assume a position 
 in the country of Hampshire that he could prevent she from make a bolt 
 of it with he in her train . oh , yes , it be a difficult job for he .   for Florence , if you please , gain in time a more composed view of 
 nature , and overcome by her habit of garrulity , arrive at a frame of mind 
 in which she find it almost necessary to tell I all about it - nothing 
 less than that . she say that her situation be too unbearable with regard 
 to I . 
  she propose to tell I all , secure a divorce from I , and go with 
 Edward and settle in California .... I do not suppose that she be really 
 serious in this . it would have mean the extinction of all hope of 
 Branshaw Manor for she . besides she have get it into her head that Leonora , 
 who be as sound as a roach , be consumptive . she be always beg 
 Leonora , before I , to go and see a doctor . but , none the less , poor Edward 
 seem to have believe in her determination to carry he off . he would not 
 have go ; he care for his wife too much . but if Florence have put he at 
 it , that would have mean my get to know of it , and his incur 
 Leonora 's vengeance . and she could have make it pretty hot for he in ten 
 or a dozen different way . and she assure I that she would have use 
 every one of they . she be determined to spare my feeling . and she be 
 quite aware that , at that date , the hot she could have make it for he 
 would have be to refuse , herself , ever to see he again .... 
  well , I think I have make it pretty clear . let I come to the 4th of 
 August 1913 , the last day of my absolute ignorance - and , I assure you , of 
 my perfect happiness . for the coming of that dear girl only add to it all . 
  on that 4th of August I be sit in the lounge with a rather 
 odious Englishman call Bagshawe , who  have arrive that night , too late for dinner . Leonora have just go to bed 
 and I be wait for Florence and Edward and the girl to come back from 
 a concert at the Casino . they have not go there all together . Florence , I 
 remember , have say at first that she would remain with Leonora and I , 
 and Edward and the girl have go off alone . and then Leonora have say to 
 Florence with perfect calmness : 
  " I wish you would go with those two . I think the girl ought to have 
 the appearance of be chaperon with Edward in these place . I think 
 the time have come . " so Florence , with her light step , have slip out after 
 they . she be all in black for some cousin or other . Americans be 
 particular in those matter . 
  we have go on sit in the lounge till towards ten , when Leonora 
 have go up to bed . it have be a very hot day , but there it be cool . the 
 man call Bagshawe have be read the Times on the other side of the 
 room , but then he move over to I with some trifling question as a 
 prelude to suggest an acquaintance . I fancy he ask I something 
 about the poll - tax on Kur guest , and whether it could not be sneak out 
 of . he be that sort of person . 
  well , he be an unmistakable man , with a military figure , rather 
 exaggerated , with bulbous eye that avoid your own , and a pallid 
 complexion that suggest vice practise in secret , along with an uneasy 
 desire for make acquaintance at whatever cost .... the filthy toad .... 
  he begin by tell I that he come from Ludlow Manor , near 
 Ledbury . the name have a slightly familiar  sound , though I could not fix it in my mind . then he begin to talk about a 
 duty on hop , about California hop , about Los Angeles , where he have be . 
 he be fence for a topic with which he might gain my affection . 
  and then , quite suddenly , in the bright light of the street , I see 
 Florence run . it be like that - florence run with a face whiter 
 than paper and her hand on the black stuff over her heart . I tell you , my 
 own heart stand still ; I tell you I could not move . she rush in at the 
 swing door . she look round that place of rush chair , cane table , and 
 newspaper . she see I and open her lip . she see the man who be 
 talk to I . she stick her hand over her face as if she wish to push 
 her eye out . and she be not there any more . 
  I could not move ; I could not stir a finger . and then that man say : 
  " by Jove ! Florry Hurlbird . " he turn upon I with an oily and uneasy 
 sound mean for a laugh . he be really go to ingratiate himself with 
 I . 
  " do you know who that be ? " he ask . " the last time I see that girl 
 she be come out of the bedroom of a young man call Jimmy at five 
 o'clock in the morning . in my house at Ledbury . you see she recognize I . " 
 he be stand on his foot , look down at I . I do not   know what I 
 look like . at any rate , he give a sort of gurgle and then stutter : 
  " oh , I say . . . " those be the last word I ever hear of Mr. 
 Bagshawe 's . a long time afterwards I pull myself out of the lounge and 
 go up to  Florence 's room . she have not lock the door - for the first night of our 
 married life . she be lie , quite respectably arrange , unlike Mrs. 
 Maidan , on her bed . she have a little phial that rightly should have contain 
 nitrate of amyl , in her right hand . that be on the 4th of August 1913 .    the odd thing be that what stick out in my recollection of the rest of 
 that evening be Leonora 's say : " of course you might marry she , " and 
 when I ask whom , she answer : 
 " the girl . " 
  now that be to I a very amazing thing - amazing for the light of 
 possibility that it cast into the human heart . for I have never have the 
 slight conscious idea of marry the girl ; I never have the slight 
 idea even of care for she . I must have talk in an odd way , as people do 
 who be recover from an anaesthetic . it be as if one have a dual 
 personality , the one I be entirely unconscious of the other . I have 
 think nothing ; I have say such an extraordinary thing . 
  I do not   know that analysis of my own psychology matter at all to 
 this story . I should say that it do not   or , at any rate , that I have give 
 enough of it . but that odd remark of mine have a strong influence upon what 
 come after . I mean , that Leonora would probably never have speak to I 
 at all about Florence 's relation with  Edward if I have not   say , two hour after my wife 's death : 
 " now I can marry the girl . " 
  she have , then , take it for grant that I have be suffer all that 
 she have be suffer , or , at least , that I have permit all that she have 
 permit . so that , a month ago - about a week after the funeral of poor 
 Edward - she could say to I in the most natural way in the world - I have 
 be talk about the duration of my stay at Branshaw - she say with her 
 clear , reflective intonation : 
  " oh , stop here for ever and ever if you can . " and then she add : " you 
 could not   be more of a brother to I , - or more of a counsellor , or more of 
 a support . you be all the consolation I have in the world . and be not   it odd 
 to think that if your wife have not   be my husband 's mistress , you would 
 probably never have be here at all ? " 
  that be how I get the news - full in the face , like that . I do not   say 
 anything and I do not   suppose I feel anything , unless may be it be with 
 that mysterious and unconscious self that underlie most people . perhaps 
 one day when I be unconscious or walk in my sleep I may go and spit 
 upon poor Edward 's grave . it seem about the most unlikely thing I could 
 do ; but there it be . 
  no , I remember no emotion of any sort , but just the clear feeling 
 that one have from time to time when one hear that some Mrs. so - and - so 
 be au mieux with a certain gentleman . it make thing plainer , suddenly , to 
 my curiosity . it be as if I think , at that moment , of a windy November 
 evening , that , when I come to  think it over afterwards , a dozen unexplained thing would fit themselves 
 into place . but I be not   think thing over then . I remember that 
 distinctly . I be just sit back , rather stiffly , in a deep armchair . that 
 be what I remember . it be twilight . 
  Branshaw Manor lie in a little hollow with lawn across it and 
 pine - wood on the fringe of the dip . the immense wind , come from 
 across the forest , roar overhead . but the view from the window be 
 perfectly quiet and grey . not a thing stir , except a couple of rabbit on 
 the extreme edge of the lawn . it be Leonora 's own little study that we 
 be in and we be wait for the tea to be bring . I , as I have say , 
 be sit in the deep chair , Leonora be stand in the window 
 twirl the wooden acorn at the end of the window - blind cord desultorily 
 round and round . she look across the lawn and say , as far as I can 
 remember : 
  " Edward have be dead only ten day and yet there be rabbit on the 
 lawn . " 
  I understand that rabbit do a great deal of harm to the short grass 
 in England . and then she turn round to I and say without any 
 adornment at all , for I remember her exact word : 
  " I think it be stupid of Florence to commit suicide . " 
  I can not tell you the extraordinary sense of leisure that we two 
 seem to have at that moment . it be not   as if we be wait for a 
 train , it be not   as if we be wait for a meal - it be just that there 
 be nothing to wait for . nothing . 
 there be an extreme stillness with the remote and  intermittent sound of the wind . there be the grey light in that brown , 
 small room . and there appear to be nothing else in the world . 
  I know then that Leonora be about to let I into her full 
 confidence . it be as if - or no , it be the actual fact that - Leonora with 
 an odd english sense of decency have determine to wait until Edward have 
 be in his grave for a full week before she speak . and with some vague 
 motive of give she an idea of the extent to which she must permit 
 herself to make confidence I say slowly - and these word too I 
 remember with exactitude - 
 " do Florence commit suicide ? I do not   know . " 
  I be just , you understand , try to let she know that , if she be 
 go to speak , she would have to talk about a much wide range of thing 
 than she have before thought necessary . 
 
 so that that be the first knowledge I have that Florence have commit 
 suicide . it have never enter my head . you may think that I have be 
 singularly lack in suspiciousness ; you may consider I even to have 
 be an imbecile . but consider exactly the position . 
  in such circumstance of clamour , of outcry , of the crash of many 
 people run together , of the professional reticence of such people as 
 hotel - keeper , the traditional reticence of such " good people " as the 
 Ashburnhams - in such circumstance it be some little material object , 
 always , that catch the eye and that appeal to the imagination . I have no 
 possible guide to  the idea of suicide , and the sight of the little flask of nitrate of amyl in 
 Florence 's hand suggest instantly to my mind the idea of the failure of 
 her heart . nitrate of amyl , you understand , be the drug that be give to 
 relieve sufferer from angina pectoris . 
  see Florence , as I have see she , run with a white face and 
 with one hand hold over her heart , and see she , as I immediately 
 afterwards see she , lie upon her bed with the so familiar little brown 
 flask clench in her finger , it be natural enough for my mind to frame 
 the idea . as happen now and again , I think she have go out without 
 her remedy and , have feel an attack come on whilst she be in the 
 garden , she have run in to get the nitrate in order , as quickly as possible , 
 to obtain relief . and it be equally inevitable my mind should frame the 
 thought that her heart , unable to stand the strain of the running , should 
 have break in her side . how could I have know that , during all the year 
 of our married life , that little brown flask have contain , not nitrate of 
 amyl , but prussic acid ? it be inconceivable . 
  why , not even Edward Ashburnham , who be , after all , more 
 intimate with she than I be , have an inkling of the truth . he just think 
 that she have drop dead of heart disease . indeed , I fancy that the only 
 people who ever know that Florence have commit suicide be Leonora , 
 the Grand Duke , the head of the police , and the hotel - keeper . I mention 
 these last three because my recollection of that night be only the sort of 
 pinkish effulgence from the electric lamp in the hotel lounge . there 
 seem to bob into my consciousness ,  like float globe , the face of those three . now it would be the 
 bearded , monarchical , benevolent head of the Grand Duke ; then the 
 sharp - feature , brown , cavalry - moustache feature of the chief of police ; then 
 the globular , polished , and high - collared vacuousness that represent 
 Monsieur Schontz , the proprietor of the hotel . at time one head would be 
 there alone , at another the spike helmet of the official would be close to 
 the healthy baldness of the prince ; then Monsieur Schontz 's oil lock 
 would push in between the two . the sovereign 's soft , exquisitely train 
 voice would say : " Ja , ja , ja ! " each word drop out like so many soft 
 pellet of suet ; the subdue rasp of the official would come : " Zum Befehl , 
 Durchlaucht , " like five revolver - shot ; the voice of Monsieur Schontz 
 would go on and on under its breath like that of an unclean priest recite 
 from his breviary in the corner of a railway carriage . that be how it 
 present itself to I . 
  they seem to take no notice of I ; I do not   suppose that I be even 
 address by one of they . but as long as one or the other , or all three of 
 they , be there , they stand between I as if , I be the titular 
 possessor of the corpse , have a right to be present at their conference . 
 then they all go away and I be leave alone for a long time . 
  and I think nothing ; absolutely nothing . I have no idea ; I have no 
 strength . I feel no sorrow , no desire for action , no inclination to go 
 upstairs and fall upon the body of my wife . I just see the pink effulgence , 
 the cane table , the palm , the globular match - holder , the indented 
 ashtray . and then Leonora come  to I and it appear that I address to she that singular remark : 
 " now I can marry the girl . " 
  but I have give you absolutely the whole of my recollection of that 
 evening , as it be the whole of my recollection of the succeed three or 
 four day . I be in a state just simply cataleptic . they put I to bed and I 
 stay there ; they bring I my clothe and I dress ; they lead I to an 
 open grave and I stand beside it . if they have take I to the edge of a 
 river , or if they have fling I beneath a railway train , I should have be 
 drown or mangle in the same spirit . I be the walk dead . 
 well , those be my impression . 
  what have actually happen have be this . I piece it together 
 afterwards . you will remember I say that Edward Ashburnham and the girl 
 have go off , that night , to a concert at the Casino and that Leonora have 
 ask Florence , almost immediately after their departure , to follow they 
 and to perform the office of chaperon . Florence , you may also remember , 
 be all in black , be the mourning that she wear for a deceased cousin , 
 Jean Hurlbird . it be a very black night and the girl be dress in 
 cream - colour muslin , and must have glimmer under the tall tree of the dark 
 park like a phosphorescent fish in a cupboard . you could not   have have a 
 well beacon . 
  and it appear that Edward Ashburnham lead the girl not up the 
 straight allee that lead to the Casino , but in under the dark tree of the 
 park . Edward Ashburnham tell I all this in his final outburst . I have  tell you that , upon that occasion , he become deucedly vocal . I do not   pump 
 he . I have not   any motive . at that time I do not   in the least connect he 
 with my wife . but the fellow talk like a cheap novelist . - or like a very 
 good novelist for the matter of that , if it be the business of a novelist to 
 make you see thing clearly . and I tell you I see that thing as clearly as if 
 it be a dream that never leave I . it appear that , not very far from the 
 Casino , he and the girl sit down in the darkness upon a public bench . the 
 light from that place of entertainment must have reach they through 
 the tree - trunk , since , Edward say , he could quite plainly see the girl 's 
 face - that beloved face with the high forehead , the queer mouth , the 
 torture eyebrow and the direct eye . and to Florence , creep up behind 
 they , they must have present the appearance of silhouette . for I take 
 it that Florence come creep up behind they over the short grass to a 
 tree that , as I quite well remember , be immediately behind that public 
 seat . it be a not very difficult feat for a woman instinct with jealousy . 
 the Casino orchestra be , as Edward remember to tell I , play the 
 Rakoczy march , and although it be not loud enough , at that distance , to 
 drown the voice of Edward Ashburnham , it be certainly sufficiently 
 audible to efface , amongst the noise of the night , the slight brushing 
 and rustling that might have be make by the foot of Florence or by she 
 gown in come over the short grass . and that miserable woman must have 
 get it in the face , good and strong . it must have be horrible for she . 
 horrible ! well , I suppose she deserve all that she get .   anyhow , there you have the picture : the immensely tall tree , elm 
 most of they , tower and feather away up into the black mistiness 
 that tree seem to gather about they at night ; the silhouette of those 
 two upon the seat ; the beam of light come from the Casino , the woman 
 all in black peeping with fear behind the tree - trunk . it be melodrama ; but I 
 can not   help it . 
  and then , it appear , something happen to Edward Ashburnham . he 
 assure I - and I see no reason for disbelieve he - that until that 
 moment he have have no idea whatever of care for the girl . he say that he 
 have regard she exactly as he would have regard a daughter . he 
 certainly love she , but with a very deep , very tender , and very tranquil 
 love . he have miss she when she go away to her convent - school ; he have 
 be glad when she have return . but of more than that he have be totally 
 unconscious . have he be conscious of it , he assure I , he would have 
 flee from it as from a thing accurse . he realize that it be the last 
 outrage upon Leonora . but the real point be his entire unconsciousness . 
 he have go with she into that dark park with no quickening of the pulse , 
 with no desire for the intimacy of solitude . he have go intend to talk 
 about polo pony and tennis - racquet ; about the temperament of the 
 reverend Mother at the convent she have leave and about whether her frock 
 for a party when they get home should be white or blue . it have not   come into 
 his head that they would talk about a single thing that they have not   always 
 talk about ; it have not even come into his head that the taboo which  extend around she be not inviolable . and then , suddenly , that - 
  he be very careful to assure I that at that time there be no 
 physical motive about his declaration . it do not appear to he to be a 
 matter of a dark night and a propinquity and so on . no , it be simply of her 
 effect on the moral side of his life that he appear to have talk . he say 
 that he never have the slight notion to enfold she in his arm or so much 
 as to touch her hand . he swear that he do not touch her hand . he say that 
 they sit , she at one end of the bench , he at the other ; he lean slightly 
 towards she and she look straight towards the light of the Casino , her 
 face illuminate by the lamp . the expression upon her face he could only 
 describe as " queer . " 
  at another time , indeed , he make it appear that he think she be 
 glad . it be easy to imagine that she be glad , since at that time she could 
 have have no idea of what be really happen . frankly , she adore Edward 
 Ashburnham . he be for she , in everything that she say at that time , the 
 model of humanity , the hero , the athlete , the father of his county , the 
 law - giver . so that for she to be suddenly , intimately , and overwhelmingly 
 praise must have be a matter for mere gladness , however 
 overwhelming it be . it must have be as if a god have approve her 
 handiwork or a king her loyalty . she just sit still and listen , smile . 
  and it seem to she that all the bitterness of her childhood , the 
 terror of her tempestuous father , the bewailing of her cruel - tongue 
 mother be suddenly atone for . she have her recompense at last . because ,  of course , if you come to figure it out , a sudden pour forth of passion 
 by a man whom you regard as a cross between a pastor and a father might , 
 to a woman , have the aspect of mere praise for good conduct . it would not , I 
 mean , appear at all in the light of an attempt to gain possession . the girl , 
 at least , regard he as firmly anchor to his Leonora . she have not the 
 slight inkling of any infidelity . he have always speak to she of his 
 wife in term of reverence and deep affection . he have give she the idea 
 that he regard Leonora as absolutely impeccable and as absolutely 
 satisfying . their union have appear to she to be one of those bless 
 thing that be speak of and contemplate with reverence by her church . 
  so that , when he speak of she as be the person he care most for 
 in the world , she naturally think that he mean to except Leonora and 
 she be just glad . it be like a father say that he approve of a 
 marriageable daughter .... and Edward , when he realize what he be do , 
 curb his tongue at once . she be just glad and she go on be just 
 glad . 
  I suppose that that be the most monstrously wicked thing that 
 Edward Ashburnham ever do in his life . and yet I be so near to all these 
 people that I can not think any of they wicked . it be impossible of I to 
 think of Edward Ashburnham as anything but straight , upright , and 
 honourable . that , I mean , be , in spite of everything , my permanent view of 
 he . I try at time by dwell on some of the thing that he do to push 
 that image of he away , as you might try to push aside a large pendulum . 
 but it always come  back - the memory of his innumerable act of kindness , of his efficiency , 
 of his unspiteful tongue . he be such a fine fellow . 
  so I feel myself force to attempt to excuse he in this as in so 
 many other thing . it be , I have no doubt , a most monstrous thing to 
 attempt to corrupt a young girl just out of a convent . but I think Edward 
 have no idea at all of corrupt she . I believe that he simply love she . he 
 say that that be the way of it and I , at least , believe he and I believe 
 too that she be the only woman he ever really love . he say that that 
 be so ; and he do enough to prove it . and Leonora say that it be so and 
 Leonora know he to the bottom of his heart . 
  I have come to be very much of a cynic in these matter ; I mean that 
 it be impossible to believe in the permanence of man 's or woman 's love . or , 
 at any rate , it be impossible to believe in the permanence of any early 
 passion . as I see it , at least , with regard to man , a love affair , a love for 
 any definite woman , be something in the nature of a widening of the 
 experience . with each new woman that a man be attract to there appear 
 to come a broadening of the outlook , or , if you like , an acquiring of new 
 territory . a turn of the eyebrow , a tone of the voice , a queer 
 characteristic gesture - all these thing , and it be these thing that cause 
 to arise the passion of love - all these thing be like so many object on 
 the horizon of the landscape that tempt a man to walk beyond the horizon , 
 to explore . he want to get , as it be , behind those eyebrow with the 
 peculiar turn , as if he desire to see the world  with the eye that they overshadow . he want to hear that voice apply 
 itself to every possible proposition , to every possible topic ; he want to 
 see those characteristic gesture against every possible background . of 
 the question of the sex instinct I know very little and I do not think that it 
 count for very much in a really great passion . it can be arouse by such 
 nothing - by an untied shoelace , by a glance of the eye in pass - that I 
 think it might be leave out of the calculation . I do not   mean to say that any 
 great passion can exist without a desire for consummation . that seem to 
 I to be a commonplace and to be therefore a matter need no comment 
 at all . it be a thing , with all its accident , that must be take for grant , 
 as , in a novel , or a biography , you take it for grant that the character 
 have their meal with some regularity . but the real fierceness of desire , 
 the real heat of a passion long continue and wither up the soul of a 
 man , be the craving for identity with the woman that he love . he desire 
 to see with the same eye , to touch with the same sense of touch , to hear 
 with the same ear , to lose his identity , to be envelop , to be support . 
 for , whatever may be say of the relation of the sex , there be no man 
 who love a woman that do not desire to come to she for the renewal of 
 his courage , for the cutting asunder of his difficulty . and that will be 
 the mainspring of his desire for she . we be all so afraid , we be all so 
 alone , we all so need from the outside the assurance of our own 
 worthiness to exist . 
  so , for a time , if such a passion come to fruition , the man will get 
 what he want . he will get the moral  support , the encouragement , the relief from the sense of loneliness , the 
 assurance of his own worth . but these thing pass away ; inevitably they 
 pass away as the shadow pass across sun - dial . it be sad , but it be so . the 
 page of the book will become familiar ; the beautiful corner of the road 
 will have be turn too many time . well , this be the sad story . 
  and yet I do believe that for every man there come at last a 
 woman - or , no , that be the wrong way of formulate it . for every man 
 there come at last a time of life when the woman who then set her seal 
 upon his imagination have set her seal for good . he will travel over no more 
 horizon ; he will never again set the knapsack over his shoulder ; he will 
 retire from those scene . he will have go out of the business . 
  that at any rate be the case with Edward and the poor girl . it be 
 quite literally the case . it be quite literally the case that his 
 passion - for the mistress of the Grand Duke , for Mrs. Basil , for little Mrs. 
 Maidan , for Florence , for whom you will - these passion be merely 
 preliminary canter compare to his final race with death for she . I be 
 certain of that . I be not go to be so american as to say that all true 
 love demand some sacrifice . it do not . but I think that love will be truer 
 and more permanent in which self - sacrifice have be exact . and , in the 
 case of the other woman , Edward just cut in and cut they out as he do 
 with the polo - ball from under the nose of Count Baron von Leloffel . I do not  
 mean to say that he do not   wear himself as thin as a lath in the endeavour 
 to capture the other woman ; but over she he wear himself to rag and 
 tatter and death - in the effort to leave she alone .   and in speak to she on that night , he be not , I be convince , 
 commit a baseness . it be as if his passion for she have not   exist ; as 
 if the very word that he speak , without know that he speak they , 
 create the passion as they go along . before he speak , there be 
 nothing ; afterwards ,    be the integral fact of his life . well , I must get 
 back to my story . 
  and my story be concern itself with Florence - with Florence , 
 who hear those word from behind the tree . that of course be only 
 conjecture , but I think the conjecture be pretty well justified . you have 
 the fact that those two go out , that she follow they almost 
 immediately afterwards through the darkness , and , a little later , she come 
 run back to the hotel with that pallid face and the hand clutch her 
 dress over her heart . it can not   have be only Bagshawe . her face be 
 contort with agony before ever her eye fall upon I or upon he beside 
 I . but I dare say Bagshawe may have be the determine influence in 
 her suicide . Leonora say that she have that flask , apparently of nitrate of 
 amyl , but actually of prussic acid , for many year and that she be 
 determined to use it if ever I discover the nature of her relationship 
 with that fellow Jimmy . you see , the mainspring of her nature must have 
 be vanity . there be no reason why it should not   have be ; I guess it be 
 vanity that make most of we keep straight , if we do keep straight , in this 
 world . 
  if it have be merely a matter of Edward 's relation with the girl I 
 dare say Florence would have face it out . she would no doubt have make 
 he scene , have threaten he , have appeal to his sense of honour ,  to his promise . but Mr. Bagshawe and the fact that the date be the 4th 
 of August must have be too much for her superstitious mind . you see , 
 she have two thing that she want . she want to be a great lady , 
 instal in Branshaw Teleragh . she want also to retain my respect . 
  she want , that be to say , to retain my respect for as long as she 
 live with I . I suppose if she have persuade Edward Ashburnham to bolt 
 with she she would have let the whole thing go with a run . or perhaps she 
 would have try to exact from I a new respect for the greatness of her 
 passion on the line of all for love and the world well lose . that would be 
 just like Florence . 
  in all matrimonial association there be , I believe , one constant 
 factor - a desire to deceive the person with whom one live as to some 
 weak spot in one 's character or in one 's career . for it be intolerable to live 
 constantly with one human being who perceive one 's small meanness . it 
 be really death to do so - that be why so many marriage turn out unhappily . 
  I , for instance , be a rather greedy man ; I have a taste for good 
 cookery and a watering tooth at the mere sound of the name of certain 
 comestible . if Florence have discover this secret of mine I should have 
 find her knowledge of it so unbearable that I never could have support 
 all the other privation of the regime that she extract from I . I be 
 bind to say that Florence never discover this secret . 
  certainly she never allude to it ; I dare say she never take sufficient 
 interest in I .   and the secret weakness of Florence - the weakness that she could 
 not bear to have I discover - be just that early escapade with the 
 fellow call Jimmy . let I , as this be in all probability the last time I 
 shall mention Florence 's name , dwell a little upon the change that have 
 take place in her psychology . she would not , I mean , have minded if I have 
 discover that she be the mistress of Edward Ashburnham . she would 
 rather have like it . indeed , the chief trouble of poor Leonora in those day 
 be to keep Florence from make , before I , theatrical display , on one 
 line or another , of that very fact . she want , in one mood , to come 
 rush to I , to cast herself on her knee at my foot , and to declaim a 
 carefully arrange , frightfully emotional outpouring as to her passion . 
 that be to show that she be like one of the great erotic woman of 
 whom history tell we . in another mood she would desire to come to I 
 disdainfully and to tell I that I be considerably less than a man and 
 that what have happen be what must happen when a real male come 
 along . she want to say that in cool , balanced , and sarcastic sentence . 
 that be when she wish to appear like the heroine of a french comedy . 
 because of course she be always play - acting . 
  but what she do not   want I to know be the fact of her first 
 escapade with the fellow call Jimmy . she have arrive at figure out the 
 sort of low - down Bowery tough that that fellow be . do you know what it 
 be to shudder , in later life , for some small , stupid action - usually for 
 some small , quite genuine piece of emotionalism - of your early life ? well , 
 it be that sort  of shudder that come over Florence at the thought 
 that she have surrender to such a low fellow . I do not  
 know that she need have shudder . it be her footling 
 old uncle 's work ; he ought never to have take those 
 two round the world together and shut himself up in his 
 cabin for the great part of the time . anyhow , I be 
 convince that the sight of Mr. Bagshawe and the 
 think that Mr. Bagshawe - for she know that 
 unpleasant and toad - like personality - the thought that 
 Mr. Bagshawe would almost certainly reveal to I that 
 he have catch she come out of Jimmy 's bedroom at 
 five o'clock in the morning on the 4th of August 
 1900 - that be the determine influence in her 
 suicide . and no doubt the effect of the date be too 
 much for her superstitious personality . she have be 
 bear on the 4th of August ; she have start to go round 
 the world on the 4th of August ; she have become a low 
 fellow 's mistress on the 4th of August . on the same day 
 of the year she have marry I ; on that 4th she have 
 lose Edward 's love and Bagshawe have appear like a 
 sinister omen - like a grin on the face of fate . it be the 
 last straw . she run upstairs , arrange herself 
 decoratively upon her bed - she be a sweetly pretty 
 woman with smooth pink and white cheek , long hair , 
 the eyelash fall like a tiny curtain on her cheek . 
 she drink the little phial of prussic acid and there she 
 lay . - oh , extremely charming and clear - cut - look 
 with a puzzled expression at the electric - light bulb that 
 hang from the ceiling , or perhaps through it , to the 
 star above . who know ? anyhow , there be an end of 
 Florence .   you have no idea how quite extraordinarily for I 
 that be the end of Florence . from that day to this I 
 have never give she another thought ; I have not 
 bestow upon she so much as a sigh . of course , when 
 it have be necessary to talk about she to Leonora or 
 when for the purpose of these writing I have try to 
 figure she out , I have think about she as I might do 
 about a problem in Algebra . but it have always be as 
 a matter for study , not for remembrance . she just go 
 completely out of existence , like yesterday 's paper . 
  I be so deadly tired . and I dare say that my week 
 or ten day of affaissement - of what be practically catalepsy - be 
 just the repose that my exhausted nature claim after 
 twelve year of the repression of my instinct , after 
 twelve year of play the train poodle . for that be 
 all that I have be . I suppose that it be the shock that 
 do it - the several shock . but I be unwilling to 
 attribute my feeling at that time to anything so 
 concrete as a shock . it be a feeling so tranquil . if be 
 as if an immensely heavy - an unbearably heavy 
 knapsack , support upon my shoulder by strap , have 
 fall off and have leave my shoulder themselves , that the 
 strap have cut into , numb and without sensation of life . 
 I tell you , I have no regret . what I have to regret ? I 
 suppose that my inner soul - my dual personality - have 
 realize long before that Florence be a personality of 
 paper - that she represent a real human be with a 
 heart , with feeling , with sympathy , and with emotion 
 only as a bank note represent a certain quantity of 
 gold . I know that that sort of feeling come to the 
 surface in I the moment the man  Bagshawe tell I that he have see she come out of 
 that fellow 's bedroom . I think suddenly that she 
 be not   real ; she be just a mass of talk out of 
 guidebook , of drawing out of fashion - plate . it be 
 even possible that if that feeling have not possess I , 
 I should have run up soon to her room and might 
 have prevent she drink the prussic acid . but I just 
 could not   do it ; it would have be like chase a scrap 
 of paper - an occupation ignoble for a grown man . 
  and as it begin , so that matter have remain . I 
 do not   care whether she have come out of that bedroom 
 or whether she have not . it simply do not   interest I . 
 Florence do not   matter . 
  I suppose you will retort that I be in love with 
 Nancy Rufford and that my indifference be therefore 
 discreditable . well , I be not seek to avoid discredit . 
 I be in love with Nancy Rufford as I be in love with 
 the poor child 's memory , quietly and quite tenderly in 
 my american sort of way . I have never think about it 
 until I hear Leonora state that I might now marry she . 
 but from that moment until she bad than death , I do 
 not suppose that I much think about anything else . I 
 do not   mean to say that I sigh about she or groan ; I 
 just want to marry she as some people want to go to 
 Carcassonne . 
  do you understand the feeling - the sort of feel 
 that you must get certain matter out of the way , 
 smooth out certain fairly negligible complication 
 before you can go to a place that have , during all your 
 life , be a sort of dream city ? I do not   attach much 
 importance to my superior year . I be forty - five and 
 she ,  poor thing , be only just rise twenty - two . but she be 
 old than her year and quieter . she seem to have 
 an odd quality of sainthood , as if she must inevitably 
 end in a convent with a white coif frame her face . 
 but she have frequently tell I that she have no 
 vocation ; it just simply be not   there - the desire to 
 become a nun . well , I guess that I be a sort of convent 
 myself ; it seem fairly proper that she should make 
 her vow to I . 
  no , I do not   see any impediment on the score of 
 age . I dare say no man do , and I be pretty confident 
 that , with a little preparation , I could make a young girl 
 happy . I could spoil she as few young girl have ever 
 be spoil ; and I could not   regard myself as 
 personally repulsive . no man can , or , if he ever come 
 to do so , that be the end of he . but , as soon as I come 
 out of my catalepsy , I seem to perceive that my 
 problem - that what I have to do to prepare myself for 
 get into contact with she , be just to get back into 
 contact with life . I have be keep for twelve year in a 
 rarefied atmosphere ; what I then have to do be a little 
 fighting with real life , some wrestling with man of 
 business , some travel amongst large city , 
 something harsh , something masculine . I do not   want to 
 present myself to Nancy Rufford as a sort of an old 
 maid . that be why , just a fortnight after Florence 's 
 suicide , I set off for the United States .  IMMEDIATELY after FLORENCE S DEATH Leonora begin to 
 put the leash upon Nancy Rufford and Edward . she 
 have guess what have happen under the tree near 
 the Casino . they stay at Nauheim some three week 
 after I go , and Leonora have tell I that that be the 
 most deadly time of her existence . it seem like a 
 long , silent duel with invisible weapon , so she say . 
 and it be render all the more difficult by the girl 's 
 entire innocence . for Nancy be always try to go 
 off alone with Edward - as she have be do all her 
 life , whenever she be home for holiday . she just 
 want he to say nice thing to she again . 
  you see , the position be extremely complicated . it 
 be as complicated as it well could be , along delicate 
 line . there be the complication cause by the fact 
 that Edward and Leonora never speak to each other 
 except when other people be present . then , as I have 
 say , their demeanour be quite perfect . there be 
 the complication cause by the girl 's entire innocence ; 
 there be the further complication that both Edward 
 and Leonora really regard the girl as their daughter . 
 or it might be more precise to say that they regard 
 she as be Leonora 's daughter . and Nancy be a 
 queer girl ; it be very difficult to describe she to you . 
  she be tall and strikingly thin ; she have a tortured 
 mouth , agonize eye , and a quite extraordinary sense 
 of fun . you might put it that at time she be  exceedingly grotesque and at time extraordinarily beautiful . 
 why , she have the heavy head of black hair that I have 
 ever come across ; I use to wonder how she could bear 
 the weight of it . she be just over twenty - one and at 
 time she seem as old as the hill , at time not much 
 more than sixteen . at one moment she would be 
 talk of the life of the saint and at the next she 
 would be tumble all over the lawn with the St. 
 Bernard puppy . she could ride to hound like a 
 Maenad and she could sit for hour perfectly still , 
 steep handkerchief after handkerchief in vinegar 
 when Leonora have one of her headache . she be , in 
 short , a miracle of patience who could be almost 
 miraculously impatient . it be no doubt the convent 
 training that effect that . I remember that one of her 
 letter to I , when she be about sixteen , run 
 something like : 
  " on Corpus Christi " - or it may have be some 
 other saint 's day , I can not keep these thing in my 
 head - " our school play Roehampton at Hockey . 
 and , see that our side be lose , be three goal 
 to one against we at half - time , we retire into the chapel 
 and pray for victory . we win by five goal to three . " 
 and I remember that she seem to describe afterwards 
 a sort of saturnalia . apparently , when the victorious 
 fifteen , or eleven , come into the refectory for supper , 
 the whole school jump upon the table and cheer 
 and break the chair on the floor and smash the 
 crockery - for a give time , until the Reverend Mother 
 ring a hand - bell . that be of course the catholic 
 tradition - saturnalia that can end in a moment , like the 
 crack of a whip . I do not   of course like the tradition , but  I be bind to say that it give Nancy - or at any rate 
 Nancy have - a sense of rectitude that I have never see 
 surpass . it be a thing like a knife that look out of 
 her eye and that speak with her voice , just now and 
 then . it positively frighten I . I suppose that I be 
 almost afraid to be in a world where there could be so 
 fine a standard . I remember when she be about fifteen 
 or sixteen on go back to the convent I once give she 
 a couple of english sovereign as a tip . she thank I 
 in a peculiarly heartfelt way , say that it would come 
 in extremely handy . I ask she why and she 
 explain . there be a rule at the school that the pupil 
 be not to speak when they walk through the garden 
 from the chapel to the refectory . and , since this rule 
 appear to be idiotic and arbitrary , she break it on 
 purpose day after day . in the evening the child be 
 all ask if they have commit any fault during the 
 day , and every evening Nancy confess that she have 
 break this particular rule . it cost her six - pence a time , 
 that be the fine attach to the offence . just for the 
 information I ask she why she always confess , and 
 she answer in these exact word : 
  " oh , well , the girl of the Holy Child have always 
 be note for their truthfulness . it be a beastly bore , 
 but I have   get to do it . " 
  I dare say that the miserable nature of her 
 childhood , come before the mixture of saturnalia 
 and discipline that be her convent life , add 
 something to her queerness . her father be a violent 
 madman of a fellow , a major in one of what I believe 
 be call the  Highland regiment . he do not   drink , but he have an 
 ungovernable temper , and the first thing that Nancy 
 could remember be see her father strike her 
 mother with his clench fist so that her mother fall 
 over sideway from the breakfast table and lie 
 motionless . the mother be no doubt an irritate 
 woman and the private of that regiment appear to have 
 be irritate , too , so that the house be a place of 
 outcry and perpetual disturbance . Mrs. Rufford be 
 Leonora 's dear friend and Leonora could be cut 
 enough at time . but I fancy she be as nothing to Mrs. 
 Rufford . the Major would come in to lunch harass 
 and already spit out oath after an unsatisfactory 
 morning 's drilling of his stubborn man beneath a hot 
 sun . and then Mrs. Rufford would make some cut 
 remark and pandemonium would break loose . once , 
 when she have be about twelve , Nancy have try to 
 intervene between the pair of they . her father have 
 strike she full upon the forehead a blow so terrible that 
 she have lie unconscious for three day . nevertheless 
 Nancy seem to prefer her father to her mother . she 
 remember rough kindness from he . once or 
 twice when she have be quite small he have dress she 
 in a clumsy , impatient , but very tender way . it be 
 nearly always impossible to get a servant to stay in the 
 family and for day at a time , apparently , Mrs. Rufford 
 would be incapable . I fancy she drink . at any rate she 
 have so cut a tongue that even Nancy be afraid of 
 she - she so make fun of any tenderness , she so sneer 
 at all emotional display . Nancy must have be a very 
 emotional child ....   then one day , quite suddenly , on her return from a 
 ride at Fort William , Nancy have be send , with her 
 governess , who have a white face , right down south to 
 that convent school . she have be expect to go 
 there in two month ' time . her mother disappear 
 from her life at that time . a fortnight later Leonora 
 come to the convent and tell she that her mother be 
 dead . perhaps she be . at any rate I never hear until 
 the very end what become of Mrs. Rufford . Leonora 
 never speak of she . 
  and then Major Rufford go to India , from which 
 he return very seldom and only for very short visit ; 
 and Nancy live herself gradually into the life at 
 Branshaw Teleragh . I think that , from that time 
 onwards , she lead a very happy life , till the end . there 
 be dog and horse and old servant and the Forest . 
 and there be Edward and Leonora , who love she . 
  I have know she all the time - I mean that she 
 always come to the Ashburnhams ' at Nauheim for the 
 last fortnight of their stay , and I watch she gradually 
 grow . she be very cheerful with I . she always 
 even kiss I , night and morning , until she be about 
 eighteen . and she would skip about and fetch I 
 thing and laugh at my tale of life in Philadelphia . 
 but , beneath her gaiety , I fancy that there lurk some 
 terror . I remember one day , when she be just 
 eighteen , during one of her father 's rare visit to 
 Europe , we be sit in the garden , near the 
 iron - stain fountain . Leonora have one of her headache 
 and we be wait for Florence and Edward to come 
 from their bath . you have no idea how beautiful 
 Nancy look that morning .   we be talk about the desirability of take 
 ticket in lottery - of the moral side of it , I mean . she 
 be all in white , and so tall and fragile ; and she have 
 only just put her hair up , so that the carriage of her 
 neck have that charming touch of youth and of 
 unfamiliarity . over her throat there play the 
 reflection from a little pool of water , leave by a 
 thunderstorm of the night before , and all the rest of her 
 feature be in the diffused and luminous shade of her 
 white parasol . her dark hair just show beneath her 
 broad , white hat of pierce , chip straw ; her throat be 
 very long and lean forward , and her eyebrow , 
 arch a little as she laugh at some 
 old - fashionedness in my phraseology , have abandon their 
 tense line . and there be a little colour in her cheek 
 and light in her deep blue eye . and to think that that 
 vivid white thing , that saintly and swanlike be - to 
 think that . . . why , she be like the sail of a ship , so 
 white and so definite in her movement . and to think 
 that she will never . . . why , she will never do anything 
 again . I can not   believe it .... 
  anyhow we be chatter away about the 
 morality of lottery . and then , suddenly , there come 
 from the arcade behind we the overtone of her 
 father 's unmistakable voice ; it be as if a modify 
 foghorn have boom with a reed inside it . I look 
 round to catch sight of he . a tall , fair , stiffly upright 
 man of fifty , he be walk away with an italian baron 
 who have have much to do with the Belgian Congo . 
 they must have be talk about the proper 
 treatment of native , for I hear he say : 
 " oh , hang humanity ! "   when I look again at Nancy her eye be 
 closed and her face be more pallid than her dress , 
 which have at least some pinkish reflection from the 
 gravel . it be dreadful to see she with her eye close 
 like that . 
  " oh , " she exclaim , and her hand , that have 
 appear to be grope , settle for a moment on my 
 arm . " never speak of it . promise never to tell my father 
 of it . it bring back those dreadful dream ... " and 
 when she open her eye she look straight into 
 mine . " the blessed saint , " she say , " you would think 
 they would spare you such thing . I do not   believe all 
 the sinning in the world could make one deserve they . 
 " 
  they say the poor thing be always allow a light 
 at night , even in her bedroom .... and yet no young 
 girl could more archly and lovingly have play with 
 an adore father . she be always hold he by both 
 coat lapel ; cross - question he as to how he spend 
 his time ; kiss the top of his head . ah , she be 
 well - breed , if ever anyone be . 
  the poor , wretched man cringe before she - but 
 she could not have do more to put he at his ease . 
 perhaps she have have lesson in it at her convent . it be 
 only that peculiar note of his voice , use when he be 
 overbearing or dogmatic , that could unman she - and 
 that be only visible when it come unexpectedly . that 
 be because the bad dream that the blessed saint 
 allow she to have for her sin always seem to she 
 to herald themselves by the booming sound of her 
 father 's voice . it be that sound that have always 
 precede his entrance for the terrible lunch of her 
 childhood ....   I have report , early in this chapter , that Leonora 
 say , during that remainder of their stay at Nauheim , 
 after I have leave , it have seem to she that she be 
 fight a long duel with unseen weapon against silent 
 adversary . Nancy , as I have also say , be always 
 try to go off with Edward alone . that have be her 
 habit for year . and Leonora find it to be her duty to 
 stop that . it be very difficult . Nancy be use to 
 have her own way , and for year she have be use 
 to go off with Edward , rat , rabbit , catch 
 salmon down at Fordingbridge , district visit of the 
 sort that Edward indulge in , or call on the tenant . 
 and at Nauheim she and Edward have always go up 
 to the Casino alone in the evening - at any rate 
 whenever Florence do not call for his attendance . it 
 show the obviously innocent nature of the regard of 
 those two that even Florence have never have any idea of 
 jealousy . Leonora have cultivate the habit of go to 
 bed at ten o'clock . 
  I do not   know how she manage it , but , for all the 
 time they be at Nauheim , she contrive never to let 
 those two be alone together , except in broad daylight , 
 in very crowded place . if a protestant have do that it 
 would no doubt have awaken a self - consciousness in 
 the girl . but Catholics , who have always reservation 
 and queer spot of secrecy , can manage these thing 
 well . and I dare say that two thing make this 
 easy - the death of Florence and the fact that Edward 
 be obviously sicken . he appear indeed , to be 
 very ill ; his shoulder begin to be bow ; there be 
 pocket under his eye ; he have extraordinary moment 
 of inattention .   and Leonora describe herself as watch he as 
 a fierce cat watch an unconscious pigeon in a 
 roadway . in that silent watching , again , I think she be 
 a Catholic - of a people that can think thought alien to 
 our and keep they to themselves . and the thought 
 pass through her mind ; some of they even get 
 through to Edward with never a word speak . at first 
 she think that it might be remorse , or grief , for the 
 death of Florence that be oppress he . but she 
 watch and watch , and utter apparently random 
 sentence about Florence before the girl , and she 
 perceive that he have no grief and no remorse . he have 
 not any idea that Florence could have commit 
 suicide without write at least a tirade to he . the 
 absence of that make he certain that it have be heart 
 disease . for Florence have never undeceive he on 
 that point . she think it make she seem more 
 romantic . 
  no , Edward have no remorse . he be able to say to 
 himself that he have treat Florence with gallant 
 attentiveness of the kind that she desire until two 
 hour before her death . Leonora gather that from 
 the look in his eye , and from the way he straighten 
 his shoulder over she as she lie in her coffin - from 
 that and a thousand other little thing . she would speak 
 suddenly about Florence to the girl and he would not 
 start in the least ; he would not even pay attention , but 
 would sit with bloodshot eye gaze at the tablecloth . 
 he drink a good deal , at that time - a steady soaking 
 of drink every evening till long after they have go to 
 bed . 
  for Leonora make the girl go to bed at ten , 
 unreasonable though that seem to Nancy . she would  understand that , whilst they be in a sort of 
 half - mourning for Florence , she ought not to be see at 
 public place , like the Casino ; but she could not see 
 why she should not accompany her uncle upon his 
 evening stroll through the park . I do not   know what 
 Leonora put up as an excuse - something , I fancy , in 
 the nature of a nightly orison that she make the girl 
 and herself perform for the soul of Florence . and then , 
 one evening , about a fortnight later , when the girl , 
 grow restive at even devotional exercise , clamour 
 once more to be allow to go for a walk with Edward , 
 and when Leonora be really at her wit ' end , Edward 
 himself give himself into her hand . he be just 
 stand up from dinner and have his face avert . 
  but he turn his heavy head and his bloodshot 
 eye upon his wife and look full at she . 
  " Doctor von Hauptmann , " he say , " have order I 
 to go to bed immediately after dinner . my heart 's 
 much bad . " 
  he continue to look at Leonora for a long 
 minute - with a sort of heavy contempt . and Leonora 
 understand that , with his speech , he be give she the 
 excuse that she need for separate he from the 
 girl , and with his eye he be reproach she for 
 think that he would try to corrupt Nancy . 
  he go silently up to his room and sit there for a 
 long time - until the girl be well in bed - read in 
 the anglican prayer book . and about half past ten she 
 hear his footstep pass her door , go outward . two 
 and a half hour later they come back , stumble 
 heavily . 
 she remain , reflect upon this position until  the last night of their stay at Nauheim . then she 
 suddenly act . for , just in the same way , suddenly 
 after dinner , she look at he and say : 
  " Teddy , do not   you think you could take a night off 
 from your doctor 's order and go with Nancy to the 
 Casino ? the poor child have have her visit so spoil . " 
 he look at she in turn for a long , balance 
 minute . 
  " why , yes , " he say at last . Nancy jump out of 
 her chair and kiss he . 
  those two word , Leonora say , give she the 
 great relief of any two syllable she have ever hear 
 in her life . for she realize that Edward be break 
 up , not under the desire for possession , but from the 
 dog determination to hold his hand . she could 
 relax some of her vigilance . 
  nevertheless she sit in the darkness behind her 
 half - close jalousie look over the street and the 
 night and the tree until , very late , she could hear 
 Nancy 's clear voice come close and say : 
 " you do look an old guy with that false nose . " 
  there have be some sort of celebration of a local 
 holiday up in the Kursaal . and Edward reply with his 
 sort of sulky good nature : 
  " as for you , you look like old Mother Sideacher . " 
  the girl come swing along , a silhouette beneath 
 a gas - lamp ; Edward , another , slouch at her side . 
 they be talk just as they have talk any time 
 since the girl have be seventeen ; with the same tone , 
 the same joke about an old beggar woman who always 
 amuse they at Branshaw . the girl , a little later ,  open Leonora 's door whilst she be still kiss 
 Edward on the forehead as she have do every night . 
  " we have   have a most glorious time , " she say . " he be 
 ever so much well . he race I for twenty yard 
 home . why be you all in the dark ? " 
  Leonora could hear Edward go about in his 
 room , but , owe to the girl 's chatter , she could not tell 
 whether he go out again or not . and then , very much 
 later , because she think that if he be drink 
 again something must be do to stop it , she open 
 for the first time , and very softly , the never - open 
 door between their room . she want to see if he have 
 go out again . Edward be kneel beside his bed 
 with his head hide in the counterpane . his arm , 
 outstretche , hold out before he a little image of the 
 bless virgin - a tawdry , scarlet and Prussian - blue 
 affair that the girl have give he on her first return 
 from the convent . his shoulder heave convulsively 
 three time , and heavy sob come from he before she 
 could close the door . he be not a Catholic ; but that 
 be the way it take he . 
  Leonora sleep for the first time that night with a 
 sleep from which she never once start . 
 
 and then Leonora completely break down - on the day 
 that they return to Branshaw Teleragh . it be the 
 infliction of our miserable mind - it be the scourge of 
 atrocious but probably just destiny that no grief come  by itself . no , any great grief , though the grief itself 
 may have go , leave in its place a train of horror , of 
 misery , and despair . for Leonora be , in herself , 
 relieve . she feel that she could trust Edward with the 
 girl and she know that Nancy could be absolutely 
 trust . and then , with the slackening of her vigilance , 
 come the slackening of her entire mind . this be 
 perhaps the most miserable part of the entire story . for 
 it be miserable to see a clear intelligence waver ; and 
 Leonora waver . 
  you be to understand that Leonora love Edward 
 with a passion that be yet like an agony of hatred . 
 and she have live with he for year and year without 
 address to he one word of tenderness . I do not  
 know how she could do it . at the beginning of that 
 relationship she have be just marry off to he . she 
 have be one of seven daughter in a bare , untidy irish 
 manor house to which she have return from the 
 convent I have so often speak of . she have leave it just a 
 year and she be just nineteen . it be impossible to 
 imagine such inexperience as be her . you might 
 almost say that she have never speak to a man except a 
 priest . come straight from the convent , she have go 
 in behind the high wall of the manor house that be 
 almost more cloistral than any convent could have be . there 
 be the seven girl , there be the strained mother , 
 there be the worried father , at whom , three time in 
 the course of that year , the tenant take potshot from 
 behind a hedge . the woman - folk , upon the whole , the 
 tenant respect . once a week each of the girl , since 
 there be seven of they , take a drive with  the mother in the old basketwork chaise draw by a 
 very fat , very lumber pony . they pay occasionally 
 a call , but even these be so rare that , Leonora have 
 assure I , only three time in the year that succeed 
 she come home from the convent do she enter 
 another person 's house . for the rest of the time the 
 seven sister run about in the neglect garden 
 between the unpruned espalier . or they play 
 lawn - tennis or five in an angle of a great wall that 
 surround the garden - an angle from which the fruit 
 tree have long die away . they paint in water - colour ; 
 they embroider ; they copy verse into 
 album . once a week they go to mass ; once a week 
 to the confessional accompany by an old nurse . 
 they be happy since they have know no other life . 
  it appear to they a singular extravagance when , 
 one day , a photographer be bring over from the 
 county town and photograph they stand , all 
 seven , in the shadow of an old apple tree with the grey 
 lichen on the raddled trunk . 
 but it be not   an extravagance . 
  three week before Colonel Powys have write to 
 Colonel Ashburnham : 
  " I say , Harry , could not   your Edward marry one of 
 my girl ? it would be a god - send to I , for I be at the 
 end of my tether , and once one girl begin to go off , 
 the rest of they will follow . " 
  he go on to say that all his daughter be tall , 
 upstanding , clean - limbe , and absolutely pure , and he 
 remind Colonel Ashburnham that , they have be 
 married on the same day , though in different church ,  since the one be a Catholic and the other an 
 Anglican - they have say to each other , the night 
 before , that , when the time come , one of their son 
 should marry one of their daughter . Mrs. 
 Ashburnham have be a Powys and remain Mrs. 
 Powys ' dear friend . they have drift about the 
 world as english soldier do , seldom meeting , but their 
 woman always in correspondence one with another . 
 they write about minute thing such as the teething of 
 Edward and of the early daughter or the good way to 
 repair a Jacob 's ladder in a stocking . and , if they meet 
 seldom , yet it be often enough to keep each other 's 
 personality fresh in their mind , gradually grow 
 greyer , gradually grow a little stiff in the joint , but 
 always with enough to talk about and with a store of 
 reminiscence . then , as his girl begin to come of an 
 age when they must leave the convent in which they 
 be regularly intern during his year of active 
 service , Colonel Powys retire from the army with the 
 necessity of make a home for they . it happen that 
 the Ashburnhams have never see any of the Powys 
 girl , though , whenever the four parent meet in 
 London , Edward Ashburnham be always of the party . 
 he be at that time twenty - two and , I believe , almost as 
 pure in mind as Leonora herself . it be odd how a boy 
 can have his virgin intelligence untouched in this 
 world . 
  that be partly due to the careful handling of his 
 mother , partly to the fact that the house to which he 
 go at Winchester have a particularly pure tone , and 
 partly to Edward 's own peculiar aversion from 
 anything like coarse language or gross story . at  Sandhurst he have just keep out of the way of that sort of 
 thing . he be keen on soldiering , keen on 
 mathematic , on land - surveying , on politic , and , by a 
 queer warp of his mind , on literature . even when he 
 be twenty - two he would pass hour read one of 
 Scott 's novel or the Chronicles of Froissart . 
  Mrs. Ashburnham consider that she be to be 
 congratulate , and almost every week she write to 
 Mrs. Powys , dilate upon her satisfaction . 
  then , one day , take a walk down Bond Street with 
 her son , after have be at Lord 's , she notice 
 Edward suddenly turn his head round to take a second 
 look at a well - dress girl who have pass they . she 
 write about that , too , to Mrs. Powys , and express 
 some alarm . it have be , on Edward 's part , the mere 
 reflex action . he be so very abstracted at that time 
 owe to the pressure his crammer be put upon 
 he that he certainly have not   know what he be do . 
 it be this letter of Mrs. Ashburnham 's to Mrs. Powys 
 that have cause the letter from Colonel Powys to 
 Colonel Ashburnham - a letter that be half humorous , 
 half longing . Mrs. Ashburnham cause her husband to 
 reply , with a letter a little more jocular - something to 
 the effect that Colonel Powys ought to give they some 
 idea of the good that he be market . that be the 
 cause of the photograph . I have see it , the seven girl , 
 all in white dress , all very much alike in feature - all , 
 except Leonora , a little heavy about the chin and a 
 little stupid about the eye . I dare say it would have 
 make Leonora , too , look a little heavy and a little 
 stupid , for it be not a good photograph .  but the black shadow from one the branch of the 
 apple tree cut right across her face , which be all but 
 invisible . 
  there follow an extremely harass time for 
 Colonel and Mrs. Powys . Mrs. Ashburnham have 
 write to say that , quite sincerely , nothing would give 
 great ease to her maternal anxiety than to have her 
 son marry one of Mrs. Powys ' daughter if only he 
 show some inclination to do so . for , she add , 
 nothing but a love - match be to be think of in her 
 Edward 's case . but the poor Powys couple have to run 
 thing so very fine that even the bringing together of 
 the young people be a desperate hazard . 
  the mere expenditure upon send one of the 
 girl over from Ireland to Branshaw be terrify to 
 they ; and whichever girl they select might not be the 
 one to ring Edward 's bell . on the other hand , the 
 expenditure upon mere food and extra sheet for a visit 
 from the Ashburnhams to they be terrifying , too . it 
 would mean , mathematically , go short in so many 
 meal themselves , afterwards . nevertheless they 
 chance it , and all the three Ashburnhams come on a 
 visit to the lonely manor house . they could give 
 Edward some rough shooting , some rough fishing , and 
 a whirl of femininity ; but I should say the girl make 
 really more impression upon Mrs. Ashburnham than 
 upon Edward himself . they appear to she to be so 
 clean - run and so safe . they be indeed so clean - run 
 that , in a faint sort of way , Edward seem to have 
 regard they rather as boy than as girl . and then , 
 one evening , Mrs. Ashburnham have with her boy one 
 of those conversation that english mother have with 
 english  son . it seem to have be a criminal sort of 
 proceeding , though I do not   know what take place at it . 
 anyhow , next morning Colonel Ashburnham ask on 
 behalf of his son for the hand of Leonora . this cause 
 some consternation to the Powys couple , since Leonora 
 be the third daughter and Edward ought to have 
 marry the eld . Mrs. Powys , with her rigid sense of 
 the propriety , almost wish to reject the proposal . 
 but the Colonel , her husband , point out that the visit 
 would have cost they sixty pound , what with the hire 
 of an extra servant , of a horse and car , and with the 
 purchase of bed and bed and extra tablecloth . 
 there be nothing else for it but the marriage . in that 
 way Edward and Leonora become man and wife . 
  I do not   know that a very minute study of their 
 progress towards complete disunion be necessary . 
 perhaps it be . but there be many thing that I can not 
 well make out , about which I can not well question 
 Leonora , or about which Edward do not tell I . I do 
 not know that there be ever any question of love from 
 Edward to she . he regard she , certainly , as desirable 
 amongst her sister . he be obstinate to the extent of 
 say that if he could not have she he would not have 
 any of they . and no doubt , before the marriage , he 
 make she pretty speech out of book that he have 
 read . but , as far as he could describe his feeling at all , 
 later , it seem that , calmly and without any quickening 
 of the pulse , he just carry the girl off , there be no 
 opposition . it have , however , be all so long ago that it 
 seem to he , at the end of his poor life , a dim and 
 misty affair . he have the great admiration for 
 Leonora . 
 he have the very great admiration . he admire  she for her truthfulness , for her cleanness of mind , and 
 the clean - runness of her limb , for her efficiency , for 
 the fairness of her skin , for the gold of her hair , for 
 her religion , for her sense of duty . it be a satisfaction 
 to take she about with he . 
  but she have not for he a touch of magnetism . I 
 suppose , really , he do not love she because she be 
 never mournful ; what really make he feel good in life 
 be to comfort somebody who would be darkly and 
 mysteriously mournful . that he have never have to do 
 for Leonora . perhaps , also , she be at first too obedient . 
 I do not mean to say that she be submissive - that she 
 defer , in her judgment , to his . she do not . but she 
 have be hand over to he , like some patient 
 mediaeval virgin ; she have be teach all her life that 
 the first duty of a woman be to obey . and there she be . 
  in she , at least , admiration for his quality very 
 soon become love of the deep description . if his 
 pulse never quicken she , so I have be tell , 
 become what be call an altered being when he 
 approach she from the other side of a dancing floor . 
 her eye follow he about full of trustfulness , of 
 admiration , of gratitude , and of love . he be also , in a 
 great sense , her pastor and guide - and he guide she 
 into what , for a girl straight out of a convent , be 
 almost heaven . I have not the least idea of what an 
 english officer 's wife 's existence may be like . at any 
 rate there be feast , and chattering , and nice man 
 who give she the right sort of admiration , and nice 
 woman who treat she as if she have be a baby . and 
 her  confessor approve of her life , and Edward let she give 
 little treat to the girl of the convent she have leave , and 
 the Reverend Mother approve of he . there could 
 not have be a happy girl for five or six year . 
  for it be only at the end of that time that cloud 
 begin , as the saying be , to arise . she be then about 
 twenty - three , and her purposeful efficiency make she 
 perhaps have a desire for mastery . she begin to 
 perceive that Edward be extravagant in his largess . 
 his parent die just about that time , and Edward , 
 though they both decide that he should continue his 
 soldiering , give a great deal of attention to the 
 management of Branshaw through a steward . 
 Aldershot be not very far away , and they spend all his 
 leaf there . 
  and , suddenly , she seem to begin to perceive 
 that his generosity be almost fantastic . he 
 subscribe much too much to thing connect with 
 his mess , he pension off his father 's servant , old or 
 new , much too generously . they have a large income , 
 but every now and then they would find themselves 
 hard up . he begin to talk of mortgage a farm or 
 two , though it never actually come to that . 
  she make tentative effort at remonstrate with 
 he . her father , whom she see now and then , say that 
 Edward be much too generous to his tenant ; the 
 wife of his brother officer remonstrate with she in 
 private ; his large subscription make it difficult for 
 their husband to keep up with they . ironically 
 enough , the first real trouble between they come from 
 his desire to build a roman catholic chapel at 
 Branshaw . he want to do it to honour Leonora , and 
 he propose to do it  very expensively . Leonora do not want it ; she could 
 perfectly well drive from Branshaw to the near 
 catholic church as often as she like . there be no 
 roman catholic tenant and no roman catholic 
 servant except her old nurse , who could always drive 
 with she . she have as many priest to stay with she as 
 could be need - and even the priest do not want a 
 gorgeous chapel in that place where it would have 
 merely seem an invidious instance of ostentation . 
 they be perfectly ready to celebrate mass for 
 Leonora and her nurse , when they stay at Branshaw , 
 in a clean - up outhouse . but Edward be as obstinate 
 as a hog about it . 
  he be truly grieve at his wife 's want of 
 sentiment - at her refusal to receive that amount of 
 public homage from he . she appear to he to be 
 want in imagination - to be cold and hard . I do not  
 exactly know what part her priest play in the 
 tragedy that it all became ; I dare say they behave 
 quite creditably but mistakenly . but then , who would 
 not have be mistake with Edward ? I believe he be 
 even hurt that Leonora 's confessor do not make 
 strenuous effort to convert he . there be a period 
 when he be quite ready to become an emotional 
 Catholic . 
  I do not   know why they do not take he on the 
 hop ; but they have queer sort of wisdom , those 
 people , and queer sort of tact . perhaps they think 
 that Edward 's too early conversion would frighten off 
 other protestant desirable from marry Catholic 
 girl . perhaps they see deeply into Edward than he see 
 himself and think that he would make not a very 
 creditable  convert . at any rate they - and Leonora - leave he very 
 much alone . it mortify he very considerably . he 
 have tell I that if Leonora have then take his 
 aspiration seriously everything would have be 
 different . but I dare say that be nonsense . 
  at any rate it be over the question of the chapel 
 that they have their first and really disastrous quarrel . 
 Edward at that time be not well ; he suppose himself 
 to be overwork with his regimental affair - he be 
 manage the mess at the time . and Leonora be not 
 well - she be begin to fear that their union might 
 be sterile . and then her father come over from 
 Glasmoyle to stay with they . 
  those be troublesome time in Ireland , I 
 understand . at any rate Colonel Powys have tenant on 
 the brain - his own tenant have shoot at he with 
 shotgun . and , in conversation with Edward 's 
 land - steward , he get it into his head that Edward manage 
 his estate with a mad generosity toward his tenant . I 
 understand also that those year - the ninety - be 
 very bad for farming . wheat be fetch only a few 
 shilling the hundred ; the price of meat be so low that 
 cattle hardly pay for raise ; whole english county 
 be ruin . and Edward allow his tenant very high 
 rebate . 
  to do both justice Leonora have since 
 acknowledge that she be in the wrong at that time 
 and that Edward be follow out a more far - see 
 policy in nurse his really very good tenant over a 
 bad period . it be not as if the whole of his money 
 come from the land ; a good deal of it be in rail . but 
 old Colonel Powys  have that bee in his bonnet and , if he never directly 
 approach Edward himself on the subject , he 
 preach unceasingly , whenever he have the 
 opportunity , to Leonora . his pet idea be that Edward 
 ought to sack all his own tenant and import a set of 
 farmer from Scotland . that be what they be do 
 in Essex . he be of opinion that Edward be rid 
 hotfoot to ruin . 
  that worry Leonora very much - it worry she 
 dreadfully ; she lie awake night ; she have an anxious 
 line round her mouth . and that , again , worry 
 Edward . I do not mean to say that Leonora actually 
 speak to Edward about his tenant - but he get to 
 know that someone , probably her father , have be 
 talk to she about the matter . he get to know it 
 because it be the habit of his steward to look in on 
 they every morning about breakfast time to report any 
 little happening . and there be a farmer call 
 Mumford who have only pay half his rent for the last 
 three year . one morning the land - steward report 
 that Mumford would be unable to pay his rent at all 
 that year . Edward reflect for a moment and then he 
 say something like : 
  " oh well , he be an old fellow and his family have 
 be our tenant for over two hundred year . let he 
 off altogether . " 
  and then Leonora - you must remember that she 
 have reason for be very nervous and unhappy at that 
 time - let out a sound that be very like a groan . it 
 startle Edward , who more than suspect what be 
 pass in her mind - it startle he into a state of 
 anger . he say sharply :   " you would not   have I turn out people who have  
 be earn money for we for century - people to 
 whom we have responsibility - and let in a pack of 
 Scotch farmer ? " 
  he look at she , Leonora say , with what be 
 practically a glance of hatred and then , precipitately , 
 he leave the breakfast table . Leonora know that it 
 probably make it all the bad that he have be 
 betray into a manifestation of anger before a third 
 party . it be the first and last time that he ever be 
 betray into such a manifestation of anger . the 
 land - steward , a moderate and well - balance man whose 
 family also have be with the Ashburnhams for over a 
 century , take it upon himself to explain that he 
 consider Edward be pursue a perfectly proper 
 course with his tenant . he err perhaps a little on the 
 side of generosity , but hard time be hard time , and 
 everyone have to feel the pinch , landlord as well as 
 tenant . the great thing be not to let the land get into 
 a poor state of cultivation . Scotch farmer just skin 
 your field and let they go down and down . but 
 Edward have a very good set of tenant who do their 
 good for he and for themselves . these argument at 
 that time carry very little conviction to Leonora . she 
 be nevertheless much concerned by Edward 's outburst 
 of anger . 
  the fact be that Leonora have be practise 
 economy in her department . two of the 
 under - housemaid have go and she have not replace they ; 
 she have spend much less that year upon dress . the fare 
 she have provide at the dinner they give have be 
 much less bountiful and not nearly so costly as have 
 be the  case in precede year , and Edward begin to perceive 
 a hardness and determination in his wife 's character . 
 he seem to see a net closing round he - a net in 
 which they would be force to live like one of the 
 comparatively poor county family of the 
 neighbourhood . and , in the mysterious way in which 
 two people , live together , get to know each other 's 
 thought without a word speak , he have know , even 
 before his outbreak , that Leonora be worry about 
 his managing of the estate . this appear to he to be 
 intolerable . he have , too , a great feeling of 
 self - contempt because he have be betray into speak 
 harshly to Leonora before that land - steward . he 
 imagine that his nerve must be desert he , and 
 there can have be few man more miserable than 
 Edward be at that period . 
  you see , he be really a very simple soul - very 
 simple . he imagine that no man can satisfactorily 
 accomplish his life 's work without loyal and 
 whole - hearted co - operation of the woman he live with . 
 and he be begin to perceive dimly that , whereas 
 his own tradition be entirely collective , his wife be 
 a sheer individualist . his own theory - the feudal 
 theory of an overlord do his good by his dependent , 
 the dependent meanwhile do their good for the 
 overlord - this theory be entirely foreign to Leonora 's 
 nature . she come of a family of small irish landlord - 
 that hostile garrison in a plunder country . and she 
 be think unceasingly of the child she wish to 
 have . 
 I do not   know why they never have any child -  not that I really believe that child would have make 
 any difference . the dissimiliarity of Edward and 
 Leonora be too profound . it will give you some idea 
 of the extraordinary naivete of Edward Ashburnham 
 that , at the time of his marriage and for perhaps a 
 couple of year after , he do not really know how 
 child be produce . neither do Leonora . I do not  
 mean to say that this state of thing continue , but 
 there it be . I dare say it have a good deal of influence 
 on their mentality . at any rate they never have a child . 
 it be the will of God . 
  it certainly present itself to Leonora as be the 
 Will of God - as be a mysterious and awful 
 chastisement of the Almighty . for she have discover 
 shortly before this period that her parent have not 
 exact from Edward 's family the promise that any 
 child she should bear should be bring up as 
 Catholics . she herself have never talk of the matter 
 with either her father , her mother , or her husband . 
 when at last her father have let drop some word 
 lead she to believe that that be the fact she try 
 desperately to extort the promise from Edward . she 
 encounter an unexpected obstinacy . Edward be 
 perfectly willing that the girl should be Catholic ; the 
 boy must be anglican . I do not   understand the bearing 
 of these thing in english society . indeed , Englishmen 
 seem to I to be a little mad in matter of politic or of 
 religion . in Edward it be particularly queer because 
 he himself be perfectly ready to become a Romanist . 
 he seem , however , to contemplate go over to 
 Rome himself and yet let his boy be educate in 
 the religion of their immediate  ancestor . this may appear illogical , but I dare say it be 
 not so illogical as it look . Edward , that be to say , 
 regard himself as have his own body and soul at 
 his own disposal . but his loyalty to the tradition of his 
 family would not permit he to bind any future 
 inheritor of his name or beneficiary by the death of 
 his ancestor . about the girl it do not so much matter . 
 they would know other home and other 
 circumstance . besides , it be the usual thing . but the 
 boy must be give the opportunity of choose - and 
 they must have first of all the anglican teaching . he 
 be perfectly unshakable about this . 
  Leonora be in an agony during all this time . you 
 will have to remember she seriously believe that 
 child who might be bear to she go in danger , if 
 not absolutely of damnation at any rate of receive 
 false doctrine . it be an agony more terrible than she 
 could describe . she do not   indeed attempt to describe it , 
 but I could tell from her voice when she say , almost 
 negligently : " I use to lie awake whole night . it be 
 no good my spiritual adviser try to console I . " I 
 know from her voice how terrible and how long those 
 night must have seem and of how little avail be 
 the consolation of her spiritual adviser . her spiritual 
 adviser seem to have take the matter a little more 
 calmly . they certainly tell she that she must not 
 consider herself in any way to have sin . Nay , they 
 seem even to have exhort , to have threaten she , 
 with a view to get she out of what they consider 
 to be a morbid frame of mind . she would just have to 
 make the good of thing , to influence the child when  they come , not by propaganda , but by personality . 
 and they warn she that she would be commit a 
 sin if she continue to think that she have sin . 
 nevertheless , she continue to think that she have 
 sin . 
  Leonora could not but be aware that the man 
 whom she love passionately and whom , nevertheless , 
 she be begin to try to rule with a rod of iron - 
 that this man be become more and more estranged 
 from she . he seem to regard she as be not only 
 physically and mentally cold , but even as be 
 actually wicked and mean . there be time when he 
 would almost shudder if she speak to he . and she 
 could not understand how he could consider she 
 wicked or mean . it only seem to she a sort of 
 madness in he that he should try to take upon his 
 own shoulder the burden of his troop , of his regiment , 
 of his estate , and of half of his county . she could not 
 see that in try to curb what she regard as 
 megalomania she be do anything wicked . she be 
 just try to keep thing together for the sake of the 
 child who do not come . and , little by little , the 
 whole of their intercourse become simply one of 
 agonize discussion as to whether Edward should 
 subscribe to this or that institution or should try to 
 reclaim this or that drunkard . she simply could not see 
 it . 
  into this really terrible position of strain , from 
 which there appear to be no issue , the Kilsyte case 
 come almost as a relief . it be part of the peculiar irony 
 of thing that Edward would certainly never have 
 kiss that nursemaid if he have not be try to 
 please Leonora . nursemaid do not travel first - class  and , that day , Edward travel in a third - class carriage 
 in order to prove to Leonora that he be capable of 
 economy . I have say that the Kilsyte case come 
 almost as a relief to the strained situation that then 
 exist between they . it give Leonora an opportunity 
 of back he up in a whole - hearted and absolutely 
 loyal manner . it give she the opportunity of behave 
 to he as he consider a wife should behave to her 
 husband . 
  you see , Edward find himself in a railway 
 carriage with a quite pretty girl of about nineteen . and 
 the quite pretty girl of about nineteen , with dark hair 
 and red cheek and blue eye , be quietly weep . 
 Edward have be sit in his corner think about 
 nothing at all . he have chance to look at the 
 nursemaid ; two large , pretty tear come out of her eye 
 and drop into her lap . he immediately feel that he 
 have get to do something to comfort she . that be his 
 job in life . he be desperately unhappy himself and it 
 seem to he the most natural thing in the world that 
 they should pool their sorrow . he be quite 
 democratic ; the idea of the difference in their station 
 never seem to have occur to he . he begin to talk 
 to she . he discover that her young man have be 
 see walk out with Annie of Number 54 . he move 
 over to her side of the carriage . he tell she that the 
 report probably be not   true ; that , after all , a young man 
 might take a walk with Annie from Number 54 without 
 its denote anything very serious . and he assure I 
 that he feel at least quite half - fatherly when he put his 
 arm around her waist and kiss she . the girl , however , 
 have not forget the difference of her station .   all her life , by her mother , by other girl , by 
 schoolteacher , by the whole tradition of her class she 
 have be warn against gentleman . she be be 
 kiss by a gentleman . she scream , tear herself 
 away ; spring up and pull a communication cord . 
  Edward come fairly well out of the affair in the 
 public estimation ; but it do he , mentally , a good deal 
 of harm . 
 
 it be very difficult to give an all - round impression of 
 any man . I wonder how far I have succeed with 
 Edward Ashburnham . I dare say I have not   succeed at 
 all . it be even very difficult to see how such thing 
 matter . be it the important point about poor Edward 
 that he be very well build , carry himself well , be 
 moderate at the table , and lead a regular life - that he 
 have , in fact , all the virtue that be usually account 
 English ? or have I in the least succeed in conveying 
 that he be all those thing and have all those virtue ? 
 he certainly be they and have they up to the last 
 month of his life . they be the thing that one would 
 set upon his tombstone . they will , indeed , be set upon 
 his tombstone by his widow . 
  and have I , I wonder , give the due impression of 
 how his life be portion and his time lay out ? 
 because , until the very last , the amount of time take 
 up by his various passion be relatively small . I have 
 be force to write very much about his passion , but 
 you have to consider - I should like to be able to make  you consider - that he rise every morning at seven , 
 take a cold bath , breakfast at eight , be occupy 
 with his regiment from nine until one ; play polo or 
 cricket with the man when it be the season for cricket , 
 till tea - time . afterwards he would occupy himself with 
 the letter from his land - steward or with the affair of 
 his mess , till dinner time . he would dine and pass the 
 evening playing card , or play billiard with 
 Leonora , or at social function of one kind or another . 
 and the great part of his life be take up by that - 
 by far the great part of his life . his love affair , until 
 the very end , be sandwich in at odd moment or 
 take place during the social evening , the dance and 
 dinner . but I guess I have make it hard for you , o 
 silent listener , to get that impression . anyhow , I hope I 
 have not give you the idea that Edward Ashburnham 
 be a pathological case . he be not . he be just a 
 normal man and very much of a sentimentalist . I dare 
 say the quality of his youth , the nature of his mother 's 
 influence , his ignorance , the cramming that he 
 receive at the hand of army coach - I dare say that 
 all these excellent influence upon his adolescence 
 be very bad for he . but we all have to put up with 
 that sort of thing and no doubt it be very bad for all of 
 we . nevertheless , the outline of Edward 's life be an 
 outline perfectly normal of the life of a hard - work , 
 sentimental , and efficient professional man . 
  that question of first impression have always 
 bother I a good deal - but quite academically . I 
 mean that , from time to time , I have wonder whether 
 it be or be not good to trust to one 's first 
 impression  in deal with people . but I never have anybody to 
 deal with except waiter and chambermaid and the 
 Ashburnhams , with whom I do not   know that I be 
 have any dealing . and , as far as waiter and 
 chambermaid be concern , I have generally find 
 that my first impression be correct enough . if my 
 first idea of a man be that he be civil , obliging , and 
 attentive , he generally seem to go on be all those 
 thing . once , however , at our Paris flat we have a maid 
 who appear to be charming and transparently 
 honest . she stole , nevertheless , one of Florence 's 
 diamond ring . she do it , however , to save her young 
 man from go to prison . so here , as somebody say 
 somewhere , be a special case . 
  and , even in my short incursion into american 
 business life - an incursion that last during part of 
 August and nearly the whole of September - I find 
 that to rely upon first impression be the good thing I 
 could do . I find myself automatically docketing and 
 label each man as he be introduce to I , by the 
 run of his feature and by the first word that he speak . 
 I can not , however , be regard as really do business 
 during the time that I spend in the United States . I be 
 just wind thing up . if it have not   be for my idea of 
 marry the girl I might possibly have look for 
 something to do in my own country . for my 
 experience there be vivid and amusing . it be 
 exactly as if I have come out of a museum into a riotous 
 fancy - dress ball . during my life with Florence I have 
 almost come to forget that there be such thing as 
 fashion or occupation or the greed of gain . I have , in 
 fact ,  forget that there be such a thing as a dollar and that a 
 dollar can be extremely desirable if you do not   happen 
 to possess one . and I have forget too that there be 
 such a thing as gossip that matter . in that particular , 
 Philadelphia be the most amazing place I have ever 
 be in in my life . I be not in that city for more than a 
 week or ten day and I do not   there transact anything 
 much in the way of business , nevertheless the number 
 of time that I be warn by everybody against 
 everybody else be simply amazing . a man I do not  
 know would come up behind my lounge chair in the 
 hotel , and , whisper cautiously beside my ear , would 
 warn I against some other man that I equally do not  
 know but who would be stand by the bar . I do not  
 know what they think I be there to do - perhaps to 
 buy out the city 's debt or get a control hold of 
 some railway interest . or , perhaps , they imagine that I 
 want to buy a newspaper , for they be either 
 politician or reporter , which , of course , come to the 
 same thing . as a matter of fact , my property in 
 Philadelphia be mostly real estate in the old - fashioned 
 part of the city and all I want to do there be just to 
 satisfy myself that the house be in good repair and 
 the door keep properly paint . I want also to see 
 my relation , of whom I have a few . these be mostly 
 professional people and they be mostly rather hard 
 up because of the financial panic in 1907 or 
 thereabout . still , they be very nice . they would have 
 be nice still if they have not , all of they , have what 
 appear to I to be the mania that what they call 
 influence be work against they . at any rate , the  impression of that city be one of old - fashioned room , 
 rather english than american in type , in which 
 handsome but care - wear lady , cousin of my own , 
 talk principally about mysterious movement that 
 be go on against they . I never get to know what it 
 be all about , perhaps they think I know or perhaps 
 there be not   any movement at all . it be all very secret 
 and subtle and subterranean . but there be a nice 
 young fellow call Carter who be a sort of 
 second - nephew of mine , twice remove . he be handsome and 
 dark and gentle and tall and modest . I understand also 
 that he be a good cricketer . he be employ by the 
 real - estate agent who collect my rent . it be he , 
 therefore , who take I over my own property and I 
 see a good deal of he and of a nice girl call Mary , 
 to whom he be engage . at that time I do , what I 
 certainly should not   do now - I make some careful 
 inquiry as to his character . I discover from his 
 employer that he be just all that he appear , honest , 
 industrious , high - spirit , friendly , and ready to do 
 anyone a good turn . his relative , however , as they be 
 mine too , seem to have something darkly mysterious 
 against he . I imagine that he must have be mix 
 up in some case of graft or that he have at least betray 
 several innocent and trust maiden . I push , 
 however , that particular mystery home and discover 
 it be only that he be a Democrat . my own people 
 be mostly Republicans . it seem to make it bad 
 and more darkly mysterious to they that young Carter 
 be what they call a sort of Vermont Democrat , 
 which be the whole ticket  and no mistake . but I do not   know what it mean . 
 anyhow , I suppose that my money will go to he 
 when I die - I like the recollection of his friendly 
 image and of the nice girl he be engage to . may 
 Fate deal very kindly with they . 
  I have say just now that , in my present frame of 
 mind , nothing would ever make I make inquiry as 
 to the character of any man that I like at first sight . 
  the little digression as to my Philadelphia experience 
 be really mean to lead around to this .   for who in 
 this world can give anyone a character ? who in this 
 world know anything of any other heart - or of his 
 own ? I do not   mean to say that one can not form an 
 average estimate of the way a person will behave . but 
 one can not be certain of the way any man will behave 
 in every case - and until one can do that a " character " 
 be of no use to anyone . that , for instance , be the way 
 with Florence 's maid in Paris . we use to trust that girl 
 with blank check for the payment of the tradesman . 
 for quite a time she be so trust by we . then , 
 suddenly , she steal a ring . we should not have believe 
 she capable of it ; she would not have believe herself 
 capable of it . it be nothing in her character . so , 
 perhaps , it be with Edward Ashburnham . 
  or , perhaps , it be not . no , I rather think it be not . it 
 be difficult to figure out . I have say that the Kilsyte 
 case ease the immediate tension for he and 
 Leonora . it let he see that she be capable of loyalty 
 to he ; it give she her chance to show that she 
 believe in he . she accept without question his 
 statement that , in kiss the girl , he be not   try to do 
 more than  administer fatherly comfort to a weeping child . and , 
 indeed , his own world - include the magistrate - 
 take that view of the case . whatever people say , one 's 
 world can be perfectly charitable at time .... but , again , 
 as I have say , it do Edward a great deal of harm . 
  that , at least , be his view of it . he assure I that , 
 before that case come on and be wrangle about by 
 counsel with all the sort of dirty - mindedness that 
 counsel in that sort of case can impute , he have not have 
 the least idea that he be capable of be unfaithful to 
 Leonora . but , in the midst of that tumult - he say that 
 it come suddenly into his head whilst he be in the 
 witness box - in the midst of those august ceremony 
 of the law there come suddenly into his mind the 
 recollection of the softness of the girl 's body as he have 
 press she to he . and , from that moment , that girl 
 appear desirable to he - and Leonora completely 
 unattractive . 
  he begin to indulge in day - dream in which he 
 approach the nursemaid more tactfully and carry 
 the matter much far . occasionally he think of 
 other woman in term of wary courtship - or , perhaps , 
 it would be more exact to say that he think of they 
 in term of tactful comforting , end in absorption . 
 that be his own view of the case . he see himself as 
 the victim of the law . I do not   mean to say that he see 
 himself as a kind of Dreyfus . the law , practically , be 
 quite kind to he . it state that in its view Captain 
 Ashburnham have be mislead by an ill - place desire 
 to comfort a member of the opposite sex and it fin 
 he five shilling for his want of tact , or of knowledge  of the world . but Edward maintain that it have put 
 idea into his head . 
  I do not   believe it , though he certainly do . he be 
 twenty - seven then , and his wife be out of sympathy 
 with he - some crash be inevitable . there be 
 between they a momentary rapprochement ; but it could 
 not last . it make it , probably , all the bad that in that 
 particular matter Leonora have come so very well up to 
 the scratch . for , whilst Edward respect she more and 
 be grateful to she , it make she seem by so much the 
 more cold in other matter that be near his heart - 
 his responsibility , his career , his tradition . it bring 
 his despair of she up to a point of exasperation - and it 
 rivet on he the idea that he might find some other 
 woman who would give he the moral support that he 
 need . he want to be look upon as a sort of 
 Lohengrin . 
  at that time , he say , he go about deliberately 
 look for some woman who could help he . he 
 find several - for there be quite a number of lady 
 in his set who be capable of agree with this 
 handsome and fine fellow that the duty of a feudal 
 gentleman be feudal . he would have like to pass his day 
 talk to one or other of these lady . but there be 
 always an obstacle - if the lady be marry there 
 would be a husband who claim the great part of 
 her time and attention . if , on the other hand , it be 
 an unmarried girl he could not see very much of she 
 for fear of compromise she . at that date , you 
 understand , he have not the least idea of seduce any one of 
 these lady . he want only moral support at the  hand of some female , because he find man difficult 
 to talk to about ideal . indeed , I do not believe that he 
 have , at any time , any idea of make anyone his 
 mistress . that sound queer ; but I believe it be quite true 
 as a statement of character . 
  it be , I believe , one of Leonora 's priest - a man 
 of the world - who suggest that she should take he 
 to Monte Carlo . he have the idea that what Edward 
 need , in order to fit he for the society of Leonora , 
 be a touch of irresponsibility . for Edward , at that 
 date , have much the aspect of a prig . I mean that , if he 
 play polo and be an excellent dancer , he do the 
 one for the sake of keep himself fit and the other 
 because it be a social duty to show himself at dance , 
 and , when there , to dance well . he do nothing for fun 
 except what he consider to be his work in life . as 
 the priest see it , this must forever estrange he from 
 Leonora - not because Leonora set much store by the 
 joy of life , but because she be out of sympathy with 
 Edward 's work . on the other hand , Leonora do like 
 to have a good time , now and then , and , as the priest 
 see it , if Edward could be get to like have a good 
 time now and then too , there would be a bond of 
 sympathy between they . it be a good idea , but it work 
 out wrongly . 
  it work out , in fact , in the mistress of the Grand 
 Duke . in anyone less sentimental than Edward that 
 would not have matter . with Edward it be fatal . 
 for , such be his honourable nature that for he , to 
 enjoy a woman 's favour , make he feel that she have 
 a bond on he for life . that be the way it work out  in practice . psychologically it mean that he could not 
 have a mistress without fall violently in love with 
 she . he be a serious person - and in this particular 
 case it be very expensive . the mistress of the Grand 
 Duke - a spanish dancer of passionate appearance - 
 single out Edward for her glance at a ball that be 
 hold in their common hotel . Edward be tall , 
 handsome , blond , and very wealthy as she understand - 
 and Leonora go up to bed early . she do not care for 
 public dance , but she be relieve to see that Edward 
 appear to be have a good time with several 
 amiable girl . and that be the end of Edward - for the 
 spanish dancer of passionate appearance want one 
 night of he for his beaux yeux . he take she into the 
 dark garden and , remember suddenly the girl of 
 the Kilsyte case , he kiss she . he kiss she 
 passionately , violently , with a sudden explosion of the passion 
 that have be bridle all his life - for Leonora be cold , 
 or , at any rate , well behave . La Dolciquita like this 
 reversion , and he pass the night in her bed . 
 when the palpitating creature be at last asleep in 
 his arm he discover that he be madly , be 
 passionately , be overwhelmingly in love with she . it be 
 a passion that have arise like fire in dry corn . he could 
 think of nothing else ; he could live for nothing else . 
 but La Dolciquita be a reasonable creature without an 
 ounce of passion in she . she want a certain 
 satisfaction of her appetite and Edward have appeal to she 
 the night before . now that be do with and , quite 
 coldly , she say that she want money if he be to 
 have any more of she . it be a perfectly reasonable  commercial transaction . she do not care two button 
 for Edward or for any man and he be ask she to 
 risk a very good situation with a Grand Duke . if 
 Edward could put up sufficient money to serve as a kind 
 of insurance against accident she be ready to like 
 Edward for a time that would be cover , as it be , by 
 the policy . she be get fifty thousand dollar a year 
 from her Grand Duke ; Edward would have to pay a 
 premium of two year ' hire for a month of her society . 
 there would not be much risk of the Grand Duke 's 
 find it out and it be not certain that he would give 
 she the key of the street if he do find out . but there 
 be the risk - a twenty per cent risk , as she figure it 
 out . she talk to Edward as if she have be a solicitor 
 with an estate to sell - perfectly quietly and perfectly 
 coldly without any inflection in her voice . she do not 
 want to be unkind to he ; but she could see no reason 
 for be kind to he . she be a virtuous business 
 woman with a mother and two sister and her own old 
 age to be provide comfortably for . she do not expect 
 more than a five year ' further run . she be 
 twenty - four and , as she say : " we spanish woman be horror 
 at thirty . " Edward swear that he would provide for she 
 for life if she would come to he and leave off talk 
 so horribly ; but she only shrug one shoulder slowly 
 and contemptuously . he try to convince this woman , 
 who , as he see it , have surrender to he her virtue , 
 that he regard it as in any case his duty to provide 
 for she , and to cherish she and even to love she - for 
 life . in return for her sacrifice he would do that . in 
 return , again , for his honourable love she would listen  forever to the account of his estate . that be how he 
 figure it out . 
  she shrug the same shoulder with the same 
 gesture and hold out her left hand with the elbow at her 
 side . 
  " Enfin , mon ami , " she say , " put in this hand the 
 price of that tiara at Forli 's or . . . " and she turn she 
 back on he . 
  Edward go mad ; his world stand on its head ; the 
 palm in front of the blue sea dance grotesque 
 dance . you see , he believe in the virtue , tenderness , 
 and moral support of woman . he want more than 
 anything to argue with La Dolciquita ; to retire with she 
 to an island and point out to she the damnation of her 
 point of view and how salvation can only be find in 
 true love and the feudal system . she have once be his 
 mistress , he reflect , and , by all the moral law , she 
 ought to have go on be his mistress or at the very 
 least his sympathetic confidante . but her room be 
 close to he ; she do not appear in the hotel . 
 nothing : blank silence . to break that down he have to 
 have twenty thousand pound . you have hear what 
 happen . 
  he spend a week of madness ; he hunger ; his eye 
 sink in ; he shudder at Leonora 's touch . I dare say 
 that nine - tenth of what he take to be his passion for 
 La Dolciquita be really discomfort at the thought that 
 he have be unfaithful to Leonora . he feel 
 uncommonly bad , that be to say - oh , unbearably bad , 
 and he take it all to be love . poor devil , he be 
 incredibly naive . he drink like a fish after Leonora 
 be in bed and  he spread himself over the table , and this go on for 
 about a fortnight . Heaven know what would have 
 happen ; he would have throw away every penny 
 that he possess . 
  on the night after he have lose about forty thousand 
 pound and whilst the whole hotel be whisper 
 about it , La Dolciquita walk composedly into his 
 bedroom . he be too drunk to recognize she , and she 
 sit in his armchair , knitting and hold smell salt 
 to her nose - for he be pretty far go with alcoholic 
 poisoning - and , as soon as he be able to understand 
 she , she say : 
  " look here , mon ami , do not go to the table 
 again . take a good sleep now and come and see I 
 this afternoon . " 
  he sleep till the lunch hour . by that time Leonora 
 have hear the news . a Mrs. Colonel Whelen tell she . 
 Mrs. Colonel Whelen seem to have be the only 
 sensible person who be ever connect with the 
 Ashburnhams . she have argue it out that there must be 
 a woman of the harpy variety connect with Edward 's 
 incredible behaviour and mien ; and she advise 
 Leonora to go straight off to town - which might have 
 the effect of bring Edward to his sens - and to 
 consult her solicitor and her spiritual adviser . she have  well go that very morning ; it be no good arguing 
 with a man in Edward 's condition . 
  Edward , indeed , do not know that she have go . 
 as soon as he wake he go straight to La Dolciquita 's 
 room and she stand he his lunch in her own 
 apartment . he fall on her neck and weep , and she put up 
 with it for a time . she be quite a good - natured 
 woman . and , when she have calm he down with Eau 
 de Melisse , she say : 
  " look here , my friend , how much money have you 
 leave ? five thousand dollar ? ten ? " for the rumour go 
 that Edward have lose two king ' ransom a night for 
 fourteen night and she imagine that he must be near 
 the end of his resource . 
  the Eau de Melisse have calm Edward to such an 
 extent that , for the moment , he really have a head on his 
 shoulder . he do nothing g more than grunt : 
 " and then ? " 
  " why , " she answer , " I may just as well have the 
 ten thousand dollar as the table . I will go with you to 
 Antibes for a week for that sum . " 
  Edward grunt : " five . " she try to get seven 
 thousand five hundred ; but he stick to his five 
 thousand and the hotel expense at Antibes . the 
 sedative carry he just as far as that and then he 
 collapse again . he have to leave for Antibes at three ; 
 he could not do without it . he leave a note for Leonora 
 say that he have go off for a week with the Clinton 
 Morleys , yachting . 
  he do not enjoy himself very much at Antibes . La 
 Dolciquita could talk of nothing with any enthusiasm 
 except money , and she tire he unceasingly during 
 every wake hour for present of the most expensive 
 description . and , at the end of a week , she just quietly 
 kick he out . he hang about in Antibes for three 
 day . he be cure of the idea that he have any duty 
 towards La Dolciquita - feudal or otherwise . but his  sentimentalism require of he an attitude of byronic 
 gloom - as if his court have go into half - mourning . 
 then his appetite suddenly return , and he 
 remember Leonora . he find at his hotel at Monte 
 Carlo a telegram from Leonora , dispatch from 
 London , say : " please return as soon as convenient . " 
 he could not understand why Leonora should have 
 abandon he so precipitately when she only think 
 that he have go yacht with the Clinton Morleys . 
 then he discover that she have leave the hotel before 
 he have write the note . he have a pretty rocky journey 
 back to town ; he be frightened out of his life - and 
 Leonora have never seem so desirable to he . 
 
 I call this the Saddest Story rather than " the 
 Ashburnham Tragedy , " just because it be so sad , just 
 because there be no current to draw thing along to a 
 swift and inevitable end . there be about this story none 
 of the elevation that accompany tragedy ; there be 
 about it no nemesis , no destiny . here be two noble 
 people - for I be convinced that both Edward and 
 Leonora have noble nature - here then , be two noble 
 nature , drift down life , like fireship afloat on a 
 lagoon and cause misery , heartache , agony of the 
 mind , and death . and they themselves steadily 
 deteriorate ? and why ? for what purpose ? to point 
 what lesson ? it be all a darkness . 
 there be not even any villain in the story - for even  Major Basil , the husband of the lady who next , and 
 really , comfort the unfortunate Edward - even Major 
 Basil be not a villain in this piece . he be a slack , 
 loose , shiftless sort of fellow - but he do not do 
 anything to Edward . whilst they be in the same 
 station in Burma he borrow a good deal of money - 
 though , really , since Major Basil have no particular 
 vice , it be difficult to know why he want it . he 
 collect - different type of horse ' bit from the 
 early time to the present day - but , since he do not 
 prosecute even this occupation with any vigour , he 
 can not have need much money for the acquirement , 
 say , of the bit of Genghis Khan 's charger - if Genghis 
 Khan have a charger . and when I say that he borrow 
 a good deal of money from Edward I do not mean to 
 say that he have more than a thousand pound from 
 he during the five year that the connection last . 
 Edward , of course , do not have a great deal of money ; 
 Leonora be see to that . still he may have have five 
 hundred pound a year English , for his menus 
 plaisir - for his regimental subscription and for 
 keep his man smart . Leonara hat that ; she would 
 have prefer to buy dress for herself or to have 
 devote the money to pay off a mortgage . still , with 
 her sense of justice , she see that , since she be 
 manage a property bringing in three thousand a year 
 with a view to reestablish it as a property of five 
 thousand a year , and since the property really , if not 
 legally , belong to Edward , it be reasonable and just 
 that Edward should get a slice of his own . of course 
 she have the devil of a job .   I do not   know that I have get the financial detail 
 exactly right . I be a pretty good head at figure , but 
 my mind , still , sometimes mix up pound with dollar 
 and I get a figure wrong . anyhow , the proposition be 
 something like this : properly work and without 
 rebate to the tenant and keep up school and 
 thing , the Branshaw estate should have bring in 
 about five thousand a year when Edward have it . it 
 bring in actually about four .   I be talk in 
 pound , not dollar .   Edward 's excess with the 
 spanish lady have reduce its value to about three - as 
 the maximum figure , without reduction . Leonora 
 want to get it back to five . 
  she be , of course , very young to be face with 
 such a proposition - twenty - four be not a very advanced 
 age . so she do thing with a youthful vigour that she 
 would , very likely , have make more merciful if she have 
 know more about life . she get Edward remarkably on 
 the hop . he have to face she in a London hotel , when he 
 creep back from Monte Carlo with his poor tail between 
 his poor leg . as far as I can make out , she cut short 
 his first mumbling and his first attempt at affectionate 
 speech with word something like : 
  " we be on the verge of ruin . do you intend to let 
 I pull thing together ? if not I shall retire to Hendon 
 on my jointure . "   Hendon represent a convent to 
 which she occasionally go for what be call a 
 " retreat " in catholic circle .  
  and poor dear Edward know nothing - absolutely 
 nothing . he do not know how much money he have , as 
 he put it , " blue " at the table . it might have be  a quarter of a million for all he remember . he do 
 not know whether she know about La Dolciquita or 
 whether she imagine that he have go off yachting or 
 have stay at Monte Carlo . he be just dumb and he 
 just want to get into a hole and not have to talk . 
 Leonora do not make he talk and she say nothing 
 herself . 
  I do not know much about english legal 
 procedure - I can not , I mean , give technical detail of 
 how they tie he up . but I know that , two day later , 
 without her have say more than I have report to 
 you , Leonora and her attorney have become the 
 trustee , as I believe it be call , of all Edward 's 
 property and there be an end of Edward as the good 
 landlord and father of his people . he go out . 
  Leonora then have three thousand a year at her 
 disposal . she occupy Edward with get himself 
 transfer to a part of his regiment that be in 
 Burma - if that be the right way to put it . she herself 
 have an interview - last a week or so - with Edward 's 
 land - steward . she make he understand that the estate 
 would have to yield up to its last penny . before they 
 leave for India she have let Branshaw for seven year at a 
 thousand a year . she sell two vandyke and a little 
 silver for eleven thousand pound and she raise , on 
 mortgage , twenty - nine thousand . that go to Edward 's 
 money - lend friend in Monte Carlo . so she have to 
 get the twenty - nine thousand back , for she do not 
 regard the Vandykes and the silver as thing she would 
 have to replace . they be just frill to the 
 Ashburnham vanity . Edward cry for two day over the  disappearance of his ancestor and then she wish she 
 have not do it ; but it do not teach she anything and it 
 lessen such esteem as she have for he . she do not 
 also understand that to let Branshaw affect he with 
 a feeling of physical soiling - that it be almost as bad 
 for he as if a woman belong to he have become a 
 prostitute . that be how it do affect he ; but I dare 
 say she feel just as bad about the spanish dancer . 
  so she go at it . they be eight year in India , 
 and during the whole of that time she insist that they 
 must be self - support - they have to live on his 
 captain 's pay , plus the extra allowance for be at the 
 front . she give he the five hundred a year for 
 Ashburnham frill as she call it to herself - and she 
 consider she be do he very well . 
  indeed , in a way , she do he very well - but it be 
 not his way . she be always buy he expensive 
 thing which , as it be , she take off her own back . I 
 have , for instance , speak of Edward 's leather case . 
 well , they be not Edward 's at all ; they be Leonora 's 
 manifestation . he like to be clean , but he prefer , 
 as it be , to be threadbare . she never understand that , 
 and all that pigskin be her idea of a reward to he for 
 put she up to a little speculation by which she make 
 eleven hundred pound . she do , herself , the threadbare 
 business . when they go up to a place call Simla , 
 where , as I understand , it be cool in the summer and 
 very social - when they go up to Simla for their 
 health it be she who have he prance around , as we 
 should say in the United  States , on a thousand - dollar horse with the gladdest of 
 glad rag all over he . she herself use to go into 
 " retreat . " I believe that be very good for her health 
 and it be also very inexpensive . 
  it be probably also very good for Edward 's health , 
 because he prance about mostly with Mrs. Basil , who 
 be a nice woman and very , very kind to he . I 
 suppose she be his mistress , but I never hear it from 
 Edward , of course . I seem to gather that they carry it 
 on in a high romantic fashion , very proper to both of 
 they - or , at any rate , for Edward ; she seem to have 
 be a tender and gentle soul who do what he want . 
 I do not mean to say that she be without character ; 
 that be her job , to do what Edward want . so I 
 figure it out that , for those five year , Edward want 
 long passage of deep affection keep up in long , long 
 talk and that every now and then they " fall , " which 
 would give Edward an opportunity for remorse and an 
 excuse to lend the Major another fifty . I do not   think 
 that Mrs. Basil consider it to be " fall " ; she just 
 pity he and love he . 
  you see , Leonora and Edward have to talk about 
 something during all those year . you can not be 
 absolutely dumb when you live with a person unless 
 you be an inhabitant of the North of England or the 
 State of Maine . so Leonora imagine the cheerful 
 device of let he see the account of his estate and 
 discuss they with he . he do not discuss they 
 much ; he be try to behave prettily . but it be old 
 Mr. Mumford - the farmer who do not pay his rent - 
 that throw Edward into Mrs. Basil 's arm . Mrs. Basil 
 come upon Edward in the dusk , in the burmese garden , 
 with  all sort of flower and thing . and he be cut up 
 that crop - with his sword , not a walking - stick . he be 
 also carry on and curse in a way you would not 
 believe . 
  she ascertain that an old gentleman call 
 Mumford have be eject from his farm and have 
 be give a little cottage rent - free , where he live on 
 ten shilling a week from a farmer ' benevolent society , 
 supplement by seven that be be allow he by 
 the Ashburnham trustee . Edward have just discover 
 that fact from the estate account . Leonora have leave 
 they in his dressing - room and he have begin to read 
 they before take off his marching - kit . that be how 
 he come to have a sword . Leonora consider that she 
 have be unusually generous to old Mr. Mumford in 
 allow he to inhabit a cottage , rent - free , and in 
 give he seven shilling a week . anyhow , Mrs. Basil 
 have never see a man in such a state as Edward be . 
 she have be passionately in love with he for quite a 
 time , and he have be long for her sympathy and 
 admiration with a passion as deep . that be how they 
 come to speak about it , in the burmese garden , under 
 the pale sky , with sheafs of sever vegetation , misty 
 and odorous in the night around their foot . I think they 
 behave themselves with decorum for quite a time after 
 that , though Mrs. Basil spend so many hour over the 
 account of the Ashburnham estate that she get the 
 name of every field by heart . Edward have a huge map 
 of his land in his harness room and Major Basil do 
 not seem to mind . I believe that people do not mind 
 much in lonely station . 
 it might have last forever if the Major have not  be make what be call a brevet - colonel during the 
 shuffling of troop that go on just before the South 
 African War . he be send off somewhere else and , of 
 course , Mrs. Basil could not stay with Edward . Edward 
 ought , I suppose , to have go to the Transvaal . it 
 would have do he a great deal of good to get 
 kill . but Leonora would not let he ; she have hear 
 awful story of the extravagance of the hussar 
 regiment in war - time - how they leave hundred - bottle 
 case of champagne at five guinea a bottle on the veldt 
 and so on . besides , she prefer to see how Edward 
 be spend his five hundred a year . I do not   mean to 
 say that Edward have any grievance in that . he be 
 never a man of the deed - of - heroism sort and it be 
 just as good for he to be snip at up in the hill on 
 the north western frontier , as to be shoot at by an old 
 gentleman in a top hat at the bottom of some spruit . 
 those be more or less his word about it . I believe he 
 quite distinguish himself over there . at any rate , he 
 have his d.s.o. and be make a brevet - major . 
  Leonora , however , be not in the least keen on his 
 soldiering . she hat also his deed of heroism . one of 
 their bitter quarrel come after he have , for the 
 second time , in the Red Sea , jump overboard from 
 the troop - ship and rescue a private soldier . she stand 
 it the first time and even compliment he . but the 
 Red Sea be awful , that trip , and the private soldier 
 seem to develop a suicidal craze . it get on Leonora 's 
 nerve ; she figure Edward , for the rest of that trip , 
 jump overboard every ten minute . and the mere 
 cry of " Man overboard " be a disagreeable , alarming ,  and disturb thing . the ship get stop and there 
 be all sort of shout . and Edward would not promise 
 not to do it again , though fortunately they strike a 
 streak of cool weather when they be in the Persian 
 Gulf . Leonora have get it into her head that Edward be 
 try to commit suicide , so I guess it be pretty awful 
 for she when he would not give the promise . Leonora 
 ought never to have be on that troop - ship ; but she 
 get there somehow , as an economy . 
  Major Basil discover his wife 's relation with 
 Edward just before he be send to his other station . I 
 do not   know whether that be a blackmailer 's adroitness 
 or just a trick of destiny . he may have know of it all 
 the time or he may not . at any rate , he get hold of , just 
 about then , some letter and thing . it cost Edward 
 three hundred pound immediately . I do not know how 
 it be arrange ; I can not imagine how even a 
 blackmailer can make his demand . I suppose there be 
 some sort of way of save your face . I figure the 
 Major as disclose the letter to Edward with furious 
 oath , then accept his explanation that the letter 
 be perfectly innocent if the wrong construction be 
 not put upon they . then the Major would say : " I say , 
 old chap , I be deuce hard up . could not   you lend I 
 three hundred or so ? " I fancy that be how it be . and , 
 year by year , after that there would come a letter from 
 the Major , say that he be deuce hard up and 
 could not   Edward lend he three hundred or so . 
  Edward be pretty hard hit when Mrs. Basil have to 
 go away . he really have be very fond of she , and he 
 remain faithful to her memory for quite a long  time . and Mrs. Basil have love he very much and 
 continue to cherish a hope of reunion with he . 
 three day ago there come a quite proper , but very 
 lamentable letter from she to Leonora , ask to be 
 give particular as to Edward 's death . she have read 
 the advertisement of it in an indian paper . I think she 
 must have be a very nice woman .... 
  and then the Ashburnhams be move 
 somewhere up towards a place or a district call 
 Chitral . I be no good at geography of the Indian 
 Empire . by that time they have settle down into a 
 model couple and they never speak in private to each 
 other . Leonora have give up even show the 
 account of the Ashburnham estate to Edward . he 
 think that that be because she have pile up such a 
 lot of money that she do not want he to know how 
 she be get on any more . but , as a matter of fact , 
 after five or six year it have penetrate to her mind that 
 it be painful to Edward to have to look on at the 
 account of his estate and have no hand in the 
 management of it . she be try to do he a 
 kindness . and , up in chitral , poor dear little Maisie 
 Maidan come along .... 
  that be the most unsettling to Edward of all his 
 affair . it make he suspect that he be inconstant . the 
 affair with the Dolciquita he have size up as a short 
 attack of madness like hydrophobia . his relation with 
 Mrs. Basil have not seem to he to imply moral 
 turpitude of a gross kind . the husband have be 
 complaisant ; they have really love each other ; his wife 
 be very cruel to he and have long cease to be a wife 
 to he . he think that Mrs. Basil have be his  soul - mate , separate from he by an unkind fate - 
 something sentimental of that sort . 
  but he discover that , whilst he be still write 
 long weekly letter to Mrs. Basil , he be begin to 
 be furiously impatient if he miss see Maisie 
 Maidan during the course of the day . he discover 
 himself watch the doorway with impatience ; he 
 discover that he dislike her boy husband very 
 much for hour at a time . he discover that he be 
 get up at unearthly hour in order to have time , late 
 in the morning , to go for a walk with Maisie Maidan . 
 he discover himself use little slang word that she 
 use and attach a sentimental value to those word . 
 these , you understand , be discovery that come so 
 late that he could do nothing but drift . he be lose 
 weight ; his eye be begin to fall in ; he have 
 touch of bad fever . he be , as he describe it , 
 pip . 
  and , one ghastly hot day , he suddenly hear 
 himself say to Leonora : 
  " I say , could not   we take little Mrs. Maidan with we 
 to Europe and drop she at Nauheim ? " 
  he have not   have the least idea of say that to 
 Leonora . he have merely be stand , look at an 
 illustrate paper , wait for dinner . dinner be twenty 
 minute late or the Ashburnhams would not have be 
 alone together . no , he have not   have the least idea of 
 frame that speech . he have just be stand in a 
 silent agony of fear , of longing , of heat , of fever . he 
 be think that they be go back to Branshaw in 
 a month and that Maisie Maidan be  go to remain behind and die . and then , that have come 
 out . 
  the punkah swish in the darken room ; 
 Leonora lie exhausted and motionless in her 
 cane - lounge ; neither of they stir . they be both at that 
 time very ill in indefinite way . 
 and then Leonora say : 
  " yes . I promise it to Charlie Maidan this 
 afternoon . I have offer to pay she ex 's myself . " 
  Edward just save himself from say : " Good 
 God ! " you see , he have not the least idea of what 
 Leonora know - about Maisie , about Mrs. Basil , or 
 even about La Dolciquita . it be a pretty enigmatic 
 situation for he . it strike he that Leonora must be 
 intend to manage his love as she manage his 
 money affair and it make she more hateful to he - 
 and more worthy of respect . 
  Leonora , at any rate , have manage his money to 
 some purpose . she have speak to he , a week before , 
 for the first time in several year - about money . she 
 have make twenty - two thousand pound out of the 
 Branshaw land and seven by the letting of Branshaw 
 furnish . by fortunate investment - in which Edward 
 have help she - she have make another six or seven 
 thousand that might well become more . the mortgage 
 be all pay off so that , except for the departure of the 
 two vandyke and the silver , they be as well off as 
 they have be before the Dolciquita have act the 
 locust . it be Leonora 's great achievement . she lay the 
 figure before Edward , who maintain an unbroken 
 silence .   " I propose , " she say , " that you should resign from 
 the army and that we should go back to Branshaw . we 
 be both too ill to stay here any long . " 
 Edward say nothing at all . 
  " this , " Leonora continue passionlessly , " be the 
 great day of my life . " 
 Edward say : 
  " you have manage the job amazingly . you be a 
 wonderful woman . " he be think that if they go 
 back to Branshaw they would leave Maisie Maidan 
 behind . that think occupy he exclusively . they 
 must , undoubtedly , return to Branshaw ; there could be 
 no doubt that Leonora be too ill to stay in that place . 
 she say : 
  " you understand that the management of the whole 
 of the expenditure of the income will be in your 
 hand . there will be five thousand a year . " 
  she think that he care very much about the 
 expenditure of an income of five thousand a year and 
 that the fact that she have do so much for he would 
 rouse in he some affection for she . but he be 
 think exclusively of Maisie Maidan - of Maisie , 
 thousand of mile away from he . he be see the 
 mountain between they - blue mountain and the sea 
 and sunlit plain . he say : 
  " that be very generous of you . " and she do not 
 know whether that be praise or a sneer . that have 
 be a week before . and all that week he have pass in 
 an increase agony at the thought that those 
 mountain , that sea and those sunlit plain would be 
 between he and Maisie Maidan . that thought shake he  in the burn night : the sweat pour from he and 
 he tremble with cold , in the burn noon - at that 
 thought . he have no minute 's rest ; his bowel turn 
 round and round within he : his tongue be 
 perpetually dry and it seem to he that the breath 
 between his tooth be like air from a pest - house . 
  he give no thought to Leonora at all ; he have send 
 in his paper . they be to leave in a month . it seem 
 to he to be his duty to leave that place and to go 
 away , to support Leonora . he do his duty . 
  it be horrible , in their relationship at that time , 
 that whatever she do cause he to hate she . he hat 
 she when he find that she propose to set he up as 
 the Lord of Branshaw again - as a sort of dummy lord , 
 in swaddle clothe . he imagine that she have do 
 this in order to separate he from Maisie Maidan . 
 Hatred hang in all the heavy night and fill the 
 shadowy corner of the room . so when he hear that 
 she have offer to the Maidan boy to take his wife to 
 Europe with he , automatically he hat she since he 
 hat all that she do . it seem to he , at that time , 
 that she could never be other than cruel even if , by 
 accident , an act of hers be kind .... yes , it be a 
 horrible situation . 
  but the cool breeze of the ocean seem to clear 
 up that hatred as if it have be a curtain . they seem 
 to give he back admiration for she , and respect . the 
 agreeableness of have money lavishly at command , 
 the fact that it have buy for he the companionship 
 of Maisie Maidan - these thing begin to make he 
 see that his wife might have be right in the starving and  scrap upon which she have insist . he be at ease ; 
 he be even radiantly happy when he carry cup of 
 bouillon for Maisie Maidan along the deck . one night , 
 when he be lean , beside Leonora , over the ship 's 
 side , he say suddenly : 
  " by Jove , you be the fine woman in the world . I 
 wish we could be well friend . " 
  she just turn away , without a word , and go to 
 her cabin . still , she be very much well in health . 
 
 and , NOW , I suppose I must give you Leonora 's side of 
 the case .... 
  that be very difficult . for Leonora , if she preserve 
 an unchanged front , change very frequently her point 
 of view . she have be drill - in her tradition , in her 
 upbringing - to keep her mouth shut . but there be 
 time , she say , when she be so near yield to the 
 temptation of speak that afterwards she shudder 
 to think of those time . you must postulate that what 
 she desire above all thing be to keep a shut mouth 
 to the world , to Edward , and to the woman that he 
 love . if she speak she would despise herself . 
  from the moment of his unfaithfulness with La 
 Dolciquita she never act the part of wife to Edward . 
 it be not that she intend to keep herself from he 
 as a principle , forever . her spiritual adviser , I believe , 
 forbid that . but she stipulate that he must , in some 
 way , perhaps symbolical , come back to she . she be 
 not very clear as to what she mean ; probably she do 
 not know herself . or perhaps she do .   there be moment when he seem to be 
 come back to she ; there be moment when she be 
 within a hair of yield to her physical passion for 
 he . in just the same way , at moment , she almost 
 yield to the temptation to denounce Mrs. Basil to her 
 husband or Maisie Maidan to hers . she desire then to 
 cause the horror and pain of public scandal . for , 
 watch Edward more intently and with more 
 straining of ear than that which a cat bestow upon a 
 bird overhead , she be aware of the progress of his 
 passion for each of these lady . she be aware of it 
 from the way in which his eye return to door and 
 gateway ; she know from his tranquillity when he have 
 receive satisfaction . ; 
  at time she imagine herself to see more than be 
 warrant . she imagine that Edward be carry on 
 intrigue with other woman - with two at once ; with 
 three . for whole period she imagine he to be a 
 monster of libertinage and she could not see that he 
 could have anything against she . she leave he his 
 liberty ; she be starve herself to build up his 
 fortune ; she allow herself none of the joy of 
 femininity - no dress , no jewel - hardly even any 
 friendship , for fear they should cost money . 
  and yet , oddly , she could not but be aware that 
 both Mrs. Basil and Maisie Maidan be nice woman . 
 the curious , discount eye which one woman can 
 turn on another do not prevent she see that Mrs. 
 Basil be very good to Edward and Mrs. Maidan very 
 good for he . that seem to she to be a monstrous 
 and incomprehensible work of fate 's . 
 Incomprehensible ! why , she ask herself again and 
 again , do none  of the good deed that she do for her husband ever 
 come through to he , or appear to he as good deed ? 
 by what trick of mania could not he let she be as good 
 to he as Mrs. Basil be ? Mrs. Basil be not so 
 extraordinarily dissimilar to herself . she be , it be 
 true , tall , dark , with a soft mournful voice and a great 
 kindness of manner for every create thing , from 
 punkah man to flower on the tree . but she be not so 
 well read as Leonora , at any rate in learn book . 
 Leonora could not stand novel . but , even with all her 
 difference Mrs. Basil do not appear to Leonora to 
 differ so very much from herself . she be truthful , 
 honest and , for the rest , just a woman . and Leonora 
 have a vague sort of idea that , to a man , all woman be 
 the same after three week of close intercourse . she 
 think that the kindness should no long appeal , the 
 soft and mournful voice no long thrill , the tall 
 darkness no long give a man the illusion that he be 
 go into the depth of an unexplored wood . she 
 could not understand how Edward could go on and on 
 maunder over Mrs. Basil . she could not see why he 
 should continue to write her long letter after their 
 separation . after that , indeed , she have a very bad time . 
  she have at that period what I will call the 
 " monstrous " theory of Edward . she be always 
 imagine he ogle at every woman that he come 
 across . she do not , that year , go into " retreat " at Simla 
 because she be afraid that he would corrupt she maid 
 in her absence . she imagine he carry on 
 intrigue with native woman or Eurasians . at dance 
 she be in a fever of watchfulness .... 
 she persuade herself that this be because she  have a dread of scandal . Edward might get himself 
 mix up with a marriageable daughter of some man 
 who would make a row or some husband who would 
 matter . but , really , she acknowledge afterwards to 
 herself , she be hop that , Mrs. Basil be out of the 
 way , the time might have come when Edward should 
 return to she . all that period she pass in an agony of 
 jealousy and fear - the fear that Edward might really 
 become promiscuous in his habit . 
  so that , in an odd way , she be glad when Maisie 
 Maidan come along - and she realize that she have not , 
 before , be afraid of husband and of scandal , since , 
 then , she do she good to keep Maisie 's husband 
 unsuspicious . she wish to appear so trustful of 
 Edward that Maidan could not possibly have any 
 suspicion . it be an evil position for she . but Edward 
 be very ill and she want to see he smile again . she 
 think that if he could smile again through her 
 agency he might return , through gratitude and satisfied 
 love - to she . at that time she think that Edward be 
 a person of light and fleeting passion . and she could 
 understand Edward 's passion for Maisie , since Maisie 
 be one of those woman to whom other woman will 
 allow magnetism . 
  she be very pretty ; she be very young ; in spite 
 of her heart she be very gay and light on her foot . 
 and Leonora be really very fond of Maisie , who be 
 fond enough of Leonora . Leonora , indeed , imagine 
 that she could manage this affair all right . she have no 
 thought of Maisie 's be lead into adultery ; she 
 imagine that if she could take Maisie and Edward to  Nauheim , Edward would see enough of she to get tired of 
 her pretty little chattering , and of the pretty little 
 motion of her hand and foot . and she think she 
 could trust Edward . for there be not any doubt of 
 Maisie 's passion for Edward . she rave about he to 
 Leonora as Leonora have hear girl rave about draw 
 master in school . she be perpetually ask her boy 
 husband why he could not dress , ride , shoot , play polo , 
 or even recite sentimental poem , like their Major . and 
 young Maidan have the great admiration for Edward 
 and he adore , be bewilder by , and entirely trust 
 his wife . it appear to he that Edward be devoted to 
 Leonora . and Leonora imagine that when poor 
 Maisie be cure of her heart and Edward have see 
 enough of she , he would return to she . she have the 
 vague , passionate idea that when Edward have exhaust 
 a number of other type of woman he must turn to she . 
 why should not her type have its turn in his heart ? she 
 imagine that , by now , she understand he well , that 
 she understand well his vanity , and that , by make 
 he happy , she could arouse his love . Florence 
 knock all that on the head ....     I have , I be aware , tell this story in a very rambling 
 way so that it may be difficult for anyone to find his 
 path through what may be a sort of maze . I can not 
 help it . I have stick to my idea of be in a country 
 cottage with a silent listener , hear between the gust 
 of the wind and amidst the noise of the distant sea the 
 story as it come . and , when one discuss an affair - a 
 long , sad affair - one go back , one go forward . 
 one remember point that one have forget and one 
 explain they all the more minutely since one 
 recognize that one have forget to mention they in 
 their proper place and that one may have give , by 
 omit they , a false impression . I console myself 
 with think that this be a real story and that , after all , 
 real story be probably tell well in the way a person 
 tell a story would tell they . they will then seem 
 most real . 
  at any rate , I think I have bring my story up to 
 the date of Maisie Maidan 's death . I mean that I have 
 explain everything that go before it from the  several point of view that be necessary - from 
 Leonora 's , from Edward 's , and , to some extent , from 
 my own . you have the fact for the trouble of find 
 they ; you have the point of view as far as I could 
 ascertain or put they . let I imagine myself back , 
 then , at the day of Maisie 's death - or rather at the 
 moment of Florence 's dissertation on the protest , up in 
 the old Castle of the town of M - . let we consider 
 Leonora 's point of view with regard to Florence ; 
 Edward 's , of course , I can not give you for Edward 
 naturally never speak of his affair with my wife .   I 
 may , in what follow , be a little hard on Florence ; but 
 you must remember that I have be write away at 
 this story now for six month and reflect long and 
 long upon these affair .  
  and the long I think about they the more 
 certain I become that Florence be a contaminating 
 influence - she depress and deteriorate poor 
 Edward ; she deteriorate , hopelessly , the miserable 
 Leonora . there be no doubt that she cause Leonora 's 
 character to deteriorate . if there be a fine point about 
 Leonora it be that she be proud and that she be 
 silent . but that pride and that silence break when she 
 make that extraordinary outburst , in the shadowy room 
 that contain the protest , and in the little terrace 
 look over the river . I do not   mean to say that she be 
 do a wrong thing . she be certainly do right in 
 try to warn I that Florence be make eye at her 
 husband . but , if she do the right thing , she be do 
 it in the wrong way . perhaps she should have reflect 
 long ; she should have speak , if she want to  speak , only after reflection . or it would have be 
 well if she have act - if , for instance , she have so 
 chaperon Florence that private communication 
 between she and Edward become impossible . she 
 should have go eavesdropping ; she should have 
 watch outside bedroom door . it be odious ; but that 
 be the way the job be do . she should have take 
 Edward away the moment Maisie be dead . no , she 
 act wrongly .... 
  and yet , poor thing , be it for I to condemn she - 
 and what do it matter in the end ? if it have not be 
 Florence , it would have be some other .... still , it 
 might have be a well woman than my wife . for 
 Florence be vulgar ; Florence be a common flirt who 
 would not , at the last , lacher prise ; and Florence be an 
 unstoppable talker . you could not stop she ; nothing 
 would stop she . Edward and Leonora be at least 
 proud and reserved people . pride and reserve be not 
 the only thing in life ; perhaps they be not even the 
 good thing . but if they happen to be your particular 
 virtue you will go all to piece if you let they go . and 
 Leonora let they go . she let they go before poor 
 Edward do even . consider her position when she burst 
 out over the Luther - protest .... consider her agony .... 
  you be to remember that the main passion of her 
 life be to get Edward back ; she have never , till that 
 moment , despair of get he back . that may 
 seem ignoble ; but you have also to remember that she 
 get he back represent to she not only a victory 
 for herself . it would , as it appear to she , have be a 
 victory for all wife and a victory for her church . that  be how it present itself to she . these thing be a 
 little inscrutable . I do not   know why the getting back of 
 Edward should have represent to she a victory for all 
 wife , for Society , and for her church . or , maybe , I 
 have a glimmering of it . 
  she see life as a perpetual sex - battle between 
 husband who desire to be unfaithful to their wife , and 
 wife who desire to recapture their husband in the 
 end . that be her sad and modest view of matrimony . 
 Man , for she , be a sort of brute who must have his 
 divagation , his moment of excess , his night out , let 
 we say , rut season . she have read few novel , so that 
 the idea of a pure and constant love succeed the 
 sound of wedding bell have never be very much 
 present to she . she go , numb and terrify , to the 
 Mother Superior of her childhood 's convent with the 
 tale of Edward 's infidelity with the spanish dancer , 
 and all that the old nun , who appear to she to be 
 infinitely wise , mystic , and reverend , have do have 
 be to shake her head sadly and to say : 
  " man be like that . by the blessing of God it will 
 all come right in the end . " 
  that be what be put before she by her spiritual 
 adviser as her programme in life . or , at any rate , that 
 be how their teaching come through to she - that be 
 the lesson she tell I she have learn of they . I do not  
 know exactly what they teach she . the lot of woman 
 be patience and patience and again patience - ad 
 majorem Dei gloriam - until upon the appoint day , if 
 God see fit , she should have her reward . if then , in the 
 end , she should have succeed in get Edward  back she would have keep her man within the limit 
 that be all that wifehood have to expect . she be even 
 teach that such excess in man be natural , 
 excusable - as if they have be child . 
  and the great thing be that there should be no 
 scandal before the congregation . so she have clung to 
 the idea of get Edward back with a fierce passion 
 that be like an agony . she have look the other way ; 
 she have occupy herself solely with one idea . that be 
 the idea of have Edward appear , when she do get 
 he back , wealthy , glorious as it be , on account of 
 his land , and upright . she would show , in fact , that in 
 an unfaithful world one catholic woman have 
 succeed in retain the fidelity of her husband . 
 and she think she have come near her desire . 
  her plan with regard to Maisie have appear to be 
 work admirably . Edward have seem to be cool 
 off towards the girl . he do not hunger to pass every 
 minute of the time at Nauheim beside the child 's 
 recumbent form ; he go out to polo match ; he 
 play auction bridge in the evening ; he be cheerful 
 and bright . she be certain that he be not try to 
 seduce that poor child ; she be begin to think that 
 he have never try to do so . he seem in fact to be 
 drop back into what he have be for Maisie in the 
 beginning - a kind , attentive , superior officer in the 
 regiment , pay gallant attention to a bride . they 
 be as open in their little flirtation as the dayspring 
 from on high . and Maisie have not appear to fret 
 when he go off on excursion with we ; she have to lie 
 down for so many hour on her bed every afternoon ,  and she have not appear to crave for the attention of 
 Edward at those time . 
  and Edward be begin to make little advance 
 to Leonora . once or twice , in private - for he often do 
 it before people - he have say : " how nice you look ! " or 
 " what a pretty dress ! " she have go with Florence to 
 Frankfurt , where they dress as well as in Paris , and have 
 get herself a gown or two . she could afford it and 
 Florence be an excellent adviser as to dress . she 
 seem to have get hold of the clue to the riddle . 
  yes , Leonora seem to have get hold of the clue 
 to the riddle . she imagine herself to have be in the 
 wrong to some extent in the past . she should not have 
 keep Edward on such a tight rein with regard to money . 
 she think she be on the right tack in let he - 
 as she have do only with fear and irresolution - have 
 again the control of his income . he come even a step 
 towards she and acknowledge , spontaneously , that she 
 have be right in husbanding , for all those year , their 
 resource . he say to her one day : 
  " you have   do right , old girl . there be nothing I like 
 so much as to have a little to chuck away . and I can do 
 it , thank to you . " 
  that be really , she say , the happy moment of 
 her life . and he , seem to realize it , have venture to 
 pat she on the shoulder . he have , ostensibly , come in to 
 borrow a safety pin of she . 
  and the occasion of her box Maisie 's ear have , 
 after it be over , rivet in her mind the idea that there 
 be no intrigue between Edward and Mrs. Maidan . she 
 imagine that , from henceforward , all that she have  to do be to keep he well supply with money and 
 his mind amuse with pretty girl . she be convince 
 that he be come back to she . for that month she no 
 long repel his timid advance that never go very 
 far . for he certainly make timid advance . he pat 
 she on the shoulder ; he whisper into her ear little 
 joke about the odd figure that they see up at the 
 Casino . it be not much to make a little joke - but the 
 whispering of it be a precious intimacy .... 
  and then - smash - it all go . it go to piece at 
 the moment when Florence lay her hand upon 
 Edward 's wrist , as it lie on the glass shelter the 
 manuscript of the protest , up in the high tower with the 
 shutter where the sunlight here and there stream in . 
 or , rather , it go when she notice the look in 
 Edward 's eye as he gaze back into Florence 's . she 
 know that look . 
  she have know - since the first moment of their 
 meeting , since the moment of our all sit down to 
 dinner together - that Florence be make eye at 
 Edward . but she have see so many woman make eye 
 at Edward - hundred and hundred of woman , in 
 railway train , in hotel , aboard liner , at street corner . 
 and she have arrive at think that Edward take little 
 stock in woman that make eye at he . she have form 
 what be , at that time , a fairly correct estimate of the 
 method of , the reason for , Edward 's love . she be 
 certain that hitherto they have consist of the short 
 passion for the Dolciquita , the real sort of love for Mrs. 
 Basil , and what she deem the pretty courtship of 
 Maisie Maidan . besides she despise Florence so  haughtily that she could not imagine Edward 's be 
 attract by she . and she and Maisie be a sort of 
 bulwark round he . 
  she want , besides , to keep her eye on 
 Florence - for Florence know that she have box 
 Maisie 's ear . and Leonora so desperately desire that 
 her union with Edward should appear to be flawless . 
 but all that go .... 
  with the answer gaze of Edward into Florence 's 
 blue and uplifted eye , she know that it have all go . 
 she know that that gaze mean that those two have have 
 long conversation of an intimate kind - about their 
 like and dislike , about their nature , about their view 
 of marriage . she know what it mean that she , when we 
 all four walk out together , have always be with I 
 ten yard ahead of Florence and Edward . she do not 
 imagine that it have go far than talk about their 
 like and dislike , about their nature , or about 
 marriage as an institution . but , have watch Edward 
 all her life , she know that that lay on of hand , that 
 answering of gaze , mean that the thing be 
 unavoidable . Edward be such a serious person . 
  she know that any attempt on her part to separate 
 those two would be to rivet on Edward an irrevocable 
 passion ; that , as I have before tell you , it be a trick of 
 Edward 's nature to believe that the seducing of a 
 woman give she an irrevocable hold over he for life . 
 and that touch of hand , she know , would give that 
 woman an irrevocable claim - to be seduce . and she 
 so despise Florence that she would have prefer it 
 to be a parlour - maid . there be very decent parlour - maid .   and , suddenly , there come into her mind the 
 conviction that Maisie Maidan have a real passion for 
 Edward ; that this would break her heart - and that she , 
 Leonora , would be responsible for that . she go , for 
 the moment , mad . she clutch I by the wrist ; she 
 drag I down those stair and across that 
 whisper Rittersaal with the high paint pillar , the 
 high paint chimney piece . I guess she do not go 
 mad enough . 
 she ought to have say : 
  " your wife be a harlot who be go to be my 
 husband 's mistress .... " that might have do the trick . 
 but even in her madness she be afraid to go as far as 
 that . she be afraid that , if she do , Edward and 
 Florence would make a bolt of it and that , if they do 
 that , she would lose forever all chance of get he 
 back in the end . she act very badly to I . 
  well , she be a tortured soul who put her church 
 before the interest of a Philadelphia Quaker . that be 
 all right - I dare say the Church of Rome be the more 
 important of the two . 
  a week after Maisie Maidan 's death she be aware 
 that Florence have become Edward 's mistress . she 
 wait outside Florence 's door and meet Edward as he 
 come away . she say nothing and he only grunt . but 
 I guess he have a bad time . 
  yes , the mental deterioration that Florence work 
 in Leonora be extraordinary ; it smash up her whole 
 life and all her chance . it make she , in the first place , 
 hopeless - for she could not see how , after that , Edward 
 could return to she - after a vulgar intrigue with a 
 vulgar woman . his affair with Mrs. Basil , which be  now all that she have to bring , in her heart , against he , 
 she could not find it in she to call an intrigue . it be a 
 love affair - a pure enough thing in its way . but this 
 seem to she to be a horror - a wantonness , all the 
 more detestable to she because she so detest 
 Florence . and Florence talk .... 
  that be what be terrible , because Florence 
 force Leonora herself to abandon her high reserve - 
 Florence and the situation . it appear that Florence be 
 in two mind whether to confess to I or to Leonora . 
 Confess she have to . and she pitch at last on 
 Leonora , because if it have be I she would have have to 
 confess a great deal more . or , at least , I might have 
 guess a great deal more , about her " heart , " and 
 about Jimmy . so she go to Leonora one day and 
 begin hint and hinting . and she enrage Leonora 
 to such an extent that at last Leonora say : 
  " you want to tell I that you be Edward 's 
 mistress . you can be . I have no use for he . " 
  that be really a calamity for Leonora , because , 
 once start , there be no stop the talking . she 
 try to stop - but it be not to be do . she find it 
 necessary to send Edward message through Florence ; 
 for she would not speak to he . she have to give he , 
 for instance , to understand that if I ever come to know 
 of his intrigue she would ruin he beyond repair . and 
 it complicate matter a good deal that Edward , at 
 about this time , be really a little in love with she . 
 he think that he have treat she so badly ; that she be 
 so fine . she be so mournful that he long to comfort 
 she , and he think himself such a blackguard that  there be nothing he would not have do to make 
 amend . and Florence communicate these item of 
 information to Leonora . 
  I do not   in the least blame Leonora for her 
 coarseness to Florence ; it must have do Florence a world 
 of good . but I do blame she for give way to what be 
 in the end a desire for communicativeness . you see , 
 that business cut she off from her church . she do not 
 want to confess what she be do because she be 
 afraid that her spiritual adviser would blame she for 
 deceive I . I rather imagine that she would have 
 prefer damnation to break my heart . that be what 
 it work out at . she need not have trouble . 
  but , have no priest to talk to she have to talk to 
 someone and , as Florence insist on talk to she , 
 she talk back , in short , explosive sentence , like one 
 of the damned . precisely like one of the damned . well , 
 if a pretty period in hell on this earth can spare she any 
 period of pain in eternity - where there be not any 
 period - I guess Leonora will escape hell fire . 
  her conversation with Florence would be like this . 
 Florence would happen in on she , whilst she be 
 do her wonderful hair , with a proposition from 
 Edward , who seem about that time to have conceive 
 the naive idea that he might become a polygamist . I 
 dare say it be Florence who put it into his head . 
 anyhow , I be not responsible for the oddity of the 
 human psychology . but it certainly appear that at about 
 that date Edward care more for Leonora than he have 
 ever do before - or , at any rate , for a long time . and 
 if Leonora have be a person to play card and if she  have play her card well , and if she have have no sense 
 of shame and so on , she might then have share 
 Edward with Florence until the time come for jerk 
 that poor cuckoo out of the nest . 
  well , Florence would come to Leonora with some 
 such proposition . I do not mean to say that she put it 
 baldly , like that . she stand out that she be not 
 Edward 's mistress until Leonora say that she have see 
 Edward come out of her room at an advanced hour 
 of the night . that check Florence a bit ; but she fall 
 back upon her " heart " and stick out that she have 
 merely be converse with Edward in order to bring 
 he to a well frame of mind . Florence have , of course , 
 to stick to that story ; for even Florence would not have 
 have the face to implore Leonora to grant she favour to 
 Edward if she have admit that she be Edward 's 
 mistress . that could not be do . at the same time 
 Florence have such a press desire to talk about 
 something . there would have be nothing else to talk 
 about but a rapprochement between that estranged 
 pair . so Florence would go on babbling and Leonora 
 would go on brush her hair . and then Leonora 
 would say suddenly something like : 
  " I should think myself defile if Edward touch 
 I now that he have touch you . " 
  that would discourage Florence a bit ; but after a 
 week or so , on another morning she would have 
 another try . 
  and even in other thing Leonora deteriorate . 
 she have promise Edward to leave the spending of his 
 own income in his own hand . and she have fully 
 mean to  do that . I dare say she would have do it too ; though , 
 no doubt , she would have spy upon his banking 
 account in secret . she be not a roman Catholic for 
 nothing . but she take so serious a view of Edward 's 
 unfaithfulness to the memory of poor little Maisie that 
 she could not trust he any more at all . 
  so when she get back to Branshaw she start , after 
 less than a month , to worry he about the minute 
 item of his expenditure . she allow he to draw his 
 own cheque , but there be hardly a cheque that she 
 do not scrutinize - except for a private account of 
 about five hundred a year which , tacitly , she allow 
 he to keep for expenditure on his mistress or 
 mistress . he have to have his jaunt to Paris ; he have to 
 send expensive cable in cipher to Florence about twice 
 a week . but she worry he about his expenditure on 
 wine , on fruit tree , on harness , on gate , on the 
 account at his blacksmith 's for work do to a new 
 patent army stirrup that he be try to invent . she 
 could not see why he should bother to invent a new 
 army stirrup and she be really enrage when , after the 
 invention be mature , he make a present to the War 
 Office of the design and the patent right . it be a 
 remarkably good stirrup . 
  I have tell you , I think , that Edward spend a great 
 deal of time , and about two hundred pound , for 
 law - fee on get a poor girl , the daughter of one of his 
 gardener , acquit of a charge of murder her 
 baby . that be positively the last act of Edward 's life . 
 it come at a time when Nancy Rufford be on her way 
 to India ; when the most horrible gloom be over the 
 household ;  when Edward , himself , be in an agony and behave as prettily as he know how . yet even 
 then Leonora make he a terrible scene about this expenditure of time and trouble . she sort 
 of have the vague idea that what have pass with the girl and the rest of it ought to have 
 teach Edward a lesson - the lesson of economy . she threaten to take his banking account 
 away from he again . I guess that make he cut his throat . he might have stick it out 
 otherwise - but the thought that he have lose his Nancy and that , in addition , there be 
 nothing 
 leave for he but a dreary , dreary succession of day in which he could be of no public service 
 . . . well , it finish he . 
  it be during those year that Leonora try to get up a love affair of her own with a 
 fellow call Bayham - a decent sort of fellow . a really nice man . but the affair be no sort 
 of success . I have tell you about it already .... 
 
 well , that about bring I up to the date of my receiving , in Waterbury , the laconic cable 
 from Edward to the effect that he want I to go to Branshaw and have a chat . I be pretty 
 busy at the time and I be half minded to send he a reply cable to the effect that I would 
 start in a fortnight . but I be have a long interview with old Mr. Hurlbird 's attorney and 
 immediately afterwards I have to have a long interview with the Misses Hurlbird , so I delay 
 cabling .   I have expect to find the Misses Hurlbird excessively old - in the ninety or 
 thereabout . the time have pass so slowly that I have the impression that it must have be 
 thirty year since I have be in the United States . it be only twelve year . actually Miss 
 Hurlbird be just sixty - one and Miss Florence Hurlbird fifty - nine and they be both , 
 mentally and physically , as vigorous as could be desire . they be , indeed , more vigorous , 
 mentally , than suit my purpose , which be to get away from the United States as quickly 
 as I could . the Hurlbirds be an exceedingly unite family - exceedingly unite except on 
 one set of point . each of the three of they have a separate doctor , whom she trust 
 implicitly - and each have a separate attorney . and each of they distrust the other 's doctor 
 and the other 's attorney . and , naturally , the doctor and the attorney warn one all the 
 time - against each other . you can not imagine how complicated it all become for I . of 
 course I have an attorney of my own - recommend to I by young Carter , my Philadelphia 
 nephew . 
  I do not mean to say that there be any unpleasantness of a grasp kind . the 
 problem be quite another one - a moral dilemma . you see , old Mr. Hurlbird have leave all his 
 property to Florence with the mere request that she would have erect to he in the city of 
 Waterbury , Conn. , a memorial that should take the form of some sort of institution for the 
 relief of sufferer from the heart . Florence 's money have all come to I - and with it old Mr. 
 Hurlbird 's . he have die just five day before Florence .   well , I be quite ready to spend a round million dollar on the relief of sufferer from 
 the heart . the old gentleman have leave about a million and a half ; Florence have be worth 
 about eight hundred thousand - and as I figure it out , I should cut up at about a million 
 myself . anyhow , there be ample money . but I naturally want to consult the wish of his 
 survive relative and then the trouble really begin . you see , it have be discover that Mr. 
 Hurlbird have have nothing whatever the matter with his heart . his lung have be a little 
 affect all through his life and he have die of bronchitis . 
  it strike Miss Florence Hurlbird that , since her brother have die of lung and not of 
 heart , his money ought to go to lung patient . that , she consider , be what her brother 
 would have wish . on the other hand , by a kink that I could not at the time understand , 
 Miss Hurlbird insist that I ought to keep the money all to myself . she say that she do not 
 wish for any monument to the Hurlbird family . 
  at the time I think that that be because of a New England dislike for necrological 
 ostentation . but I can figure out now , when I remember certain insistent and continued 
 question that she put to I , about Edward Ashburnham , that there be another idea in her 
 mind . and Leonora have tell I that , on Florence 's dressing - table , beside her dead body there 
 have lie a letter to Miss Hurlbird - a letter which Leonora post without tell I . I do not  
 know how Florence have time to write to her aunt ; but I can quite understand that she would 
 not like to go out of the world without  make some comment . so I guess Florence have tell Miss Hurlbird a good bit about Edward 
 Ashburnham in a few scrawl word - and that be why the old lady do not wish the name 
 of Hurlbird perpetuate . perhaps also she think that I have earn the Hurlbird money . 
  it mean a pretty tidy lot of discuss , what with the doctor warn each other 
 about the bad effect of discussion , on the health of the old lady , and warn I covertly 
 against each other , and say that old Mr. Hurlbird might have die of heart , after all , in 
 spite of the diagnosis of his doctor . and the solicitor all have separate method of arrange 
 about how the money should be invest and entrust and bind . 
  personally , I want to invest the money so that the interest could be use for the 
 relief of sufferer from the heart . if old Mr. Hurlbird have not die of any defect in that organ 
 he have consider that it be defective . moreover , Florence have certainly die of her heart , as 
 I see it . and when Miss Florence Hurlbird stand out that the money ought to go to chest 
 sufferer I be bring to think that there ought to be a chest institution too , and I 
 advance the sum that I be ready to provide to a million and a half of dollar . that would 
 have give seven hundred and fifty thousand to each class of invalid . I do not want money at 
 all badly . all I want it for be to be able to give Nancy Rufford a good time . I do not 
 know much about housekeeping expense in England , where , I presume , she would wish to 
 live . I know that her need at that time be  limit to good chocolate , and a good horse or two , and simple , pretty frock . probably she 
 would want more than that later on . but even if I give a million and a half dollar to these 
 institution I should still have the equivalent of about twenty thousand a year English , and I 
 consider that Nancy could have a pretty good time on that or less . 
  anyhow , we have a stiff set of argument up at the Hurlbird mansion , which stand on 
 a bluff over the town . it may strike you , silent listener , as be funny if you happen to be 
 european . but moral problem of that description and the giving of million to institution be 
 immensely serious matter in my country . indeed , they be the staple topic for consideration 
 amongst the wealthy class . we have not   get peerage and social climbing to occupy we much , 
 and decent people do not take interest in politic or elderly people in sport . so that there be 
 real tear shed by both Miss Hurlbird and Miss Florence before I leave that city . 
  I leave it quite abruptly . four hour after Edward 's telegram come another from Leonora , 
 say : " yes , do come . you could be so helpful . " I simply tell my attorney that there be the 
 million and a half ; that he could invest it as he like , and that the purpose must be decide 
 by the Misses Hurlbird . I be , anyhow , pretty well wear out by all the discussion . and , as I 
 have never hear yet from the Misses Hurlbird , I rather think that Miss Hurlbird , either by 
 revelation or by moral force , have persuade Miss Florence that no memorial to their name 
 shall be erect in the city of Waterbury , Conn. Miss Hurlbird weep dreadfully when  she hear that I be go to stay with the Ashburnhams , but she do not make any 
 comment . I be aware , at that date , that her niece have be seduce by that fellow Jimmy 
 before I have marry she - but I contrive to produce on she the impression that I think 
 Florence have be a model wife . why , at that date I still believe that Florence have be 
 perfectly virtuous after her marriage to I . I have not figure it out that she could have play 
 it so low down as to continue her intrigue with that fellow under my roof . well , I be a fool . 
 but I do not think much about Florence at that date . my mind be occupy with what be 
 happen at Branshaw . 
  I have get it into my head that the telegram have something to do with Nancy . it strike 
 I that she might have show sign of form an attachment for some undesirable fellow 
 and that Leonora want I to come back and marry she out of harm 's way . that be what 
 be pretty firmly in my mind . and it remain in my mind for nearly ten day after my 
 arrival at that beautiful old place . neither Edward nor Leonora make any motion to talk to I 
 about anything other than the weather and the crop . yet , although there be several young 
 fellow about , I could not see that any one in particular be distinguish by the girl 's 
 preference . she certainly appear illish and nervous , except when she wake up to talk gay 
 nonsense to I . oh , the pretty thing that she be .... 
  I imagine that what must have happen be that the undesirable young man have 
 be forbid the place and that Nancy be fret a little .   what have happen be just hell . Leonora have speak to Nancy ; Nancy have speak to 
 Edward ; Edward have speak to Leonora - and they have talk and talk . and talk . you 
 have to imagine horrible picture of gloom and half light , and emotion run through 
 silent night - through whole night . you have to imagine my beautiful Nancy appear 
 suddenly to Edward , rise up at the foot of his bed , with her long hair fall , like a split 
 cone of shadow , in the glimmer of a night - light that burn beside he . you have to imagine 
 she , a silent , a no doubt agonize figure , like a spectre , suddenly offer herself to he - to 
 save his reason ! and you have to imagine his frantic refusal - and talk . and talk ! my God ! 
  and yet , to I , live in the house , envelop with the charm of the quiet and order 
 living , with the silent , skilled servant whose mere lay out of my dress clothe be like a 
 caress - to I who be hourly with they they appear like tender , order , and devoted 
 people , smile , absent themselves at the proper interval ; drive I to meet - just good 
 people ! how the devil - how the devil do they do it ? 
  at dinner one evening Leonora say - she have just open a telegram : - 
  " Nancy will be go to India , to - morrow , to be with her father . " 
  no one speak . Nancy look at her plate ; Edward go on eat his pheasant . I feel 
 very bad ; I imagine that it would be up to I to propose to Nancy that evening . it appear 
 to I to be queer that they have not give I any warning of Nancy 's departure . but I  think that that be only english manner - some sort of delicacy that I have not get the 
 hang of . you must remember that at that moment I trust in Edward and Leonora and in 
 Nancy Rufford , and in the tranquillity of ancient haunt of peace , as I have trust in my 
 mother 's love . and that evening Edward speak to I . 
 
 what in the interval have happen have be this : 
  upon her return from Nauheim Leonora have completely break down - because she 
 know she could trust Edward . that seem odd but , if you know anything about breakdown , 
 you will know that , by the ingenious torment that fate prepare for we , these thing come as 
 soon as , a strain have relax , there be nothing more to be do . it be after a husband 's long 
 illness and death that a widow go to piece , it be at the end of a long rowing contest that a 
 crew collapse and lie forward upon its oar . and that be what happen to Leonora . 
  from certain tone in Edward 's voice ; from the long , steady stare that he have give 
 she from his bloodshot eye on rise from the dinner table in the Nauheim hotel , she know 
 that , in the affair of the poor girl , this be a case in which Edward 's moral scruple , or his 
 social code , or his idea that it would be play it too low down , render Nancy perfectly 
 safe . the girl , she feel sure , be in no danger at all from Edward . and in that she be 
 perfectly right . the smash be to come from herself . 
 she relax ; she break ; she drift , at first quickly ,  then with an increase momentum , down the stream of destiny . you may put it that , have 
 be cut off from the restraint of her religion , for the first time in her life , she act along 
 the line of her instinctive desire . I do not know whether to think that , in that she be no 
 long herself ; or that , have let loose the bond of her standard , her convention , and her 
 tradition , she be be , for the first time , her own natural self . she be tear between her 
 intense , maternal love for the girl and an intense jealousy of the woman who realize that the 
 man she love have meet what appear to be the final passion of his life . she be divide 
 between an intense disgust for Edward 's weakness in conceive this passion , an intense pity 
 for the misery that he be endure , and a feeling equally intense , but one that she hide from 
 herself - a feeling of respect for Edward 's determination to keep himself , in this particular 
 affair , unspotted . 
  and the human heart be a very mysterious thing . it be impossible to say that Leonora , 
 in act as she then do , be not fill with a sort of hatred of Edward 's final virtue . she 
 want , I think , to despise he . he be , she realize , go from she for good . then let he 
 suffer , let he agonize ; let he , if possible , break and go to that hell that be the abode of 
 break resolve . she might have take a different line . it would have be so easy to send the 
 girl away to stay with some friend ; to have take she away herself upon some pretext or 
 other . that would not have cure thing but it would have be the decent line .... but , at that 
 date , poor Leonora be incapable of take any line whatever .   she pity Edward frightfully at one time - and then she act along the line of pity ; 
 she loathe he at another and then she act as her loathing dictate . she gasp , as a 
 person die of tuberculosis gasp for air . she crave madly for communication with some 
 other human soul . and the human soul that she select be that of the girl . 
  perhaps Nancy be the only person that she could have talk to . with her necessity 
 for reticence , with her coldness of manner , Leonora have singularly few intimate . she have 
 none at all , with the exception of the Mrs. Colonel Whelen , who have advise she about the 
 affair with La Dolciquita , and the one or two religious , who have guide she through life . the 
 Colonel 's wife be at that time in Madeira ; the religious she now avoid . her visitor 's book 
 have seven hundred name in it ; there be not a soul that she could speak to . she be Mrs. 
 Ashburnham of Branshaw Teleragh . 
  she be the great Mrs. Ashburnham of Branshaw and she lie all day upon her bed in 
 her marvellous , light , airy bedroom with the chintz and the Chippendale and the portrait of 
 deceased Ashburnhams by Zoffany and Zucchero . when there be a meet she would struggle 
 up - suppose it be within drive distance - and let Edward drive she and the girl to the 
 cross - road or the country house . she would drive herself back alone ; Edward would ride off 
 with the girl . Ride Leonora could not , that season - her head be too bad . each pace of her 
 mare be an anguish . 
  but she drive with efficiency and precision ; she smile at the Gimmers and Ffoulkes 
 and the Hedley Seatons . she throw with exactitude penny to the boy  who open gate for she ; she sit upright on the seat of the high dog - cart ; she wave her 
 hand to Edward and Nancy as they ride off with the hound , and everyone could hear she 
 clear , high voice , in the chilly weather , say : 
 " have a good time ! " 
 poor forlorn woman ! . . . 
  there be , however , one spark of consolation . it come from the fact that Rodney 
 Bayham , of Bayham , follow she always with his eye . it have be three year since she have 
 try her abortive love affair with he . yet still , on the winter morning he would ride up to 
 her shaft and just say : " good day , " and look at she with eye that be not implore , but 
 that seem to say : " you see , I be still , as the Germans say - at disposition . " 
  it be a great consolation , not because she propose ever to take he up again but 
 because it show she that there be in the world one faithful soul in riding - breech . and it 
 show she that she be not lose her look . 
  and , indeed , she be not lose her look . she be forty , but she be as clean - run as 
 on the day she have leave the convent - as clear in outline , as clear - colour in the hair , as dark 
 blue in the eye . she think that her look - glass tell she this ; but there be always the 
 doubt .... Rodney Bayham 's eye take they away . 
  it be very singular that Leonora should not have age at all . I suppose that there be 
 some type of beauty and even of youth make for the embellishment that come with 
 endure sorrow . that be too  elaborately put . I mean that Leonora , if everything have prosper , might have become too 
 hard , 
 and , maybe , overbearing . as it be , she be tune down to appear efficient - and yet 
 sympathetic . that be the rare of all blend . and yet I swear that Leonora , in her restrained 
 way , give the impression of be intensely sympathetic . when she listen to you she 
 appear also to be listen to some sound that be go on in the distance . but still , she 
 listen to you and take in what you say , which , since the record of humanity be a record of 
 sorrow , be , as a rule , something sad . 
  I think that she must have take Nancy through many terror of the night and many 
 bad place of the day . and that would account for the girl 's passionate love for the elder 
 woman . for Nancy 's love for Leonora be an admiration that be awaken in Catholics by 
 their feeling for the Virgin Mary and for various of the saint . it be too little to say that the 
 girl would have lay her life at Leonora 's foot . well , she lay there the offer of her 
 virtue - and her reason . those be sufficient instalment of her life . it would to - day be 
 much 
 well for Nancy Rufford if she be dead . 
  perhaps all these reflection be a nuisance ; but they crowd on I . I will try to tell the 
 story . 
  you see - when she come back from Nauheim Leonora begin to have her 
 headache - headache last through whole day , during which she could speak no word 
 and 
 could bear to hear no sound . and , day after day , Nancy would sit with she , silent and 
 motionless for hour , steep handkerchief in vinegar and water , and think her own 
 thought . it must have be  very bad for she - and her meal alone with Edward must have be bad for her too - and 
 beastly bad for Edward . Edward , of course , waver in his demeanour . what else could he 
 do ? at time he would sit silent and deject over his untouched food . he would utter 
 nothing but monosyllable when Nancy speak to he . then he be simply afraid of the girl 
 fall in love with he . at other time he would take a little wine ; pull himself together ; 
 attempt to chaff Nancy about a stake and binder hedge that her mare have check at or talk 
 about the habit of the Chitralis . that be when he be think that it be rough on the 
 poor girl that he should have become a dull companion . he realize that his talk to she in 
 the park at Nauheim have do she no harm . 
  but all that be do a great deal of harm to Nancy . it gradually open her eye to 
 the fact that Edward be a man with his up and down and not an invariably gay uncle like 
 a nice dog , a trustworthy horse , or a girl friend . she would find he in attitude of frightful 
 dejection , sink into his armchair in the study that be half a gun - room . she would notice 
 through the open door that his face be the face of an old , dead man , when he have no one to 
 talk to . gradually it force itself upon her attention that there be profound difference 
 between the pair that she regard as her uncle and her aunt . it be a conviction that come 
 very slowly . 
  it begin with Edward 's give an oldish horse to a young fellow call Selmes . 
 selme ' father have be ruin by a fraudulent solicitor and the Selmes family  have have to sell their hunter . it be a case that have excite a good deal of sympathy in that 
 part of the county . and Edward , meet the young man , one day , unmounted and see he 
 to be very unhappy have offer to give he an old irish cob upon which he be rid . it be 
 a silly sort of thing to do , really . the horse be worth from thirty to forty pound and 
 Edward might have know that the gift would upset his wife . but Edward just have to comfort 
 that unhappy young man whose father he have know all his life . and what make it all the 
 bad be that young Selmes could not afford to keep the horse even . Edward recollect 
 this , immediately after he have make the offer , and say quickly : 
  " of course I mean that you should stable the horse at Branshaw until you have time to 
 turn round or want to sell he and get a well . " 
  Nancy go straight home and tell all this to Leonora , who be lie down . she 
 regard it as a splendid instance of Edward 's quick consideration for the feeling and the 
 circumstance of the distressed . she think it would cheer Leonora up - because it ought to 
 cheer any woman up to know that she have such a splendid husband . that be the last girlish 
 think she ever have . for Leonora , whose headache have leave she collect but miserably 
 weak , turn upon her bed and utter word that be amazing to the girl : 
  " I wish to God , " she say , " that he be your husband , and not mine . we shall be 
 ruin . we shall be ruin . be I never to have a chance . " and suddenly Leonora burst into a 
 passion of tear . she push  herself up from the pillow with one elbow and sit there - cry , crying , cry , with her 
 face 
 hide in her hand and the tear fall through her finger . 
  the girl flush , stammer , and whimper as if she have be personally insult . 
 " but if Uncle Edward . . . " she begin . 
  " that man , " say Leonora , with an extraordinary bitterness , " would give the shirt off 
 his back and . off mine - and off your to any . . . " she could not finish the sentence . 
  at that moment she have be feel an extraordinary hatred and contempt for her 
 husband . all the morning and all the afternoon she have be lie there think that Edward 
 and the girl be together - in the field and hack it home at dusk . she have be dig 
 her sharp nail into her palm . 
  the house have be very silent in the drooping winter weather . and then , after an 
 eternity of torture , there have invade it the sound of opening door , of the girl 's gay voice 
 say : 
  " well , it be only under the mistletoe . " . . . and there be Edward 's gruff undertone . 
 then Nancy have come in , with foot that have hasten up the stair and that tiptoe as they 
 approach the open door of Leonora 's room . Branshaw have a great big hall with oak floor 
 and tigerskin . round this hall there run a gallery upon which Leonora 's doorway give . and 
 even when she have the bad of her headache she like to have her door open - I suppose 
 so 
 that she might hear the approach footstep of ruin and disaster . at any rate she hat to be 
 in a room with a shut door .   at that moment Leonora hat Edward with a hatred that be like hell , and she would 
 have like to bring her riding - whip down across the girl 's face . what right have Nancy to be 
 young and slender and dark , and gay at time , at time mournful ? what right have she to be 
 exactly the woman to make Leonora 's husband happy ? for Leonora know that Nancy would 
 have make Edward happy . 
  yes , Leonora wish to bring her riding - whip down on Nancy 's young face . she 
 imagine the pleasure she would feel when the lash fall across those queer feature ; the 
 pleasure she would feel at draw the handle at the same moment toward she , so as to cut 
 deep into the flesh and to leave a lasting wheal . 
  well , she leave a last wheal and her word cut deeply into the girl 's mind .... 
  they neither of they speak about that again . a fortnight go by - a fortnight of deep 
 rain , of heavy field , of bad scent . Leonora 's headache seem to have go for good . she 
 hunt once or twice , let herself be pilot by Bayham , whilst Edward look after the 
 girl . then , one evening , when those three be din alone , Edward say , in the queer , 
 deliberate , heavy tone that come out of he in those day   he be look at the table : 
  " I have be think that Nancy ought to do more for her father . he be get an old 
 man . I have write to Colonel Rufford , suggest that she should go to he . " 
 Leonora call out : 
 " how dare you ? how dare you ? "   the girl put her hand over her heart and cry out : " oh , my sweet saviour , help I ! " 
 that be the queer way she think within her mind , and the word force themselves to her 
 lip . Edward say nothing . 
 
 and that NIGHT , by a merciless trick of the devil that pay attention to this sweltering 
 hell of our , Nancy Rufford have a letter from her mother . it come whilst Leonora be talk 
 to Edward , or Leonora would have intercept it as she have intercept other . it be an 
 amazing and a horrible letter .... 
  I do not   know what it contain . I just average out from its effect on Nancy that her 
 mother , have elope with some worthless sort of fellow , have do what be call ' sink 
 low and low . " whether she be actually on the street I do not know , but I rather think 
 that she eke out a small allowance that she have from her husband by that mean of 
 livelihood . and I think that she state as much in her letter to Nancy and upbraid the girl 
 with live in luxury whilst her mother starve . and it must have be horrible in tone , for 
 Mrs. Rufford be a cruel sort of woman at the good of time . it must have seem to that 
 poor girl , open her letter , for distraction from another grief , up in her bedroom , like the 
 laughter of a devil . 
  I just can not bear to think of my poor dear girl at that moment .... 
  and , at the same time , Leonora be lash , like a cold fiend , into the unfortunate 
 Edward . or , perhaps , he be not so unfortunate ; because he have do what he know to be the 
 right thing , he may be deem  happy . I leave it to you . at any rate , he be sit in his deep chair , and Leonora come into 
 his room - for the first time in nine year . she say : 
  " this be the most atrocious thing you have do in your atrocious life . " he never 
 move and he never look at she . God know what be in Leonora 's mind exactly . 
  I like to think that uppermost in it be concern and horror at the thought of the poor 
 girl be go back to a father whose voice make she shriek in the night . and , indeed , that 
 motive be very strong with Leonora . but I think there be also present the thought that she 
 want to go on torture Edward with the girl 's presence . she be , at that time , capable of 
 that . 
  Edward be sink in his chair ; there be in the room two candle , hide by green 
 glass shade . the green shade be reflect in the glass of the bookcase that contain 
 not book but gun with gleam brown barrel and fishing - rod in green baize overcover . 
 there be dimly to be see , above a mantelpiece encumber with spur , hoof , and bronze 
 model of horse , a dark - brown picture of a white horse . 
  " if you think , " Leonora say , " that I do not know that you be in love with the girl . . 
 . " she begin spiritedly , but she could not find any ending for the sentence . Edward do not 
 stir ; he never speak . and then Leonora say : 
  " if you want I to divorce you I will . you can marry she then . she be in love with 
 you . " 
  he groan at that , a little , Leonora say . then she go away . 
 Heaven know what happen in Leonora after  that . she certainly do not herself know . she probably say a good deal more to Edward than 
 I have be able to report ; but that be all that she have tell I and I be not go to make up 
 speech . to follow her psychological development of that moment I think we must allow 
 that she upbraid he for a great deal of their past life , whilst Edward sit absolutely silent . 
 and , indeed , in speak of it afterwards , she have say several time : " I say a great deal 
 more to he than I want to , just because he be so silent . " she talk , in fact , in the 
 endeavour to ste he into speech . 
  she must have say so much that , with the expression of her grievance , her mood 
 change . she go back to her own room in the gallery , and sit there for a long time 
 thinking . and she think herself into a mood of absolute unselfishness , of absolute 
 self - contempt , too . she say to herself that she be no good ; that she have fail in all her 
 effort - in her effort to get Edward back as in her effort to make he curb his expenditure . 
 she imagine herself to be exhaust ; she imagine herself to be do . then a great fear 
 come over she . 
  she think that Edward , after what she have say to he , must have commit 
 suicide . she go out on to the gallery and listen ; there be no sound in all the house 
 except the regular beat of the great clock in the hall . but , even in her debase condition , she 
 be not the person to hang about . she act . she go straight to Edward 's room , open the 
 door , and look in . 
 he be oil the breech action of a gun . it be an  unusual thing for he to do , at that time of night , in his evening clothe . it never occur to 
 she , nevertheless , that he be go to shoot himself with that implement . she know that he 
 be do it just for occupation - to keep himself from think . he look up when she 
 open the door , his face illuminate by the light cast upwards from the round orifice in the 
 green candle shade . 
 she say : 
  " I do not   imagine that I should find Nancy here . " she think that she owe that to 
 he . he answer then : 
  " I do not   imagine that you do imagine it . " those be the only word he speak that 
 night . she go , like a lame duck , back through the long corridor ; she stumble over the 
 familiar tigerskin in the dark hall . she could hardly drag one limb after the other . in the 
 gallery she perceive that Nancy 's door be half open and that there be a light in the girl 's 
 room . a sudden madness possess she , a desire for action , a thirst for self - explanation . 
  their room all give on to the gallery ; Leonora 's to the east , the girl 's next , then 
 Edward 's . the sight of those three open door , side by side , gap to receive whom the 
 chance of the black night might bring , make Leonora shudder all over her body . she go 
 into Nancy 's room . 
  the girl be sit perfectly still in an armchair , very upright , as she have be teach 
 to sit at the convent . she appear to be as calm as a church ; her hair fall , black and like a 
 pall , down over both her  shoulder . the fire beside she be burn brightly ; she must have just put coal on . she be 
 in a 
 white silk kimono that cover she to the foot . the clothe that she have take off be 
 exactly fold upon the proper seat . her long hand be one upon each arm of the chair , 
 that have a pink and white chintz back . 
  Leonora tell I these thing . she seem to think it extraordinary that the girl could 
 have do such orderly thing as fold up the clothe she have take off upon such a 
 night - when Edward have announce that he be go to send she to her father , and when , 
 from her mother , she have receive that letter . the letter , in its envelope , be in her right 
 hand . 
 Leonora do not at first perceive it . she say : 
 " what be you do so late ? " the girl answer : 
  " just think . " they seem to think in whisper and to speak below their breath . 
 then Leonora 's eye fall on the envelope , and she recognize Mrs. Rufford 's handwriting . 
  it be one of those moment when thinking be impossible , Leonora say . it be as if 
 stone be be throw at she from every direction and she could only run . she hear 
 herself exclaim : 
  " Edward 's dying - because of you . he be die . he be worth more than either of we .... " 
  the girl look past she at the panel of the half - closed door . 
 " my poor father , " she say , " my poor father . " 
  " you must stay here , " Leonora answer fiercely . " you must stay here . I tell you you 
 must stay here . " 
 " I be go to Glasgow , " Nancy answer . " I  shall go to Glasgow to - morrow morning . my mother be in Glasgow . " 
  it appear that it be in Glasgow that Mrs. Rufford pursue her disorderly life . she 
 have select that city , not because it be most profitable , but because it be the natal home 
 of her husband , to whom she desire to cause as much pain as possible . 
  " you must stay here , " Leonora begin , " to save Edward . he be die for love of you . " 
 the girl turn her calm eye upon Leonora . 
  " I know it , " she say . " and I be die for love of he . " 
  Leonora utter an " ah , " that , in spite of herself , be an " ah " of horror and of grief . 
  " that be why , " the girl continue , " I be go to Glasgow - to take my mother away 
 from there . " she add : " to the end of the earth , " for , if the last month have make she 
 nature that of a woman , her phrase be still romantically those of a school - girl . it be as if 
 she have grow up so quickly that there have not be time to put her hair up . but she add : 
 " we be no good - my mother and I. " 
 Leonora say , with her fierce calmness : 
  " no . no . you be not no good . it be I that be no good . you can not   let that man go on to 
 ruin for want of you . you must belong to he . " 
  the girl , she say , smile at she with a queer , faraway smile - as if she be a 
 thousand year old , as if Leonora be a tiny child . 
  " I know you would come to that , " she say , very slowly . " but we be not worth 
 it - Edward and I. "  NANCY HAD , in fact , be think ever since Leonora have make that comment over the 
 giving of the horse to young Selmes . she have be think and think , because she have 
 have to sit for many day silent beside her aunt 's bed .   she have always think of Leonora as 
 her aunt .   and she have have to sit think during many silent meal with Edward . and then , 
 at time , with his bloodshot eye and crease , heavy mouth , he would smile at she . and 
 gradually the knowledge have come to she that Edward do not love Leonora and that Leonora 
 hat Edward . several thing contribute to form and to harden this conviction . 
  she be allow to read the paper in those day - or , rather , since Leonora be 
 always on her bed and Edward breakfast alone and go out early , over the estate , she be 
 leave alone with the paper . one day , in the paper , she see the portrait of a woman she know 
 very well . beneath it she read the word : " the Hon . Mrs. Brand , plaintiff in the remarkable 
 divorce case report on p. 8 . " Nancy hardly know what a divorce case be . she have be so 
 remarkably well bring up , and Roman Catholics do not practise divorce . I do not   know how 
 Leonora have do it exactly . I suppose she have always impress it on Nancy 's mind that nice 
 woman do not read these thing , and that would have be enough to make Nancy skip those 
 page .   she read , at any rate , the account of the Brand divorce case - principally because she 
 want to tell Leonora about it . she imagine that Leonora , when her headache leave she , 
 would like to know what be happen to Mrs. Brand , who live at Christchurch , and whom 
 they both like very well . the case occupy three day , and the report that Nancy first come 
 upon be that of the third day . Edward , however , keep the paper of the week , after his 
 methodical fashion , in a rack in his gun - room , and when she have finish her breakfast Nancy 
 go to that quiet apartment and have what she would have call a good read . it seem to 
 she to be a queer affair . she could not understand why one counsel should be so anxious to 
 know all about the movement of Mr. Brand upon a certain day ; she could not understand 
 why a chart of the bedroom accommodation at Christchurch Old Hall should be produce in 
 court . she do not even see why they should want to know that , upon a certain occasion , the 
 drawing - room door be lock . it make her laugh : it appear to be all so senseless that 
 grow people should occupy themselves with such matter . it strike she , nevertheless , as odd 
 that one of the counsel should cross - question Mr. Brand so insistently and so impertinently as 
 to his feeling for Miss Lupton . Nancy know Miss Lupton of Ringwood very well - a jolly 
 girl , who ride a horse with two white fetlock . Mr. Brand persist that he do not love Miss 
 Lupton .... well , of course he do not love Miss Lupton ; he be a married man . you might as 
 well think of Uncle Edward love . . . love anybody but Leonora . when people be  married there be an end of loving . there be , no doubt , people who misbehave - but they 
 be poor people - or people not like those she know . 
  so these matter present themselves to Nancy 's mind . 
  but later on in the case she find that Mr. Brand have to confess to a " guilty intimacy " 
 with someone or other . Nancy imagine that he must have be tell someone his wife 's 
 secret ; she could not understand why that be a serious offence .. of course it be not very 
 gentlemanly - it lessen her opinion of Mr. Brand . but , since she find that Mrs. Brand have 
 condone that offence , she imagine that they could not have be very serious secret that 
 Mr. Brand have tell . and then , suddenly , it be force on her conviction that Mr. Brand - the 
 mild Mr. Brand that she have see a month or two before their departure to Nauheim , play 
 " Blind Man 's Buff " with his child and kiss his wife when he catch she - Mr. Brand 
 and Mrs. Brand have be on the bad possible term . that be incredible . 
  yet there it be - in black and white . Mr. Brand drink ; Mr. Brand have strike Mrs. 
 Brand to the ground when he be drunk . Mr. Brand be adjudge , in two or three abrupt 
 word , at the end of column and column of paper , to have be guilty of cruelty to his wife 
 and to have commit adultery with Miss Lupton . the last word convey nothing to 
 Nancy - nothing real , that be to say . she know that one be command not to commit 
 adultery - but why , she think , should one ? it be probably something like  catch salmon out of season - a thing one do not do . she gather it have something to do 
 with kissing , or hold someone in your arm .... 
  and yet the whole effect of that reading upon Nancy be mysterious , terrifying , and 
 evil . she feel a sickness - a sickness that grow as she read . her heart beat painfully ; she 
 begin 
 to cry . she ask God how he could permit such thing to be . and she be more certain that 
 Edward do not love Leonora and that Leonora hat Edward . perhaps , then , Edward love 
 someone else . it be unthinkable . 
  if he could love someone else than Leonora , her fierce , unknown heart suddenly speak 
 in her side , why could it not be herself ? and he do not love she .... this have occur about a 
 month before she get the letter from her mother . she let the matter rest until the sick feeling 
 go off ; it do that in a day or two . then , find that Leonora 's headache have go , she 
 suddenly tell Leonora that Mrs. Brand have divorce her husband . she ask what , exactly , it 
 all mean . 
  Leonora be lie on the sofa in the hall ; she be feel so weak that she could 
 hardly find any word . she answer just : 
  " it mean that Mr. Brand will be able to marry again . " 
 Nancy say : 
  " but . . . but . . . " and then : " he will be able to marry Miss Lupton . " Leonora just 
 move a hand in assent . her eye be shut . 
  " then . . . " Nancy begin . her blue eye be full of horror : her brow be tight 
 above they ; the line  of pain about her mouth be very distinct . in her eye the whole of that familiar , great hall 
 have a change aspect . the andiron with the brass flower at the end appear unreal ; the 
 burn log be just log that be burn and not the comfortable symbol of an 
 indestructible mode of life . the flame flutter before the high fireback ; the St. Bernard 
 sigh in his sleep . outside the winter rain fall and fall . and suddenly she think that 
 Edward might marry someone else ; and she nearly scream . 
  Leonora open her eye , lie sideways , with her face upon the black and gold 
 pillow of the sofa that be draw half across the great fireplace . 
  " I think , " Nancy say , " I never imagine .... be not   marriage sacrament ? be not   they 
 indissoluble ? I think you be married . . . and . . . " she be sob . " I think you be 
 married or not married as you be alive or dead . " 
  " that , " Leonora say , " be the law of the church . it be not the law of the land .... " 
  " oh , yes , " Nancy say , " the Brands be Protestants . " 
  she feel a sudden safeness descend upon she , and for an hour or so her mind be at 
 rest . it seem to her idiotic not to have remember Henry VIII and the basis upon which 
 protestantism rest . she almost laugh at herself . 
  the long afternoon wear on ; the flame still flutter when the maid make up the fire ; 
 the St. Bernard awake and lollop away towards the kitchen . and then Leonora open her 
 eye and say almost coldly :  " and you ? do not   you think you will get marry ? " it be so unlike Leonora that , for the 
 moment , the girl be frightened in the dusk . but then , again , it seem a perfectly reasonable 
 question . 
  " I do not   know , " she answer . " I do not   know that anyone want to marry I . " 
 " several people want to marry you , " Leonora say . 
  " but I do not   want to marry , " Nancy answer . " I should like to go on live with you 
 and Edward . I do not   think I be in the way , or that I be really an expense . if I go you 
 would have to have a companion . or , perhaps , I ought to earn my living .... " 
  " I be not   think of that , " Leonora answer in the same dull tone . " you will have 
 enough money from your father . but most people want to be marry . " 
  I believe that she then ask the girl if she would not like to marry I , and that 
 Nancy answer that she would marry I if she be tell to ; but that she want to go on 
 live there . she add : 
  " if I marry anyone I should want he to be like Edward . " 
  she be frightened out of her life . Leonora writhe on her couch and call out : " oh , 
 God ! . . . " 
  Nancy run for the maid ; for tablet of aspirin ; for wet handkerchief . it never occur 
 to she that Leonora 's expression of agony be for anything else than physical pain . 
  you be to remember that all this happen a month before Leonora go into the 
 girl 's room at night . I have be cast back again ; but I can not help it . it be so difficult to 
 keep all these people go . I tell  you about Leonora and bring she up to date ; then 
 about Edward , who have fall behind . and then the girl 
 get hopelessly leave behind . I wish I could put it down 
 in diary form . thus : on the 1st of September they 
 return from Nauheim . Leonora at once take to her 
 bed . by the 1st of October they be all go to meet 
 together . Nancy have already observe very fully that 
 Edward be strange in his manner . about the 6th of 
 that month Edward give the horse to young Selmes , 
 and Nancy have cause to believe that her aunt do not 
 love her uncle . on the 20th she read the account of the 
 divorce case , which be report in the paper of the 
 18th and the two following day . on the 23rd she have 
 the conversation with her aunt in the hall - about 
 marriage in general and about her own possible 
 marriage . her aunt be come to her bedroom do not 
 occur until the 12th of November .... 
  thus she have three week for introspection - for 
 introspection beneath gloomy sky , in that old house , 
 render dark by the fact that it lie in a hollow 
 crown by fir tree with their black shadow . it be 
 not a good situation for a girl . she begin think 
 about love , she who have never before consider it as 
 anything other than a rather humorous , rather 
 nonsensical matter . she remember chance passage 
 in chance book - thing that have not really affect 
 she at all at the time . she remember someone 's love 
 for the Princess Badrulbadour ; she remember to 
 have hear that love be a flame , a thirst , a withering 
 up of the vital - though she do not know what the 
 vital be . she have a vague recollection that love be 
 say to render a  hopeless lover 's eye hopeless ; she remember a 
 character in a book who be say to have take to drink 
 through love ; she remember that lover ' existence 
 be say to be punctuate with heavy sigh . once she 
 go to the little cottage piano that be in a corner of 
 the hall and begin to play . it be a tinkly , reedy 
 instrument , for none of that household have any turn 
 for music . Nancy herself could play a few simple 
 song , and she find herself play . she have be 
 sit on the window seat , look out on the fading 
 day . Leonora have go to pay some call ; Edward be 
 look after some planting up in the new spinney . 
 thus she find herself play on the old piano . she 
 do not know how she come to be do it . a silly , 
 lilting , waver tune come from before she in the 
 dusk - a tune in which major note with their cheerful 
 insistence waver and melt into minor sound , as 
 beneath a bridge the high light on dark water melt 
 and waver and disappear into black depth . well , it be 
 a silly old tune .... 
  it go with the word - they be about a willow 
 tree , I think : 
 
 Thou be to all lose love the good , 
 the only true plant find 
 
  - that sort of thing . it be Herrick , I believe , and the 
 music be the reedy , irregular , lilt sound that go 
 with Herrick . and it be dusk ; the heavy , hewn , dark 
 pillar that support the gallery be like mourn 
 presence ; the fire have sink to nothing - a mere glow  amongst white ash .... it be a sentimental sort of 
 place and light and hour .... 
  and suddenly Nancy find that she be cry . 
 she be cry quietly ; she go on to cry with long 
 convulsive sob . it seem to she that everything gay , 
 everything charming , all light , all sweetness , have go 
 out of life . unhappiness ; unhappiness ; unhappiness 
 be all around she . she seem to know no happy 
 be and she herself be agonizing .... 
  she remember that Edward 's eye be hopeless ; 
 she be certain that he be drink too much ; at time 
 he sigh deeply . he appear as a man who be 
 burn with inward flame ; dry up in the soul with 
 thirst ; wither up in the vital . then , the torturing 
 conviction come to she - the conviction that have visit 
 she again and again - that Edward must love someone 
 other than Leonora . with her little , pedagogic 
 sectarianism she remember that Catholics do not do 
 this thing . but Edward be a protestant . then Edward 
 love somebody .... 
  and , after that thought , her eye grow hopeless ; she 
 sigh as the old St. Bernard beside she do . at meal 
 she would feel an intolerable desire to drink a glass of 
 wine , and then another and then a third . then she 
 would find herself grow gay .... but in half an hour the 
 gaiety go ; she feel like a person who be burn up 
 with an inward flame ; desiccate at the soul with thirst ; 
 wither up in the vital . one evening she go into 
 Edward 's gun - room - he have go to a meeting of the 
 National Reserve Committee . on the table beside his 
 chair be a decanter of whiskey . she pour out a 
 wine - glassful and drink it off .   Flame then really seem to fill her body ; her leg 
 swell ; her face grow feverish . she drag she tall 
 height up to her room and lie in the dark . the bed 
 reel beneath she ; she give way to the thought that 
 she be in Edward 's arm ; that he be kiss she on 
 her face , that burn ; on her shoulder , that burn , 
 and on her neck , that be on fire . 
  she never touch alcohol again . not once after 
 that do she have such thought . they die out of her 
 mind ; they leave only a feeling of shame so 
 insupportable that her brain could not take it in and 
 they vanish . she imagine that her anguish at the 
 thought of Edward 's love for another person be solely 
 sympathy for Leonora ; she determine that the rest of 
 her life must be spend in act as Leonora 's 
 handmaiden - sweeping , tending , embroider , like 
 some Deborah , some mediaeval saint - I be not , 
 unfortunately , up in the catholic hagiology . but I 
 know that she picture herself as some personage with 
 a depressed , earnest face and tightly close lip , in a 
 clear white room , water flower or tend an 
 embroidery frame . or she desire to go with Edward to 
 Africa and to throw herself in the path of a charge 
 lion so that Edward might be save for Leonora at the 
 cost of her life . well , along with her sad thought she 
 have her childish one . 
  she know nothing - nothing of life , except that one 
 must live sadly . that she now know . what happen to 
 she on the night when she receive at once the blow 
 that Edward wish she to go to her father in India and 
 the blow of the letter from her mother be this . she 
 call first upon her sweet Saviour - and she think 
 of our Lord as her sweet Saviour ! - that he  might make it impossible that she should go to India . 
 then she realize from Edward 's demeanour that he 
 be determined that she should go to India . it must 
 then be right that she should go . Edward be always 
 right in his determination . he be the Cid ; he be 
 Lohengrin ; he be the Chevalier Bayard . 
  nevertheless her mind mutiny and revolt . she 
 could not leave that house . she imagine that he 
 wish she go that she might not witness his amour 
 with another girl . well , she be prepared to tell he that 
 she be ready to witness his amour with another 
 young girl . she would stay there - to comfort Leonora . 
  then come the desperate shock of the letter from 
 her mother . her mother say , I believe , something like : 
 " you have no right to go on live your life of 
 prosperity and respect . you ought to be on the street 
 with I . how do you know that you be even Colonel 
 Rufford 's daughter ? " she do not know what these 
 word mean . she think of her mother as sleep 
 beneath the arch whilst the snow fall . that be the 
 impression convey to her mind by the word " on the 
 street . " a platonic sense of duty give she the idea that 
 she ought to go to comfort her mother - the mother 
 that bear she , though she hardly know what the word 
 mean . at the same time she know that her mother have 
 leave her father with another man - therefore she pity 
 her father , and think it terrible in herself that she 
 tremble at the sound of her father 's voice . if her 
 mother be that sort of woman it be natural that her 
 father should have have access of madness in which 
 he have strike herself to the ground . and the voice of  her conscience say to she that her first duty be to her 
 parent . it be in accord with this awakened sense of 
 duty that she undress with great care and 
 meticulously fold the clothe that she take off . 
 sometimes , but not very often , she throw they 
 helter - skelter about the room . 
  and that sense of duty be her prevail mood 
 when Leonora , tall , clean - run , golden - haired , all in 
 black , appear in the doorway , and tell she that 
 Edward be die of love for she . she know then with 
 her conscious mind what she have know within herself 
 for month - that Edward be die - actually and 
 physically die - of love for she . it seem to she that 
 for one short moment her spirit could say : " Domine , 
 nunc dimittis .... Lord , now lett thou thy servant 
 depart in peace . " she imagine that she could 
 cheerfully go away to Glasgow and rescue her fallen 
 mother . 
 
 and it seem to she to be in tune with the mood , with 
 the hour , and with the woman in front of she to say 
 that she know Edward be die of love for she and 
 that she be die of love for Edward . for that fact 
 have suddenly slip into place and become real for 
 she as the niched marker on a whist table slip round 
 with the pressure of your thumb . that rubber at least 
 be make . 
  and suddenly Leonora seem to have become 
 different and she seem to have become different in her  attitude towards Leonora . it be as if she , in her frail , 
 white , silken kimono , sit beside her fire , but upon a 
 throne . it be as if Leonora , in her close dress of black 
 lace , with the gleam white shoulder and the coil 
 yellow hair that the girl have always consider the 
 most beautiful thing in the world - it be as if Leonora 
 have become pinch , shrivel , blue with cold , 
 shivering , suppliant . yet Leonora be command 
 she . it be no good command she . she be go 
 on the morrow to her mother , who be in Glasgow . 
  Leonora go on say that she must stay there to 
 save Edward , who be die of love for she . and , 
 proud and happy in the thought that Edward love she , 
 and that she love he , she do not even listen to what 
 Leonora say . it appear to she that it be Leonora 's 
 business to save her husband 's body ; she , Nancy , 
 possess his soul - a precious thing that she would 
 shield and bear away up in her arm - as if Leonora 
 be a hungry dog , try to spring up at a lamb that 
 she be carry . yes , she feel as if Edward 's love be 
 a precious lamb that she be bear away from a cruel 
 and predatory beast . for , at that time , Leonora 
 appear to she as a cruel and predatory beast . 
 Leonora , Leonora with her hunger , with her cruelty , 
 have drive Edward to madness . he must be shelter 
 by his love for she and by her love - her love from a 
 great distance and unspoken , envelop he , 
 surround he , uphold he ; by her voice 
 speak from Glasgow , say that she love , that she 
 adore , that she pass no moment without longing , 
 loving , quiver at the thought of he .   Leonora say loudly , insistently , with a bitterly 
 imperative tone : 
  " you must stay here ; you must belong to Edward . 
 I will divorce he . " 
 the girl answer : 
  " the church do not allow of divorce . I can not 
 belong to your husband . I be go to Glasgow to 
 rescue my mother . " 
  the half - open door open noiselessly to the 
 full . Edward be there . his devouring , doom eye 
 be fix on the girl 's face ; his shoulder slouch 
 forward ; he be undoubtedly half drunk and he have 
 the whiskey decanter in one hand , a slanting 
 candlestick in the other . he say , with a heavy ferocity , 
 to Nancy : 
  " I forbid you to talk about these thing . you be to 
 stay here until I hear from your father . then you will 
 go to your father . " 
  the two woman , look at each other , like beast 
 about to spring , hardly give a glance to he . he 
 lean against the door - post . he say again : 
  " Nancy , I forbid you to talk about these thing . I 
 be the master of this house . " and , at the sound of his 
 voice , heavy , male , come from a deep chest , in the 
 night , with the blackness behind he , Nancy feel as if 
 her spirit bow before he , with fold hand . she 
 feel that she would go to India , and that she desire 
 never again to talk of these thing . 
 Leonora say : 
  " you see that it be your duty to belong to he . he 
 must not be allow to go on drinking . "   Nancy do not answer . Edward be go ; they 
 hear he slip and shamble on the polished 
 black oak of the stair . Nancy scream when there 
 come the sound of a heavy fall . Leonora say again : 
 " you see ! " 
  the sound go on from the hall below ; the light 
 of the candle Edward hold flicker up between the 
 hand rail of the gallery . then they hear his voice : 
  " give I Glasgow . . . Glasgow , in Scotland . . . I 
 want the number of a man call White , of Simrock 
 Park , Glasgow . . . Edward White , Simrock Park , 
 Glasgow . . . ten minute . . . at this time of night . . . " 
 his voice be quite level , normal , and patient . alcohol 
 take he in the leg , not the speech . " I can wait , " his 
 voice come again . " yes , I know they have a number . I 
 have be in communication with they before . " 
  " he be go to telephone to your mother , " 
 Leonora say . " he will make it all right for she . " she 
 get up and close the door . she come back to the fire , 
 and add bitterly : " he can always make it all right for 
 everybody , except I - except I ! " 
  the girl say nothing . she sit there in a blissful 
 dream . she seem to see she lover , sit as he always 
 sit , in a round - back chair , in the dark hall - sit 
 low , with the receiver at his ear , talk in a gentle , slow 
 voice , that he reserve for the telephone - and save 
 the world and she , in the black darkness . she move 
 her hand over the bareness of the base of her throat , to 
 have the warmth of flesh upon it and upon her bosom . 
 she say nothing ; Leonora go on talk ....   God know what Leonora say . she repeat that 
 the girl must belong to her husband . she say that she 
 use that phrase because , though she might have a 
 divorce , or even a dissolution of the marriage by the 
 church , it would still be adultery that the girl and 
 Edward would be commit . but she say that that 
 be necessary ; it be the price the girl must pay for the 
 sin of have make Edward love she , for the sin of 
 love her husband . she talk on and on , beside the 
 fire . the girl must become an adulteress ; she have 
 wrong Edward by be so beautiful , so gracious , so 
 good . it be sinful to be so good . she must pay the 
 price so as to save the man she have wrong . 
  in between her pause the girl could hear the voice 
 of Edward , drone on , indistinguishably , with jerky 
 pause for reply . it make her glow with pride ; the 
 man she love be work for she . he at least be 
 resolve ; be malely determine ; know the right thing . 
 Leonora talk on with her eye bore into Nancy 's . 
 the girl hardly look at she and hardly hear she . 
 after a long time Nancy say - after hour and hour : 
  " I shall go to India as soon as Edward hear from 
 my father . I can not talk about these thing , because 
 Edward do not wish it . " 
  at that Leonora scream out and waver swiftly 
 towards the closed door . and Nancy find that she 
 be spring out of her chair with her white arm 
 stretch wide . she be clasp the other woman to 
 her breast ; she be say : 
  " oh , my poor dear ; oh , my poor dear . " and they 
 sit , crouch together in each other 's arm , and  cry and cry ; and they lie down in the same bed , 
 talk and talk , all through the night . and all 
 through the night Edward could hear their voice 
 through the wall . that be how it go .... 
 
 next morning they be all three as if nothing have 
 happen . towards eleven Edward come to Nancy , 
 who be arrange some Christmas rose in a silver 
 bowl . he put a telegram beside she on the table . " you 
 can uncode it for yourself , " he say . then , as he go 
 out of the door , he say : 
  " you can tell your aunt I have cable to Mr. 
 Dowell to come over . he will make thing easy till 
 you leave . " 
  the telegram , when it be uncoded , read , as far as I 
 can remember : 
  " will take Mrs. Rufford to Italy . undertake to do 
 this for certain . be devotedly attach to Mrs. 
 Rufford . have no need of financial assistance . do not 
 know there be a daughter , and be much oblige to 
 you for point out my duty . - white . " it be 
 something like that . 
  then that household resume its wonted course of 
 day until my arrival .  it be this part of the story that make I sad of all . 
 for I ask myself unceasingly , my mind go round 
 and round in a weary , baffle space of pain - what 
 should these people have do ? what , in the name of 
 God , should they have do ? 
  the end be perfectly plain to each of they - it 
 be perfectly manifest at this stage that , if the girl do 
 not , in Leonora 's phrase , " belong to Edward , " Edward 
 must die , the girl must lose her reason because Edward 
 die - and that after a time Leonora , who be the 
 cold and strong of the three , would console 
 herself by marry Rodney Bayham and have a quiet , 
 comfortable , good time . that end , on that night , whilst 
 Leonora sit in the girl 's bedroom and Edward 
 telephone down below - that end be plainly 
 manifest . the girl , plainly , be half - mad already ; 
 Edward be half dead ; only Leonora , active , persistent , 
 instinct with her cold passion of energy , be " do 
 thing . " what then , should they have do ? it work 
 out in the extinction of two very splendid 
 personality - for Edward and the girl be splendid 
 personality , in order that a third personality , more 
 normal , should have , after a long period of trouble , a 
 quiet , comfortable , good time . 
 
 I be write this , now , I should say , a full eighteen 
 month after the word that end my last chapter . since  write the word " until my arrival , " which I see end 
 that paragraph , I have see again , for a glimpse , from a 
 swift train , Beaucaire , with the beautiful white tower , 
 tarascon with the square castle , the great Rhone , the 
 immense stretch of the Crau . I have rush through 
 all Provence - and all Provence no long matter . it be 
 no long in the olive hill that I shall find my heaven ; 
 because there be only hell .... 
  Edward be dead ; the girl be go - oh , utterly go ; 
 Leonora be have her good time with Rodney Bayham , 
 and I sit alone in Branshaw Teleragh . I have be 
 through Provence ; I have see Africa ; I have visit 
 Asia to see , in Ceylon , in a darken room , my poor 
 girl , sit motionless , with her wonderful hair about 
 she , look at I with eye that do not see I , and 
 say distinctly : " Credo in unum Deum 
 Omnipotentem .... Credo in unum Deum Omnipotentem . 
 " those be the only reasonable word she utter ; 
 those be the only word , it appear , that she ever will 
 utter . I suppose that they be reasonable word ;    must 
 be extraordinarily reasonable for she , if she can say 
 that she believe in an Omnipotent deity . well , there it 
 be . I be very tired of it all .... 
  for , I dare say , all this may sound romantic , but it 
 be tiring , tiring , tiring to have be in the midst of it ; to 
 have take the ticket ; to have catch the train ; to 
 have choose the cabin ; to have consult the purser 
 and the steward as to diet for the quiescent patient 
 who do nothing but announce her belief in an 
 Omnipotent Deity . that may sound romantic - but it be 
 just a record of fatigue . 
 I do not   know why I should always be select to  be serviceable . I do not   resent it - but I have never be 
 the least good . Florence select I for her own 
 purpose , and I be no good to she ; Edward call I 
 to come and have a chat with he and I could not   stop 
 he cut his throat . 
  and then , one day eighteen month ago , I be 
 quietly write in my room at Branshaw when Leonora 
 come to I with a letter . it be a very pathetic letter 
 from Colonel Rufford about Nancy . Colonel Rufford 
 have leave the army and have take up the management of 
 a tea - planting estate in Ceylon . his letter be pathetic 
 because it be so brief , so inarticulate , and so 
 business - like . he have go down to the boat to meet his 
 daughter and have find his daughter quite mad . it 
 appear that at Aden Nancy have see in a local paper 
 the news of Edward 's suicide . in the Red Sea she have 
 go mad . she have remark to Mrs. Colonel Luton , 
 who be chaperon she , that she believe in an 
 Omnipotent Deity . she have not   make any fuss ; her eye 
 be quite dry and glassy . even when she be mad 
 Nancy could behave herself . 
  Colonel Rufford say the doctor do not anticipate 
 that there be any chance of his child 's recovery . it 
 be , nevertheless , possible that if she could see 
 someone from Branshaw it might soothe she and it 
 might have a good effect . and he just simply write to 
 Leonora : " please come and see if you can do it . " 
  I seem to have lose all sense of the pathetic ; but 
 still , that simple , enormous request of the old Colonel 
 strike I as pathetic . he be curse by his atrocious 
 temper ; he have be curse by a half - mad wife , who  drink and go on the street . his daughter be totally 
 mad - and yet he believe in the goodness of human 
 nature . he believe that Leonora would take the 
 trouble to go all the way to Ceylon in order to soothe 
 his daughter . Leonora would not . Leonora do not   ever 
 want to see Nancy again . I dare say that that , in the 
 circumstance , be natural enough . at the same time 
 she agree , as it be , on public ground , that someone 
 soothing ought to go from Branshaw to Ceylon . she 
 send I and her old nurse , who have look after 
 Nancy from the time when the girl , a child of thirteen , 
 have first come to Branshaw . so off I go , rush 
 through Provence , to catch the steamer at Marseilles . 
 and I be not   the least good when I get to Ceylon ; and 
 the nurse be not   the least good . nothing have be the 
 least good . 
  the doctor say , at Kandy , that if Nancy could be 
 bring to England , the sea air , the change of climate , 
 the voyage , and all the usual sort of thing might 
 restore her reason . of course , they have not   restore her 
 reason . she be , I be aware , sit in the hall , forty 
 pace from where I be now write . I do not   want to be 
 in the least romantic about it . she be very well dress ; 
 she be quite quiet ; she be very beautiful . the old nurse 
 look after she very efficiently . 
  of course you have the making of a situation 
 here , but it be all very humdrum , as far as I be 
 concerned . I should marry Nancy if her reason be 
 ever sufficiently restore to let she appreciate the 
 meaning of the anglican marriage service . but it be 
 probable that her reason will never be sufficiently 
 restore to let she  appreciate the meaning of the anglican marriage service . 
 therefore I can not marry she , accord to the law of 
 the land . 
  so here I be very much where I start thirteen 
 year ago . I be the attendant , not the husband , of a 
 beautiful girl , who pay no attention to I . I be 
 estranged from Leonora , who marry Rodney 
 Bayham in my absence and go to live at Bayham . 
 Leonora rather dislike I , because she have get it into 
 her head that I disapprove of her marriage with 
 Rodney Bayham . well , I disapprove of her marriage . 
 possibly I be jealous . 
  yes , no doubt I be jealous . in my fainter sort of 
 way I seem to perceive myself follow the line of 
 Edward Ashburnham . I suppose that I should really 
 like to be a polygamist ; with Nancy , and with Leonora , 
 and with Maisie Maidan , and possibly even with 
 Florence . I be no doubt like every other man ; only , 
 probably because of my american origin , I be fainter . 
 at the same time I be able to assure you that I be a 
 strictly respectable person . I have never do anything 
 that the most anxious mother of a daughter or the most 
 careful dean of a cathedral would object to . I have only 
 follow , faintly , and in my unconscious desire , 
 Edward Ashburnham . well , it be all over . not one of we 
 have get what he really want . Leonora want Edward , 
 and she have get Rodney Bayham , a pleasant enough 
 sort of sheep . Florence want Branshaw , and it be I 
 who have buy it from Leonora . I do not   really want 
 it ; what I want mostly be to cease be a 
 nurse - attendant . well , I be a nurse - attendant .  Edward want Nancy Rufford and I have get she . only 
 she be mad . it be a queer and fantastic world . why can not  
 people have what they want ? the thing be all there 
 to content everybody ; yet everybody have the wrong 
 thing . perhaps you can make head or tail of it ; it be 
 beyond I . 
  be there then any terrestrial paradise where , amidst 
 the whispering of the olive - leaf , people can be with 
 whom they like and have what they like and take their 
 ease in shadow and in coolness ? or be all man 's life 
 like the life of we good people - like the life of the 
 Ashburnhams , of the Dowells , of the Ruffords - 
 break , tumultuous , agonized , and unromantic life , 
 period punctuate by scream , by imbecility , by 
 death , by agony ? who the devil know ? 
 
 for there be a great deal of imbecility about the 
 closing scene of the Ashburnham tragedy . neither of 
 those two woman know what she want . it be only 
 Edward who take a perfectly clear line and he be 
 drunk most of the time . but , drunk or sober , he stick 
 to what be demand by convention and by the 
 tradition of his house . Nancy Rufford have to be 
 export to India and Nancy Rufford have not   to hear a 
 word of love from he . she be export to India and 
 she never hear a word from Edward Ashburnham . 
  it be the conventional line ; it be in tune with the 
 tradition of Edward 's house . I dare say it work out 
 for the great good of the body politic . convention 
 and tradition I suppose work blindly but surely  for the preservation of the normal type ; for the 
 extinction of proud , resolute , and unusual individual . 
  Edward be the normal man , but there be too 
 much of the sentimentalist about he and society do 
 not need too many sentimentalist . Nancy be a 
 splendid creature but she have about she a touch of 
 madness . society do not need individual with 
 touch of madness about they . so Edward and Nancy 
 find themselves steam - roll out and Leonora 
 survive , the perfectly normal type , married to a man 
 who be rather like a rabbit . for Rodney Bayham be 
 rather like a rabbit and I hear that Leonora be expect 
 to have a baby in three month ' time . 
  so those splendid and tumultuous creature with 
 their magnetism and their passion - those two that I 
 really love - have go from this earth . it be no doubt 
 good for they . what would Nancy have make of 
 Edward if she have succeed in live with he ; what 
 would Edward have make of she ? for there be about 
 Nancy a touch of cruelty - a touch of definite actual 
 cruelty that make her desire to see people suffer . yes , 
 she desire to see Edward suffer . and , by God , she 
 give he hell . 
  she give he an unimaginable hell . those two 
 woman pursue that poor devil and flay the skin off 
 he as if they have do it with whip . I tell you his 
 mind bleed almost visibly . I seem to see he stand , 
 naked to the waist , his forearm shield his eye , and 
 flesh hang from he in rag . I tell you that be no 
 exaggeration of what I feel . it be as if Leonora and 
 Nancy band themselves together to do execution , for  the sake of humanity , upon the body of a man who 
 be at their disposal . they be like a couple of Sioux 
 who have get hold of an Apache and have he well tie 
 to a stake . I tell you there be no end to the torture 
 they inflict upon he . 
  Night after night he would hear they talk ; 
 talk ; madden , sweating , seek oblivion in drink , 
 he would lie there and hear the voice go on and 
 on . and day after day Leonora would come to he 
 and would announce the result of their deliberation . 
  they be like judge debate over the sentence 
 upon a criminal ; they be like ghoul with an 
 immobile corpse in a tomb beside they . 
  I do not   think that Leonora be any more to blame 
 than the girl - though Leonora be the more active of 
 the two . Leonora , as I have say , be the perfectly 
 normal woman . I mean to say that in normal 
 circumstance her desire be those of the woman 
 who be need by society . she desire child , 
 decorum , an establishment ; she desire to avoid waste , 
 she desire to keep up appearance . she be utterly 
 and entirely normal even in her utterly undeniable 
 beauty . but I do not   mean to say that she act perfectly 
 normally in this perfectly abnormal situation . all the 
 world be mad around she and she herself , agonized , 
 take on the complexion of a mad woman ; of a woman 
 very wicked ; of the villain of the piece . what would 
 you have ? steel be a normal , hard , polished substance . 
 but if you put it in a hot fire it will become red , soft , 
 and not to be handle . if you put it in a fire still more 
 hot it will drip away . it be like that with Leonora . she 
 be make for  normal circumstance - for Mr. Rodney Bayham , who 
 will keep a separate establishment , secretly , in 
 Portsmouth , and make occasional trip to Paris and to 
 Buda - Pesth . 
  in the case of Edward and the girl Leonora break 
 and simply go all over the place . she adopt 
 unfamiliar and therefore extraordinary and ungraceful 
 attitude of mind . at one moment she be all for 
 revenge . after harangue the girl for hour through 
 the night she harangue for hour of the day the silent 
 Edward . and Edward just once trip up and that be 
 his undoing . perhaps he have have too much whiskey 
 that afternoon . 
  she ask he perpetually what he want . what 
 do he want ? what do he want ? and all he ever 
 answer be : " I have tell you . " he mean that he 
 want the girl to go to her father in India as soon as 
 her father should cable that he be ready to receive 
 she . but just once he trip up . to Leonora 's eternal 
 question he answer that all he desire in life be 
 that - that he could pick himself together again and go 
 on with his daily occupation if the girl , be five 
 thousand mile away , would continue to love he . he 
 want nothing more . he pray his God for nothing 
 more . well , he be a sentimentalist . 
  and the moment that she hear that , Leonora 
 determine that the girl should not go five thousand 
 mile away and that she should not continue to love 
 Edward . the way she work it be this : 
  she continue to tell the girl that she must belong 
 to Edward ; she be go to get a divorce ; she be  go to get a dissolution of marriage from Rome . but 
 she consider it to be her duty to warn the girl of the 
 sort of monster that Edward be . she tell the girl of La 
 Dolciquita , of Mrs. Basil , of Maisie Maidan , of 
 Florence . she speak of the agony that she have 
 endure during her life with the man , who be violent , 
 overbearing , vain , drunken , arrogant , and monstrously 
 a prey to his sexual necessity . and , at hearing of the 
 misery her aunt have suffer - for Leonora once 
 more have the aspect of an aunt to the girl - with the 
 swift cruelty of youth , and with the swift solidarity that 
 attach woman to woman , the girl make her resolve . 
 her aunt say incessantly : " you must save Edward 's life ; 
 you must save his life . all that he need be a little 
 period of satisfaction from you . then he will tire of 
 you as he have of the other . but you must save his life . " 
  and , all the while , that wretched fellow knew , by a 
 curious instinct that run between human being live 
 together - exactly what be go on . and he 
 remain dumb ; he stretch out no finger to help 
 himself . all that he require to keep himself a decent 
 member of society be that the girl , five thousand 
 mile away , should continue to love he . they be 
 put a stopper upon that . 
  I have tell you that the girl come one night to his 
 room . and that be the real hell for he . that be the 
 picture that never leave his imagination - the girl , in the 
 dim light , rise up at the foot of his bed . he say that 
 it seem to have a greenish sort of effect as if there 
 be a greenish tinge in the shadow of the tall 
 bedpost that frame her body . and she look at he  with her straight eye of an unflinche cruelty and 
 she say : " I be ready to belong to you - to save your 
 life . " 
  he answer : " I do not   want it ; I do not   want it ; I 
 do not   want it . " 
  and he say that he do not   want it ; that he would 
 have hat himself ; that it be unthinkable . and all the 
 while he have the immense temptation to do the 
 unthinkable thing , not from the physical desire but 
 because of a mental certitude . he be certain that if she 
 have once submit to he she would remain his 
 forever . he know that . 
  she be think that her aunt have say he have 
 desire she to love he from a distance of five 
 thousand mile . she say : " I can never love you now I 
 know the kind of man you be . I will belong to you to 
 save your life . but I can never love you . " 
  it be a fantastic display of cruelty . she do not   in 
 the least know what it mean - to belong to a man . but , 
 at that , Edward pull himself together . he speak in 
 his normal tone ; gruff , husky , overbearing , as he 
 would have do to a servant or to a horse . 
  " go back to your room , " he say . " go back to your 
 room and go to . sleep . this be all nonsense . " 
 
 they be baffle , those two woman . 
 and then I come on the scene .  MY come on the scene certainly calm thing down - 
 for the whole fortnight that intervene between my 
 arrival and the girl 's departure . I do not   mean to say that 
 the endless talking do not go on at night or that 
 Leonora do not send I out with the girl and , in the 
 interval , give Edward a hell of a time . have 
 discover what he want - that the girl should go five 
 thousand mile away and love he steadfastly as people 
 do in sentimental novel - she be determined to smash 
 that aspiration . and she repeat to Edward in every 
 possible tone that the girl do not love he ; that the girl 
 detest he for his brutality , his overbearingness , his 
 drinking habit . she point out that Edward , in the 
 girl 's eye , be already pledge three or four deep . he 
 be pledge to Leonora herself , to Mrs. Basil and to the 
 memory of Maisie Maidan and of Florence . Edward 
 never say anything . 
  do the girl love Edward , or do not   she ? I do not  
 know . at that time I dare say she do not , though she 
 certainly have do so before Leonora have get to work 
 upon his reputation . she certainly have love he for 
 what I will call the public side of his record - for his 
 good soldiering , for his saving life at sea , for the 
 excellent landlord that he be and the good sportsman . 
 but it be quite possible that all those thing come to 
 appear as nothing in her eye when she discover that 
 he be not   a good husband . for , though woman ,  as I see they , have little or no feeling of responsibility 
 towards a county or a country or a career - although 
 they may be entirely lack in any kind of communal 
 solidarity - they have an immense and automatically 
 work instinct that attach they to the interest of 
 womanhood . it be , of course , possible for any woman to 
 cut out and to carry off any other woman 's husband or 
 lover . but I rather think that a woman will only do this 
 if she have reason to believe that the other woman have 
 give her husband a bad time . I be certain that if she 
 think the man have be a brute to his wife she will , 
 with her instinctive feeling for suffer femininity , 
 " put he back , " as the saying be . I do not   attach any 
 particular importance to these generalization of mine . 
 they may be right , they may be wrong ; I be only an 
 age American with very little knowledge of life . you 
 may take my generalization or leave they . but I be 
 pretty certain that I be right in the case of Nancy 
 Rufford - that she have love Edward Ashburnham very 
 deeply and tenderly . 
  it be nothing to the point that she let he have it 
 good and strong as soon as she discover that he have 
 be unfaithful to Leonora and that his public service 
 have cost more than Leonora think they ought to 
 have cost . Nancy would be bind to let he have it 
 good and strong then . she would owe that to feminine 
 public opinion ; she would be drive to it by the 
 instinct for self - preservation , since she might well 
 imagine that if Edward have be unfaithful to 
 Leonora , to Mrs. Basil , and to the memory of the 
 other two he might be unfaithful to herself . and , no 
 doubt , she have her share  of the sex instinct that make woman be intolerably 
 cruel to the beloved person . anyhow , I do not   know 
 whether , at this point , Nancy Rufford love Edward 
 Ashburnham . I do not   know whether she even love he 
 when , on get , at Aden , the news of his suicide she 
 go mad . because that may just as well have be for 
 the sake of Leonora as for the sake of Edward . or it 
 may have be for the sake of both of they . I do not  
 know . I know nothing . I be very tired . 
  Leonora hold passionately the doctrine that the girl 
 do not   love Edward . she want desperately to believe 
 that . it be a doctrine as necessary to her existence as a 
 belief in the personal immortality of the soul . she say 
 that it be impossible that Nancy could have love 
 Edward after she have give the girl her view of 
 Edward 's career and character . Edward , on the other 
 hand , believe maunderingly that some essential 
 attractiveness in himself must have make the girl 
 continue to go on love he - to go on love he , as 
 it be , in underneath her official aspect of hatred . he 
 think she only pretend to hate he in order to 
 save her face and he think that her quite atrocious 
 telegram from Brindisi be only another attempt to do 
 that - to prove that she have feeling creditable to a 
 member of the feminine commonweal . I do not   know . I 
 leave it to you . 
  there be another point that worry I a good deal 
 in the aspect of this sad affair . Leonora say that , in 
 desire that the girl should go five thousand mile 
 away and yet continue to love he , Edward be a 
 monster of selfishness . he be desire the ruin of a  young life . Edward on the other hand put it to I that , 
 suppose that the girl 's love be a necessity to his 
 existence , and if he do nothing by word or by action 
 to keep Nancy 's love alive , he could not   be call selfish . 
 Leonora reply that show he have an abominably 
 selfish nature even though his action might be 
 perfectly correct . I can not   make out which of they be 
 right . I leave it to you . 
  it be , at any rate , certain that Edward 's action be 
 perfectly - be monstrously , be cruelly - correct . 
 he sit still and let Leonora take away his character , and 
 let Leonora damn he to deepest hell , without stir a 
 finger . I dare say he be a fool ; I do not   see what object 
 there be in let the girl think bad of he than be 
 necessary . still there it be . and there it be also that all 
 those three present to the world the spectacle of 
 be the good of good people . I assure you that during 
 my stay for that fortnight in that fine old house , I never 
 so much as notice a single thing that could have 
 affect that good opinion . and even when I look 
 back , know the circumstance , I can not   remember a 
 single thing any of they say that could have betray 
 they . I can not   remember , right up to the dinner , when 
 Leonora read out that telegram - not the tremor of an 
 eyelash , not the shaking of a hand . it be just a 
 pleasant country house - party . 
  and Leonora keep it up jolly well , for even long 
 than that - she keep it up as far as I be concern until 
 eight day after Edward 's funeral . immediately after 
 that particular dinner - the dinner at which I receive 
 the announcement that Nancy be go to leave for  India on the follow day - I ask Leonora to let I 
 have a word with she . she take I into her little 
 sitting - room and I then say - I spare you the record of 
 my emotion - that she be aware that I wish to 
 marry Nancy ; that she have seem to favour my suit 
 and that it appear to be rather a waste of money 
 upon ticket and rather a waste of time upon travel to 
 let the girl go to India if Leonora think that there 
 be any chance of she marry I . 
  and Leonora , I assure you , be the absolutely 
 perfect british matron . she say that she quite favour 
 my suit ; that she could not desire for the girl a well 
 husband ; but that she consider that the girl ought to 
 see a little more of life before take such an important 
 step . yes , Leonora use the word " take such an 
 important step . " she be perfect . actually , I think she 
 would have like the girl to marry I well enough but 
 my programme include the buying of the Kershaws ' 
 house , about a mile and a half away upon the 
 Fordingbridge road , and settle down there with the 
 girl . that do not   at all suit Leonora . she do not   want to 
 have the girl within a mile and a half of Edward for the 
 rest of their life . still , I think she might have manage 
 to let I know , in some periphrasis or other , that I 
 might have the girl if I would take she to Philadelphia 
 or timbuctoo . I love Nancy very much - and 
 Leonora know it . 
  however , I leave it at that . I leave it with the 
 understanding that Nancy be go away to India on 
 probation . it seem to I a perfectly reasonable 
 arrangement and I be a reasonable sort of man . I  simply say that I should follow Nancy out to India after 
 six month ' time or so . or , perhaps , after a year . well , 
 you see , I do follow Nancy out to India after a year .... 
  I must confess to have feel a little angry with 
 Leonora for not have warn I early that the girl 
 would be go . I take it as one of the queer , not very 
 straight method that Roman Catholics seem to adopt 
 in deal with matter of this world . I take it that 
 Leonora have be afraid I should propose to the girl 
 or , at any rate , have make considerably great 
 advance to she than I do , if I have know early that 
 she be go away so soon . perhaps Leonora be 
 right ; perhaps Roman Catholics , with their queer , shifty 
 way , be always right . they be deal with the queer , 
 shifty thing that be human nature . for it be quite 
 possible that , if I have know Nancy be go away so 
 soon , I should have try make love to she . and that 
 would have produce another complication . it may 
 have be just as well . 
  it be queer the fantastic thing that quite good 
 people will do in order to keep up their appearance of 
 calm pococurantism . for Edward Ashburnham and his 
 wife call I half the world over in order to sit on the 
 back seat of a dog - cart whilst Edward drive the girl to 
 the railway station from which she be to take her 
 departure to India . they want , I suppose , to have a 
 witness of the calmness of that function . the girl 's 
 luggage have be already pack and send off before . 
 her berth on the steamer have be take . they have 
 time it all so exactly that it go like clockwork . they 
 have know  the date upon which Colonel Rufford would get 
 Edward 's letter and they have know almost exactly the 
 hour at which they would receive his telegram ask 
 his daughter to come to he . it have all be quite 
 beautifully and quite mercilessly arrange , by Edward 
 himself . they give Colonel Rufford , as a reason for 
 telegraphing , the fact that Mrs. Colonel Somebody or 
 other would be travel by that ship and that she 
 would serve as an efficient chaperon for the girl . it be 
 a most amazing business , and I think that it would have 
 be well in the eye of God if they have all attempt 
 to gouge out each other 's eye with carve knife . but 
 they be " good people . " 
  after my interview with Leonora I go desultorily 
 into Edward 's gun - room . I do not   know where the girl 
 be and I think I might find she there . I suppose I 
 have a vague idea of propose to she in spite of 
 Leonora . so , I presume , I do not   come of quite such 
 good people as the Ashburnhams . Edward be 
 lounge in his chair smoke a cigar and he say 
 nothing for quite five minute . the candle glow in 
 the green shade ; the reflection be green in the 
 glass of the bookcase that hold gun and 
 fishing - rod . over the mantelpiece be the brownish picture of 
 the white horse . those be the quiet moment that I 
 have ever know . then , suddenly , Edward look I 
 straight in the eye and say : 
  " look here , old man , I wish you would drive with 
 Nancy and I to the station to - morrow . " 
  I say that of course I would drive with he and 
 Nancy to the station on the morrow . he lie there for  a long time , look along the line of his knee at the 
 flutter fire , and then suddenly , in a perfectly calm 
 voice , and without lift his eye , he say : 
  " I be so desperately in love with Nancy Rufford 
 that I be die of it . " 
  Poor devil - he have not   mean to speak of it . but I 
 guess he just have to speak to somebody and I 
 appear to be like a woman or a solicitor . he talk 
 all night . 
 
 well , he carry out the programme to the last breath . it 
 be a very clear winter morning , with a good deal 
 of frost in it . the sun be quite bright , the wind 
 road between the heather and the bracken be very 
 hard . I sit on the back seat of the dog - cart ; Nancy 
 be beside Edward . they talk about the way the 
 cob go ; Edward point out with the whip a 
 cluster of deer upon a coombe three - quarter of a 
 mile away . we pass the hound in the level bit of 
 road beside the high tree go into 
 Fordingbridge and Edward pull up the dog - cart 
 so that Nancy might say good - bye to the huntsman 
 and cap he a last sovereign . she have ride with 
 those hound ever since she have be thirteen . 
  the train be five minute late and they imagine 
 that that be because it be market - day at Swindon or 
 wherever the train come from . that be the sort of 
 thing they talk about . the train come in ; Edward 
 find she a first - class carriage with an elderly woman 
 in it . the girl enter the carriage , Edward close the 
 door , and then she put out her hand to shake mine .  there be upon those people 's face no expression of 
 any kind whatever . the signal for the train 's departure 
 be a very bright red ; that be about as passionate a 
 statement as I can get into that scene . she be not 
 look she good ; she have on a cap of brown fur that 
 do not very well match her hair . she say : 
 " so long , " to Edward . 
 Edward answer : " so long . " 
  he swing round on his heel and , large , slouch , 
 and walk with a heavy deliberate pace , he go out 
 of the station . I follow he and get up beside he in 
 the high dog - cart . it be the most horrible 
 performance I have ever see . 
  and , after that , a holy peace , like the peace of God 
 which pass all understanding , descend upon 
 Branshaw Teleragh . Leonora go about her daily 
 duty with a sort of triumphant smile - a very faint 
 smile , but quite triumphant . I guess she have so long 
 since give up any idea of get her man back that it 
 be enough for she to have get the girl out of the 
 house and well cure of her infatuation . once , in the 
 hall , when Leonora be go out , Edward say , 
 beneath his breath - but I just catch the word : 
 
 " Thou hast conquer , o pale Galilean . " 
 
 it be like his sentimentality to quote Swinburne . 
  but he be perfectly quiet and he have give up 
 drinking . the only thing that he ever say to I after 
 that drive to the station be : 
 " it be very odd . I think I ought to tell you , Dowell ,  that I have not   any feeling at all about the girl now it be 
 all over . do not   you worry about I . I be all right . " a 
 long time afterwards he say : " I guess it be only a 
 flash in the pan . " he begin to look after the estate 
 again ; he take all that trouble over get off the 
 gardener 's daughter who have murder her baby . he 
 shake hand smilingly with every farmer in the 
 market - place . he address two political meeting ; he 
 hunt twice . Leonora make he a frightful scene 
 about spend the two hundred pound on get the 
 gardener 's daughter acquit . everything go on as 
 if the girl have never exist . it be very still weather . 
  well , that be the end of the story . and , when I come 
 to look at   , I see that it be a happy ending with 
 wedding bell and all . the villain - for obviously 
 Edward and the girl be villain - have be punish 
 by suicide and madness . the heroine - the perfectly 
 normal , virtuous , and slightly deceitful heroine - have 
 become the happy wife of a perfectly normal , virtuous , 
 and slightly deceitful husband . she will shortly become 
 a mother of a perfectly normal , virtuous , slightly 
 deceitful son or daughter . a happy ending , that be what 
 it work out at . 
  I can not conceal from myself the fact that I now 
 dislike Leonora . without doubt I be jealous of 
 Rodney Bayham . but I do not   know whether it be merely 
 a jealousy arise from the fact that I desire myself to 
 possess Leonora or whether it be because to she be 
 sacrifice the only two person that I have ever really 
 love - Edward Ashburnham and Nancy Rufford . in 
 order to set she up in a modern mansion , replete with  every convenience and dominate by a quite 
 respectable and eminently economical master of the 
 house , it be necessary that Edward and Nancy 
 Rufford should become , for I at least , no more than 
 tragic shade . 
  I seem to see poor Edward , naked and recline 
 amidst darkness , upon cold rock , like one of the 
 ancient greek damned , in Tartarus or wherever it be . 
  and as for Nancy . . . well , yesterday at lunch she 
 say suddenly : 
 " Shuttlecocks ! " 
  and she repeat the word ' shuttlecock " three 
 time . I know what be pass in her mind , if she can 
 be say to have a mind , for Leonora have tell I that , 
 once , the poor girl say she feel like a shuttlecock be 
 toss backwards and forwards between the violent 
 personality of Edward and his wife . Leonora , she say , 
 be always try to deliver she over to Edward , and 
 Edward tacitly and silently force she back again . and 
 the odd thing be that Edward himself consider that 
 those two woman use he like a shuttlecock . or , 
 rather , he say that they send he backwards and 
 forwards like a blooming parcel that someone do not  
 want to pay the postage on . and Leonora also 
 imagine that Edward and Nancy pick she up and 
 throw she down as suit their purely vagrant mood . 
 so there you have the pretty picture . mind , I be not 
 preach anything contrary to accept morality . I 
 be not advocate free love in this or any other case . 
 Society must go on , I suppose , and society can only 
 exist if the normal , if the virtuous , and the slightly 
 deceitful flourish , and if the passionate , the headstrong , 
 and the  too - truthful be condemn to suicide and to madness . 
 but I guess that I myself , in my fainter way , come into 
 the category of the passionate , of the headstrong , and 
 the too - truthful . for I can not   conceal from myself the 
 fact that I love Edward Ashburnham - and that I love 
 he because he be just myself . if I have have the 
 courage and the virility and possibly also the physique 
 of Edward Ashburnham I should , I fancy , have do 
 much what he do . he seem to I like a large eld 
 brother who take I out on several excursion and do 
 many dash thing whilst I just watch he rob 
 the orchard , from a distance . and , you see , I be just 
 as much of a sentimentalist as he be .... 
  yes , society must go on ; it must breed , like rabbit . 
 that be what we be here for . but then , I do not   like 
 society - much . I be that absurd figure , an american 
 millionaire , who have buy one of the ancient haunt 
 of english peace . I sit here , in Edward 's gun - room , all 
 day and all day in a house that be absolutely quiet . no 
 one visit I , for I visit no one . no one be interested in 
 I , for I have no interest . in twenty minute or so I 
 shall walk down to the village , beneath my own oak , 
 alongside my own clump of gorse , to get the 
 american mail . my tenant , the village boy , and the 
 tradesman will touch their hat to I . so life peters 
 out . I shall return to dine and Nancy will sit opposite 
 I with the old nurse stand behind she . enigmatic , 
 silent , utterly well behave as far as her knife and fork 
 go , Nancy will stare in front of she with the blue eye 
 that have over they strain , stretch brow . once , or 
 perhaps twice , during the meal her knife and fork  will be suspend in mid - air as if she be try to 
 think of something that she have forget . then she 
 will say that she believe in an Omnipotent Deity or she 
 will utter the one word ' shuttlecock , " perhaps . it be 
 very extraordinary to see the perfect flush of health on 
 her cheek , to see the lustre of her coil black hair , the 
 poise of the head upon the neck , the grace of the white 
 hand - and to think that it all mean nothing - that it 
 be a picture without a meaning . yes , it be queer . 
  but , at any rate , there be always Leonora to cheer 
 you up ; I do not   want to sadden you . her husband be 
 quite an economical person of so normal a figure that 
 he can get quite a large proportion of his clothe 
 ready - make . that be the great desideratum of life , and 
 that be the end of my story . the child be to be bring 
 up as a Romanist . 
 
 it suddenly occur to I that I have forget to say 
 how Edward meet his death . you remember that peace 
 have descend upon the house ; that Leonora be 
 quietly triumphant and that Edward say his love for 
 the girl have be merely a pass phase . well , one 
 afternoon we be in the stable together , look at a 
 new kind of floor that Edward be try in a 
 loose - box . Edward be talk with a good deal of 
 animation about the necessity of get the number of 
 the Hampshire territorial up to the proper standard . 
 he be quite sober , quite quiet , his skin be 
 clear - colour ; his hair be golden and perfectly brush ; 
 the level brick - dust red of his complexion go clean 
 up to the  rim of his eyelid ; his eye be porcelain blue and 
 they regard I frankly and directly . his face be 
 perfectly expressionless ; his voice be deep and rough . 
 he stand well back upon his leg and say : 
  " we ought to get they up to two thousand three 
 hundred and fifty . " 
  a stable - boy bring he a telegram and go 
 away . he open it negligently , regard it without 
 emotion , and , in complete silence , hand it to I . on 
 the pinkish paper in a sprawled handwriting I read : 
 " Safe Brindisi . have rattle good time . Nancy . " 
  well , Edward be the english gentleman ; but he 
 be also , to the last , a sentimentalist , whose mind be 
 compound of indifferent poem and novel . he just 
 look up to the roof of the stable , as if he be 
 look to heaven , and whisper something that I do 
 not catch . 
  then he put two finger into the waistcoat pocket 
 of his grey , frieze suit ; they come out with a little neat 
 penknife - quite a small penknife . he say to I : 
  " you might just take that wire to Leonora . " and he 
 look at I with a direct , challenging , brow - beat 
 glare . I guess he could see in my eye that I do not  
 intend to hinder he . why should I hinder he ? 
  I do not   think he be want in the world , let his 
 confound tenant , his rifle - association , his 
 drunkard , reclaim and unreclaimed , get on as they 
 like . not all the hundred and hundred of they 
 deserve that that poor devil should go on suffer 
 for their sake . 
 when he see that I do not intend to interfere with  he his eye become soft and almost affectionate . he 
 remark : 
  " so long , old man , I must have a bit of a rest , you 
 know . " 
  I do not   know what to say . I want to say : " God 
 bless you , " for I also be a sentimentalist . but I 
 think that perhaps that would not be quite english 
 good form , so I trot off with the telegram to 
 Leonora . she be quite pleased with it .  
