howards end 

 E. M. Forster 




 Chapter 1 

 one may as well begin with Helen 's letter to her sister . 


  howard END , 
  TUESDAY . 

 Dearest Meg , 

 it be not   go to be what we expect . it be old and 
 little , and altogether delightful - red brick . we can 
 scarcely pack in as it be , and the dear know what will 
 happen when Paul   young son   arrive tomorrow . from hall 
 you go right or leave into dining - room or drawing - room . Hall 
 itself be practically a room . you open another door in it , 
 and there be the stair go up in a sort of tunnel to the 
 first - floor . three bedroom in a row there , and three 
 attic in a row above . that be not   all the house really , but 
 it be all that one notice - nine window as you look up from 
 the front garden . 

 then there be a very big wych - elm - to the left as you 
 look up - lean a little over the house , and stand on 
 the boundary between the garden and meadow . I quite love 
 that tree already . also ordinary elm , oak - no nasty 
 than ordinary oak - pear - tree , apple - tree , and a vine . no 
 silver birch , though . however , I must get on to my host 
 and hostess . I only want to show that it be not   the least 
 what we expect . why do we settle that their house would 
 be all gable and wiggle , and their garden all 
 gamboge - colour path ? I believe simply because we 
 associate they with expensive hotel - Mrs. Wilcox trail 
 in beautiful dress down long corridor , Mr. Wilcox 
 bully porter , etc . we female be that unjust . 

 I shall be back Saturday ; will let you know train 
 later . they be as angry as I be that you do not come too ; 
 really Tibby be too tiresome , he start a new mortal disease 
 every month . how could he have get hay fever in London ? 
 and even if he could , it seem hard that you should give up 
 a visit to hear a schoolboy sneeze . tell he that Charles 
 Wilcox   the son who be here   have hay fever too , but he be 
 brave , and get quite cross when we inquire after it . man 
 like the Wilcoxes would do Tibby a power of good . but you 
 will not   agree , and I would well change the subject . 

 this long letter be because I be write before 
 breakfast . oh , the beautiful vine leave ! the house be 
 cover with a vine . I look out early , and Mrs. Wilcox 
 be already in the garden . she evidently love it . no 
 wonder she sometimes look tired . she be watch the 
 large red poppy come out . then she walk off the lawn to 
 the meadow , whose corner to the right I can just see . 
 Trail , trail , go her long dress over the sop grass , 
 and she come back with her hand full of the hay that be 
 cut yesterday - I suppose for rabbit or something , as she 
 keep on smell it . the air here be delicious . later on I 
 hear the noise of croquet ball , and look out again , and 
 it be Charles Wilcox practise ; they be keen on all 
 game . presently he start sneeze and have to stop . then 
 I hear more clicketing , and it be Mr. Wilcox practise , and 
 then , ' a - tissue , a - tissue ' : he have to stop too . then Evie 
 come out , and do some calisthenic exercise on a machine 
 that be tack on to a greengage - tree - they put everything 
 to use - and then she say ' a - tissue , ' and in she go . and 
 finally Mrs. Wilcox reappear , trail , trail , still smell 
 hay and look at the flower . I inflict all this on you 
 because once you say that life be sometimes life and 
 sometimes only a drama , and one must learn to distinguish 
 t'other from which , and up to now I have always put that 
 down as ' Meg 's clever nonsense . ' but this morning , it really 
 do seem not life but a play , and it do amuse I 
 enormously to watch the W 's . now Mrs. Wilcox have come in . 

 I be go to wear   omission . last night Mrs. Wilcox 
 wear an   omission , and Evie   omission . so it be not 
 exactly a go - as - you - please place , and if you shut your eye 
 it still seem the wiggly hotel that we expect . not if 
 you open they . the dog - rose be too sweet . there be a 
 great hedge of they over the lawn - magnificently tall , so 
 that they fall down in garland , and nice and thin at the 
 bottom , so that you can see duck through it and a cow . 
 these belong to the farm , which be the only house near we . 
 there go the breakfast gong . much love . modify love to 
 Tibby . love to Aunt Juley ; how good of she to come and keep 
 you company , but what a bore . burn this . will write again 
 Thursday . 

  Helen 


  howard END , 
  FRIDAY . 

 Dearest Meg , 

 I be have a glorious time . I like they all . Mrs. 
 Wilcox , if quieter than in Germany , be sweet than ever , 
 and I never see anything like her steady unselfishness , and 
 the good of it be that the other do not take advantage of 
 she . they be the very happy , jolly family that you 
 can imagine . I do really feel that we be make friend . 
 the fun of it be that they think I a noodle , and say so - at 
 least Mr. Wilcox do - and when that happen , and one 
 do not   mind , it be a pretty sure test , be not   it ? he say 
 the most horrid thing about woman 's suffrage so nicely , and 
 when I say I believe in equality he just fold his arm 
 and give I such a setting down as I have   never have . Meg , 
 shall we ever learn to talk less ? I never feel so ashamed 
 of myself in my life . I could not   point to a time when man 
 have be equal , nor even to a time when the wish to be equal 
 have make they happy in other way . I could not   say a 
 word . I have just pick up the notion that equality be good 
 from some book - probably from poetry , or you . anyhow , it be 
 be knock into piece , and , like all people who be 
 really strong , Mr. Wilcox do it without hurt I . on the 
 other hand , I laugh at they for catch hay fever . we live 
 like fighting - cock , and Charles take we out every day in 
 the motor - a tomb with tree in it , a hermit 's house , a 
 wonderful road that be make by the king of 
 Mercia - tennis - a cricket match - bridge - and at night we 
 squeeze up in this lovely house . the whole clan 's here 
 now - it be like a rabbit warren . Evie be a dear . they want 
 I to stop over Sunday - I suppose it will not   matter if I do . 
 marvellous weather and the view 's marvellous - view westward 
 to the high ground . thank you for your letter . burn this . 

  your affectionate 
  Helen 


  howard END , 
  SUNDAY . 

 Dearest , dear Meg , - I do not know what you will say : 
 Paul and I be in love - the young son who only come here 
 Wednesday . 


 chapter 2 

 Margaret glance at her sister 's note and push it over the 
 breakfast - table to her aunt . there be a moment 's hush , and 
 then the flood - gate open . 

 " I can tell you nothing , Aunt Juley . I know no more 
 than you do . we meet - we only meet the father and mother 
 abroad last spring . I know so little that I do not   even 
 know their son 's name . it be all so - " she wave her hand 
 and laugh a little . 

 " in that case it be far too sudden . " 

 " who know , Aunt Juley , who know ? " 

 " but , Margaret dear , I mean we must not   be unpractical 
 now that we have   come to fact . it be too sudden , surely . " 

 " who know ! " 

 " but Margaret dear - " 

 " I will go for her other letter , " say Margaret . " no , I 
 will not , I will finish my breakfast . in fact , I have not   they . 
 we meet the Wilcoxes on an awful expedition that we make from 
 Heidelberg to Speyer . Helen and I have get it into our head 
 that there be a grand old cathedral at Speyer - the 
 Archbishop of Speyer be one of the seven elector - you 
 know - ' Speyer , Maintz , and Koln . ' those three see once 
 command the Rhine Valley and get it the name of Priest Street . " 

 " I still feel quite uneasy about this business , Margaret . " 

 " the train cross by a bridge of boat , and at first 
 sight it look quite fine . but oh , in five minute we have 
 see the whole thing . the cathedral have be ruin , 
 absolutely ruin , by restoration ; not an inch leave of the 
 original structure . we waste a whole day , and come across 
 the Wilcoxes as we be eat our sandwich in the public 
 garden . they too , poor thing , have be take in - they 
 be actually stop at Speyer - and they rather like 
 Helen insist that they must fly with we to Heidelberg . 
 as a matter of fact , they do come on next day . we all take 
 some drive together . they know we well enough to ask Helen 
 to come and see they - at least , I be ask too , but Tibby 's 
 illness prevent I , so last Monday she go alone . that be 
 all . you know as much as I do now . it be a young man out 
 the unknown . she be to have come back Saturday , but put 
 off till Monday , perhaps on account of - I do not   know . 

 she break off , and listen to the sound of a London 
 morning . their house be in Wickham Place , and fairly 
 quiet , for a lofty promontory of building separate it from 
 the main thoroughfare . one have the sense of a backwater , or 
 rather of an estuary , whose water flow in from the 
 invisible sea , and ebb into a profound silence while the 
 wave without be still beat . though the promontory 
 consist of flat - expensive , with cavernous entrance 
 hall , full of concierge and palm - it fulfil its 
 purpose , and gain for the old house opposite a certain 
 measure of peace . these , too , would be sweep away in time , 
 and another promontory would rise upon their site , as 
 humanity pile itself higher and high on the precious soil 
 of London . 

 Mrs. Munt have her own method of interpret her 
 niece . she decide that Margaret be a little hysterical , 
 and be try to gain time by a torrent of talk . feel 
 very diplomatic , she lament the fate of Speyer , and 
 declare that never , never should she be so misguided as to 
 visit it , and add of her own accord that the principle of 
 restoration be ill understand in Germany . " the Germans , " 
 she say , " be too thorough , and this be all very well 
 sometimes , but at other time it do not do . " 

 " exactly , " say Margaret ; " Germans be too thorough . " 
 and her eye begin to shine . 

 " of course I regard you schlegel as English , " say Mrs. 
 Munt hastily - " English to the backbone . " 

 Margaret lean forward and stroke her hand . 

 " and that remind I - Helen 's letter - " 

 " oh , yes , Aunt Juley , I be think all right about 
 Helen 's letter . I know - I must go down and see she . I be 
 think about she all right . I be mean to go down " 

 " but go with some plan , " say Mrs. Munt , admit into 
 her kindly voice a note of exasperation . " Margaret , if I 
 may interfere , do not   be take by surprise . what do you 
 think of the Wilcoxes ? be they our sort ? be they likely 
 people ? could they appreciate Helen , who be to my mind a 
 very special sort of person ? do they care about Literature 
 and art ? that be most important when you come to think of 
 it . literature and Art . most important . how old would the 
 son be ? she say ' young son . ' would he be in a position 
 to marry ? be he likely to make Helen happy ? do you gather - " 

 " I gather nothing . " 

 they begin to talk at once . 

 " then in that case - " 

 " in that case I can make no plan , do not   you see . " 

 " on the contrary - " 

 " I hate plan . I hate line of action . Helen be not   a baby . " 

 " then in that case , my dear , why go down ? " 

 Margaret be silent . if her aunt could not see why she 
 must go down , she be not go to tell she . she be not 
 go to say " I love my dear sister ; I must be near she at 
 this crisis of her life . " the affection be more reticent 
 than the passion , and their expression more subtle . if she 
 herself should ever fall in love with a man , she , like 
 Helen , would proclaim it from the house - top , but as she 
 only love a sister she use the voiceless language of sympathy . 

 " I consider you odd girl , " continue Mrs. Munt , " and 
 very wonderful girl , and in many way far old than your 
 year . but - you will not   be offend ? - frankly I feel you be 
 not up to this business . it require an old person . 
 Dear , I have nothing to call I back to Swanage . " she spread 
 out her plump arm . " I be all at your disposal . let I go 
 down to this house whose name I forget instead of you . " 

 " Aunt Juley " - she jump up and kiss she - " I must , 
 must go to howard end myself . you do not   exactly 
 understand , though I can never thank you properly for offering . " 

 " I do understand , " retort Mrs. Munt , with immense 
 confidence . " I go down in no spirit of interference , but to 
 make inquiry . inquiry be necessary . now , I be go 
 to be rude . you would say the wrong thing ; to a certainty 
 you would . in your anxiety for Helen 's happiness you would 
 offend the whole of these Wilcoxes by ask one of your 
 impetuous question - not that one mind offend they . " 

 " I shall ask no question . I have it in Helen 's writing 
 that she and a man be in love . there be no question to ask 
 as long as she keep to that . all the rest be not   worth a 
 straw . a long engagement if you like , but inquiry , 
 question , plan , line of action - no , Aunt Juley , no . " 

 away she hurry , not beautiful , not supremely 
 brilliant , but fill with something that take the place of 
 both quality - something well describe as a profound 
 vivacity , a continual and sincere response to all that she 
 encounter in her path through life . 

 " if Helen have write the same to I about a 
 shop - assistant or a penniless clerk - " 

 " Dear Margaret , do come into the library and shut the 
 door . your good maid be dust the banister . " 

 " - or if she have want to marry the man who call for 
 Carter Paterson , I should have say the same . " then , with 
 one of those turn that convince her aunt that she be not 
 mad really and convince observer of another type that she 
 be not a barren theorist , she add : " though in the case of 
 Carter Paterson I should want it to be a very long 
 engagement indeed , I must say . " 

 " I should think so , " say Mrs. Munt ; " and , indeed , I can 
 scarcely follow you . now , just imagine if you say anything 
 of that sort to the Wilcoxes . I understand it , but most 
 good people would think you mad . imagine how disconcert 
 for Helen ! what be want be a person who will go slowly , 
 slowly in this business , and see how thing be and where 
 they be likely to lead to . " 

 Margaret be down on this . 

 " but you imply just now that the engagement must be 
 break off . " 

 " I think probably it must ; but slowly . " 

 " can you break an engagement off slowly ? " her eye light 
 up . " what be an engagement make of , do you suppose ? I think 
 it be make of some hard stuff , that may snap , but can not 
 break . it be different to the other tie of life . they 
 stretch or bend . they admit of degree . they be different . " 

 " exactly so . but will not   you let I just run down to 
 Howards House , and save you all the discomfort ? I will 
 really not interfere , but I do so thoroughly understand the 
 kind of thing you schlegel want that one quiet look round 
 will be enough for I . " 

 Margaret again thank she , again kiss she , and then 
 run upstairs to see her brother . 

 he be not so well . 

 the hay fever have worry he a good deal all night . 
 his head ache , his eye be wet , his mucous membrane , he 
 inform she , be in a most unsatisfactory condition . the 
 only thing that make life worth live be the thought of 
 Walter Savage Landor , from whose IMAGINARY conversation she 
 have promise to read at frequent interval during the day . 

 it be rather difficult . something must be do about 
 Helen . she must be assure that it be not a criminal 
 offence to love at first sight . a telegram to this effect 
 would be cold and cryptic , a personal visit seem each 
 moment more impossible . now the doctor arrive , and say 
 that Tibby be quite bad . might it really be good to accept 
 Aunt Juley 's kind offer , and to send she down to howard end 
 with a note ? 

 certainly Margaret be impulsive . she do swing rapidly 
 from one decision to another . run downstairs into the 
 library , she cry - " yes , I have change my mind ; I do wish 
 that you would go . " 

 there be a train from King 's Cross at eleven . at 
 half - past ten Tibby , with rare self - effacement , fall asleep , 
 and Margaret be able to drive her aunt to the station . 

 " you will remember , Aunt Juley , not to be draw into 
 discuss the engagement . give my letter to Helen , and say 
 whatever you feel yourself , but do keep clear of the 
 relative . we have scarcely get their name straight yet , 
 and besides , that sort of thing be so uncivilized and wrong . 

 " so uncivilized ? " query Mrs. Munt , fear that she 
 be lose the point of some brilliant remark . 

 " oh , I use an affected word . I only mean would you 
 please only talk the thing over with Helen . " 

 " only with Helen . " 

 " because - " but it be no moment to expound the personal 
 nature of love . even Margaret shrink from it , and content 
 herself with stroke her good aunt 's hand , and with 
 meditating , half sensibly and half poetically , on the 
 journey that be about to begin from King 's Cross . 

 like many other who have live long in a great capital , 
 she have strong feeling about the various railway termini . 
 they be our gate to the glorious and the unknown . through 
 they we pass out into adventure and sunshine , to they alas ! 
 we return . in Paddington all Cornwall be latent and the 
 remoter west ; down the incline of Liverpool Street lie 
 fenland and the illimitable Broads ; Scotland be through the 
 pylon of Euston ; Wessex behind the poise chaos of 
 Waterloo . italian realize this , as be natural ; those of 
 they who be so unfortunate as to serve as waiter in Berlin 
 call the Anhalt Bahnhof the Stazione d'Italia , because by it 
 they must return to their home . and he be a chilly 
 Londoner who do not endow his station with some 
 personality , and extend to they , however shyly , the emotion 
 of fear and love . 

 to Margaret - I hope that it will not set the reader 
 against she - the station of King 's Cross have always 
 suggest Infinity . its very situation - withdraw a little 
 behind the facile splendour of St. Pancras - imply a 
 comment on the materialism of life . those two great arch , 
 colourless , indifferent , shoulder between they an 
 unlovely clock , be fit portal for some eternal adventure , 
 whose issue might be prosperous , but would certainly not be 
 express in the ordinary language of prosperity . if you 
 think this ridiculous , remember that it be not Margaret who 
 be tell you about it ; and let I hasten to add that they 
 be in plenty of time for the train ; that Mrs. Munt , though 
 she take a second - class ticket , be put by the guard into a 
 first   only two second on the train , one smoking and the 
 other baby - one can not be expect to travel with baby ; 
 and that Margaret , on her return to Wickham Place , be 
 confront with the follow telegram : 

 all over . WISH I had never write . tell no ONE . 
  - HELEN 

 but Aunt Juley be go - go irrevocably , and no power 
 on earth could stop she . 


 chapter 3 

 most complacently do Mrs. Munt rehearse her mission . her 
 niece be independent young woman , and it be not often 
 that she be able to help they . Emily 's daughter have never 
 be quite like other girl . they have be leave motherless 
 when Tibby be bear , when Helen be five and Margaret 
 herself but thirteen . it be before the passing of the 
 Deceased Wife 's Sister Bill , so Mrs. Munt could without 
 impropriety offer to go and keep house at Wickham Place . 
 but her brother - in - law , who be peculiar and a German , have 
 refer the question to Margaret , who with the crudity of 
 youth have answer , " no , they could manage much well 
 alone . " five year later Mr. Schlegel have die too , and Mrs. 
 Munt have repeat her offer . Margaret , crude no long , have 
 be grateful and extremely nice , but the substance of her 
 answer have be the same . " I must not interfere a third 
 time , " think Mrs. Munt . however , of course she do . she 
 learn , to her horror , that Margaret , now of age , be take 
 her money out of the old safe investment and put it 
 into Foreign thing , which always smash . silence would have 
 be criminal . her own fortune be invest in Home rail , 
 and most ardently do she beg her niece to imitate she . 
 " then we should be together , dear . " Margaret , out of 
 politeness , invest a few hundred in the Nottingham and 
 Derby Railway , and though the Foreign Things do admirably 
 and the Nottingham and Derby decline with the steady 
 dignity of which only Home rail be capable , Mrs. Munt 
 never cease to rejoice , and to say , " I do manage that , at 
 all event . when the smash come poor Margaret will have a 
 nest - egg to fall back upon . " this year Helen come of age , 
 and exactly the same thing happen in Helen 's case ; she 
 also would shift her money out of Consols , but she , too , 
 almost without be press , consecrate a fraction of it 
 to the Nottingham and Derby Railway . so far so good , but in 
 social matter their aunt have accomplish nothing . soon 
 or later the girl would enter on the process know as 
 throw themselves away , and if they have delay hitherto , 
 it be only that they might throw themselves more vehemently 
 in the future . they see too many people at Wickham 
 Place - unshaven musician , an actress even , german cousin 
  one know what foreigner be , acquaintance pick up at 
 Continental hotel   one know what they be too . it be 
 interesting , and down at Swanage no one appreciated culture 
 more than Mrs. Munt ; but it be dangerous , and disaster be 
 bind to come . how right she be , and how lucky to be on 
 the spot when the disaster come ! 

 the train speed northward , under innumerable tunnel . it 
 be only an hour 's journey , but Mrs. Munt have to raise and 
 lower the window again and again . she pass through the 
 South Welwyn Tunnel , see light for a moment , and enter the 
 North Welwyn Tunnel , of tragic fame . she traverse the 
 immense viaduct , whose arch span untroubled meadow and 
 the dreamy flow of Tewin Water . she skirt the park of 
 politician . at time the Great North Road accompany she , 
 more suggestive of infinity than any railway , awakening , 
 after a nap of a hundred year , to such life as be confer 
 by the stench of motor - car , and to such culture as be 
 imply by the advertisement of antibilious pill . to 
 history , to tragedy , to the past , to the future , Mrs. Munt 
 remain equally indifferent ; her but to concentrate on the 
 end of her journey , and to rescue poor Helen from this 
 dreadful mess . 

 the station for howard end be at Hilton , one of the 
 large village that be string so frequently along the North 
 Road , and that owe their size to the traffic of coaching and 
 pre - coaching day . be near London , it have not share in 
 the rural decay , and its long High Street have bud out 
 right and leave into residential estate . for about a mile a 
 series of tile and slat house pass before Mrs. Munt 's 
 inattentive eye , a series break at one point by six Danish 
 tumuli that stand shoulder to shoulder along the highroad , 
 tomb of soldier . beyond these tumuli habitation 
 thicken , and the train come to a standstill in a tangle 
 that be almost a town . 

 the station , like the scenery , like Helen 's letter , 
 strike an indeterminate note . into which country will it 
 lead , England or Suburbia ? it be new , it have island 
 platform and a subway , and the superficial comfort exact 
 by business man . but it hold hint of local life , personal 
 intercourse , as even Mrs. Munt be to discover . 

 " I want a house , " she confide to the ticket boy . " its 
 name be howard Lodge . do you know where it be ? " 

 " Mr. Wilcox ! " the boy call . 

 a young man in front of they turn round . 

 " she be want howard End . " 

 there be nothing for it but to go forward , though Mrs. 
 Munt be too much agitated even to stare at the stranger . 
 but remember that there be two brother , she have the 
 sense to say to he , " excuse I ask , but be you the 
 young Mr. Wilcox or the elder ? " 

 " the young . can I do anything for you ? " 

 " oh , well " - she control herself with difficulty . 
 " really . be you ? I - " she move away from the ticket boy 
 and lower her voice . " I be Miss Schlegels aunt . I ought 
 to introduce myself , ought not   I ? my name be Mrs. Munt . " 

 she be conscious that he raise his cap and say quite 
 coolly , " oh , rather ; Miss Schlegel be stop with we . do 
 you want to see she ? " 

 " possibly - " 

 " I will call you a cab . no ; wait a mo - " he think . 
 " our motor 's here . I will run you up in it . " 

 " that be very kind - " 

 " not at all , if you will just wait till they bring out a 
 parcel from the office . this way . " 

 " my niece be not with you by any chance ? " 

 " no ; I come over with my father . he have go on north 
 in your train . you will see Miss Schlegel at lunch . you be 
 come up to lunch , I hope ? " 

 " I should like to come up , " say Mrs. Munt , not 
 commit herself to nourishment until she have study 
 Helen 's lover a little more . he seem a gentleman , but have 
 so rattle her round that her power of observation be 
 numb . she glance at he stealthily . to a feminine eye 
 there be nothing amiss in the sharp depression at the 
 corner of his mouth , nor in the rather box - like 
 construction of his forehead . he be dark , clean - shaven and 
 seem accustomed to command . 

 " in front or behind ? which do you prefer ? it may be 
 windy in front . " 

 " in front if I may ; then we can talk . " 

 " but excuse I one moment - I can not   think what they be 
 do with that parcel . " he stride into the booking - office 
 and call with a new voice : " hi ! hi , you there ! be you 
 go to keep I wait all day ? Parcel for Wilcox , 
 howard end . just look sharp ! " emerge , he say in 
 quieter tone : " this station 's abominably organize ; if I 
 have my way , the whole lot of them should get the sack . may I 
 help you in ? " 

 " this be very good of you , " say Mrs. Munt , as she 
 settle herself into a luxurious cavern of red leather , and 
 suffer her person to be pad with rug and shawl . she 
 be more civil than she have intend , but really this young 
 man be very kind . moreover , she be a little afraid of 
 he : his self - possession be extraordinary . " very good 
 indeed , " she repeat , add : " it be just what I should 
 have wish . " 

 " very good of you to say so , " he reply , with a slight 
 look of surprise , which , like most slight look , escape 
 Mrs. Munt 's attention . " I be just tool my father over 
 to catch the down train . " 

 " you see , we hear from Helen this morning . " 

 Young Wilcox be pour in petrol , start his engine , 
 and perform other action with which this story have no 
 concern . the great car begin to rock , and the form of Mrs. 
 Munt , try to explain thing , spring agreeably up and down 
 among the red cushion . " the mater will be very glad to see 
 you , " he mumble . " hi ! I say . Parcel for howard End . 
 bring it out . hi ! " 

 a bearded porter emerge with the parcel in one hand and 
 an entry book in the other . with the gathering whir of the 
 motor these ejaculation mingle : " Sign , must I ? why 
 the - should I sign after all this bother ? not even get a 
 pencil on you ? remember next time I report you to the 
 station - master . my time 's of value , though yours may not 
 be . here " - here be a tip . 

 " extremely sorry , Mrs. Munt . " 

 " not at all , Mr. Wilcox . " 

 " and do you object to go through the village ? it be 
 rather a long spin , but I have one or two commission . " 

 " I should love go through the village . naturally I 
 be very anxious to talk thing over with you . " 

 as she say this she feel ashamed , for she be 
 disobey Margaret 's instruction . only disobey they in 
 the letter , surely . Margaret have only warn she against 
 discuss the incident with outsider . surely it be not 
 " uncivilized or wrong " to discuss it with the young man 
 himself , since chance have throw they together . 

 a reticent fellow , he make no reply . mount by her 
 side , he put on glove and spectacle , and off they drive , 
 the bearded porter - life be a mysterious business - look 
 after they with admiration . 

 the wind be in their face down the station road , 
 blow the dust into Mrs. Munt 's eye . but as soon as they 
 turn into the Great North Road she open fire . " you can 
 well imagine , " she say , " that the news be a great shock to 
 we . " 

 " what news ? " 

 " Mr. Wilcox , " she say frankly . " Margaret have tell I 
 everything - everything . I have see Helen 's letter . " 

 he could not look she in the face , as his eye be 
 fix on his work ; he be travel as quickly as he dare 
 down the High Street . but he incline his head in her 
 direction , and say , " I beg your pardon ; I do not   catch . " 

 " About Helen . Helen , of course . Helen be a very 
 exceptional person - I be sure you will let I say this , 
 feeling towards she as you do - indeed , all the schlegel be 
 exceptional . I come in no spirit of interference , but it 
 be a great shock . " 

 they draw up opposite a draper 's . without reply , he 
 turn round in his seat , and contemplate the cloud of dust 
 that they have raise in their passage through the village . 
 it be settle again , but not all into the road from which 
 he have take it . some of it have percolate through the open 
 window , some have whiten the rose and gooseberry of the 
 wayside garden , while a certain proportion have enter the 
 lung of the villager . " I wonder when they will learn wisdom 
 and tar the road , " be his comment . then a man run out of 
 the draper 's with a roll of oilcloth , and off they go again . 

 " Margaret could not come herself , on account of poor 
 Tibby , so I be here to represent she and to have a good talk . " 

 " I be sorry to be so dense , " say the young man , again 
 draw up outside a shop . " but I still have not   quite understand . " 

 " Helen , Mr. Wilcox - my niece and you . " 

 he push up his goggle and gaze at she , absolutely 
 bewilder . Horror smite she to the heart , for even she 
 begin to suspect that they be at cross - purpose , and that 
 she have commence her mission by some hideous blunder . 

 " Miss Schlegel and myself . " he ask , compress his lip . 

 " I trust there have be no misunderstanding , " quaver 
 Mrs. Munt . " her letter certainly read that way . " 

 " what way ? " 

 " that you and she - " she pause , then droop her eyelid . 

 " I think I catch your meaning , " he say stickily . " what 
 an extraordinary mistake ! " 

 " then you do not   the least - " she stammer , get 
 blood - red in the face , and wish she have never be bear . 

 " Scarcely , as I be already engage to another lady . " 
 there be a moment 's silence , and then he catch his breath 
 and explode with , " oh , good God ! do not   tell I it be some 
 silliness of Paul 's . " 

 " but you be Paul . " 

 " I be not . " 

 " then why do you say so at the station ? " 

 " I say nothing of the sort . " 

 " I beg your pardon , you do . " 

 " I beg your pardon , I do not . my name be Charles . " 

 " Younger " may mean son as oppose to father , or second 
 brother as oppose to first . there be much to be say for 
 either view , and later on they say it . but they have other 
 question before they now . 

 " do you mean to tell I that Paul - " 

 but she do not like his voice . he sound as if he be 
 talk to a porter , and , certain that he have deceive she 
 at the station , she too grow angry . 

 " do you mean to tell I that Paul and your niece - " 

 Mrs. Munt - such be human nature - determine that she 
 would champion the lover . she be not go to be bully 
 by a severe young man . " yes , they care for one another very 
 much indeed , " she say . " I dare say they will tell you 
 about it by - and - by . we hear this morning . " 

 and Charles clench his fist and cry , " the idiot , the 
 idiot , the little fool ! " 

 Mrs. Munt try to divest herself of her rug . " if that 
 be your attitude , Mr. Wilcox , I prefer to walk . " 

 " I beg you will do no such thing . I will take you up this 
 moment to the house . let I tell you the thing 's 
 impossible , and must be stop . " 

 Mrs. Munt do not often lose her temper , and when she 
 do it be only to protect those whom she love . on this 
 occasion she blaze out . " I quite agree , sir . the thing be 
 impossible , and I will come up and stop it . my niece be a 
 very exceptional person , and I be not inclined to sit still 
 while she throw herself away on those who will not 
 appreciate she . " 

 Charles work his jaw . 

 " consider she have only know your brother since 
 Wednesday , and only meet your father and mother at a stray hotel - " 

 " could you possibly lower your voice ? the shopman will overhear . " 

 " Esprit de classe " - if one may coin the phrase - be 
 strong in Mrs. Munt . she sit quiver while a member of 
 the low order deposit a metal funnel , a saucepan , and a 
 garden squirt beside the roll of oilcloth . 

 " right behind ? " 

 " yes , sir . " and the low order vanish in a cloud of dust . 

 " I warn you : Paul have not   a penny ; it be useless . " 

 " no need to warn we , Mr. Wilcox , I assure you . the 
 warning be all the other way . my niece have be very 
 foolish , and I shall give she a good scolding and take she 
 back to London with I . " 

 " he have to make his way out in Nigeria . he could not 
 think of marry for year and when he do it must be a 
 woman who can stand the climate , and be in other way - why 
 have not   he tell we ? of course he be ashamed . he know he be 
 be a fool . and so he have - a damned fool . " 

 she grow furious . 

 " whereas Miss Schlegel have lose no time in publish 
 the news . " 

 " if I be a man , Mr. Wilcox , for that last remark I would 
 box your ear . you be not fit to clean my niece 's boot , to 
 sit in the same room with she , and you dare - you actually 
 dare - I decline to argue with such a person . " 

 " all I know be , she be spread the thing and he have not , 
 and my father 's away and I - " 

 " and all that I know be - " 

 " might I finish my sentence , please ? " 

 " no . " 

 Charles clench his tooth and send the motor swerve 
 all over the lane . 

 she scream . 

 so they play the game of Capping Families , a round of 
 which be always play when love would unite two member of 
 our race . but they play it with unusual vigour , state 
 in so many word that schlegel be well than Wilcoxes , 
 Wilcoxes well than schlegel . they fling decency aside . 
 the man be young , the woman deeply stir ; in both a vein 
 of coarseness be latent . their quarrel be no more 
 surprising than be most quarrel - inevitable at the time , 
 incredible afterwards . but it be more than usually 
 futile . a few minute , and they be enlighten . the 
 motor draw up at howard End , and Helen , look very pale , 
 run out to meet her aunt . 

 " Aunt Juley , I have just have a telegram from Margaret ; 
 I - I mean to stop your coming . it be not   - it be over . " 

 the climax be too much for Mrs. Munt . she burst into tear . 

 " Aunt Juley dear , do not . do not   let they know I have   be 
 so silly . it be not   anything . do bear up for my sake . " 

 " Paul , " cry Charles Wilcox , pull his glove off . 

 " do not   let they know . they be never to know . " 

 " oh , my darling Helen - " 

 " Paul ! Paul ! " 

 a very young man come out of the house . 

 " Paul , be there any truth in this ? " 

 " I do not   - I do not   - " 

 " yes or no , man ; plain question , plain answer . do or 
 do not   Miss Schlegel - " 

 " Charles dear , " say a voice from the garden . " Charles , 
 dear Charles , one do not   ask plain question . there be not 
 such thing . " 

 they be all silent . it be Mrs. Wilcox . 

 she approach just as Helen 's letter have describe she , 
 trail noiselessly over the lawn , and there be actually a 
 wisp of hay in her hand . she seem to belong not to the 
 young people and their motor , but to the house , and to the 
 tree that overshadow it . one know that she worship the 
 past , and that the instinctive wisdom the past can alone 
 bestow have descend upon she - that wisdom to which we give 
 the clumsy name of aristocracy . high bear she might not 
 be . but assuredly she care about her ancestor , and let 
 they help she . when she see Charles angry , Paul frighten , 
 and Mrs. Munt in tear , she hear her ancestor say , 
 " separate those human being who will hurt each other most . 
 the rest can wait . " so she do not ask question . still 
 less do she pretend that nothing have happen , as a 
 competent society hostess would have do . she say , " Miss 
 Schlegel , would you take your aunt up to your room or to my 
 room , whichever you think well . Paul , do find Evie , and 
 tell her lunch for six , but I be not sure whether we shall 
 all be downstairs for it . " and when they have obey she , she 
 turn to her eld son , who still stand in the throbbing 
 stink car , and smile at he with tenderness , and without 
 a word , turn away from he towards her flower . 

 " Mother , " he call , " be you aware that Paul have be 
 play the fool again ? " 

 " it be all right , dear . they have break off the engagement . " 

 " Engagement - ! " 

 " they do not love any long , if you prefer it put that 
 way , " say Mrs. Wilcox , stoop down to smell a rose . 


 chapter 4 

 Helen and her aunt return to Wickham Place in a state of 
 collapse , and for a little time Margaret have three invalid 
 on her hand . Mrs. Munt soon recover . she possess to a 
 remarkable degree the power of distort the past , and 
 before many day be over she have forget the part play 
 by her own imprudence in the catastrophe . even at the 
 crisis she have cry , " thank goodness , poor Margaret be 
 save this ! " which during the journey to London evolve 
 into , " it have to be go through by someone , " which in its 
 turn ripen into the permanent form of " the one time I 
 really do help Emily 's girl be over the Wilcox 
 business . " but Helen be a more serious patient . new idea 
 have burst upon she like a thunder clap , and by they and by 
 her reverberation she have be stun . 

 the truth be that she have fall in love , not with an 
 individual , but with a family . 

 before Paul arrive she have , as it be , be tune up 
 into his key . the energy of the Wilcoxes have fascinate 
 she , have create new image of beauty in her responsive 
 mind . to be all day with they in the open air , to sleep at 
 night under their roof , have seem the supreme joy of life , 
 and have lead to that abandonment of personality that be a 
 possible prelude to love . she have like give in to Mr. 
 Wilcox , or Evie , or Charles ; she have like be tell that 
 her notion of life be shelter or academic ; that 
 equality be nonsense , vote for woman nonsense , socialism 
 nonsense , art and literature , except when conducive to 
 strengthen the character , nonsense . one by one the 
 Schlegel fetich have be overthrow , and , though 
 profess to defend they , she have rejoice . when Mr. 
 Wilcox say that one sound man of business do more good to 
 the world than a dozen of your social reformer , she have 
 swallow the curious assertion without a gasp , and have 
 leant back luxuriously among the cushion of his motor - car . 
 when Charles say , " why be so polite to servant ? they 
 do not   understand it , " she have not give the Schlegel retort 
 of , " if they do not   understand it , I do . " no ; she have vow 
 to be less polite to servant in the future . " I be swathe 
 in can not , " she think , " and it be good for I to be strip 
 of it . " and all that she think or do or breathe be a 
 quiet preparation for Paul . Paul be inevitable . Charles 
 be take up with another girl , Mr. Wilcox be so old , evie 
 so young , Mrs. Wilcox so different . round the absent 
 brother she begin to throw the halo of Romance , to irradiate 
 he with all the splendour of those happy day , to feel that 
 in he she should draw near to the robust ideal . he and 
 she be about the same age , Evie say . Most people think 
 Paul handsomer than his brother . he be certainly a well 
 shot , though not so good at golf . and when Paul appear , 
 flush with the triumph of get through an examination , 
 and ready to flirt with any pretty girl , Helen meet he 
 halfway , or more than halfway , and turn towards he on the 
 Sunday evening . 

 he have be talk of his approach exile in Nigeria , 
 and he should have continue to talk of it , and allow 
 their guest to recover . but the heave of her bosom 
 flatter he . passion be possible , and he become 
 passionate . deep down in he something whisper , " this 
 girl would let you kiss she ; you might not have such a 
 chance again . " 

 that be " how it happen , " or , rather , how Helen 
 describe it to her sister , use word even more 
 unsympathetic than my own . but the poetry of that kiss , the 
 wonder of it , the magic that there be in life for hour 
 after it - who can describe that ? it be so easy for an 
 Englishman to sneer at these chance collision of human 
 being . to the insular cynic and the insular moralist they 
 offer an equal opportunity . it be so easy to talk of 
 " pass emotion , " and how to forget how vivid the emotion 
 be ere it pass . our impulse to sneer , to forget , be at 
 root a good one . we recognize that emotion be not enough , 
 and that man and woman be personality capable of 
 sustained relation , not mere opportunity for an 
 electrical discharge . yet we rate the impulse too highly . 
 we do not admit that by collision of this trivial sort the 
 door of heaven may be shake open . to Helen , at all 
 event , her life be to bring nothing more intense than the 
 embrace of this boy who play no part in it . he have draw 
 she out of the house , where there be danger of surprise and 
 light ; he have lead she by a path he know , until they stand 
 under the column of the vast wych - elm . a man in the 
 darkness , he have whisper " I love you " when she be 
 desire love . in time his slender personality fade , the 
 scene that he have evoke endure . in all the variable year 
 that follow she never see the like of it again . 

 " I understand , " say Margaret - " at least , I understand 
 as much as ever be understand of these thing . tell I now 
 what happen on the Monday morning . " 

 " it be over at once . " 

 " how , Helen ? " 

 " I be still happy while I dress , but as I come 
 downstairs I get nervous , and when I go into the 
 dining - room I know it be no good . there be Evie - I can not 
 explain - manage the tea - urn , and Mr. Wilcox read the 
 TIMES . " 

 " be Paul there ? " 

 " yes ; and Charles be talk to he about Stocks and 
 share , and he look frightened . " 

 by slight indication the sister could convey much to 
 each other . Margaret see horror latent in the scene , and 
 Helen 's next remark do not surprise she . 

 " somehow , when that kind of man look frightened it be 
 too awful . it be all right for we to be frightened , or for 
 man of another sort - father , for instance ; but for man like 
 that ! when I see all the other so placid , and Paul mad 
 with terror in case I say the wrong thing , I feel for a 
 moment that the whole Wilcox family be a fraud , just a wall 
 of newspaper and motor - car and golf - club , and that if it 
 fall I should find nothing behind it but panic and 
 emptiness . " 

 " I do not   think that . the Wilcoxes strike I as be 
 genuine people , particularly the wife . " 

 " no , I do not   really think that . but Paul be so 
 broad - shoulder ; all kind of extraordinary thing make it 
 bad , and I know that it would never do - never . I say to 
 he after breakfast , when the other be practise 
 stroke , ' we rather lose our head , ' and he look well at 
 once , though frightfully ashame . he begin a speech about 
 have no money to marry on , but it hurt he to make it , and 
 I - stop he . then he say , ' I must beg your pardon over 
 this , Miss Schlegel ; I can not   think what come over I last 
 night . ' and I say , ' nor what over I ; never mind . ' and then 
 we part - at least , until I remember that I have write 
 straight off to tell you the night before , and that 
 frighten he again . I ask he to send a telegram for 
 I , for he know you would be come or something ; and he 
 try to get hold of the motor , but Charles and Mr. Wilcox 
 want it to go to the station ; and Charles offer to send 
 the telegram for I , and then I have to say that the telegram 
 be of no consequence , for Paul say Charles might read it , 
 and though I write it out several time , he always say 
 people would suspect something . he take it himself at last , 
 pretend that he must walk down to get cartridge , and , 
 what with one thing and the other , it be not hand in at 
 the Post Office until too late . it be the most terrible 
 morning . Paul dislike I more and more , and Evie talk 
 cricket average till I nearly scream . I can not think how 
 I stand she all the other day . at last Charles and his 
 father start for the station , and then come your telegram 
 warn I that Aunt Juley be come by that train , and 
 Paul - oh , rather horrible - say that I have muddle it . but 
 Mrs. Wilcox know . " 

 " know what ? " 

 " everything ; though we neither of we tell she a word , 
 and have know all along , I think . " 

 " oh , she must have overhear you . " 

 " I suppose so , but it seem wonderful . when Charles and 
 Aunt Juley drive up , call each other name , Mrs. Wilcox 
 step in from the garden and make everything less 
 terrible . ugh ! but it have be a disgusting business . to 
 think that - " she sigh . 

 " to think that because you and a young man meet for a 
 moment , there must be all these telegram and anger , " 
 supply Margaret . 

 Helen nod . 

 " I have   often think about it , Helen . it be one of the 
 most interesting thing in the world . the truth be that 
 there be a great outer life that you and I have never 
 touch - a life in which telegram and anger count . 
 personal relation , that we think supreme , be not supreme 
 there . there love mean marriage settlement , death , death 
 duty . so far I be clear . but here my difficulty . this 
 outer life , though obviously horrid , often seem the real 
 one - there be grit in it . it do breed character . do 
 personal relation lead to sloppiness in the end ? " 

 " oh , Meg , that be what I feel , only not so clearly , when 
 the Wilcoxes be so competent , and seem to have their 
 hand on all the rope . " 

 " do not   you feel it now ? " 

 " I remember Paul at breakfast , " say Helen quietly . " I 
 shall never forget he . he have nothing to fall back upon . 
 I know that personal relation be the real life , for ever 
 and ever . 

 " amen ! " 

 so the Wilcox episode fall into the background , leave 
 behind it memory of sweetness and horror that mingle , and 
 the sister pursue the life that Helen have commend . they 
 talk to each other and to other people , they fill the 
 tall thin house at Wickham Place with those whom they like 
 or could befriend . they even attend public meeting . in 
 their own fashion they care deeply about politic , though 
 not as politician would have we care ; they desire that 
 public life should mirror whatever be good in the life 
 within . temperance , tolerance , and sexual equality be 
 intelligible cry to they ; whereas they do not follow our 
 Forward Policy in Thibet with the keen attention that it 
 merit , and would at time dismiss the whole British Empire 
 with a puzzle , if reverent , sigh . not out of they be the 
 show of history erect : the world would be a grey , 
 bloodless place be it entirely compose of Miss 
 schlegel . but the world be what it be , perhaps they 
 shine out in it like star . 

 a word on their origin . they be not " english to the 
 backbone , " as their aunt have piously assert . but , on the 
 other band , they be not " german of the dreadful sort . " 
 their father have belong to a type that be more prominent 
 in Germany fifty year ago than now . he be not the 
 aggressive German , so dear to the english journalist , nor 
 the domestic german , so dear to the english wit . if one 
 class he at all it would be as the countryman of Hegel 
 and Kant , as the idealist , incline to be dreamy , whose 
 Imperialism be the Imperialism of the air . not that his 
 life have be inactive . he have fight like blaze against 
 Denmark , Austria , France . but he have fight without 
 visualize the result of victory . a hint of the truth 
 break on he after Sedan , when he see the dye moustache of 
 Napoleon go grey ; another when he enter Paris , and see 
 the smash window of the Tuileries . peace come - it be 
 all very immense , one have turn into an empire - but he know 
 that some quality have vanish for which not all 
 Alsace - Lorraine could compensate he . Germany a commercial 
 Power , Germany a naval Power , Germany with colony here and 
 a Forward Policy there , and legitimate aspiration in the 
 other place , might appeal to other , and be fitly serve by 
 they ; for his own part , he abstain from the fruit of 
 victory , and naturalize himself in England . the more 
 earnest member of his family never forgave he , and know 
 that his child , though scarcely English of the dreadful 
 sort , would never be german to the backbone . he have 
 obtain work in one of our provincial Universities , and 
 there marry poor Emily   or die Englanderin as the case may 
 be , and as she have money , they proceed to London , and 
 come to know a good many people . but his gaze be always 
 fix beyond the sea . it be his hope that the cloud of 
 materialism obscure the Fatherland would part in time , and 
 the mild intellectual light re - emerge . " do you imply that 
 we Germans be stupid , Uncle Ernst ? " exclaim a haughty and 
 magnificent nephew . Uncle Ernst reply , " to my mind . you 
 use the intellect , but you no long care about it . that I 
 call stupidity . " as the haughty nephew do not follow , he 
 continue , " you only care about the ' thing that you can 
 use , and therefore arrange they in the following order : 
 money , supremely useful ; intellect , rather useful ; 
 imagination , of no use at all . no " - for the other have 
 protest - " your Pan - Germanism be no more imaginative than 
 be our Imperialism over here . it be the vice of a vulgar 
 mind to be thrill by bigness , to think that a thousand 
 square mile be a thousand time more wonderful than one 
 square mile , and that a million square mile be almost the 
 same as heaven . that be not imagination . no , it kill it . 
 when their poet over here try to celebrate bigness they be 
 dead at once , and naturally . your poet too be die , your 
 philosopher , your musician , to whom Europe have listen 
 for two hundred year . go . go with the little court 
 that nurture they - go with Esterhaz and Weimar . what ? 
 what be that ? your university ? oh , yes , you have learn 
 man , who collect more fact than do the learn man of 
 England . they collect fact , and fact , and empire of 
 fact . but which of they will rekindle the light within ? " 

 to all this Margaret listen , sit on the haughty 
 nephew 's knee . 

 it be a unique education for the little girl . the 
 haughty nephew would be at Wickham Place one day , bring 
 with he an even haughty wife , both convince that Germany 
 be appoint by God to govern the world . Aunt Juley would 
 come the next day , convince that Great Britain have be 
 appoint to the same post by the same authority . be both 
 these loud - voice party right ? on one occasion they have 
 meet , and Margaret with clasped hand have implore they to 
 argue the subject out in her presence . whereat they 
 blush , and begin to talk about the weather . " papa " she 
 cry - she be a most offensive child - " why will they not 
 discuss this most clear question ? " her father , survey 
 the party grimly , reply that he do not know . put 
 her head on one side , Margaret then remark , " to I one of 
 two thing be very clear ; either God do not know his own 
 mind about England and Germany , or else these do not know 
 the mind of God . " a hateful little girl , but at thirteen she 
 have grasp a dilemma that most people travel through life 
 without perceive . her brain dart up and down ; it grow 
 pliant and strong . her conclusion be , that any human being 
 lie near to the unseen than any organization , and from 
 this she never vary . 

 Helen advance along the same line , though with a more 
 irresponsible tread . in character she resemble her sister , 
 but she be pretty , and so apt to have a more amusing time . 
 People gather round she more readily , especially when they 
 be new acquaintance , and she do enjoy a little homage 
 very much . when their father die and they rule alone at 
 Wickham Place , she often absorb the whole of the company , 
 while Margaret - both be tremendous talker - fall flat . 
 neither sister bother about this . Helen never apologize 
 afterwards , Margaret do not feel the slight rancour . 
 but look have their influence upon character . the sister 
 be alike as little girl , but at the time of the Wilcox 
 episode their method be begin to diverge ; the young 
 be rather apt to entice people , and , in entice they , to 
 be herself entice ; the elder go straight ahead , and 
 accept an occasional failure as part of the game . 

 little need be premise about Tibby . he be now an 
 intelligent man of sixteen , but dyspeptic and difficile . 


 chapter 5 

 it will be generally admit that Beethoven 's Fifth 
 Symphony be the most sublime noise that have ever penetrate 
 into the ear of man . all sort and condition be satisfy 
 by it . whether you be like Mrs. Munt , and tap 
 surreptitiously when the tune come - of course , not so as to 
 disturb the other - ; or like Helen , who can see hero and 
 shipwreck in the music 's flood ; or like Margaret , who can 
 only see the music ; or like Tibby , who be profoundly verse 
 in counterpoint , and hold the full score open on his knee ; 
 or like their cousin , Fraulein Mosebach , who remember all 
 the time that beethoven be " echt Deutsch " ; or like Fraulein 
 Mosebach 's young man , who can remember nothing but Fraulein 
 Mosebach : in any case , the passion of your life become more 
 vivid , and you be bind to admit that such a noise be cheap 
 at two shilling . it be cheap , even if you hear it in the 
 Queen 's Hall , dreary music - room in London , though not as 
 dreary as the Free Trade Hall , Manchester ; and even if you 
 sit on the extreme left of that hall , so that the brass 
 bump at you before the rest of the orchestra arrive , it be 
 still cheap . 

 " who be Margaret talk to ? " say Mrs. Munt , at the 
 conclusion of the first movement . she be again in London 
 on a visit to Wickham Place . 

 Helen look down the long line of their party , and say 
 that she do not know . 

 " would it be some young man or other whom she take an 
 interest in ? " 

 " I expect so , " Helen reply . music enwrap she , and 
 she could not enter into the distinction that divide young 
 man whom one take an interest in from young man whom one know . 

 " you girl be so wonderful in always have - oh dear ! 
 one must not   talk . " 

 for the Andante have begin - very beautiful , but bear a 
 family likeness to all the other beautiful Andantes that 
 Beethoven have write , and , to Helen 's mind , rather 
 disconnect the hero and shipwreck of the first 
 movement from the hero and goblin of the third . she 
 hear the tune through once , and then her attention 
 wander , and she gaze at the audience , or the organ , or 
 the architecture . much do she censure the attenuate 
 cupid who encircle the ceiling of the Queen 's Hall , 
 incline each to each with vapid gesture , and clothe in 
 sallow pantaloon , on which the October sunlight strike . 
 " how awful to marry a man like those cupid ! " think 
 Helen . here Beethoven start decorate his tune , so she 
 hear he through once more , and then she smile at her 
 cousin Frieda . but Frieda , listen to Classical Music , 
 could not respond . Herr Liesecke , too , look as if wild 
 horse could not make he inattentive ; there be line 
 across his forehead , his lip be part , his pince - nez at 
 right angle to his nose , and he have lay a thick , white 
 hand on either knee . and next to she be Aunt Juley , so 
 british , and want to tap . how interesting that row of 
 people be ! what diverse influence have go to the 
 making ! here Beethoven , after hum and haw with great 
 sweetness , say " Heigho , " and the Andante come to an end . 
 applause , and a round of " wunderschoning " and 
 " prachtvolleye " from the german contingent . Margaret 
 start talk to her new young man ; Helen say to her 
 aunt : " now come the wonderful movement : first of all the 
 goblin , and then a trio of elephant dancing ; " and Tibby 
 implore the company generally to look out for the 
 transitional passage on the drum . 

 " on the what , dear ? " 

 " on the DRUM , Aunt Juley . " 

 " no ; look out for the part where you think you have do 
 with the goblin and they come back , " breathe Helen , as the 
 music start with a goblin walk quietly over the 
 universe , from end to end . other follow he . they be 
 not aggressive creature ; it be that that make they so 
 terrible to Helen . they merely observe in pass that 
 there be no such thing as splendour or heroism in the 
 world . after the interlude of elephant dancing , they 
 return and make the observation for the second time . 
 Helen could not contradict they , for , once at all event , 
 she have feel the same , and have see the reliable wall of 
 youth collapse . panic and emptiness ! panic and emptiness ! 
 the goblin be right . 

 her brother raise his finger : it be the transitional 
 passage on the drum . 

 for , as if thing be go too far , Beethoven take 
 hold of the goblin and make they do what he want . he 
 appear in person . he give they a little push , and they 
 begin to walk in major key instead of in a minor , and 
 then - he blow with his mouth and they be scatter ! gust 
 of splendour , god and demigod contend with vast sword , 
 colour and fragrance broadcast on the field of battle , 
 magnificent victory , magnificent death ! oh , it all burst 
 before the girl , and she even stretch out her gloved hand 
 as if it be tangible . any fate be titanic ; any contest 
 desirable ; conqueror and conquer would alike be applaud 
 by the angel of the utmost star . 

 and the goblin - they have not really be there at all ? 
 they be only the phantom of cowardice and unbelief ? one 
 healthy human impulse would dispel they ? man like the 
 Wilcoxes , or President Roosevelt , would say yes . Beethoven 
 know well . the goblin really have be there . they might 
 return - and they do . it be as if the splendour of life 
 might boil over - and waste to steam and froth . in its 
 dissolution one hear the terrible , ominous note , and a 
 goblin , with increase malignity , walk quietly over the 
 universe from end to end . panic and emptiness ! panic and 
 emptiness ! even the flame rampart of the world might fall . 

 Beethoven choose to make all right in the end . he build 
 the rampart up . he blow with his mouth for the second time , 
 and again the goblin be scatter . he bring back the 
 gust of splendour , the heroism , the youth , the magnificence 
 of life and of death , and , amid vast roaring of a 
 superhuman joy , he lead his Fifth Symphony to its 
 conclusion . but the goblin be there . they could 
 return . he have say so bravely , and that be why one can 
 trust Beethoven when he say other thing . 

 Helen push her way out during the applause . she 
 desire to be alone . the music sum up to she all that 
 have happen or could happen in her career . she read it as 
 a tangible statement , which could never be supersede . the 
 note mean this and that to she , and they could have no 
 other meaning , and life could have no other meaning . she 
 push right out of the building , and walk slowly down the 
 outside staircase , breathe the autumnal air , and then she 
 stroll home . 

 " Margaret , " call Mrs. Munt , " be Helen all right ? " 

 " oh yes . " 

 " she be always go away in the middle of a programme , " 
 say Tibby . 

 " the music have evidently move she deeply , " say 
 Fraulein Mosebach . 

 " excuse I , " say Margaret 's young man , who have for some 
 time be prepare a sentence , " but that lady have , quite 
 inadvertently , take my umbrella . " 

 " oh , good gracious I ! - I be so sorry . tibby , run 
 after Helen . " 

 " I shall miss the Four Serious Songs if I do . " 

 " tibby love , you must go . " 

 " it be not   of any consequence , " say the young man , in 
 truth a little uneasy about his umbrella . 

 " but of course it be . Tibby ! Tibby ! " 

 Tibby rise to his foot , and wilfully catch his person 
 on the back of the chair . by the time he have tip up 
 the seat and have find his hat , and have deposit his full 
 score in safety , it be " too late " to go after Helen . the 
 four Serious Songs have begin , and one could not move during 
 their performance . 

 " my sister be so careless , " whisper Margaret . 

 " not at all , " reply the young man ; but his voice be 
 dead and cold . 

 " if you would give I your address - " 

 " oh , not at all , not at all ; " and he wrap his 
 greatcoat over his knee . 

 then the four Serious Songs rang shallow in Margaret 's 
 ear . Brahms , for all his grumbling and grizzling , have 
 never guess what it feel like to be suspect of steal 
 an umbrella . for this fool of a young man think that she 
 and Helen and Tibby have be play the confidence trick on 
 he , and that if he give his address they would break into 
 his room some midnight or other and steal his walkingstick 
 too . Most lady would have laugh , but Margaret really 
 minded , for it give she a glimpse into squalor . to trust 
 people be a luxury in which only the wealthy can indulge ; 
 the poor can not afford it . as soon as Brahms have grunt 
 himself out , she give he her card and say , " that be where 
 we live ; if you prefer , you could call for the umbrella 
 after the concert , but I do not   like to trouble you when it 
 have all be our fault . " 

 his face brighten a little when he see that Wickham 
 Place be W. it be sad to see he corrode with suspicion , 
 and yet not dare to be impolite , in case these 
 well - dress people be honest after all . she take it as a 
 good sign that he say to she , " it be a fine programme this 
 afternoon , be it not ? " for this be the remark with which he 
 have originally open , before the umbrella intervene . 

 " the Beethoven 's fine , " say Margaret , who be not a 
 female of the encouraging type . " I do not   like the Brahms , 
 though , nor the Mendelssohn that come first - and ugh ! I 
 do not   like this Elgar that be come . " 

 " what , what ? " call Herr Liesecke , overhear . " the 
 POMP and CIRCUMSTANCE will not be fine ? " 

 " oh , Margaret , you tiresome girl ! " cry her aunt . 
 " here have I be persuade Herr Liesecke to stop for POMP 
 and CIRCUMSTANCE , and you be undo all my work . I be so 
 anxious for he to hear what we be do in music . oh , you 
 must not   run down our english composer , Margaret . " 

 " for my part , I have hear the composition at Stettin , " 
 say Fraulein Mosebach . " on two occasion . it be dramatic , 
 a little . " 

 " Frieda , you despise english music . you know you do . 
 and english art . and English Literature , except Shakespeare 
 and he be a German . very well , Frieda , you may go . " 

 the lover laugh and glance at each other . move by 
 a common impulse , they rise to their foot and flee from POMP 
 and CIRCUMSTANCE . 

 " we have this call to play in Finsbury Circus , it be 
 true , " say Herr Liesecke , as he edge past she and reach 
 the gangway just as the music start . 

 " Margaret - " loudly whisper by Aunt Juley . " Margaret , 
 Margaret ! Fraulein Mosebach have leave she beautiful little 
 bag behind she on the seat . " 

 sure enough , there be Frieda 's reticule , contain she 
 address book , her pocket dictionary , her map of London , and 
 her money . 

 " oh , what a bother - what a family we be ! Fr - Frieda ! " 

 " hush ! " say all those who think the music fine . 

 " but it be the number they want in Finsbury Circus - " 

 " might i - could not   i - " say the suspicious young man , 
 and get very red . 

 " oh , I would be so grateful . " 

 he take the bag - money clink inside it - and slip 
 up the gangway with it . he be just in time to catch they 
 at the swing - door , and he receive a pretty smile from the 
 german girl and a fine bow from her cavalier . he return 
 to his seat up - side with the world . the trust that they 
 have repose in he be trivial , but he feel that it 
 cancel his mistrust for they , and that probably he would 
 not be " have " over his umbrella . this young man have be 
 " have " in the past - badly , perhaps overwhelmingly - and now 
 most of his energy go in defend himself against the 
 unknown . but this afternoon - perhaps on account of 
 music - he perceive that one must slack off occasionally , or 
 what be the good of be alive ? Wickham Place , W. , though 
 a risk , be as safe as most thing , and he would risk it . 

 so when the concert be over and Margaret say , " we live 
 quite near ; I be go there now . could you walk around 
 with I , and we will find your umbrella ? " he say , " thank 
 you , " peaceably , and follow she out of the Queen 's Hall . 
 she wish that he be not so anxious to hand a lady 
 downstair , or to carry a lady 's programme for her - his 
 class be near enough her own for its manner to vex she . 
 but she find he interesting on the whole - every one 
 interest the schlegel on the whole at that time - and 
 while her lip talk culture , her heart be plan to 
 invite he to tea . 

 " how tired one get after music ! " she begin . 

 " do you find the atmosphere of Queen 's Hall oppressive ? " 

 " yes , horribly . " 

 " but surely the atmosphere of Covent Garden be even more 
 oppressive . " 

 " do you go there much ? " 

 " when my work permit , I attend the gallery for , the 
 Royal Opera . " 

 Helen would have exclaim , " so do I. I love the 
 gallery , " and thus have endear herself to the young man . 
 Helen could do these thing . but Margaret have an almost 
 morbid horror of " draw people out , " of " make thing 
 go . " she have be to the gallery at Covent Garden , but she 
 do not " attend " it , prefer the more expensive seat ; 
 still less do she love it . so she make no reply . 

 " this year I have be three time - to FAUST , TOSCA , 
 and - " be it " Tannhouser " or " Tannhoyser " ? well not risk 
 the word . 

 Margaret dislike tosca and FAUST . and so , for one 
 reason and another , they walk on in silence , chaperon by 
 the voice of Mrs. Munt , who be get into difficulty 
 with her nephew . 

 " I do in a way remember the passage , Tibby , but when 
 every instrument be so beautiful , it be difficult to pick 
 out one thing rather than another . I be sure that you and 
 Helen take I to the very nice concert . not a dull note 
 from begin to end . I only wish that our german friend 
 would have stay till it finish . " 

 " but surely you have not   forget the drum steadily 
 beat on the low C , Aunt Juley ? " come Tibby 's voice . " no 
 one could . it be unmistakable . " 

 " a specially loud part ? " hazard Mrs. Munt . " of course 
 I do not go in for be musical , " she add , the shot 
 failing . " I only care for music - a very different thing . 
 but still I will say this for myself - I do know when I like 
 a thing and when I do not . some people be the same about 
 picture . they can go into a picture gallery - Miss Conder 
 can - and say straight off what they feel , all round the 
 wall . I never could do that . but music be so different to 
 picture , to my mind . when it come to music I be as safe 
 as house , and I assure you , Tibby , I be by no mean please 
 by everything . there be a thing - something about a faun in 
 French - which Helen go into ecstasy over , but I think 
 it most tinkling and superficial , and say so , and I hold to 
 my opinion too . " 

 " do you agree ? " ask Margaret . " do you think music be 
 so different to picture ? " 

 " I - I should have think so , kind of , " he say . 

 " so should I. now , my sister declare they be just the 
 same . we have great argument over it . she say I be dense ; 
 I say she be sloppy . " get under way , she cry : " now , 
 do not   it seem absurd to you ? what be the good of the Arts 
 if they be interchangeable ? what be the good of the ear if 
 it tell you the same as the eye ? Helen 's one aim be to 
 translate tune into the language of painting , and picture 
 into the language of music . it be very ingenious , and she 
 say several pretty thing in the process , but what be 
 gain , I would like to know ? oh , it be all rubbish , radically 
 false . if Monet 's really Debussy , and Debussy 's really 
 Monet , neither gentleman be worth his salt - that be my opinion . 

 evidently these sister quarrel . 

 " now , this very symphony that we have   just be 
 have - she will not   let it alone . she label it with meaning 
 from start to finish ; turn it into literature . I wonder if 
 the day will ever return when music will be treat as 
 music . yet I do not   know . there be my brother - behind we . 
 he treat music as music , and oh , my goodness ! he make I 
 angry than anyone , simply furious . with he I dare not 
 even argue . " 

 an unhappy family , if talente . 

 " but , of course , the real villain be Wagner . he have 
 do more than any man in the nineteenth century towards the 
 muddling of art . I do feel that music be in a very serious 
 state just now , though extraordinarily interesting . every 
 now and then in history there do come these terrible 
 genius , like Wagner , who stir up all the well of thought 
 at once . for a moment it be splendid . such a splash as 
 never be . but afterwards - such a lot of mud ; and the 
 well - as it be , they communicate with each other too 
 easily now , and not one of they will run quite clear . 
 that be what Wagner be do . " 

 her speech flutter away from the young man like 
 bird . if only he could talk like this , he would have 
 catch the world . oh to acquire culture ! oh , to pronounce 
 foreign name correctly ! oh , to be well inform , 
 discourse at ease on every subject that a lady start ! 
 but it would take one year . with an hour at lunch and a 
 few shattered hour in the evening , how be it possible to 
 catch up with leisure woman , who have be read steadily 
 from childhood ? his brain might be full of name , he might 
 have even hear of Monet and Debussy ; the trouble be that 
 he could not string they together into a sentence , he could 
 not make they " tell , " he could not quite forget about his 
 steal umbrella . yes , the umbrella be the real trouble . 
 behind Monet and Debussy the umbrella persist , with the 
 steady beat of a drum . " I suppose my umbrella will be all 
 right , " he be think . " I do not   really mind about it . I 
 will think about music instead . I suppose my umbrella will 
 be all right . " early in the afternoon he have worry about 
 seat . ought he to have pay as much as two shilling ? 
 early still he have wonder , " shall I try to do without a 
 programme ? " there have always be something to worry he 
 ever since he could remember , always something that 
 distract he in the pursuit of beauty . for he do pursue 
 beauty , and therefore , Margaret 's speech do flutter away 
 from he like bird . 

 Margaret talk ahead , occasionally say , " do not   you 
 think so ? do not   you feel the same ? " and once she stop , 
 and say " oh , do interrupt I ! " which terrify he . she 
 do not attract he , though she fill he with awe . her 
 figure be meagre , her face seem all tooth and eye , her 
 reference to her sister and brother be uncharitable . for 
 all her cleverness and culture , she be probably one of 
 those soulless , atheistical woman who have be so show up 
 by Miss Corelli . it be surprising   and alarm   that she 
 should suddenly say , " I do hope that you will come in and have 
 some tea . " 

 " I do hope that you will come in and have some tea . we 
 should be so glad . I have drag you so far out of your way . " 

 they have arrive at Wickham Place . the sun have set , and 
 the backwater , in deep shadow , be fill with a gentle 
 haze . to the right of the fantastic skyline of the flat 
 tower black against the hue of evening ; to the left the 
 old house raise a square - cut , irregular parapet against 
 the grey . Margaret fumble for her latchkey . of course she 
 have forget it . so , grasp her umbrella by its ferrule , 
 she leant over the area and tap at the dining - room window . 

 " Helen ! let we in ! " 

 " all right , " say a voice . 

 " you have   be take this gentleman 's umbrella . " 

 " take a what ? " say Helen , open the door . " oh , 
 what be that ? do come in ! how do you do ? " 

 " Helen , you must not be so ramshackly . you take this 
 gentleman 's umbrella away from Queen 's Hall , and he have have 
 the trouble of come for it . " 

 " oh , I be so sorry ! " cry Helen , all her hair fly . 
 she have pull off her hat as soon as she return , and have 
 fling herself into the big dining - room chair . " I do nothing 
 but steal umbrella . I be so very sorry ! do come in and 
 choose one . be yours a hooky or a nobbly ? mine be a 
 nobbly - at least , I think it be . " 

 the light be turn on , and they begin to search the 
 hall , Helen , who have abruptly part with the Fifth 
 Symphony , comment with shrill little cry . 

 " do not   you talk , Meg ! you steal an old gentleman 's silk 
 top - hat . yes , she do , Aunt Juley . it be a positive fact . 
 she think it be a muff . oh , heaven ! I have   knock the 
 In and out card down . where 's Frieda ? Tibby , why do not   you 
 ever - no , I can not   remember what I be go to say . that 
 be not   it , but do tell the maid to hurry tea up . what 
 about this umbrella ? " she open it . " no , it be all go 
 along the seam . it be an appalling umbrella . it must be mine . " 

 but it be not . 

 he take it from she , murmur a few word of thank , and 
 then flee , with the lilting step of the clerk . 

 " but if you will stop - " cry Margaret . " now , Helen , 
 how stupid you have   be ! " 

 " whatever have I do ? " 

 " do not   you see that you have   frighten he away ? I mean 
 he to stop to tea . you ought not   to talk about steal or 
 hole in an umbrella . I see his nice eye get so 
 miserable . no , it be not a bit of good now . " for Helen have 
 dart out into the street , shout , " oh , do stop ! " 

 " I dare say it be all for the good , " opine Mrs. Munt . 
 " we know nothing about the young man , Margaret , and your 
 drawing - room be full of very tempting little thing . " 

 but Helen cry : " Aunt Juley , how can you ! you make I 
 more and more ashamed . I would rather he have be a thief and 
 take all the apostle spoon than that I - well , I must shut 
 the front - door , I suppose . one more failure for Helen . " 

 " yes , I think the apostle spoon could have go as 
 rent , " say Margaret . see that her aunt do not 
 understand , she add : " you remember ' rent . ' it be one of 
 father 's word - rent to the ideal , to his own faith in human 
 nature . you remember how he would trust stranger , and if 
 they fool he he would say , ' it be well to be fool than 
 to be suspicious ' - that the confidence trick be the work of 
 man , but the want - of - confidence - trick be the work of the devil . " 

 " I remember something of the sort now , " say Mrs. Munt , 
 rather tartly , for she long to add , " it be lucky that 
 your father marry a wife with money . " but this be unkind , 
 and she content herself with , " why , he might have steal 
 the little Ricketts picture as well . " 

 " well that he have , " say Helen stoutly . 

 " no , I agree with Aunt Juley , " say Margaret . " I would 
 rather mistrust people than lose my little Ricketts . there 
 be limit . " 

 their brother , find the incident commonplace , have 
 steal upstairs to see whether there be scone for tea . 
 he warm the teapot - almost too deftly - reject the Orange 
 Pekoe that the parlour - maid have provide , pour in five 
 spoonful of a superior blend , fill up with really boil 
 water , and now call to the lady to be quick or they 
 would lose the aroma . 

 " all right , Auntie Tibby , " call Helen , while Margaret , 
 thoughtful again , say : " in a way , I wish we have a real boy 
 in the house - the kind of boy who care for man . it would 
 make entertaining so much easy . " 

 " so do I , " say her sister . " Tibby only care for 
 cultured female sing Brahms . " and when they join he 
 she say rather sharply : " why do not   you make that young man 
 welcome , Tibby ? you must do the host a little , you know . 
 you ought to have take his hat and coax he into 
 stop , instead of let he be swamp by scream woman . " 

 Tibby sigh , and draw a long strand of hair over his forehead . 

 " oh , it be no good look superior . I mean what I say . " 

 " leave Tibby alone ! " say Margaret , who could not bear 
 her brother to be scold . 

 " here be the house a regular hen - coop ! " grumble Helen . 

 " oh , my dear ! " protest Mrs. Munt . " how can you say 
 such dreadful thing ! the number of man you get here have 
 always astonish I . if there be any danger it be the other 
 way round . " 

 " yes , but it be the wrong sort of man , Helen mean . " 

 " no , I do not , " correct Helen . " we get the right sort 
 of man , but the wrong side of he , and I say that be Tibby 's 
 fault . there ought to be a something about the house - an - I 
 do not   know what . " 

 " a touch of the W. 's , perhaps ? " 

 Helen put out her tongue . 

 " who be the W. 's ? " ask Tibby . 

 " the W. 's be thing I and Meg and Aunt Juley know about 
 and you do not , so there ! " 

 " I suppose that our be a female house , " say Margaret , 
 " and one must just accept it . no , Aunt Juley , I do not   mean 
 that this house be full of woman . I be try to say 
 something much more clever . I mean that it be irrevocably 
 feminine , even in father 's time . now I be sure you 
 understand ! well , I will give you another example . it will 
 shock you , but I do not   care . suppose Queen Victoria give a 
 dinner - party , and that the guest have be Leighton , 
 Millais , Swinburne , Rossetti , Meredith , Fitzgerald , etc . do 
 you suppose that the atmosphere of that dinner would have 
 be artistic ? heaven no ! the very chair on which they 
 sit would have see to that . so with our house - it must be 
 feminine , and all we can do be to see that it be not 
 effeminate . just as another house that I can mention , but I 
 will not , sound irrevocably masculine , and all its inmate 
 can do be to see that it be not   brutal . " 

 " that house be the W. 's house , I presume , " say Tibby . 

 " you be not go to be tell about the W. 's , my child , " 
 Helen cry , ' so do not   you think it . and on the other hand , 
 I do not   the least mind if you find out , so do not   you think 
 you have   do anything clever , in either case . give I a cigarette . " 

 " you do what you can for the house , " say Margaret . 
 " the drawing - room reek of smoke . " 

 " if you smoke too , the house might suddenly turn 
 masculine . atmosphere be probably a question of touch and 
 go . even at Queen Victoria 's dinner - party - if something have 
 be just a little different - perhaps if she have wear a 
 cling Liberty tea - gown instead of a magenta satin - " 

 " with an indian shawl over her shoulder - " 

 " fasten at the bosom with a Cairngorm - pin - " 

 burst of disloyal laughter - you must remember that they 
 be half german - greet these suggestion , and Margaret 
 say pensively , " how inconceivable it would be if the Royal 
 Family care about Art . " and the conversation drift away 
 and away , and Helen 's cigarette turn to a spot in the 
 darkness , and the great flat opposite be sow with 
 light window , which vanish and be relit again , and 
 vanish incessantly . beyond they the thoroughfare roar 
 gently - a tide that could never be quiet , while in the east , 
 invisible behind the smoke of Wapping , the moon be rise . 

 " that remind I , Margaret . we might have take that 
 young man into the dining - room , at all event . only the 
 majolica plate - and that be so firmly set in the wall . I be 
 really distressed that he have no tea . " 

 for that little incident have impress the three woman 
 more than might be suppose . it remain as a goblin 
 football , as a hint that all be not for the good in the good 
 of all possible world , and that beneath these 
 superstructure of wealth and art there wander an ill - feed 
 boy , who have recover his umbrella indeed , but who have leave 
 no address behind he , and no name . 


 chapter 6 

 we be not concerned with the very poor . they be 
 unthinkable , and only to be approach by the statistician 
 or the poet . this story deal with gentlefolk , or with 
 those who be oblige to pretend that they be gentlefolk . 

 the boy , Leonard Bast , stand at the extreme verge of 
 gentility . he be not in the abyss , but he could see it , 
 and at time people whom he know have drop in , and count 
 no more . he know that he be poor , and would admit it : he 
 would have die soon than confess any inferiority to the 
 rich . this may be splendid of he . but he be inferior to 
 most rich people , there be not the least doubt of it . he 
 be not as courteous as the average rich man , nor as 
 intelligent , nor as healthy , nor as lovable . his mind and 
 his body have be alike underfed , because he be poor , and 
 because he be modern they be always crave well food . 
 have he live some century ago , in the brightly colour 
 civilization of the past , he would have have a definite 
 status , his rank and his income would have correspond . 
 but in his day the angel of Democracy have arise , 
 enshadowe the class with leathern wing , and 
 proclaiming , " all man be equal - all man , that be to say , 
 who possess umbrella , " and so he be oblige to assert 
 gentility , lest he slip into the abyss where nothing 
 count , and the statement of Democracy be inaudible . 

 as he walk away from Wickham Place , his first care be 
 to prove that he be as good as the Miss Schlegels . 
 obscurely wound in his pride , he try to wound they in 
 return . they be probably not lady . would real lady 
 have ask he to tea ? they be certainly ill - natured and 
 cold . at each step his feeling of superiority increase . 
 would a real lady have talk about steal an umbrella ? 
 perhaps they be thief after all , and if he have go into 
 the house they could have clap a chloroform 
 handkerchief over his face . he walk on complacently as 
 far as the Houses of Parliament . there an empty stomach 
 assert itself , and tell he he be a fool . 

 " Evening , Mr. Bast . " 

 " Evening , Mr. Dealtry . " 

 " nice evening . " 

 " evening . " 

 Mr. Dealtry , a fellow clerk , pass on , and Leonard 
 stand wonder whether he would take the tram as far as a 
 penny would take he , or whether he would walk . he decide 
 to walk - it be no good giving in , and he have spend money 
 enough at Queen 's Hall - and he walk over Westminster 
 Bridge , in front of St. Thomas 's Hospital , and through the 
 immense tunnel that pass under the south - western main line 
 at Vauxhall . in the tunnel he pause and listen to the 
 roar of the train . a sharp pain dart through his head , 
 and he be conscious of the exact form of his eye socket . 
 he push on for another mile , and do not slacken speed 
 until he stand at the entrance of a road call Camelia 
 Road , which be at present his home . 

 here he stop again , and glance suspiciously to right 
 and leave , like a rabbit that be go to bolt into its 
 hole . a block of flat , construct with extreme cheapness , 
 tower on either hand . far down the road two more 
 block be be build , and beyond these an old house be 
 be demolish to accommodate another pair . it be the 
 kind of scene that may be observe all over London , whatever 
 the locality - brick and mortar rise and fall with the 
 restlessness of the water in a fountain , as the city 
 receive more and more man upon her soil . Camelia Road 
 would soon stand out like a fortress , and command , for a 
 little , an extensive view . only for a little . plan be 
 out for the erection of flat in Magnolia Road also . and 
 again a few year , and all the flat in either road might be 
 pull down , and new building , of a vastness at present 
 unimaginable , might arise where they have fall . 

 " Evening , Mr. Bast . " 

 " evening , Mr. Cunningham . " 

 " very serious thing this decline of the birth - rate in Manchester . " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " 

 " very serious thing this decline of the birth - rate in 
 Manchester , " repeat Mr. Cunningham , tap the Sunday 
 paper , in which the calamity in question have just be 
 announce to he . 

 " ah , yes , " say Leonard , who be not go to let on 
 that he have not buy a Sunday paper . 

 " if this kind of thing go on the population of England 
 will be stationary in 1960 . " 

 " you do not   say so . " 

 " I call it a very serious thing , eh ? " 

 " good - evening , Mr. Cunningham . " 

 " good - evening , Mr. Bast . " 

 then Leonard enter Block B of the flat , and turn , 
 not upstairs , but down , into what be know to house agent 
 as a semi - basement , and to other man as a cellar . he open 
 the door , and cry " Hullo ! " with the pseudo - geniality of 
 the Cockney . there be no reply . " Hullo ! " he repeat . 
 the sitting - room be empty , though the electric light have 
 be leave burn . a look of relief come over his face , and 
 he fling himself into the armchair . 

 the sitting - room contain , besides the armchair , two 
 other chair , a piano , a three - legged table , and a cosy 
 corner . of the wall , one be occupy by the window , the 
 other by a drape mantelshelf bristle with cupid . 
 opposite the window be the door , and beside the door a 
 bookcase , while over the piano there extend one of the 
 masterpiece of Maud Goodman . it be an amorous and not 
 unpleasant little hole when the curtain be draw , and the 
 light turn on , and the gas - stove unlit . but it strike 
 that shallow makeshift note that be so often hear in the 
 modem dwelling - place . it have be too easily gain , and 
 could be relinquish too easily . 

 as Leonard be kick off his boot he jar the 
 three - legged table , and a photograph frame , honourably 
 poise upon it , slid sideways , fall off into the fireplace , 
 and smash . he swear in a colourless sort of way , and 
 pick the photograph up . it represent a young lady 
 call Jacky , and have be take at the time when young 
 lady call Jacky be often photograph with their 
 mouth open . tooth of dazzle whiteness extend along 
 either of Jacky 's jaw , and positively weight her head 
 sideways , so large be they and so numerous . take my word 
 for it , that smile be simply stunning , and it be only you 
 and I who will be fastidious , and complain that true joy 
 begin in the eye , and that the eye of Jacky do not 
 accord with her smile , but be anxious and hungry . 

 Leonard try to pull out the fragment of glass , and 
 cut his finger and swear again . a drop of blood fall on 
 the frame , another follow , spill over on to the expose 
 photograph . he swear more vigorously , and dash to the 
 kitchen , where he bath his hand . the kitchen be the 
 same size as the sit room ; through it be a bedroom . 
 this complete his home . he be rent the flat furnished : 
 of all the object that encumber it none be his own 
 except the photograph frame , the cupid , and the book . 

 " damn , damn , damnation ! " he murmur , together with such 
 other word as he have learn from old man . then he raise 
 his hand to his forehead and say , " oh , damn it all - " which 
 mean something different . he pull himself together . he 
 drink a little tea , black and silent , that still survive 
 upon an upper shelf . he swallow some dusty crumb of 
 cake . then he go back to the sitting - room , settle 
 himself anew , and begin to read a volume of Ruskin . 

 " seven mile to the north of Venice - " 

 how perfectly the famous chapter open ! how supreme its 
 command of admonition and of poetry ! the rich man be 
 speak to we from his gondola . 

 " seven mile to the north of Venice the bank of sand 
 which nearer the city rise little above low - water mark 
 attain by degree a high level , and knit themselves at 
 last into field of salt morass , raise here and there into 
 shapeless mound , and intercept by narrow creek of sea . " 

 Leonard be try to form his style on Ruskin : he 
 understand he to be the great master of English Prose . 
 he read forward steadily , occasionally make a few note . 

 " let we consider a little each of these character in 
 succession , and first   for of the shaft enough have be 
 say already , what be very peculiar to this church - its luminousness . " 

 be there anything to be learn from this fine 
 sentence ? could he adapt it to the need of daily life ? 
 could he introduce it , with modification , when he next 
 write a letter to his brother , the lay - reader ? for example - 

 " let we consider a little each of these character in 
 succession , and first   for of the absence of ventilation 
 enough have be say already , what be very peculiar to this 
 flat - its obscurity . " 

 something tell he that the modification would not do ; 
 and that something , have he know it , be the spirit of 
 English Prose . " my flat be dark as well as stuffy . " those 
 be the word for he . 

 and the voice in the gondola roll on , pip 
 melodiously of Effort and Self - Sacrifice , full of high 
 purpose , full of beauty , full even of sympathy and the love 
 of man , yet somehow elude all that be actual and 
 insistent in Leonard 's life . for it be the voice of one 
 who have never be dirty or hungry , and have not guess 
 successfully what dirt and hunger be . 

 Leonard listen to it with reverence . he feel that he 
 be be do good to , and that if he keep on with Ruskin , 
 and the Queen 's Hall Concerts , and some picture by Watts , 
 he would one day push his head out of the grey water and 
 see the universe . he believe in sudden conversion , a 
 belief which may be right , but which be peculiarly 
 attractive to a half - baked mind . it be the bias of much 
 popular religion : in the domain of business it dominate the 
 Stock Exchange , and become that " bit of luck " by which all 
 success and failure be explain . " if only I have a bit 
 of luck , the whole thing would come straight . . . . he be 
 get a most magnificent place down at Streatham and a 20 
 h.-p . Fiat , but then , mind you , he be have luck . . . . I be 
 sorry the wife 's so late , but she never have any luck over 
 catch train . " Leonard be superior to these people ; he 
 do believe in effort and in a steady preparation for the 
 change that he desire . but of a heritage that may expand 
 gradually , he have no conception : he hop to come to Culture 
 suddenly , much as the Revivalist hop to come to Jesus . 
 those Miss Schlegels have come to it ; they have do the 
 trick ; their hand be upon the rope , once and for all . 
 and meanwhile , his flat be dark , as well as stuffy . 

 presently there be a noise on the staircase . he shut 
 up Margaret 's card in the page of Ruskin , and open the 
 door . a woman enter , of whom it be simple to say that 
 she be not respectable . her appearance be awesome . she 
 seem all string and bell - pull - ribbon , chain , bead 
 necklace that clink and catch - and a boa of azure 
 feather hang round her neck , with the end uneven . her 
 throat be bare , wound with a double row of pearl , her arm 
 be bare to the elbow , and might again be detect at the 
 shoulder , through cheap lace . her hat , which be flowery , 
 resemble those punnet , cover with flannel , which we 
 sow with mustard and cress in our childhood , and which 
 germinate here yes , and there no . she wear it on the back 
 of her head . as for her hair , or rather hair , they be too 
 complicated to describe , but one system go down her back , 
 lie in a thick pad there , while another , create for a 
 light destiny , ripple around her forehead . the face - the 
 face do not signify . it be the face of the photograph , 
 but old , and the tooth be not so numerous as the 
 photographer have suggest , and certainly not so white . 
 yes , Jacky be past her prime , whatever that prime may have 
 be . she be descend quick than most woman into the 
 colourless year , and the look in her eye confess it . 

 " what ho ! " say Leonard , greet that apparition with 
 much spirit , and help it off with its boa . 

 Jacky , in husky tone , reply , " what ho ! " 

 " be out ? " he ask . the question sound superfluous , 
 but it can not have be really , for the lady answer , " no , " 
 add , " oh , I be so tired . " 

 " you tired ? " 

 " eh ? " 

 " I be tired , " say he , hang the boa up . 

 " oh , Len , I be so tired . " 

 " I have   be to that classical concert I tell you about , " 
 say Leonard . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " I come back as soon as it be over . " 

 " any one be round to our place ? " ask Jacky . 

 " not that I have   see . I meet Mr. Cunningham outside , and 
 we pass a few remark . " 

 " what , not Mr. Cunnginham ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " oh , you mean Mr. Cunningham . " 

 " yes . Mr. Cunningham . " 

 " I have   be out to tea at a lady friend 's . " 

 her secret be at last give to the world , and the 
 name of the lady - friend be even adumbrate , Jacky make no 
 further experiment in the difficult and tiring art of 
 conversation . she never have be a great talker . even in 
 her photographic day she have rely upon her smile and her 
 figure to attract , and now that she be - 

  " on the shelf , 
  on the shelf , 
  Boys , boy , I be on the shelf , " 

 she be not likely to find her tongue . Occasional 
 burst of song   of which the above be an example   still 
 issue from her lip , but the speak word be rare . 

 she sit down on Leonard 's knee , and begin to fondle 
 he . she be now a massive woman of thirty - three , and her 
 weight hurt he , but he could not very well say anything . 
 then she say , " be that a book you be read ? " and he say , 
 " that be a book , " and draw it from her unreluctant grasp . 
 Margaret 's card fall out of it . it fall face downwards , and 
 he murmur , " Bookmarker . " 

 " Len - " 

 " what be it ? " he ask , a little wearily , for she only 
 have one topic of conversation when she sit upon his knee . 

 " you do love I ? " 

 " Jacky , you know that I do . how can you ask such question ! " 

 " but you do love I , Len , do not   you ? " 

 " of course I do . " 

 a pause . the other remark be still due . 

 " Len - " 

 " well ? what be it ? " 

 " Len , you will make it all right ? " 

 " I can not   have you ask I that again , " say the boy , 
 flare up into a sudden passion . " I have   promise to marry 
 you when I be of age , and that be enough . my word 's my word . 
 I have   promise to marry you as soon as ever I be twenty - one , 
 and I can not   keep on be worried . I have   worry enough . it 
 be not   likely I would throw you over , let alone my word , when 
 I have   spend all this money . besides , I be an Englishman , and 
 I never go back on my word . Jacky , do be reasonable . of 
 course I will marry you . only do stop badger I . " 

 " when be your birthday , Len ? " 

 " I have   tell you again and again , the eleventh of November 
 next . now get off my knee a bit ; someone must get supper , I 
 suppose . " 

 Jacky go through to the bedroom , and begin to see to 
 her hat . this mean blow at it with short sharp puff . 
 Leonard tidy up the sitting - room , and begin to prepare 
 their evening meal . he put a penny into the slot of the 
 gas - meter , and soon the flat be reek with metallic 
 fume . somehow he could not recover his temper , and all the 
 time he be cook he continue to complain bitterly . 

 " it really be too bad when a fellow be not   trust . it 
 make one feel so wild , when I have   pretend to the people 
 here that you be my wife - all right , you shall be my 
 wife - and I have   buy you the ring to wear , and I have   take 
 this flat furnish , and it be far more than I can afford , 
 and yet you be not   content , and I have   also not tell the truth 
 when I have   write home . " he lower his voice . " he would stop 
 it . " in a tone of horror , that be a little luxurious , he 
 repeat : " my brother'd stop it . I be go against the 
 whole world , Jacky . 

 " that be what I be , Jacky . I do not   take any heed of what 
 anyone say . I just go straight forward , I do . that be 
 always be my way . I be not one of your weak knock - kneed 
 chap . if a woman 's in trouble , I do not   leave she in the 
 lurch . that be not my street . no , thank you . 

 " I will tell you another thing too . I care a good deal 
 about improve myself by mean of Literature and Art , and 
 so get a wide outlook . for instance , when you come in 
 I be read Ruskin 's STONES of VENICE . I do not   say this to 
 boast , but just to show you the kind of man I be . I can 
 tell you , I enjoy that classical concert this afternoon . " 

 to all his mood Jacky remain equally indifferent . 
 when supper be ready - and not before - she emerge from the 
 bedroom , say : " but you do love I , do not   you ? " 

 they begin with a soup square , which Leonard have just 
 dissolve in some hot water . it be follow by the 
 tongue - a freckled cylinder of meat , with a little jelly at 
 the top , and a great deal of yellow fat at the 
 bottom - end with another square dissolve in water 
  jelly : pineapple , which Leonard have prepare early in 
 the day . Jacky eat contentedly enough , occasionally look 
 at her man with those anxious eye , to which nothing else in 
 her appearance correspond , and which yet seem to mirror 
 her soul . and Leonard manage to convince his stomach that 
 it be have a nourishing meal . 

 after supper they smoke cigarette and exchange a few 
 statement . she observe that her " likeness " have be 
 break . he find occasion to remark , for the second time , 
 that he have come straight back home after the concert at 
 Queen 's Hall . presently she sit upon his knee . the 
 inhabitant of Camelia Road tramp to and fro outside the 
 window , just on a level with their head , and the family in 
 the flat on the ground - floor begin to sing , " Hark , my soul , 
 it be the Lord . " 

 " that tune fairly give I the hump , " say Leonard . 

 Jacky follow this , and say that , for her part , she 
 think it a lovely tune . 

 " no ; I will play you something lovely . get up , dear , for 
 a minute . " 

 he go to the piano and jingle out a little Grieg . he 
 play badly and vulgarly , but the performance be not 
 without its effect , for Jacky say she think she would be 
 go to bed . as she recede , a new set of interest 
 possess the boy , and he begin to think of what have be 
 say about music by that odd Miss Schlegel - the one that 
 twist her face about so when she speak . then the thought 
 grow sad and envious . there be the girl name Helen , who 
 have pinch his umbrella , and the german girl who have smile 
 at he pleasantly , and Herr someone , and Aunt someone , and 
 the brother - all , all with their hand on the rope . they 
 have all pass up that narrow , rich staircase at Wickham 
 Place , to some ample room , whither he could never follow 
 they , not if he read for ten hour a day . oh , it be not 
 good , this continual aspiration . some be bear cultured ; 
 the rest have well go in for whatever come easy . to see 
 life steadily and to see it whole be not for the like of he . 

 from the darkness beyond the kitchen a voice call , " Len ? " 

 " you in bed ? " he ask , his forehead twitching . 

 " M'm . " 

 " all right . " 

 presently she call he again . 

 " I must clean my boot ready for the morning , " he answer . 

 presently she call he again . 

 " I rather want to get this chapter do . " 

 " what ? " 

 he close his ear against she . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " all right , Jacky , nothing ; I be read a book . " 

 " what ? " 

 " what ? " he answer , catch her degraded deafness . 

 presently she call he again . 

 Ruskin have visit Torcello by this time , and be 
 order his gondolier to take he to Murano . it occur 
 to he , as he glide over the whispering lagoon , that the 
 power of Nature could not be shorten by the folly , nor her 
 beauty altogether sadden by the misery , of such as 
 Leonard . 


 chapter 7 

 " oh , Margaret , " cry her aunt next morning , ' such a most 
 unfortunate thing have happen . I could not get you alone . " 

 the most unfortunate thing be not very serious . one of 
 the flat in the ornate block opposite have be take 
 furnish by the Wilcox family , " come up , no doubt , in the 
 hope of get into London society . " that Mrs. Munt should 
 be the first to discover the misfortune be not remarkable , 
 for she be so interested in the flat , that she watch 
 their every mutation with unwearye care . in theory she 
 despise they - they take away that old - world look - they cut 
 off the sun - flat house a flashy type of person . but if 
 the truth have be know , she find her visit to Wickham 
 Place twice as amusing since Wickham Mansions have arise , 
 and would in a couple of day learn more about they than her 
 niece in a couple of month , or her nephew in a couple of 
 year . she would stroll across and make friend with the 
 porter , and inquire what the rent be , exclaim for 
 example : " what ! a hundred and twenty for a basement ? 
 you will never get it ! " and they would answer : " one can but 
 try , madam . " the passenger lift , the provision lift , the 
 arrangement for coal   a great temptation for a dishonest 
 porter , be all familiar matter to she , and perhaps a 
 relief from the politico - economical - aesthetic atmosphere that 
 reign at the schlegel ' . 

 Margaret receive the information calmly , and do not 
 agree that it would throw a cloud over poor Helen 's life . 

 " oh , but Helen be not   a girl with no interest , " she 
 explain . " she have plenty of other thing and other people 
 to think about . she make a false start with the Wilcoxes , 
 and she will be as willing as we be to have nothing more to 
 do with they . " 

 " for a clever girl , dear , how very oddly you do talk . 
 Helen'll have to have something more to do with they , now 
 that they be all opposite . she may meet that Paul in the 
 street . she can not very well not bow . " 

 " of course she must bow . but look here ; let us do the 
 flower . I be go to say , the will to be interested in 
 he have die , and what else matter ? I look on that 
 disastrous episode   over which you be so kind   as the 
 killing of a nerve in Helen . it be dead , and she will never be 
 trouble with it again . the only thing that matter be the 
 thing that interest one . bow , even call and leave 
 card , even a dinner - party - we can do all those thing to 
 the Wilcoxes , if they find it agreeable ; but the other 
 thing , the one important thing - never again . do not   you see ? " 

 Mrs. Munt do not see , and indeed Margaret be make a 
 most questionable statement - that any emotion , any interest 
 once vividly arouse , can wholly die . 

 " I also have the honour to inform you that the Wilcoxes 
 be bore with we . I do not   tell you at the time - it might 
 have make you angry , and you have enough to worry you - but I 
 write a letter to Mrs. W. , and apologize for the trouble 
 that Helen have give they . she do not   answer it . " 

 " how very rude ! " 

 " I wonder . or be it sensible ? " 

 " no , Margaret , most rude . " 

 " in either case one can class it as reassure . " 

 Mrs. Munt sigh . she be go back to Swanage on the 
 morrow , just as her niece be want she most . other 
 regret crowd upon she : for instance , how magnificently 
 she would have cut Charles if she have meet he face to face . 
 she have already see he , give an order to the porter - and 
 very common he look in a tall hat . but unfortunately his 
 back be turn to she , and though she have cut his back , she 
 could not regard this as a telling snub . 

 " but you will be careful , will not   you ? " she exhort . 

 " oh , certainly . fiendishly careful . " 

 " and Helen must be careful , too , " 

 " careful over what ? " cry Helen , at that moment come 
 into the room with her cousin . 

 " nothing , " say Margaret , seize with a momentary awkwardness . 

 " careful over what , Aunt Juley ? " 

 Mrs. Munt assume a cryptic air . " it be only that a 
 certain family , whom we know by name but do not mention , as 
 you say yourself last night after the concert , have take 
 the flat opposite from the Mathesons - where the plant be 
 in the balcony . " 

 Helen begin some laugh reply , and then disconcert 
 they all by blush . Mrs. Munt be so disconcert that 
 she exclaim , " what , Helen , you do not   mind they come , do 
 you ? " and deepen the blush to crimson . 

 " of course I do not   mind , " say Helen a little crossly . 
 " it be that you and Meg be both so absurdly grave about it , 
 when there be nothing to be grave about at all . " 

 " I be not grave , " protest Margaret , a little cross in 
 her turn . 

 " well , you look grave ; do not   she , Frieda ? " 

 " I do not   feel grave , that be all I can say ; you be go 
 quite on the wrong tack . " 

 " no , she do not feel grave , " echo Mrs. Munt . " I can 
 bear witness to that . she disagree - " 

 " Hark ! " interrupt Fraulein Mosebach . " I hear Bruno 
 enter the hall . " 

 for Herr Liesecke be due at Wickham Place to call for 
 the two young girl . he be not enter the hall - in 
 fact , he do not enter it for quite five minute . but 
 Frieda detect a delicate situation , and say that she and 
 Helen have much well wait for Bruno down below , and leave 
 Margaret and Mrs. Munt to finish arrange the flower . 
 Helen acquiesce . but , as if to prove that the situation 
 be not delicate really , she stop in the doorway and say : 

 " do you say the Mathesons ' flat , Aunt Juley ? how 
 wonderful you be ! I never know that the woman who lace 
 too tightly 's name be Matheson . " 

 " Come , Helen , " say her cousin . 

 " go , Helen , " say her aunt ; and continue to Margaret 
 almost in the same breath : " Helen can not deceive I , she 
 do mind . " 

 " oh , hush ! " breathe Margaret . " Frieda'll hear you , and 
 she can be so tiresome . " 

 " she mind , " persist Mrs. Munt , move thoughtfully 
 about the room , and pull the dead chrysanthemum out of 
 the vas . " I know she would mind - and I be sure a girl ought 
 to ! such an experience ! such awful coarse - grain people ! 
 I know more about they than you do , which you forget , and if 
 Charles have take you that motor drive - well , you would have 
 reach the house a perfect wreck . oh , Margaret , you do not 
 know what you be in for . they be all bottle up against 
 the drawing - room window . there be Mrs. Wilcox - I have   see 
 she . there be Paul . there be Evie , who be a minx . there be 
 Charles - I see he to start with . and who would an elderly 
 man with a moustache and a copper - colour face be ? " 

 " Mr. Wilcox , possibly . " 

 " I know it . and there be Mr. Wilcox . " 

 " it be a shame to call his face copper colour , " 
 complain Margaret . " he have a remarkably good complexion 
 for a man of his age . " 

 Mrs. Munt , triumphant elsewhere , could afford to concede 
 Mr. Wilcox his complexion . she pass on from it to the 
 plan of campaign that her niece should pursue in the 
 future . Margaret try to stop she . 

 " Helen do not take the news quite as I expect , but 
 the Wilcox nerve be dead in she really , so there be no need 
 for plan . " 

 " it be as well to be prepare . " 

 " no - it be as well not to be prepare . " 

 " because - ' 

 her thought draw be from the obscure borderland . she 
 could not explain in so many word , but she feel that those 
 who prepare for all the emergency of life beforehand may 
 equip themselves at the expense of joy . it be necessary to 
 prepare for an examination , or a dinner - party , or a possible 
 fall in the price of stock : those who attempt human 
 relation must adopt another method , or fail . " because I would 
 soon risk it , " be her lame conclusion . 

 " but imagine the evening , " exclaim her aunt , point 
 to the Mansions with the spout of the watering - can . " turn 
 the electric light on she or there , and it be almost the same 
 room . one evening they may forget to draw their blind 
 down , and you will see they ; and the next , you yours , and 
 they will see you . impossible to sit out on the balcony . 
 impossible to water the plant , or even speak . Imagine 
 go out of the front - door , and they come out opposite at 
 the same moment . and yet you tell I that plan be 
 unnecessary , and you would rather risk it . " 

 " I hope to risk thing all my life . " 

 " oh , Margaret , most dangerous . " 

 " but after all , " she continue with a smile , " there be 
 never any great risk as long as you have money . " 

 " oh , shame ! what a shocking speech ! " 

 " money pad the edge of thing , " say Miss Schlegel . 
 " God help those who have none . " 

 " but this be something quite new ! " say Mrs. Munt , who 
 collect new idea as a squirrel collect nut , and be 
 especially attract by those that be portable . 

 " new for I ; sensible people have acknowledge it for 
 year . you and I and the Wilcoxes stand upon money as upon 
 island . it be so firm beneath our foot that we forget its 
 very existence . it be only when we see someone near we 
 tottering that we realize all that an independent income 
 mean . last night , when we be talk up here round the 
 fire , I begin to think that the very soul of the world be 
 economic , and that the low abyss be not the absence of 
 love , but the absence of coin . " 

 " I call that rather cynical . " 

 " so do I. but Helen and I , we ought to remember , when we 
 be tempt to criticize other , that we be stand on 
 these island , and that most of the other , be down below 
 the surface of the sea . the poor can not always reach those 
 whom they want to love , and they can hardly ever escape from 
 those whom they love no long . we rich can . imagine the 
 tragedy last June , if Helen and Paul Wilcox have be poor 
 people , and could not   invoke railway and motor - car to part they . " 

 " that be more like socialism , " say Mrs. Munt suspiciously . 

 " call it what you like . I call it go through life 
 with one 's hand spread open on the table . I be tired of 
 these rich people who pretend to be poor , and think it show 
 a nice mind to ignore the pile of money that keep their 
 foot above the wave . I stand each year upon six hundred 
 pound , and Helen upon the same , and Tibby will stand upon 
 eight , and as fast as our pound crumble away into the sea 
 they be renew - from the sea , yes , from the sea . and all 
 our thought be the thought of six - hundred - pounder , and 
 all our speech ; and because we do not   want to steal 
 umbrella ourselves , we forget that below the sea people do 
 want to steal they , and do steal they sometimes , and that 
 what be a joke up here be down there reality - " 

 " there they go - there go Fraulein Mosebach . really , 
 for a German she do dress charmingly . oh - ! " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " Helen be look up at the Wilcoxes ' flat . " 

 " why should not   she ? " 

 " I beg your pardon , I interrupt you . what be it you 
 be say about reality ? " 

 " I have work round to myself , as usual , " answer 
 Margaret in tone that be suddenly preoccupy . 

 " do tell I this , at all event . be you for the rich 
 or for the poor ? " 

 " too difficult . ask I another . be I for poverty or 
 for rich ? for rich . Hurrah for rich ! " 

 " for rich ! " echo Mrs. Munt , have , as it be , at 
 last secure her nut . 

 " yes . for rich . money for ever ! " 

 " so be I , and so , I be afraid , be most of my 
 acquaintance at Swanage , but I be surprised that you agree 
 with we . " 

 " thank you so much , Aunt Juley . while I have talk 
 theory , you have do the flower . " 

 " not at all , dear . I wish you would let I help you in 
 more important thing . " 

 " well , would you be very kind ? would you come round 
 with I to the registry office ? there be a housemaid who 
 will not   say yes but do not   say no . " 

 on their way thither they too look up at the Wilcoxes ' 
 flat . Evie be in the balcony , ' star most rudely , " 
 accord to Mrs. Munt . oh yes , it be a nuisance , there 
 be no doubt of it . Helen be proof against a pass 
 encounter but - Margaret begin to lose confidence . might it 
 reawake the die nerve if the family be live close 
 against her eye ? and Frieda Mosebach be stop with 
 they for another fortnight , and Frieda be sharp , abominably 
 sharp , and quite capable of remark , " you love one of the 
 young gentleman opposite , yes ? " the remark would be untrue , 
 but of the kind which , if state often enough , may become 
 true ; just as the remark , " England and Germany be bind to 
 fight , " render war a little more likely each time that it 
 be make , and be therefore make the more readily by the 
 gutter press of either nation . have the private emotion 
 also their gutter press ? Margaret think so , and fear 
 that good Aunt Juley and Frieda be typical specimen of 
 it . they might , by continual chatter , lead Helen into a 
 repetition of the desire of June . into a repetition - they 
 could not do more ; they could not lead she into lasting 
 love . they be - she see it clearly - Journalism ; her 
 father , with all his defect and wrong - headedness , have be 
 literature , and have he live , he would have persuade his 
 daughter rightly . 

 the registry office be hold its morning reception . 
 a string of carriage fill the street . Miss Schlegel 
 wait her turn , and finally have to be content with an 
 insidious " temporary , " be reject by genuine housemaid 
 on the ground of her numerous stair . her failure depress 
 she , and though she forget the failure , the depression 
 remain . on her way home she again glance up at the 
 Wilcoxes ' flat , and take the rather matronly step of 
 speak about the matter to Helen . 

 " Helen , you must tell I whether this thing worry you . " 

 " if what ? " say Helen , who be wash her hand for lunch . 

 " the W. 's come . " 

 " no , of course not . " 

 " really ? " 

 " really . " then she admit that she be a little 
 worried on Mrs. Wilcox 's account ; she imply that Mrs. 
 Wilcox might reach backward into deep feeling , and be 
 pain by thing that never touch the other member of 
 that clan . " I shall not   mind if Paul point at our house and 
 say , ' there live the girl who try to catch I . ' but she might . " 

 " if even that worry you , we could arrange something . 
 there be no reason we should be near people who displease we 
 or whom we displease , thank to our money . we might even go 
 away for a little . " 

 " well , I be go away . Frieda 's just ask I to 
 Stettin , and I shall not   be back till after the New Year . will 
 that do ? or must I fly the country altogether ? really , 
 Meg , what have come over you to make such a fuss ? " 

 " oh , I be get an old maid , I suppose . I think I 
 mind nothing , but really I - I should be bored if you fall 
 in love with the same man twice and " - she clear she 
 throat - " you do go red , you know , when Aunt Juley attack 
 you this morning . I should not   have refer to it otherwise . " 

 but Helen 's laugh ring true , as she raise a soapy hand 
 to heaven and swear that never , nowhere and nohow , would she 
 again fall in love with any of the Wilcox family , down to 
 its remotest collateral . 


 chapter 8 

 the friendship between Margaret and Mrs. Wilcox , which be 
 to develop so - quickly and with such strange result , may 
 perhaps have have its beginning at Speyer , in the spring . 
 perhaps the eld lady , as she gaze at the vulgar , ruddy 
 cathedral , and listen to the talk of Helen and her 
 husband , may have detect in the other and less charming of 
 the sister a deep sympathy , a sounder judgment . she be 
 capable of detect such thing . perhaps it be she who 
 have desire the Miss Schlegels to be invite to Howards End , 
 and Margaret whose presence she have particularly desire . 
 all this be speculation : Mrs. Wilcox have leave few clear 
 indication behind she . it be certain that she come to call 
 at Wickham Place a fortnight later , the very day that Helen 
 be go with her cousin to Stettin . 

 " Helen ! " cry Fraulein Mosebach in awestruck tone   she 
 be now in her cousin 's confidence   - " his mother have 
 forgive you ! " and then , remember that in England the 
 new - comer ought not to call before she be call upon , she 
 change her tone from awe to disapproval , and opine that 
 Mrs. Wilcox be " keine Dame . " 

 " Bother the whole family ! " snap Margaret . " Helen , 
 stop giggle and pirouette , and go and finish your 
 packing . why can not   the woman leave we alone ? " 

 " I do not   know what I shall do with Meg , " Helen retort , 
 collapse upon the stair . " she be get Wilcox and Box upon 
 the brain . Meg , Meg , I do not   love the young gentleman ; I 
 do not   love the young gentleman , Meg , Meg . can a body speak plainer ? " 

 " most certainly her love have die , " assert Fraulein Mosebach . 

 " most certainly it have , Frieda , but that will not 
 prevent I from be bore with the Wilcoxes if I return 
 the call . " 

 then Helen simulate tear , and Fraulein Mosebach , who 
 think she extremely amusing , do the same . " oh , boo hoo ! 
 boo hoo hoo ! Meg 's go to return the call , and I can not . 
 'co why ? 'cos I be go to german - eye . " 

 " if you be go to Germany , go and pack ; if you 
 be not , go and call on the Wilcoxes instead of I . " 

 " but , Meg , Meg , I do not   love the young gentleman ; I 
 do not   love the young - 0 lud , who be that come down the 
 stair ? I vow ' tis my brother . 0 crimini ! " 

 a male - even such a male as Tibby - be enough to stop 
 the foolery . the barrier of sex , though decrease among 
 the civilized , be still high , and high on the side of 
 woman . Helen could tell her sister all , and her cousin much 
 about Paul ; she tell her brother nothing . it be not 
 prudishness , for she now speak of " the Wilcox ideal " with 
 laughter , and even with a grow brutality . nor be it 
 precaution , for Tibby seldom repeat any news that do not 
 concern himself . it be rather the feeling that she 
 betray a secret into the camp of man , and that , however 
 trivial it be on this side of the barrier , it would become 
 important on that . so she stop , or rather begin to fool 
 on other subject , until her long - suffer relative drive 
 her upstairs . Fraulein Mosebach follow she , but linger 
 to say heavily over the banister to Margaret , " it be all 
 right - she do not love the young man - he have not be 
 worthy of she . " 

 " yes , I know ; thank very much . " 

 " I think I do right to tell you . " 

 " ever so many thank . " 

 " what be that ? " ask Tibby . no one tell he , and he 
 proceed into the dining - room , to eat Elvas plum . 

 that evening Margaret take decisive action . the house 
 be very quiet , and the fog - we be in November now - press 
 against the window like an exclude ghost . Frieda and 
 Helen and all their luggage have go . Tibby , who be not 
 feel well , lie stretch on a sofa by the fire . Margaret 
 sit by he , think . her mind dart from impulse to 
 impulse , and finally marshal they all in review . the 
 practical person , who know what he want at once , and 
 generally know nothing else , will excuse she of 
 indecision . but this be the way her mind work . and when 
 she do act , no one could accuse she of indecision then . 
 she hit out as lustily as if she have not consider the 
 matter at all . the letter that she write Mrs. Wilcox glow 
 with the native hue of resolution . the pale cast of thought 
 be with she a breath rather than a tarnish , a breath that 
 leave the colour all the more vivid when it have be wipe 
 away . 


 Dear Mrs. Wilcox , 

 I have to write something discourteous . it would be 
 well if we do not meet . both my sister and my aunt 
 have give displeasure to your family , and , in my 
 sister 's case , the ground for displeasure might recur . 
 as far as I know , she no long occupy her thought 
 with your son . but it would not be fair , either to she 
 or to you , if they meet , and it be therefore right that 
 our acquaintance which begin so pleasantly , should end . 

 I fear that you will not agree with this ; indeed , I 
 know that you will not , since you have be good enough 
 to call on we . it be only an instinct on my part , and no 
 doubt the instinct be wrong . my sister would , 
 undoubtedly , say that it be wrong . I write without her 
 knowledge , and I hope that you will not associate she 
 with my discourtesy . 

  believe I , 
  your truly , 
  M. J. Schlegel 


 Margaret send this letter round by post . next morning 
 she receive the follow reply by hand : 


 Dear Miss Schlegel , 

 you should not have write I such a letter . I 
 call to tell you that Paul have go abroad . 

  Ruth Wilcox 


 Margaret 's cheek burn . she could not finish her 
 breakfast . she be on fire with shame . Helen have tell she 
 that the youth be leave England , but other thing have 
 seem more important , and she have forget . all her 
 absurd anxiety fall to the ground , and in their place 
 arise the certainty that she have be rude to Mrs. Wilcox . 
 Rudeness affect Margaret like a bitter taste in the 
 mouth . it poison life . at time it be necessary , but woe 
 to those who employ it without due need . she fling on a hat 
 and shawl , just like a poor woman , and plunge into the fog , 
 which still continue . her lip be compress , the letter 
 remain in her hand , and in this state she cross the 
 street , enter the marble vestibule of the flat , elude 
 the concierge , and run up the stair till she reach the 
 second - floor . 

 she send in her name , and to her surprise be show 
 straight into Mrs. Wilcox 's bedroom . 

 " oh , Mrs. Wilcox , I have make the badd blunder . I be 
 more , more ashamed and sorry than I can say . " 

 Mrs. Wilcox bow gravely . she be offend , and do 
 not pretend to the contrary . she be sit up in bed , 
 write letter on an invalid table that span her knee . 
 a breakfast tray be on another table beside she . the light 
 of the fire , the light from the window , and the light of a 
 candle - lamp , which throw a quivering halo round her hand , 
 combine to create a strange atmosphere of dissolution . 

 " I know he be go to India in November , but I forget . " 

 " he sail on the 17th for Nigeria , in Africa . " 

 " I know - I know . I have be too absurd all through . I 
 be very much ashamed . " 

 Mrs. Wilcox do not answer . 

 " I be more sorry than I can say , and I hope that you 
 will forgive I . " 

 " it do not   matter , Miss Schlegel . it be good of you to 
 have come round so promptly . " 

 " it do matter , " cry Margaret . " I have be rude to 
 you ; and my sister be not even at home , so there be not 
 even that excuse . 

 " indeed ? " 

 " she have just go to Germany . " 

 " she go as well , " murmur the other . " yes , 
 certainly , it be quite safe - safe , absolutely , now . " 

 " you have   be worry too ! " exclaim Margaret , get 
 more and more excited , and take a chair without 
 invitation . " how perfectly extraordinary ! I can see that 
 you have . you feel as I do ; Helen must not   meet he again . " 

 " I do think it well . " 

 " now why ? " 

 " that be a most difficult question , " say Mrs. Wilcox , 
 smile , and a little lose her expression of annoyance . 
 " I think you put it well in your letter - it be an instinct , 
 which may be wrong . " 

 " it be not   that your son still - " 

 " oh no ; he often - my Paul be very young , you see . " 

 " then what be it ? " 

 she repeat : " an instinct which may be wrong . " 

 " in other word , they belong to type that can fall in 
 love , but could not   live together . that be dreadfully 
 probable . I be afraid that in nine case out of ten nature 
 pull one way and human nature another . " 

 " these be indeed ' other word , ' " say Mrs. Wilcox . " I 
 have nothing so coherent in my head . I be merely alarmed 
 when I know that my boy care for your sister . " 

 " ah , I have always be want to ask you . how do you 
 know ? Helen be so surprised when our aunt drive up , and 
 you step forward and arrange thing . do Paul tell you ? " 

 " there be nothing to be gain by discuss that , " say 
 Mrs. Wilcox after a moment 's pause . 

 " Mrs. Wilcox , be you very angry with we last June ? I 
 write you a letter and you do not   answer it . " 

 " I be certainly against take Mrs. Matheson 's flat . I 
 know it be opposite your house . " 

 " but it be all right now ? " 

 " I think so . " 

 " you only think ? you be not   sure ? I do love these 
 little muddle tidy up ? " 

 " oh yes , I be sure , " say Mrs. Wilcox , move with 
 uneasiness beneath the clothe . " I always sound uncertain 
 over thing . it be my way of speak . " 

 " that be all right , and I be sure too . " 

 here the maid come in to remove the breakfast - tray . 
 they be interrupt , and when they resume conversation it 
 be on more normal line . 

 " I must say good - bye now - you will be get up . " 

 " no - please stop a little long - I be take a day in 
 bed . now and then I do . " 

 " I think of you as one of the early riser . " 

 " at howard end - yes ; there be nothing to get up for in London . " 

 " nothing to get up for ? " cry the scandalize 
 Margaret . " when there be all the autumn exhibition , and 
 Ysaye play in the afternoon ! not to mention people . " 

 " the truth be , I be a little tired . first come the 
 wedding , and then Paul go off , and , instead of rest 
 yesterday , I pay a round of call . " 

 " a wedding ? " 

 " yes ; Charles , my eld son , be marry . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " we take the flat chiefly on that account , and also that 
 Paul could get his african outfit . the flat belong to a 
 cousin of my husband 's , and she most kindly offer it to 
 we . so before the day come we be able to make the 
 acquaintance of Dolly 's people , which we have not yet do . " 

 Margaret ask who dolly 's people be . 

 " Fussell . the father be in the indian army - retire ; 
 the brother be in the army . the mother be dead . " 

 so perhaps these be the " chinless sunburnt man " whom 
 Helen have espy one afternoon through the window . Margaret 
 feel mildly interested in the fortune of the Wilcox 
 family . she have acquire the habit on Helen 's account , and 
 it still clung to she . she ask for more information about 
 Miss dolly Fussell that be , and be give it in even , 
 unemotional tone . Mrs. Wilcox 's voice , though sweet and 
 compelling , have little range of expression . it suggest 
 that picture , concert , and people be all of small and 
 equal value . only once have it quicken - when speak of 
 howard End . 

 " Charles and Albert Fussell have know one another some 
 time . they belong to the same club , and be both devoted to 
 golf . dolly play golf too , though I believe not so well , 
 and they first meet in a mixed foursome . we all like she , 
 and be very much pleased . they be marry on the 11th , a 
 few day before Paul sail . Charles be very anxious to 
 have his brother as good man , so he make a great point of 
 have it on the 11th . the Fussells would have prefer it 
 after Christmas , but they be very nice about it . there be 
 dolly 's photograph - in that double frame . " 

 " be you quite certain that I be not interrupt , Mrs. Wilcox ? " 

 " yes , quite . " 

 " then I will stay . I be enjoy this . " 

 Dolly 's photograph be now examine . it be sign " for 
 dear mim , " which Mrs. Wilcox interpret as " the name she 
 and Charles have settle that she should call I . " dolly 
 look silly , and have one of those triangular face that so 
 often prove attractive to a robust man . she be very 
 pretty . from her Margaret pass to Charles , whose feature 
 prevail opposite . she speculate on the force that have 
 draw the two together till God part they . she find time 
 to hope that they would be happy . 

 " they have go to Naples for their honeymoon . " 

 " lucky people ! " 

 " I can hardly imagine Charles in Italy . " 

 " do not   he care for travel ? " 

 " he like travel , but he do see through foreigner 
 so . what he enjoy most be a motor tour in England , and I 
 think that would have carry the day if the weather have not 
 be so abominable . his father give he a car of his own 
 for a wedding present , which for the present be be store 
 at howard End . " 

 " I suppose you have a garage there ? " 

 " yes . my husband build a little one only last month , to 
 the west of the house , not far from the wych - elm , in what 
 use to be the paddock for the pony . " 

 the last word have an indescribable ring about they . 

 " where be the pony go ? " ask Margaret after a pause . 

 " the pony ? oh , dead , ever so long ago . " " the wych - elm I 
 remember . Helen speak of it as a very splendid tree . " 

 " it be the fine wych - elm in Hertfordshire . do your 
 sister tell you about the tooth ? " 

 " no . " 

 " oh , it might interest you . there be pig ' tooth stick 
 into the trunk , about four foot from the ground . the 
 country people put they in long ago , and they think that if 
 they chew a piece of the bark , it will cure the toothache . 
 the tooth be almost grow over now , and no one come to the 
 tree . " 

 " I should . I love folklore and all fester superstition . " 

 " do you think that the tree really do cure toothache , 
 if one believe in it ? " 

 " of course it do . it would cure anything - once . " 

 " certainly I remember case - you see I live at howard 
 end long , long before Mr. Wilcox know it . I be bear there . " 

 the conversation again shift . at the time it seem 
 little more than aimless chatter . she be interested when 
 her hostess explain that howard end be her own 
 property . she be bore when too minute an account be 
 give of the Fussell family , of the anxiety of Charles 
 concern Naples , of the movement of Mr. Wilcox and Evie , 
 who be motor in Yorkshire . Margaret could not bear 
 be bore . she grow inattentive , play with the 
 photograph frame , drop it , smash dolly 's glass , 
 apologize , be pardon , cut her finger thereon , be 
 pity , and finally say she must be go - there be all 
 the housekeeping to do , and she have to interview Tibby 's 
 riding - master . 

 then the curious note be strike again . 

 " good - bye , Miss Schlegel , good - bye . thank you for 
 come . you have cheer I up . " 

 " I be so glad ! " 

 " I - I wonder whether you ever think about yourself . ? " 

 " I think of nothing else , " say Margaret , blushing , but 
 let her hand remain in that of the invalid . 

 " I wonder . I wonder at Heidelberg . " 

 " i'm sure ! " 

 " I almost think - " 

 " yes ? " ask Margaret , for there be a long pause - a 
 pause that be somehow akin to the flicker of the fire , the 
 quiver of the reading - lamp upon their hand , the white blur 
 from the window ; a pause of shift and eternal shadow . 

 " I almost think you forget you be a girl . " 

 Margaret be startled and a little annoyed . " I be 
 twenty - nine , " she remark . " that not so wildly girlish . " 

 Mrs. Wilcox smile . 

 " what make you say that ? do you mean that I have be 
 gauche and rude ? " 

 a shake of the head . " I only mean that I be fifty - one , 
 and that to I both of you - read it all in some book or 
 other ; I can not put thing clearly . " 

 " oh , I have   get it - inexperience . I be no well than 
 Helen , you mean , and yet I presume to advise she . " 

 " yes . you have get it . inexperience be the word . " 

 " inexperience , " repeat Margaret , in serious yet 
 buoyant tone . " of course , I have everything to 
 learn - absolutely everything - just as much as Helen . Life 's 
 very difficult and full of surprise . at all event , I have 
 get as far as that . to be humble and kind , to go straight 
 ahead , to love people rather than pity they , to remember the 
 submerge - well , one can not   do all these thing at once , 
 bad luck , because they be so contradictory . it be then 
 that proportion come in - to live by proportion . do not 
 begin with proportion . only prig do that . let proportion 
 come in as a last resource , when the well thing have 
 fail , and a deadlock - gracious I , I have   start preach ! " 

 " indeed , you put the difficulty of life splendidly , " 
 say Mrs. Wilcox , withdraw her hand into the deep 
 shadow . " it be just what I should have like to say about 
 they myself . " 


 chapter 9 

 Mrs. Wilcox can not be accuse of give Margaret much 
 information about life . and Margaret , on the other hand , 
 have make a fair show of modesty , and have pretend to an 
 inexperience that she certainly do not feel . she have keep 
 house for over ten year ; she have entertain , almost with 
 distinction ; she have bring up a charming sister , and be 
 bring up a brother . surely , if experience be attainable , 
 she have attain it . 

 yet the little luncheon - party that she give in Mrs. 
 Wilcox 's honour be not a success . the new friend do not 
 blend with the " one or two delightful people " who have be 
 ask to meet she , and the atmosphere be one of polite 
 bewilderment . her taste be simple , her knowledge of 
 culture slight , and she be not interested in the New 
 English Art Club , nor in the dividing - line between 
 Journalism and Literature , which be start as a 
 conversational hare . the delightful people dart after it 
 with cry of joy , Margaret lead they , and not till the 
 meal be half over do they realize that the principal guest 
 have take no part in the chase . there be no common topic . 
 Mrs. Wilcox , whose life have be spend in the service of 
 husband and son , have little to say to stranger who have 
 never share it , and whose age be half her own . clever 
 talk alarm she , and wither her delicate imagining ; it 
 be the social ; counterpart of a motorcar , all jerk , and 
 she be a wisp of hay , a flower . twice she deplore the 
 weather , twice criticize the train service on the Great 
 Northern Railway . they vigorously assent , and rush on , 
 and when she inquire whether there be any news of Helen , 
 her hostess be too much occupy in place Rothenstein to 
 answer . the question be repeat : " I hope that your sister 
 be safe in Germany by now . " Margaret check herself and 
 say , " yes , thank you ; I hear on Tuesday . " but the demon of 
 vociferation be in she , and the next moment she be off again . 

 " only on Tuesday , for they live right away at Stettin . 
 do you ever know any one live at Stettin ? " 

 " never , " say Mrs. Wilcox gravely , while her neighbour , 
 a young man low down in the Education Office , begin to 
 discuss what people who live at Stettin ought to look 
 like . be there such a thing as Stettininity ? Margaret 
 sweep on . 

 " People at Stettin drop thing into boat out of 
 overhang warehouse . at least , our cousin do , but 
 be not   particularly rich . the town be not   interesting , 
 except for a clock that roll its eye , and the view of the 
 Oder , which truly be something special . oh , Mrs. Wilcox , 
 you would love the Oder ! the river , or rather river - there 
 seem to be dozen of they - be intense blue , and the plain 
 they run through an intensest green . " 

 " indeed ! that sound like a most beautiful view , Miss Schlegel . " 

 " so I say , but Helen , who will muddle thing , say no , 
 it be like music . the course of the Oder be to be like 
 music . it be oblige to remind she of a symphonic poem . the 
 part by the landing - stage be in B minor , if I remember 
 rightly , but low down thing get extremely mixed . there 
 be a slodgy theme in several key at once , mean 
 mud - bank , and another for the navigable canal , and the exit 
 into the Baltic be in C sharp major , pianissimo . " 

 " what do the overhanging warehouse make of that ? " ask 
 the man , laugh . 

 " they make a great deal of it , " reply Margaret , 
 unexpectedly rush off on a new track . " I think it be 
 affectation to compare the Oder to music , and so do you , but 
 the overhanging warehouse of Stettin take beauty seriously , 
 which we do not , and the average Englishman do not , and 
 despise all who do . now do not   say ' Germans have no taste , ' 
 or I shall scream . they have not . but - but - such a 
 tremendous but ! - they take poetry seriously . they do take 
 poetry seriously . 

 " be anything gain by that ? " 

 " yes , yes . the German be always on the lookout for 
 beauty . he may miss it through stupidity , or misinterpret 
 it , but he be always ask beauty to enter his life , and I 
 believe that in the end it will come . at Heidelberg I meet a 
 fat veterinary surgeon whose voice break with sob as he 
 repeat some mawkish poetry . so easy for I to laugh - I , 
 who never repeat poetry , good or bad , and can not remember 
 one fragment of verse to thrill myself with . my blood 
 boil - well , I be half german , so put it down to 
 patriotism - when I listen to the tasteful contempt of the 
 average islander for thing teutonic , whether they be 
 Bocklin or my veterinary surgeon . ' oh , Bocklin , ' they say ; 
 ' he strain after beauty , he people nature with god too 
 consciously . ' of course Bocklin strain , because he want 
 something - beauty and all the other intangible gift that 
 be float about the world . so his landscape do not   come 
 off , and Leader 's do . " 

 " I be not sure that I agree . do you ? " say he , turn 
 to Mrs. Wilcox . 

 she reply : " I think Miss Schlegel put everything 
 splendidly " ; and a chill fall on the conversation . 

 " oh , Mrs. Wilcox , say something nice than that . it be 
 such a snub to be tell you put thing splendidly . " 

 " I do not mean it as a snub . your last speech 
 interest I so much . generally people do not seem quite 
 to like Germany . I have long want to hear what be say on 
 the other side . " 

 " the other side ? then you do disagree . oh , good ! give 
 we your side . " 

 " I have no side . but my husband " - her voice soften , 
 the chill increase - " have very little faith in the 
 Continent , and our child have all take after he . " 

 " on what ground ? do they feel that the continent be in 
 bad form ? " 

 Mrs. Wilcox have no idea ; she pay little attention to 
 ground . she be not intellectual , nor even alert , and it 
 be odd that , all the same , she should give the idea of 
 greatness . Margaret , zigzag with her friend over 
 Thought and Art , be conscious of a personality that 
 transcend their own and dwarf their activity . there 
 be no bitterness in Mrs. Wilcox ; there be not even 
 criticism ; she be lovable , and no ungracious or 
 uncharitable word have pass her lip . yet she and daily 
 life be out of focus : one or the other must show blur . 
 and at lunch she seem more out of focus than usual , and 
 nearer the line that divide life from a life that may be of 
 great importance . 

 " you will admit , though , that the continent - it seem 
 silly to speak of ' the continent , ' but really it be all more 
 like itself than any part of it be like England . England be 
 unique . do have another jelly first . I be go to say 
 that the Continent , for good or for evil , be interested in 
 idea . its Literature and Art have what one might call the 
 kink of the unseen about they , and this persist even 
 through decadence and affectation . there be more liberty of 
 action in England , but for liberty of thought go to 
 bureaucratic Prussia . People will there discuss with 
 humility vital question that we here think ourselves too 
 good to touch with tong . " 

 " I do not want to go to Prussian " say Mrs. Wilcox - " not 
 even to see that interesting view that you be describe . 
 and for discuss with humility I be too old . we never 
 discuss anything at howard End . " 

 " then you ought to ! " say Margaret . " Discussion keep a 
 house alive . it can not stand by brick and mortar alone . " 

 " it can not stand without they , " say Mrs. Wilcox , 
 unexpectedly catch on to the thought , and rousing , for 
 the first and last time , a faint hope in the breast of the 
 delightful people . " it can not stand without they , and I 
 sometimes think - but I can not expect your generation to 
 agree , for even my daughter disagree with I here . " 

 " never mind we or she . do say ! " 

 " I sometimes think that it be wise to leave action and 
 discussion to man . " 

 there be a little silence . 

 " one admit that the argument against the suffrage be 
 extraordinarily strong , " say a girl opposite , lean 
 forward and crumble her bread . 

 " be they ? I never follow any argument . I be only too 
 thankful not to have a vote myself . " 

 " we do not   mean the vote , though , do we ? " supply 
 Margaret . " be not   we differ on something much wide , 
 Mrs. Wilcox ? whether woman be to remain what they have 
 be since the dawn of history ; or whether , since man have 
 move forward so far , they too may move forward a little 
 now . I say they may . I would even admit a biological change . " 

 " I do not   know , I do not   know . " 

 " I must be get back to my overhang warehouse , " 
 say the man . " they have   turn disgracefully strict . 

 Mrs. Wilcox also rise . 

 " oh , but come upstairs for a little . Miss Quested 
 play . do you like MacDowell ? do you mind he only have 
 two noise ? if you must really go , I will see you out . will not 
 you even have coffee ? " 

 they leave the dining - room , close the door behind they , 
 and as Mrs. Wilcox button up her jacket , she say : " what 
 an interesting life you all lead in London ! " 

 " no , we do not , " say Margaret , with a sudden revulsion . 
 " we lead the life of gibber monkey . Mrs. 
 Wilcox - really - we have something quiet and stable at the 
 bottom . we really have . all my friend have . do not 
 pretend you enjoy lunch , for you loathe it , but forgive 
 I by come again , alone , or by ask I to you . " 

 " I be use to young people , " say Mrs. Wilcox , and with 
 each word she speak the outline of know thing grow dim . 
 " I hear a great deal of chatter at home , for we , like you , 
 entertain a great deal . with we it be more sport and 
 politic , but - I enjoy my lunch very much , Miss Schlegel , 
 dear , and be not pretend , and only wish I could have 
 join in more . for one thing , I be not particularly well 
 just today . for another , you young people move so quickly 
 that it daze I . Charles be the same , dolly the same . but 
 we be all in the same boat , old and young . I never forget that . " 

 they be silent for a moment . then , with a newborn 
 emotion , they shake hand . the conversation cease suddenly 
 when Margaret re - enter the dining - room : her friend have 
 be talk over her new friend , and have dismiss she as 
 uninteresting . 


 chapter 10 

 several day pass . 

 be Mrs. Wilcox one of the unsatisfactory people - there 
 be many of they - who dangle intimacy and then withdraw it ? 
 they evoke our interest and affection , and keep the life 
 of the spirit dawdle round they . then they withdraw . 
 when physical passion be involve , there be a definite name 
 for such behaviour - flirt - and if carry far enough it 
 be punishable by law . but no law - not public opinion 
 even - punish those who coquette with friendship , though 
 the dull ache that they inflict , the sense of misdirect 
 effort and exhaustion , may be as intolerable . be she one 
 of these ? 

 Margaret fear so at first , for , with a Londoner 's 
 impatience , she want everything to be settle up 
 immediately . she mistrust the period of quiet that be 
 essential to true growth . desire to book Mrs. Wilcox as a 
 friend , she press on the ceremony , pencil , as it be , in 
 hand , press the more because the rest of the family be 
 away , and the opportunity seem favourable . but the eld 
 woman would not be hurry . she refuse to fit in with the 
 Wickham Place set , or to reopen discussion of Helen and 
 Paul , whom Margaret would have utilize as a short - cut . she 
 take her time , or perhaps let time take she , and when the 
 crisis do come all be ready . 

 the crisis open with a message : would Miss Schlegel 
 come shop ? Christmas be near , and Mrs. Wilcox feel 
 behind - hand with the present . she have take some more day 
 in bed , and must make up for lose time . Margaret accept , 
 and at eleven o'clock one cheerless morning they start out 
 in a brougham . 

 " first of all , " begin Margaret , " we must make a list and 
 tick off the people 's name . my aunt always do , and this 
 fog may thicken up any moment . have you any idea ? " 

 " I think we would go to Harrod 's or the Haymarket 
 Stores , " say Mrs. Wilcox rather hopelessly . " everything be 
 sure to be there . I be not a good shopper . the din be so 
 confusing , and your aunt be quite right - one ought to make a 
 list . take my notebook , then , and write your own name at 
 the top of the page . " 

 " oh , hooray ! " say Margaret , write it . " how very kind 
 of you to start with I ! " but she do not want to receive 
 anything expensive . their acquaintance be singular rather 
 than intimate , and she divine that the Wilcox clan would 
 resent any expenditure on outsider ; the more compact 
 family do . she do not want to be think a second Helen , 
 who would snatch present since she could not snatch young 
 man , nor to be expose , like a second Aunt Juley , to the 
 insult of Charles . a certain austerity of demeanour be 
 good , and she add : " I do not   really want a Yuletide gift , 
 though . in fact , I would rather not . " 

 " why ? " 

 " because I have   odd idea about Christmas . because I have 
 all that money can buy . I want more people , but no more thing . " 

 " I should like to give you something worth your 
 acquaintance , Miss Schlegel , in memory of your kindness to 
 I during my lonely fortnight . it have so happen that I 
 have be leave alone , and you have stop I from 
 brooding . I be too apt to brood . " 

 " if that be so , " say Margaret , " if I have happen to 
 be of use to you , which I do not   know , you can not pay I 
 back with anything tangible . " 

 " I suppose not , but one would like to . perhaps I shall 
 think of something as we go about . " 

 her name remain at the head of the list , but nothing 
 be write opposite it . they drive from shop to shop . the 
 air be white , and when they alight it taste like cold 
 penny . at time they pass through a clot of grey . Mrs. 
 Wilcox 's vitality be low that morning , and it be Margaret 
 who decide on a horse for this little girl , a golliwog for 
 that , for the rector 's wife a copper warming - tray . " we 
 always give the servant money . " " yes , do you , yes , much 
 easy , " reply Margaret , but feel the grotesque impact of 
 the unseen upon the see , and see issue from a forget 
 manger at Bethlehem this torrent of coin and toy . 
 Vulgarity reign . public - house , besides their usual 
 exhortation against temperance reform , invite man to " join 
 our Christmas goose club " - one bottle of gin , etc . , or two , 
 accord to subscription . a poster of a woman in tight 
 herald the Christmas pantomime , and little red devil , who 
 have come in again that year , be prevalent upon the 
 Christmas - card . Margaret be no morbid idealist . she do 
 not wish this spate of business and self - advertisement 
 check . it be only the occasion of it that strike she 
 with amazement annually . how many of these vacillating 
 shopper and tired shop - assistant realize that it be a 
 divine event that draw they together ? she realize it , 
 though stand outside in the matter . she be not a 
 Christian in the accepted sense ; she do not believe that 
 God have ever work among we as a young artisan . these 
 people , or most of they , believe it , and if press , would 
 affirm it in word . but the visible sign of their belief 
 be Regent Street or Drury Lane , a little mud displace , a 
 little money spend , a little food cook , eat , and 
 forget . inadequate . but in public who shall express the 
 unseen adequately ? it be private life that hold out the 
 mirror to infinity ; personal intercourse , and that alone , 
 that ever hint at a personality beyond our daily vision . 

 " no , I do like Christmas on the whole , " she announce . 
 " in its clumsy way , it do approach Peace and Goodwill . 
 but oh , it be clumsier every year . " 

 " be it ? I be only use to country christmas . " 

 " we be usually in London , and play the game with 
 vigour - carol at the Abbey , clumsy midday meal , clumsy 
 dinner for the maid , follow by Christmas - tree and dancing 
 of poor child , with song from Helen . the drawing - room 
 do very well for that . we put the tree in the 
 powder - closet , and draw a curtain when the candle be 
 light , and with the look - glass behind it look quite 
 pretty . I wish we might have a powder - closet in our next 
 house . of course , the tree have to be very small , and the 
 present do not   hang on it . no ; the present reside in a 
 sort of rocky landscape make of crumple brown paper . " 

 " you speak of your ' next house , ' Miss Schlegel . then 
 be you leave Wickham Place ? " 

 " yes , in two or three year , when the lease expire . we 
 must . " 

 " have you be there long ? " 

 " all our life . " 

 " you will be very sorry to leave it . " 

 " I suppose so . we scarcely realize it yet . my 
 father - " she break off , for they have reach the stationery 
 department of the Haymarket Stores , and Mrs. Wilcox want 
 to order some private greeting card . 

 " if possible , something distinctive , " she sigh . at 
 the counter she find a friend , bent on the same errand , and 
 converse with she insipidly , waste much time . " my 
 husband and our daughter be motor . " 

 " Bertha too ? oh , fancy , what a coincidence ! " Margaret , 
 though not practical , could shine in such company as this . 
 while they talk , she go through a volume of speciman 
 card , and submit one for Mrs. Wilcox 's inspection . Mrs. 
 Wilcox be delighted - so original , word so sweet ; she would 
 order a hundred like that , and could never be sufficiently 
 grateful . then , just as the assistant be book the 
 order , she say : " do you know , I will wait . on second 
 thought , I will wait . there be plenty of time still , be not 
 there , and I shall be able to get Evie 's opinion . " 

 they return to the carriage by devious path ; when 
 they be in , she say , " but could not   you get it renew ? " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " ask Margaret . 

 " the lease , I mean . " 

 " oh , the lease ! have you be think of that all the 
 time ? how very kind of you ! " 

 " surely something could be do . " 

 " no ; value have rise too enormously . they mean to 
 pull down Wickham Place , and build flat like your . " 

 " but how horrible ! " 

 " landlord be horrible . " 

 then she say vehemently : " it be monstrous , Miss 
 Schlegel ; it be not   right . I have no idea that this be 
 hang over you . I do pity you from the bottom of my 
 heart . to be part from your house , your father 's 
 house - it ought not   to be allow . it be bad than die . 
 I would rather die than - oh , poor girl ! can what they call 
 civilization be right , if people may not   die in the room 
 where they be bear ? my dear , I be so sorry - " 

 Margaret do not know what to say . Mrs. Wilcox have be 
 overtire by the shopping , and be incline to hysteria . 

 " howard end be nearly pull down once . it would have 
 kill I . " 

 " howard end must be a very different house to ours . we 
 be fond of our , but there be nothing distinctive about 
 it . as you see , it be an ordinary London house . we shall 
 easily find another . " 

 " so you think . " 

 " again my lack of experience , I suppose ! " say Margaret , 
 ease away from the subject . " I can not   say anything when 
 you take up that line , Mrs. Wilcox . I wish I could see 
 myself as you see I - foreshorten into a backfisch . quite 
 the ingenue . very charming - wonderfully well read for my 
 age , but incapable - " 

 Mrs. Wilcox would not be deter . " come down with I 
 to howard end now , " she say , more vehemently than ever . 
 " I want you to see it . you have never see it . I want to 
 hear what you say about it , for you do put thing so wonderfully . " 

 Margaret glance at the pitiless air and then at the 
 tired face of her companion . " later on I should love it , " 
 she continue , " but it be hardly the weather for such an 
 expedition , and we ought to start when we be fresh . be not 
 the house shut up , too ? " 

 she receive no answer . Mrs. Wilcox appear to be annoy . 

 " might I come some other day ? " 

 Mrs. Wilcox bend forward and tap the glass . " back to 
 Wickham Place , please ! " be her order to the coachman . 
 Margaret have be snub . 

 " a thousand thank , Miss Schlegel , for all your help . " 

 " not at all . " 

 " it be such a comfort to get the present off my 
 mind - the Christmas - card especially . I do admire your choice . " 

 it be her turn to receive no answer . in her turn 
 Margaret become annoyed . 

 " my husband and Evie will be back the day after 
 tomorrow . that be why I drag you out shopping today . I 
 stay in town chiefly to shop , but get through nothing , and 
 now he write that they must cut their tour short , the 
 weather be so bad , and the police - trap have be so 
 bad - nearly as bad as in Surrey . Ours be such a careful 
 chauffeur , and my husband feel it particularly hard that 
 they should be treat like roadhog . " 

 " why ? " 

 " well , naturally he - he be not   a road - hog . " 

 " he be exceed the speed - limit , I conclude . he must 
 expect to suffer with the low animal . " 

 Mrs. Wilcox be silence . in grow discomfort they 
 drive homeward . the city seem Satanic , the narrow 
 street oppress like the gallery of a mine . no harm 
 be do by the fog to trade , for it lie high , and the 
 light window of the shop be throng with customer . 
 it be rather a darkening of the spirit which fall back upon 
 itself , to find a more grievous darkness within . Margaret 
 nearly speak a dozen time , but something throttle she . 
 she feel petty and awkward , and her meditation on Christmas 
 grow more cynical . peace ? it may bring other gift , but be 
 there a single Londoner to whom Christmas be peaceful ? the 
 craving for excitement and for elaboration have ruin that 
 blessing . Goodwill ? have she see any example of it in the 
 horde of purchaser ? or in herself . she have fail to 
 respond to this invitation merely because it be a little 
 queer and imaginative - she , whose birthright it be to 
 nourish imagination ! well to have accept , to have tire 
 themselves a little by the journey , than coldly to reply , 
 " might I come some other day ? " her cynicism leave she . 
 there would be no other day . this shadowy woman would never 
 ask she again . 

 they part at the Mansions . Mrs. Wilcox go in after 
 due civility , and Margaret watch the tall , lonely figure 
 sweep up the hall to the lift . as the glass door close on 
 it she have the sense of an imprisonment . the beautiful head 
 disappear first , still bury in the muff , the long 
 trail skirt follow . a woman of undefinable rarity be 
 go up heaven - ward , like a speciman in a bottle . and into 
 what a heaven - a vault as of hell , sooty black , from which 
 soot descend ! 

 at lunch her brother , see she incline for silence , 
 insist on talk . Tibby be not ill - natured , but from 
 babyhood something drive he to do the unwelcome and the 
 unexpected . now he give she a long account of the 
 day - school that he sometimes patronize . the account be 
 interesting , and she have often press he for it before , 
 but she could not attend now , for her mind be focusse on 
 the invisible . she discern that Mrs. Wilcox , though a 
 love wife and mother , have only one passion in life - her 
 house - and that the moment be solemn when she invite a 
 friend to share this passion with she . to answer " another 
 day " be to answer as a fool . " another day " will do for 
 brick and mortar , but not for the Holy of Holies into which 
 howard end have be transfigure . her own curiosity be 
 slight . she have hear more than enough about it in the 
 summer . the nine window , the vine , and the wych - elm have no 
 pleasant connection for she , and she would have prefer 
 to spend the afternoon at a concert . but imagination 
 triumph . while her brother hold forth she determine to 
 go , at whatever cost , and to compel Mrs. Wilcox to go , too . 
 when lunch be over she step over to the flat . 

 Mrs. Wilcox have just go away for the night . 

 Margaret say that it be of no consequence , hurry 
 downstair , and take a hansom to King 's Cross . she be 
 convince that the escapade be important , though it would 
 have puzzle she to say why . there be a question of 
 imprisonment and escape , and though she do not know the 
 time of the train , she strain her eye for the St. 
 Pancras ' clock . 

 then the clock of King 's Cross swing into sight , a 
 second moon in that infernal sky , and her cab draw up at the 
 station . there be a train for Hilton in five minute . she 
 take a ticket , ask in her agitation for a single . as she 
 do so , a grave and happy voice salute she and thank she . 

 " I will come if I still may , " say Margaret , laugh nervously . 

 " you be come to sleep , dear , too . it be in the 
 morning that my house be most beautiful . you be come to 
 stop . I can not show you my meadow properly except at 
 sunrise . these fog " - she point at the station 
 roof - " never spread far . I dare say they be sit in the 
 sun in Hertfordshire , and you will never repent join they . 

 " I shall never repent join you . " 

 " it be the same . " 

 they begin the walk up the long platform . far at its 
 end stand the train , breast the darkness without . they 
 never reach it . before imagination could triumph , there 
 be cry of " Mother ! Mother ! " and a heavy - browed girl 
 dart out of the cloak - room and seize Mrs. Wilcox by the arm . 

 " Evie ! " she gasp . " Evie , my pet - " 

 the girl call , " Father ! I say ! look who be here . " 

 " evie , dear girl , why be not   you in Yorkshire ? " 

 " no - motor smash - change plan - Father 's come . " 

 " why , Ruth ! " cry Mr. Wilcox , join they . " what in 
 the name of all that be wonderful be you do here , Ruth ? " 

 Mrs. Wilcox have recover herself . 

 " oh , Henry dear ! - here be a lovely surprise - but let I 
 introduce - but I think you know Miss Schlegel . " 

 " oh , yes , " he reply , not greatly interested . " but 
 how be yourself , Ruth ? " 

 " fit as a fiddle , " she answer gaily . 

 " so be we and so be our car , which run A-1 as far as 
 Ripon , but there a wretched horse and cart which a fool of a 
 driver - " 

 " Miss Schlegel , our little outing must be for another day . " 

 " I be say that this fool of a driver , as the 
 policeman himself admit - " 

 " another day , Mrs. Wilcox . of course . " 

 " - but as we have   insure against third party risk , it 
 will not   so much matter - " 

 " - cart and car be practically at right angles - " 

 the voice of the happy family rise high . Margaret be 
 leave alone . no one want she . Mrs. Wilcox walk out of 
 King 's Cross between her husband and her daughter , listen 
 to both of they . 


 chapter 11 

 the funeral be over . the carriage roll away through the 
 soft mud , and only the poor remain . they approach to 
 the newly - dig shaft and look their last at the coffin , now 
 almost hide beneath the spadeful of clay . it be their 
 moment . Most of they be woman from the dead woman 's 
 district , to whom black garment have be serve out by Mr. 
 Wilcox 's order . pure curiosity have bring other . they 
 thrill with the excitement of a death , and of a rapid 
 death , and stand in group or move between the graf , like 
 drop of ink . the son of one of they , a wood - cutter , be 
 perch high above their head , pollard one of the 
 churchyard elm . from where he sit he could see the village 
 of Hilton , string upon the North Road , with its accrete 
 suburb ; the sunset beyond , scarlet and orange , wink at 
 he beneath brow of grey ; the church ; the plantation ; and 
 behind he an unspoilt country of field and farm . but he , 
 too , be roll the event luxuriously in his mouth . he 
 try to tell his mother down below all that he have feel 
 when he see the coffin approach : how he could not leave 
 his work , and yet do not like to go on with it ; how he have 
 almost slip out of the tree , he be so upset ; the rook 
 have caw , and no wonder - it be as if rook know too . his 
 mother claim the prophetic power herself - she have see a 
 strange look about Mrs. Wilcox for some time . London have 
 do the mischief , say other . she have be a kind lady ; 
 her grandmother have be kind , too - a plainer person , but 
 very kind . ah , the old sort be die out ! Mr. Wilcox , he 
 be a kind gentleman . they advance to the topic again and 
 again , dully , but with exaltation . the funeral of a rich 
 person be to they what the funeral of Alcestis or Ophelia 
 be to the educated . it be art ; though remote from life , it 
 enhance life 's value , and they witness it avidly . 

 the grave - digger , who have keep up an undercurrent of 
 disapproval - they dislike Charles ; it be not a moment to 
 speak of such thing , but they do not like Charles 
 Wilcox - the grave - digger finish their work and pile up 
 the wreath and cross above it . the sun set over Hilton : 
 the grey brow of the evening flush a little , and be 
 cleft with one scarlet frown . chatter sadly to each 
 other , the mourner pass through the lych - gate and 
 traverse the chestnut avenue that lead down to the 
 village . the young wood - cutter stay a little long , 
 poise above the silence and sway rhythmically . at last 
 the bough fall beneath his saw . with a grunt , he descend , 
 his thought dwell no long on death , but on love , for 
 he be mat . he stop as he pass the new grave ; a 
 sheaf of tawny chrysanthemum have catch his eye . " they 
 do not   ought to have colour flower at burying , " he 
 reflect . trudge on a few step , he stop again , 
 look furtively at the dusk , turn back , wrench a 
 chrysanthemum from the sheaf , and hide it in his pocket . 

 after he come silence absolute . the cottage that 
 abut on the churchyard be empty , and no other house 
 stand near . hour after hour the scene of the interment 
 remain without an eye to witness it . cloud drift over 
 it from the west ; or the church may have be a ship , 
 high - prowed , steer with all its company towards 
 infinity . towards morning the air grow cold , the sky 
 clear , the surface of the earth hard and sparkle above 
 the prostrate dead . the wood - cutter , return after a 
 night of joy , reflect : " they lilie , they chrysant ; it be 
 a pity I do not   take they all . " 

 up at howard end they be attempt breakfast . 
 Charles and Evie sit in the dining - room , with Mrs. Charles . 
 their father , who could not bear to see a face , breakfast 
 upstairs . he suffer acutely . Pain come over he in 
 spasm , as if it be physical , and even while he be about 
 to eat , his eye would fill with tear , and he would lay 
 down the morsel untasted . 

 he remember his wife 's even goodness during thirty 
 year . not anything in detail - not courtship or early 
 rapture - but just the unvarying virtue , that seem to he 
 a woman 's noble quality . so many woman be capricious , 
 break into odd flaw of passion or frivolity . not so his 
 wife . year after year , summer and winter , as bride and 
 mother , she have be the same , he have always trust she . 
 her tenderness ! her innocence ! the wonderful innocence 
 that be her by the gift of God . Ruth know no more of 
 worldly wickedness and wisdom than do the flower in her 
 garden , or the grass in her field . her idea of 
 business - " Henry , why do people who have enough money try to 
 get more money ? " her idea of politic - " I be sure that if 
 the mother of various nation could meet , there would be no 
 more war . " her idea of religion - ah , this have be a cloud , 
 but a cloud that pass . she come of Quaker stock , and he 
 and his family , formerly dissenter , be now member of the 
 Church of England . the rector 's sermon have at first 
 repel she , and she have express a desire for " a more 
 inward light , " add , " not so much for myself as for baby " 
  Charles . inward light must have be grant , for he 
 hear no complaint in later year . they bring up their 
 three child without dispute . they have never dispute . 

 she lie under the earth now . she have go , and as if to 
 make she go the more bitter , have go with a touch of 
 mystery that be all unlike she . " why do not   you tell I 
 you know of it ? " he have moan , and her faint voice have 
 answer : " I do not   want to , Henry - I might have be 
 wrong - and every one hat illness . " he have be tell of 
 the horror by a strange doctor , whom she have consult 
 during his absence from town . be this altogether just ? 
 without fully explain , she have die . it be a fault on 
 her part , and - tear rush into his eye - what a little 
 fault ! it be the only time she have deceive he in those 
 thirty year . 

 he rise to his foot and look out of the window , for 
 Evie have come in with the letter , and he could meet no 
 one 's eye . ah yes - she have be a good woman - she have be 
 steady . he choose the word deliberately . to he steadiness 
 include all praise . 

 he himself , gaze at the wintry garden , be in 
 appearance a steady man . his face be not as square as his 
 son 's , and , indeed , the chin , though firm enough in outline , 
 retreat a little , and the lip , ambiguous , be curtain 
 by a moustache . but there be no external hint of 
 weakness . the eye , if capable of kindness and 
 goodfellowship , if ruddy for the moment with tear , be the 
 eye of one who could not be drive . the forehead , too , be 
 like Charles 's . high and straight , brown and polished , 
 merge abruptly into temple and skull , it have the effect 
 of a bastion that protect his head from the world . at 
 time it have the effect of a blank wall . he have dwelt 
 behind it , intact and happy , for fifty year . 

 " the post 's come , Father , " say Evie awkwardly . 

 " thank . put it down . " 

 " have the breakfast be all right ? " 

 " yes , thank . " 

 the girl glance at he and at it with constraint . she 
 do not know what to do . 

 " Charles say do you want the TIMES ? " 

 " no , I will read it later . " 

 " ring if you want anything , Father , will not   you ? " 

 " I have   all I want . " 

 have sort the letter from the circular , she go 
 back to the dining - room . 

 " Father 's eat nothing , " she announce , sit down 
 with wrinkle brow behind the tea - urn - 

 Charles do not answer , but after a moment he run 
 quickly upstairs , open the door , and say : " look here , 
 Father , you must eat , you know " ; and have pause for a 
 reply that do not come , steal down again . " he be go to 
 read his letter first , I think , " he say evasively ; " I dare 
 say he will go on with his breakfast afterwards . " then he 
 take up the TIMES , and for some time there be no sound 
 except the clink of cup against saucer and of knife on plate . 

 Poor Mrs. Charles sit between her silent companion , 
 terrify at the course of event , and a little bored . she 
 be a rubbishy little creature , and she know it . a telegram 
 have drag she from Naples to the death - bed of a woman whom 
 she have scarcely know . a word from her husband have plunge 
 she into mourning . she desire to mourn inwardly as well , 
 but she wish that Mrs. Wilcox , since fat to die , could 
 have die before the marriage , for then less would have be 
 expect of she . crumble her toast , and too nervous to 
 ask for the butter , she remain almost motionless , thankful 
 only for this , that her father - in - law be have his 
 breakfast upstairs . 

 at last Charles speak . " they have no business to be 
 pollard those elm yesterday , " he say to his sister . 

 " no indeed . " 

 " I must make a note of that , " he continue . " I be 
 surprised that the rector allow it . " 

 " perhaps it may not be the rector 's affair . " 

 " whose else could it be ? " 

 " the lord of the manor . " 

 " impossible . " 

 " Butter , dolly ? " 

 " thank you , Evie dear . Charles - " 

 " yes , dear ? " 

 " I do not   know one could pollard elm . I think one 
 only pollard willow . " 

 " oh no , one can pollard elm . " 

 " then why ought not   the elm in the churchyard to be pollard ? " 

 Charles frown a little , and turn again to his 
 sister . " another point . I must speak to Chalkeley . " 

 " yes , rather ; you must complain to Chalkeley . 

 " it be no good he say he be not responsible for those 
 man . he be responsible . " 

 " yes , rather . " 

 brother and sister be not callous . they speak thus , 
 partly because they desire to keep Chalkeley up to the 
 mark - a healthy desire in its way - partly because they 
 avoid the personal note in life . all Wilcoxes do . it 
 do not seem to they of supreme importance . or it may be as 
 Helen suppose : they realize its importance , but be 
 afraid of it . panic and emptiness , could one glance behind . 
 they be not callous , and they leave the breakfast - table 
 with ache heart . their mother never have come in to 
 breakfast . it be in the other room , and especially in the 
 garden , that they feel her loss most . as Charles go out 
 to the garage , he be remind at every step of the woman 
 who have love he and whom he could never replace . what 
 battle he have fight against her gentle conservatism ! how 
 she have dislike improvement , yet how loyally she have 
 accept they when make ! he and his father - what trouble 
 they have have to get this very garage ! with what difficulty 
 have they persuade she to yield they to the paddock for 
 it - the paddock that she love more dearly than the garden 
 itself ! the vine - she have get her way about the vine . it 
 still encumber the south wall with its unproductive 
 branch . and so with Evie , as she stand talk to the 
 cook . though she could take up her mother 's work inside the 
 house , just as the man could take it up without , she feel 
 that something unique have fall out of her life . their 
 grief , though less poignant than their father 's , grow from 
 deep root , for a wife may be replace ; a mother never . 

 Charles would go back to the office . there be little 
 to do at howard End . the content of his mother 's will have 
 be long know to they . there be no legacy , no 
 annuity , none of the posthumous bustle with which some of 
 the dead prolong their activity . trust her husband , 
 she have leave he everything without reserve . she be quite 
 a poor woman - the house have be all her dowry , and the 
 house would come to Charles in time . her water - colour Mr. 
 Wilcox intend to reserve for Paul , while Evie would take 
 the jewellery and lace . how easily she slip out of 
 life ! Charles think the habit laudable , though he do not 
 intend to adopt it himself , whereas Margaret would have see 
 in it an almost culpable indifference to earthly fame . 
 cynicism - not the superficial cynicism that snarl and 
 sneer , but the cynicism that can go with courtesy and 
 tenderness - that be the note of Mrs. Wilcox 's will . she 
 want not to vex people . that accomplish , the earth 
 might freeze over she for ever . 

 no , there be nothing for Charles to wait for . he could 
 not go on with his honeymoon , so he would go up to London 
 and work - he feel too miserable hang about . he and dolly 
 would have the furnish flat while his father rest 
 quietly in the country with Evie . he could also keep an eye 
 on his own little house , which be be paint and 
 decorate for he in one of the Surrey suburb , and in which 
 he hop to install himself soon after Christmas . yes , he 
 would go up after lunch in his new motor , and the town 
 servant , who have come down for the funeral , would go up by train . 

 he find his father 's chauffeur in the garage , say , 
 " Morning " without look at the man 's face , and , bend 
 over the car , continue : " Hullo ! my new car be be drive ! " 

 " have it , sir ? " 

 " yes , " say Charles , get rather red ; " and whoever be 
 drive it have not   clean it properly , for there be mud on the 
 axle . take it off . " 

 the man go for the cloth without a word . he be a 
 chauffeur as ugly as sin - not that this do he disservice 
 with Charles , who think charm in a man rather rot , and have 
 soon get rid of the little italian beast with whom they have start . 

 " Charles - " his bride be trip after he over the 
 hoar - frost , a dainty black column , her little face and 
 elaborate mourning hat form the capital thereof . 

 " one minute , I be busy . well , Crane , who be be drive 
 it , do you suppose ? " 

 " do not   know , I be sure , sir . no one be drive it since 
 I have   be back , but , of course , there be the fortnight I have 
 be away with the other car in Yorkshire . " 

 the mud come off easily . 

 " Charles , your father 's down . something 's happen . he 
 want you in the house at once . oh , Charles ! " 

 " wait , dear , wait a minute . who have the key to the 
 garage while you be away , crane ? " 

 " the gardener , sir . " 

 " do you mean to tell I that old Penny can drive a motor ? " 

 " no , sir ; no one 's have the motor out , sir . " 

 " then how do you account for the mud on the axle ? " 

 " I can not , of course , say for the time I have   be in 
 Yorkshire . no more mud now , sir . " 

 Charles be vex . the man be treat he as a fool , 
 and if his heart have not be so heavy he would have 
 report he to his father . but it be not a morning for 
 complaint . order the motor to be round after lunch , he 
 join his wife , who have all the while be pour out some 
 incoherent story about a letter and a Miss Schlegel . 

 " now , dolly , I can attend to you . Miss Schlegel ? what 
 do she want ? " 

 when people write a letter Charles always ask what 
 they want . want be to he the only cause of action . and 
 the question in this case be correct , for his wife reply , 
 " she want howard End . " 

 " howard end ? now , Crane , just do not   forget to put on 
 the Stepney wheel . " 

 " no , sir . " 

 " now , mind you do not   forget , for I - Come , little woman . " 
 when they be out of the chauffeur 's sight he put his arm 
 around her waist and press she against he . all his 
 affection and half his attention - it be what he grant she 
 throughout their happy married life . 

 " but you have not   listen , Charles - " 

 " what be wrong ? " 

 " I keep on tell you - howard end . Miss Schlegels get 
 it . " 

 " got what ? " ask Charles , unclasp she . " what the 
 dicken be you talk about ? " 

 " now , Charles , you promise not to say those naughty - " 

 " look here , I be in no mood for foolery . it be no morning 
 for it either . " 

 " I tell you - I keep on tell you - Miss Schlegel - she be 
 get it - your mother 's leave it to she - and you have   all get to 
 move out ! " 

 " howard END ? " 

 " howard END ! " she scream , mimic he , and as she 
 do so Evie come dash out of the shrubbery . 

 " dolly , go back at once ! my father 's much annoyed with 
 you . Charles " - she hit herself wildly - " come in at once to 
 Father . he be have a letter that be too awful . " 

 Charles begin to run , but check himself , and step 
 heavily across the gravel path . there the house be - the 
 nine window , the unprolific vine . he exclaim , " schlegel 
 again ! " and as if to complete chaos , dolly say , " oh no , the 
 matron of the nursing home have write instead of she . " 

 " come in , all three of you ! " cry his father , no long 
 inert . " dolly , why have you disobey I ? " 

 " oh , Mr. Wilcox - " 

 " I tell you not to go out to the garage . I have   hear you 
 all shout in the garden . I will not   have it . come in . " 

 he stand in the porch , transform , letter in his hand . 

 " into the dining - room , every one of you . we can not 
 discuss private matter in the middle of all the servant . 
 here , Charles , here ; read these . see what you make . " 

 Charles take two letter , and read they as he follow 
 the procession . the first be a covering note from the 
 matron . Mrs. Wilcox have desire she , when the funeral 
 should be over , to forward the enclosed . the enclose - it 
 be from his mother herself . she have write : " to my 
 husband : I should like Miss Schlegel   Margaret   to have 
 howard End . " 

 " I suppose we be go to have a talk about this ? " he 
 remark , ominously calm . 

 " certainly . I be come out to you when dolly - " 

 " well , let us sit down . " 

 " Come , Evie , do not   waste time , sit down . " 

 in silence they draw up to the breakfast - table . the 
 event of yesterday - indeed , of this morning - suddenly 
 recede into a past so remote that they seem scarcely to 
 have live in it . heavy breathing be hear . they be 
 calm themselves . Charles , to steady they far , read 
 the enclosure out loud : " a note in my mother 's handwriting , 
 in an envelope address to my father , seal . inside : ' I 
 should like Miss Schlegel   Margaret   to have howard End . ' 
 no date , no signature . forward through the matron of that 
 nursing home . now , the question be - " 

 dolly interrupt he . " but I say that note be not 
 legal . house ought to be do by a lawyer , Charles , surely . " 

 her husband work his jaw severely . little lump 
 appear in front of either ear - a symptom that she have not 
 yet learn to respect , and she ask whether she might see 
 the note . Charles look at his father for permission , who 
 say abstractedly , " give it she . " she seize it , and at once 
 exclaim : " why , it be only in pencil ! I say so . Pencil 
 never count . " 

 " we know that it be not legally binding , dolly , " say 
 Mr. Wilcox , speak from out of his fortress . " we be 
 aware of that . legally , I should be justify in tear it 
 up and throw it into the fire . of course , my dear , we 
 consider you as one of the family , but it will be well if 
 you do not interfere with what you do not understand . " 

 Charles , vex both with his father and his wife , then 
 repeat : " the question be - " he have clear a space of the 
 breakfast - table from plate and knife , so that he could 
 draw pattern on the tablecloth . " the question be whether 
 Miss Schlegel , during the fortnight we be all away , 
 whether she unduly - " he stop . 

 " I do not   think that , " say his father , whose nature be 
 noble than his son 's 

 " do not   think what ? " 

 " that she would have - that it be a case of undue 
 influence . no , to my mind the question be the - the 
 invalid 's condition at the time she write . " 

 " my dear father , consult an expert if you like , but I 
 do not   admit it be my mother 's writing . " 

 " why , you just say it be ! " cry dolly . 

 " never mind if I do , " he blaze out ; " and hold your tongue . " 

 the poor little wife colour at this , and , draw her 
 handkerchief from her pocket , shed a few tear . no one 
 notice she . Evie be scowl like an angry boy . the two 
 man be gradually assume the manner of the 
 committee - room . they be both at their good when serve 
 on committee . they do not make the mistake of handle 
 human affair in the bulk , but dispose of they item by 
 item , sharply . calligraphy be the item before they now , 
 and on it they turn their well - train brain . Charles , 
 after a little demur , accept the writing as genuine , and 
 they pass on to the next point . it be the well - perhaps 
 the only - way of dodge emotion . they be the average 
 human article , and have they consider the note as a whole 
 it would have drive they miserable or mad . consider item 
 by item , the emotional content be minimize , and all go 
 forward smoothly . the clock tick , the coal blaze 
 high , and contend with the white radiance that pour in 
 through the window . unnoticed , the sun occupy his sky , 
 and the shadow of the tree stem , extraordinarily solid , 
 fall like trench of purple across the frosted lawn . it 
 be a glorious winter morning . Evie 's fox terrier , who have 
 pass for white , be only a dirty grey dog now , so intense 
 be the purity that surround he . he be discredit , but 
 the blackbird that he be chase glow with arabian 
 darkness , for all the conventional colouring of life have 
 be alter . inside , the clock strike ten with a rich and 
 confident note . other clock confirm it , and the 
 discussion move towards its close . 

 to follow it be unnecessary . it be rather a moment when 
 the commentator should step forward . ought the Wilcoxes to 
 have offer their home to Margaret ? I think not . the 
 appeal be too flimsy . it be not legal ; it have be 
 write in illness , and under the spell of a sudden 
 friendship ; it be contrary to the dead woman 's intention 
 in the past , contrary to her very nature , so far as that 
 nature be understand by they . to they howard end be a 
 house : they could not know that to she it have be a spirit , 
 for which she seek a spiritual heir . and - push one 
 step far in these mist - may they not have decide even 
 well than they suppose ? be it credible that the 
 possession of the spirit can be bequeath at all ? have the 
 soul offspring ? a wych - elm tree , a vine , a wisp of hay with 
 dew on it - can passion for such thing be transmit where 
 there be no bond of blood ? no ; the Wilcoxes be not to be 
 blame . the problem be too terrific , and they could not 
 even perceive a problem . no ; it be natural and fitting that 
 after due debate they should tear the note up and throw it 
 on to their dining - room fire . the practical moralist may 
 acquit they absolutely . he who strive to look deep may 
 acquit they - almost . for one hard fact remain . they do 
 neglect a personal appeal . the woman who have die do say 
 to they , " do this , " and they answer , " we will not . " 

 the incident make a most painful impression on they . 
 Grief mount into the brain and work there 
 disquietingly . yesterday they have lament : " she be a dear 
 mother , a true wife : in our absence she neglect her health 
 and die . " today they think : " she be not as true , as 
 dear , as we suppose . " the desire for a more inward light 
 have find expression at last , the unseen have impact on the 
 see , and all that they could say be " Treachery . " Mrs. 
 Wilcox have be treacherous to the family , to the law of 
 property , to her own write word . how do she expect 
 howard end to be convey to Miss Schlegel ? be her 
 husband , to whom it legally belong , to make it over to she 
 as a free gift ? be the say Miss Schlegel to have a life 
 interest in it , or to own it absolutely ? be there to be no 
 compensation for the garage and other improvement that they 
 have make under the assumption that all would be theirs some 
 day ? treacherous ! treacherous and absurd ! when we think 
 the dead both treacherous and absurd , we have go far 
 towards reconcile ourselves to their departure . that 
 note , scribble in pencil , send through the matron , be 
 unbusinesslike as well as cruel , and decrease at once the 
 value of the woman who have write it . 

 " ah , well ! " say Mr. Wilcox , rise from the table . " I 
 should not   have think it possible . " 

 " mother could not   have mean it , " say Evie , still frown . 

 " no , my girl , of course not . " 

 " Mother believe so in ancestor too - it be not   like she 
 to leave anything to an outsider , who would never appreciate . " 

 " the whole thing be unlike she , " he announce . " if Miss 
 Schlegel have be poor , if she have want a house , I could 
 understand it a little . but she have a house of her own . 
 why should she want another ? she would not   have any use of 
 howard End . " 

 " that time may prove , " murmur Charles . 

 " how ? " ask his sister . 

 " presumably she know - mother will have tell she . she 
 get twice or three time into the nursing home . presumably 
 she be await development . " 

 " what a horrid woman ! " and dolly , who have recover , 
 cry , " why , she may be come down to turn we out now ! " 

 Charles put she right . " I wish she would , " he say 
 ominously . " I could then deal with she . " 

 " so could I , " echo his father , who be feel rather 
 in the cold . Charles have be kind in undertake the 
 funeral arrangement and in tell he to eat his 
 breakfast , but the boy as he grow up be a little 
 dictatorial , and assume the post of chairman too readily . 
 " I could deal with she , if she come , but she will not   come . 
 you be all a bit hard on Miss Schlegel . " 

 " that Paul business be pretty scandalous , though . " 

 " I want no more of the Paul business , Charles , as I say 
 at the time , and besides , it be quite apart from this 
 business . Margaret Schlegel have be officious and tiresome 
 during this terrible week , and we have all suffer under 
 she , but upon my soul she be honest . she be not in collusion 
 with the matron . I be absolutely certain of it . nor be she 
 with the doctor . I be equally certain of that . she do not 
 hide anything from we , for up to that very afternoon she be 
 as ignorant as we be . she , like ourselves , be a dupe - " 
 he stop for a moment . " you see , Charles , in her terrible 
 pain your poor mother put we all in false position . Paul 
 would not have leave England , you would not have go to 
 Italy , nor Evie and I into Yorkshire , if only we have know . 
 well , Miss Schlegel 's position have be equally false . take 
 all in all , she have not come out of it badly . " 

 Evie say : " but those chrysanthemum - " 

 " or come down to the funeral at all - " echo dolly . 

 " why should not   she come down ? she have the right to , and 
 she stand far back among the Hilton woman . the 
 flower - certainly we should not have send such flower , but 
 they may have seem the right thing to she , Evie , and for 
 all you know they may be the custom in Germany . " 

 " oh , I forget she be not   really english , " cry Evie . 
 " that would explain a lot . " 

 " she be a cosmopolitan , " say Charles , look at his 
 watch . " I admit I be rather down on cosmopolitan . my 
 fault , doubtless . I can not stand they , and a german 
 cosmopolitan be the limit . I think that be about all , be not 
 it ? I want to run down and see Chalkeley . a bicycle will 
 do . and , by the way , I wish you would speak to Crane some 
 time . I be certain he be have my new car out . " 

 " have he do it any harm ? " 

 " no . " 

 " in that case I shall let it pass . it be not worth while 
 have a row . " 

 Charles and his father sometimes disagree . but they 
 always part with an increase regard for one another , and 
 each desire no doughty comrade when it be necessary to 
 voyage for a little past the emotion . so the sailor of 
 Ulysses voyage past the Sirens , have first stop one 
 another 's ear with wool . 


 chapter 12 

 Charles need not have be anxious . Miss Schlegel have never 
 hear of his mother 's strange request . she be to hear of 
 it in after year , when she have build up her life 
 differently , and it be to fit into position as the 
 headstone of the corner . her mind be bent on other 
 question now , and by she also it would have be reject 
 as the fantasy of an invalid . 

 she be part from these Wilcoxes for the second 
 time . Paul and his mother , ripple and great wave , have 
 flow into her life and ebb out of it for ever . the 
 ripple have leave no trace behind : the wave have strew at her 
 foot fragment tear from the unknown . a curious seeker , she 
 stand for a while at the verge of the sea that tell so 
 little , but tell a little , and watch the outgoing of this 
 last tremendous tide . her friend have vanish in agony , but 
 not , she believe , in degradation . her withdrawal have 
 hint at other thing besides disease and pain . some leave 
 our life with tear , other with an insane frigidity ; Mrs. 
 Wilcox have take the middle course , which only rare nature 
 can pursue . she have keep proportion . she have tell a little 
 of her grim secret to her friend , but not too much ; she have 
 shut up her heart - almost , but not entirely . it be thus , if 
 there be any rule , that we ought to die - neither as victim 
 nor as fanatic , but as the seafarer who can greet with an 
 equal eye the deep that he be enter , and the shore that 
 he must leave . 

 the last word - whatever it would be - have certainly not 
 be say in Hilton churchyard . she have not die there . a 
 funeral be not death , any more than baptism be birth or 
 marriage union . all three be the clumsy device , come 
 now too late , now too early , by which Society would register 
 the quick motion of man . in Margaret 's eye Mrs. Wilcox 
 have escape registration . she have go out of life vividly , 
 her own way , and no dust be so truly dust as the content 
 of that heavy coffin , lower with ceremonial until it 
 rest on the dust of the earth , no flower so utterly 
 waste as the chrysanthemum that the frost must have 
 wither before morning . Margaret have once say she " love 
 superstition . " it be not true . few woman have try more 
 earnestly to pierce the accretion in which body and soul 
 be enwrap . the death of Mrs. Wilcox have help she in 
 her work . she see a little more clearly than hitherto what 
 a human being be , and to what he may aspire . Truer 
 relationship gleam . perhaps the last word would be 
 hope - hope even on this side of the grave . 

 meanwhile , she could take an interest in the survivor . 
 in spite of her Christmas duty , in spite of her brother , 
 the Wilcoxes continue to play a considerable part in her 
 thought . she have see so much of they in the final week . 
 they be not " her sort , " they be often suspicious and 
 stupid , and deficient where she excel ; but collision with 
 they stimulate she , and she feel an interest that verge 
 into liking , even for Charles . she desire to protect they , 
 and often feel that they could protect she , excel where 
 she be deficient . once past the rock of emotion , they 
 know so well what to do , whom to send for ; their hand be 
 on all the rope , they have grit as well as grittiness , and 
 she value grit enormously . they lead a life that she could 
 not attain to - the outer life of " telegram and anger , " 
 which have detonate when Helen and Paul have touch in June , 
 and have detonate again the other week . to Margaret this 
 life be to remain a real force . she could not despise it , 
 as Helen and Tibby affect to do . it foster such virtue 
 as neatness , decision , and obedience , virtue of the second 
 rank , no doubt , but they have form our civilization . they 
 form character , too ; Margaret could not doubt it : they keep 
 the soul from become sloppy . how dare schlegel despise 
 Wilcoxes , when it take all sort to make a world ? 

 " do not   brood too much , " she write to Helen , " on the 
 superiority of the unseen to the seen . it be true , but to 
 brood on it be mediaeval . our business be not to contrast 
 the two , but to reconcile they . " 

 Helen reply that she have no intention of brood on 
 such a dull subject . what do her sister take she for ? the 
 weather be magnificent . she and the Mosebachs have go 
 toboggan on the only hill that Pomerania boast . it be 
 fun , but overcrowd , for the rest of Pomerania have go 
 there too . Helen love the country , and her letter glow 
 with physical exercise and poetry . she speak of the 
 scenery , quiet , yet august ; of the snow - clothe field , with 
 their scampering herd of deer ; of the river and its quaint 
 entrance into the Baltic Sea ; of the Oderberge , only three 
 hundred foot high , from which one slide all too quickly back 
 into the pomeranian plain , and yet these Oderberge be 
 real mountain , with pine - forest , stream , and view 
 complete . " it be not   size that count so much as the way 
 thing be arrange . " in another paragraph she refer to 
 Mrs. Wilcox sympathetically , but the news have not bite 
 into she . she have not realize the accessory of death , 
 which be in a sense more memorable than death itself . the 
 atmosphere of precaution and recrimination , and in the 
 midst a human body grow more vivid because it be in 
 pain ; the end of that body in Hilton churchyard ; the 
 survival of something that suggest hope , vivid in its turn 
 against life 's workaday cheerfulness ; - all these be lose 
 to Helen , who only feel that a pleasant lady could now be 
 pleasant no long . she return to Wickham Place full of 
 her own affair - she have have another proposal - and Margaret , 
 after a moment 's hesitation , be content that this should be 
 so . 

 the proposal have not be a serious matter . it be the 
 work of Fraulein Mosebach , who have conceive the large and 
 patriotic notion of win back her cousin to the 
 Fatherland by matrimony . England have play Paul Wilcox , 
 and lose ; Germany play Herr Forstmeister someone - Helen 
 could not remember his name . 

 Herr Forstmeister live in a wood , and stand on the 
 summit of the Oderberge , he have point out his house to 
 Helen , or rather , have point out the wedge of pine in 
 which it lay . she have exclaim , " oh , how lovely ! that be 
 the place for I ! " and in the evening Frieda appear in her 
 bedroom . " I have a message , dear Helen , " etc . , and so she 
 have , but have be very nice when Helen laugh ; quite 
 understand - a forest too solitary and damp - quite agree , 
 but Herr Forstmeister believe he have assurance to the 
 contrary . Germany have lose , but with good - humour ; hold 
 the manhood of the world , she feel bind to win . " and there 
 will even be someone for Tibby , " conclude Helen . " there 
 now , Tibby , think of that ; Frieda be save up a little girl 
 for you , in pig - tail and white worsted stocking , but the 
 foot of the stocking be pink , as if the little girl have 
 trodden in strawberry . I have   talk too much . my head 
 ache . now you talk . " 

 Tibby consent to talk . he too be full of his own 
 affair , for he have just be up to try for a scholarship at 
 Oxford . the man be down , and the candidate have be 
 house in various college , and have din in hall . Tibby 
 be sensitive to beauty , the experience be new , and he give 
 a description of his visit that be almost glow . the 
 august and mellow University , soak with the richness of 
 the western county that it have serve for a thousand 
 year , appeal at once to the boy 's taste : it be the kind 
 of thing he could understand , and he understand it all the 
 well because it be empty . Oxford be - Oxford : not a mere 
 receptacle for youth , like Cambridge . perhaps it want its 
 inmate to love it rather than to love one another : such at 
 all event be to be its effect on Tibby . his sister send 
 he there that he might make friend , for they know that his 
 education have be cranky , and have sever he from other 
 boy and man . he make no friend . his Oxford remain 
 Oxford empty , and he take into life with he , not the memory 
 of a radiance , but the memory of a colour scheme . 

 it please Margaret to hear her brother and sister 
 talk . they do not get on overwell as a rule . for a few 
 moment she listen to they , feel elderly and benign . 
 then something occur to she , and she interrupt : 

 " Helen , I tell you about poor Mrs. Wilcox ; that sad business ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " I have have a correspondence with her son . he be 
 wind up the estate , and write to ask I whether his 
 mother have want I to have anything . I think it good of 
 he , consider I know she so little . I say that she have 
 once speak of give I a Christmas present , but we both 
 forget about it afterwards . " 

 " I hope Charles take the hint . " 

 " yes - that be to say , her husband write later on , and 
 thank I for be a little kind to she , and actually give 
 I her silver vinaigrette . do not   you think that be 
 extraordinarily generous ? it have make I like he very 
 much . he hop that this will not be the end of our 
 acquaintance , but that you and I will go and stop with Evie 
 some time in the future . I like Mr. Wilcox . he be take 
 up his work - rubber - it be a big business . I gather he be 
 launch out rather . Charles be in it , too . Charles be 
 married - a pretty little creature , but she do not   seem 
 wise . they take on the flat , but now they have go off to 
 a house of their own . " 

 Helen , after a decent pause , continue her account of 
 Stettin . how quickly a situation change ! in June she have 
 be in a crisis ; even in November she could blush and be 
 unnatural ; now it be January , and the whole affair lay 
 forget . look back on the past six month , Margaret 
 realize the chaotic nature of our daily life , and its 
 difference from the orderly sequence that have be 
 fabricate by historian . actual life be full of false 
 clue and sign - post that lead nowhere . with infinite 
 effort we nerve ourselves for a crisis that never come . 
 the most successful career must show a waste of strength 
 that might have remove mountain , and the most unsuccessful 
 be not that of the man who be take unprepared , but of he 
 who have prepare and be never take . on a tragedy of that 
 kind our national morality be duly silent . it assume that 
 preparation against danger be in itself a good , and that 
 man , like nation , be the well for stagger through 
 life fully armed . the tragedy of preparedness have scarcely 
 be handle , save by the Greeks . life be indeed dangerous , 
 but not in the way morality would have we believe . it be 
 indeed unmanageable , but the essence of it be not a battle . 
 it be unmanageable because it be a romance , and its essence 
 be romantic beauty . 

 Margaret hop that for the future she would be less 
 cautious , not more cautious , than she have be in the past . 


 chapter 13 

 over two year pass , and the Schlegel household continue 
 to lead its life of cultured but not ignoble ease , still 
 swim gracefully on the grey tide of London . concert 
 and play sweep past they , money have be spend and renew , 
 reputation win and lose , and the city herself , emblematic 
 of their life , rise and fall in a continual flux , while her 
 shallow wash more widely against the hill of Surrey and 
 over the field of Hertfordshire . this famous building have 
 arise , that be doom . today Whitehall have be 
 transform : it would be the turn of Regent Street 
 tomorrow . and month by month the road smell more strongly 
 of petrol , and be more difficult to cross , and human 
 being hear each other speak with great difficulty , 
 breathe less of the air , and see less of the sky . nature 
 withdraw : the leaf be fall by midsummer ; the sun 
 shine through dirt with an admired obscurity . 

 to speak against London be no long fashionable . the 
 Earth as an artistic cult have have its day , and the 
 literature of the near future will probably ignore the 
 country and seek inspiration from the town . one can 
 understand the reaction . of Pan and the elemental force , 
 the public have hear a little too much - they seem victorian , 
 while London be georgian - and those who care for the earth 
 with sincerity may wait long ere the pendulum swing back to 
 she again . certainly London fascinate . one visualize it 
 as a tract of quiver grey , intelligent without purpose , 
 and excitable without love ; as a spirit that have alter 
 before it can be chronicle ; as a heart that certainly 
 beat , but with no pulsation of humanity . it lie beyond 
 everything : nature , with all her cruelty , come near to we 
 than do these crowd of man . a friend explain himself : the 
 earth be explicable - from she we come , and we must return to 
 she . but who can explain Westminster Bridge Road or 
 Liverpool Street in the morning - the city inhaling - or the 
 same thoroughfare in the evening - the city exhale she 
 exhausted air ? we reach in desperation beyond the fog , 
 beyond the very star , the voids of the universe be 
 ransack to justify the monster , and stamp with a human 
 face . London be religion 's opportunity - not the decorous 
 religion of theologian , but anthropomorphic , crude . yes , 
 the continuous flow would be tolerable if a man of our own 
 sort - not anyone pompous or tearful - be care for we up 
 in the sky . 

 the Londoner seldom understand his city until it sweep 
 he , too , away from his mooring , and Margaret 's eye be 
 not open until the lease of Wickham Place expire . she 
 have always know that it must expire , but the knowledge only 
 become vivid about nine month before the event . then the 
 house be suddenly ring with pathos . it have see so much 
 happiness . why have it to be sweep away ? in the street of 
 the city she note for the first time the architecture of 
 hurry , and hear the language of hurry on the mouth of its 
 inhabitant - clip word , formless sentence , pot 
 expression of approval or disgust . month by month thing 
 be step livelier , but to what goal ? the population 
 still rise , but what be the quality of the man bear ? the 
 particular millionaire who own the freehold of Wickham 
 Place , and desire to erect babylonian flat upon it - what 
 right have he to stir so large a portion of the quivering 
 jelly ? he be not a fool - she have hear he expose 
 socialism - but true insight begin just where his 
 intelligence end , and one gather that this be the case 
 with most millionaire . what right have such man - but 
 Margaret check herself . that way lie madness . thank 
 goodness she , too , have some money , and could purchase a new home . 

 Tibby , now in his second year at Oxford , be down for 
 the Easter vacation , and Margaret take the opportunity of 
 have a serious talk with he . do he at all know where he 
 want to live ? Tibby do not   know that he do know . do he 
 at all know what he want to do ? he be equally uncertain , 
 but when press remark that he should prefer to be quite 
 free of any profession . Margaret be not shock , but go 
 on sewing for a few minute before she reply : 

 " I be think of Mr. Vyse . he never strike I as 
 particularly happy . " 

 " ye - es , " say Tibby , and then hold his mouth open in a 
 curious quiver , as if he , too , have thought of Mr. Vyse , have 
 see round , through , over , and beyond Mr. Vyse , have weigh 
 Mr. Vyse , group he , and finally dismiss he as have 
 no possible bearing on the subject under discussion . that 
 bleat of Tibby 's infuriate Helen . but Helen be now down 
 in the dining - room prepare a speech about political 
 economy . at time her voice could be hear declaim 
 through the floor . 

 " but Mr. Vyse be rather a wretched , weedy man , do not   you 
 think ? then there be Guy . that be a pitiful business . 
 besides " - shift to the general - " every one be the well 
 for some regular work . " 

 Groans . 

 " I shall stick to it , " she continue , smile . " I be 
 not say it to educate you ; it be what I really think . I 
 believe that in the last century man have develop the 
 desire for work , and they must not starve it . it be a new 
 desire . it go with a great deal that be bad , but in itself 
 it be good , and I hope that for woman , too , ' not to work ' 
 will soon become as shocking as ' not to be marry ' be a 
 hundred year ago . " 

 " I have no experience of this profound desire to which 
 you allude , " enunciate Tibby . 

 " then we will leave the subject till you do . I be not 
 go to rattle you round . take your time . only do think 
 over the life of the man you like most , and see how they have 
 arrange they . " 

 " I like Guy and Mr. Vyse most , " say Tibby faintly , and 
 leant so far back in his chair that he extend in a 
 horizontal line from knee to throat . 

 " and do not   think I be not serious because I do not   use the 
 traditional argument - make money , a sphere await you , 
 and so on - all of which be , for various reason , can not . " she 
 sew on . " I be only your sister . I have not   any authority 
 over you , and I do not   want to have any . just to put before 
 you what I think the truth . you see " - she shake off the 
 pince - nez to which she have recently take - " in a few year 
 we shall be the same age practically , and I shall want you 
 to help I . man be so much nice than woman . " 

 " labour under such a delusion , why do you not marry ? " 

 " I sometimes jolly well think I would if I get the chance . " 

 " have nobody arst you ? " 

 " only ninny . " 

 " do people ask Helen ? " 

 " plentifully . " 

 " tell I about they . " 

 " no . " 

 " tell I about your ninny , then . " 

 " they be man who have nothing well to do , " say his 
 sister , feel that she be entitle to score this point . 
 " so take warning : you must work , or else you must pretend to 
 work , which be what I do . work , work , work if you would save 
 your soul and your body . it be honestly a necessity , dear 
 boy . look at the Wilcoxes , look at Mr. Pembroke . with all 
 their defect of temper and understanding , such man give I 
 more pleasure than many who be well equipped and I think 
 it be because they have work regularly and honestly . 

 " spare I the Wilcoxes , " he moan . 

 " I shall not . they be the right sort . " 

 " oh , goodness I , Meg ! " he protest , suddenly sit 
 up , alert and angry . tibby , for all his defect , have a 
 genuine personality . 

 " well , they be as near the right sort as you can imagine . " 

 " no , no - oh , no ! " 

 " I be think of the young son , whom I once class 
 as a ninny , but who come back so ill from Nigeria . he be 
 go out there again , Evie Wilcox tell I - out to his duty . " 

 " Duty " always elicit a groan . 

 " he do not   want the money , it be work he want , though 
 it be beastly work - dull country , dishonest native , an 
 eternal fidget over fresh water and food . a nation who can 
 produce man of that sort may well be proud . no wonder 
 England have become an empire . " 

 " EMPIRE ! " 

 " I can not   bother over result , " say Margaret , a little 
 sadly . " they be too difficult for I . I can only look at 
 the man . an Empire bore I , so far , but I can appreciate 
 the heroism that build it up . London bore I , but what 
 thousand of splendid people be labour to make London - " 

 " what it be , " he sneer . 

 " what it be , bad luck . I want activity without 
 civilization . how paradoxical ! yet I expect that be what 
 we shall find in heaven . " 

 " and I , " say Tibby , " want civilization without 
 activity , which , I expect , be what we shall find in the 
 other place . " 

 " you need not   go as far as the other place , Tibbi - kin , 
 if you want that . you can find it at Oxford . " 

 " Stupid - " 

 " if I be stupid , get I back to the house - hunting . I will 
 even live in Oxford if you like - North Oxford . I will live 
 anywhere except Bournemouth , Torquay , and Cheltenham . oh 
 yes , or Ilfracombe and Swanage and Tunbridge Wells and 
 Surbiton and Bedford . there on no account . " 

 " London , then . " 

 " I agree , but Helen rather want to get away from 
 London . however , there be no reason we should not   have a 
 house in the country and also a flat in town , provide we 
 all stick together and contribute . though of course - oh , 
 how one do maunder on , and to think , to think of the 
 people who be really poor . how do they live ? not to move 
 about the world would kill I . " 

 as she speak , the door be fling open , and Helen burst 
 in in a state of extreme excitement . 

 " oh , my dear , what do you think ? you will never guess . 
 a woman 's be here ask I for her husband . her what ? " 
  Helen be fond of supply her own surprise .   " yes , for 
 her husband , and it really be so . " 

 " not anything to do with Bracknell ? " cry Margaret , who 
 have lately take on an unemployed of that name to clean the 
 knife and boot . 

 " I offer Bracknell , and he be reject . so be 
 Tibby .   Cheer up , Tibby !   it be no one we know . I say , 
 ' Hunt , my good woman ; have a good look round , hunt under the 
 table , poke up the chimney , shake out the antimacassar . 
 Husband ? husband ? ' oh , and she so magnificently dress and 
 tinkle like a chandelier . " 

 " now , Helen , what do happen really ? " 

 " what I say . I be , as it be , orate my speech . 
 Annie open the door like a fool , and show a female 
 straight in on I , with my mouth open . then we begin - very 
 civilly . ' I want my husband , what I have reason to believe 
 be here . ' no - how unjust one be . she say ' whom , ' not 
 ' what . ' she get it perfectly . so I say , ' name , please ? ' 
 and she say , ' Lan , Miss , ' and there we be . 

 " Lan ? " 

 " Lan or Len . we be not nice about our vowel . Lanoline . " 

 " but what an extraordinary - " 

 " I say , ' my good Mrs. Lanoline , we have some grave 
 misunderstanding here . beautiful as I be , my modesty be 
 even more remarkable than my beauty , and never , never have 
 Mr. Lanoline rest his eye on mine . ' " 

 " I hope you be pleased , " say Tibby . 

 " of course , " Helen squeak . " a perfectly delightful 
 experience . oh , Mrs. Lanoline 's a dear - she ask for a 
 husband as if he be an umbrella . she mislay he Saturday 
 afternoon - and for a long time suffer no inconvenience . 
 but all night , and all this morning her apprehension grow . 
 Breakfast do not   seem the same - no , no more do lunch , and 
 so she stroll up to 2 , Wickham Place as be the most 
 likely place for the miss article . " 

 " but how on earth - " 

 " do not   begin how on earthing . ' I know what I know , ' she 
 keep repeat , not uncivilly , but with extreme gloom . in 
 vain I ask she what she do know . some know what other 
 know , and other do not , and if they do not , then other 
 again have well be careful . oh dear , she be incompetent ! 
 she have a face like a silkworm , and the dining - room reek of 
 orris - root . we chat pleasantly a little about husband , 
 and I wonder where hers be too , and advise she to go to 
 the police . she thank I . we agree that Mr. Lanoline 's 
 a notty , notty man , and have not   no business to go on the 
 lardy - da . but I think she suspect I up to the last . 
 bag I write to Aunt Juley about this . now , Meg , 
 remember - bag I. " 

 " Bag it by all mean , " murmur Margaret , put down 
 her work . " I be not sure that this be so funny , Helen . it 
 mean some horrible volcano smoking somewhere , do not   it ? " 

 " I do not   think so - she do not   really mind . the 
 admirable creature be not   capable of tragedy . " 

 " her husband may be , though , " say Margaret , move to 
 the window . 

 " oh , no , not likely . no one capable of tragedy could 
 have marry Mrs. Lanoline . " 

 " be she pretty ? " 

 " her figure may have be good once . " 

 the flat , their only outlook , hang like an ornate 
 curtain between Margaret and the welter of London . her 
 thought turn sadly to house - hunting . Wickham Place have 
 be so safe . she fear , fantastically , that her own 
 little flock might be move into turmoil and squalor , into 
 nearer contact with such episode as these . 

 " Tibby and I have again be wonder where we will live 
 next September , " she say at last . 

 " Tibby have well first wonder what he will do , " retort 
 Helen ; and that topic be resume , but with acrimony . then 
 tea come , and after tea Helen go on prepare her speech , 
 and Margaret prepare one , too , for they be go out to a 
 discussion society on the morrow . but her thought be 
 poison . Mrs. Lanoline have rise out of the abyss , like a 
 faint smell , a goblin football , tell of a life where love 
 and hatred have both decay . 


 chapter 14 

 the mystery , like so many mystery , be explain . next 
 day , just as they be dress to go out to dinner , a Mr. 
 Bast call . he be a clerk in the employment of the 
 Porphyrion Fire Insurance Company . thus much from his 
 card . he have come " about the lady yesterday . " thus much 
 from Annie , who have show he into the dining - room . 

 " cheer , child ! " cry Helen . " it be Mrs. Lanoline . " 

 Tibby be interested . the three hurried downstair , to 
 find , not the gay dog they expect , but a young man , 
 colourless , toneless , who have already the mournful eye 
 above a droop moustache that be so common in London , and 
 that haunt some street of the city like accuse 
 presence . one guess he as the third generation , 
 grandson to the shepherd or ploughboy whom civilization have 
 suck into the town ; as one of the thousand who have lose 
 the life of the body and fail to reach the life of the 
 spirit . hint of robustness survive in he , more than a 
 hint of primitive good look , and Margaret , note the spine 
 that might have be straight , and the chest that might have 
 broaden , wonder whether it pay to give up the glory of 
 the animal for a tail coat and a couple of idea . culture 
 have work in her own case , but during the last few week 
 she have doubt whether it humanize the majority , so wide 
 and so widen be the gulf that stretch between the 
 natural and the philosophic man , so many the good chap who 
 be wreck in try to cross it . she know this type very 
 well - the vague aspiration , the mental dishonesty , the 
 familiarity with the outside of book . she know the very 
 tone in which he would address she . she be only 
 unprepared for an example of her own visit - card . 

 " you would not   remember give I this , Miss Schlegel ? " 
 say he , uneasily familiar . 

 " no ; I can not   say I do . " 

 " well , that be how it happen , you see . " 

 " where do we meet , Mr. Bast ? for the minute I do not   remember . " 

 " it be a concert at the Queen 's Hall . I think you will 
 recollect , " he add pretentiously , " when I tell you that it 
 include a performance of the Fifth Symphony of Beethoven . " 

 " we hear the Fifth practically every time it be do , so 
 I be not sure - do you remember , Helen ? " 

 " be it the time the sandy cat walk round the balustrade ? " 

 he think not . 

 " then I do not   remember . that be the only Beethoven I 
 ever remember specially . " 

 " and you , if I may say so , take away my umbrella , 
 inadvertently of course . " 

 " likely enough , " Helen laugh , " for I steal umbrella 
 even oftener than I hear Beethoven . do you get it back ? " 

 " yes , thank you , Miss Schlegel . " 

 " the mistake arise out of my card , do it ? " interpose Margaret . 

 " yes , the mistake arise - it be a mistake . " 

 " the lady who call here yesterday think that you 
 be call too , and that she could find you ? " she 
 continue , push he forward , for , though he have promise 
 an explanation , he seem unable to give one . 

 " that be so , call too - a mistake . " 

 " then why - ? " begin Helen , but Margaret lay a hand on 
 her arm . 

 " I say to my wife , " he continue more rapidly - " I say 
 to Mrs. Bast , ' I have to pay a call on some friend , ' and 
 Mrs. Bast say to I , ' do go . ' while I be go , however , 
 she want I on important business , and think I have come 
 here , owe to the card , and so come after I , and I beg to 
 tender my apology , and her as well , for any inconvenience 
 we may have inadvertently cause you . " 

 " no inconvenience , " say Helen ; " but I still do not   understand . " 

 an air of evasion characterize Mr. Bast . he explain 
 again , but be obviously lie , and Helen do not   see why he 
 should get off . she have the cruelty of youth . neglecting 
 her sister 's pressure , she say , " I still do not   understand . 
 when do you say you pay this call ? " 

 " call ? what call ? " say he , star as if her question 
 have be a foolish one , a favourite device of those in mid - stream . 

 " this afternoon call . " 

 " in the afternoon , of course ! " he reply , and look at 
 Tibby to see how the repartee go . but Tibby , himself a 
 repartee , be unsympathetic , and say , " Saturday afternoon 
 or Sunday afternoon ? " 

 " S - Saturday . " 

 " really ! " say Helen ; " and you be still call on 
 Sunday , when your wife come here . a long visit . " 

 " I do not   call that fair , " say Mr. Bast , go scarlet 
 and handsome . there be fight in his eye . " I know what 
 you mean , and it be not   so . " 

 " oh , do not   let we mind , " say Margaret , distress again 
 by odour from the abyss . 

 " it be something else , " he assert , his elaborate 
 manner break down . " I be somewhere else to what you 
 think , so there ! " 

 " it be good of you to come and explain , " she say . 
 " the rest be naturally no concern of ours . " 

 " yes , but I want - I want - have you ever read the 
 ORDEAL of RICHARD FEVEREL ? " 

 Margaret nod . 

 " it be a beautiful book . I want to get back to the 
 Earth , do not   you see , like Richard do in the end . or have 
 you ever read Stevenson 's PRINCE OTTO ? " 

 Helen and Tibby groan gently . 

 " that be another beautiful book . you get back to the 
 Earth in that . I want - " he mouth affectedly . then 
 through the mist of his culture come a hard fact , hard as a 
 pebble . " I walk all the Saturday night , " say Leonard . 
 " I walk . " a thrill of approval run through the sister . 
 but culture close in again . he ask whether they have ever 
 read E. V. Lucas 's open road . 

 say Helen , " no doubt it be another beautiful book , but 
 I would rather hear about your road . " 

 " oh , I walk . " 

 " how far ? " 

 " I do not   know , nor for how long . it get too dark to see 
 my watch . " 

 " be you walk alone , may I ask ? " 

 " yes , " he say , straighten himself ; " but we would be 
 talk it over at the office . there be be a lot of talk 
 at the office lately about these thing . the fellow there 
 say one steer by the Pole Star , and I look it up in the 
 celestial atla , but once out of door everything get so mixed - " 

 " do not   talk to I about the Pole Star , " interrupt 
 Helen , who be become interested . " I know its little 
 way . it go round and round , and you go round after it . " 

 " well , I lose it entirely . first of all the street 
 lamp , then the tree , and towards morning it get cloudy . " 

 Tibby , who prefer his comedy undiluted , slip from 
 the room . he know that this fellow would never attain to 
 poetry , and do not want to hear he try . Margaret and 
 Helen remain . their brother influence they more than 
 they know : in his absence they be stir to enthusiasm 
 more easily . 

 " where do you start from ? " cry Margaret . " do tell we 
 more . " 

 " I take the Underground to Wimbledon . as I come out of 
 the office I say to myself , ' I must have a walk once in a 
 way . if I do not   take this walk now , I shall never take it . ' 
 I have a bit of dinner at Wimbledon , and then - " 

 " but not good country there , be it ? " 

 " it be gas - lamp for hour . still , I have all the 
 night , and be out be the great thing . I do get into 
 wood , too , presently . " 

 " yes , go on , " say Helen . 

 " you have   no idea how difficult uneven ground be when it be 
 dark . " 

 " do you actually go off the road ? " 

 " oh yes . I always mean to go off the road , but the 
 bad of it be that it be more difficult to find one 's way . " 

 " Mr. Bast , you be a bear adventurer , " laugh Margaret . 
 " no professional athlete would have attempt what you have 
 do . it be a wonder your walk do not   end in a broken neck . 
 whatever do your wife say ? " 

 " professional athlete never move without lantern and 
 compass , " say Helen . " besides , they can not   walk . it 
 tire they . go on . " 

 " I feel like R. L. S. you probably remember how in 
 VIRGINIBUS - " 

 " yes , but the wood . this ' ere wood . how do you get 
 out of it ? " 

 " I manage one wood , and find a road the other side 
 which go a good bit uphill . I rather fancy it be those 
 North Downs , for the road go off into grass , and I get 
 into another wood . that be awful , with gorse bush . I 
 do wish I would never come , but suddenly it get light - just 
 while I seem go under one tree . then I find a road 
 down to a station , and take the first train I could back to London . " 

 " but be the dawn wonderful ? " ask Helen . 

 with unforgettable sincerity he reply , " no . " the word 
 fly again like a pebble from the sling . down topple all 
 that have seem ignoble or literary in his talk , down 
 topple tiresome R. L. S. and the " love of the earth " and 
 his silk top - hat . in the presence of these woman Leonard 
 have arrive , and he speak with a flow , an exultation , that 
 he have seldom know . 

 " the dawn be only grey , it be nothing to mention - " 

 " just a grey evening turn upside down . I know . " 

 " - and I be too tired to lift up my head to look at it , 
 and so cold too . I be glad I do it , and yet at the time it 
 bore I more than I can say . and besides - you can believe 
 I or not as you choose - I be very hungry . that dinner at 
 Wimbledon - I mean it to last I all night like other 
 dinner . I never think that walking would make such a 
 difference . why , when you be walk you want , as it be , 
 a breakfast and luncheon and tea during the night as well , 
 and I have nothing but a packet of Woodbines . Lord , I do feel 
 bad ! look back , it be not   what you may call enjoyment . 
 it be more a case of stick to it . I do stick . I - I 
 be determine . oh , hang it all ! what be the good - I mean , 
 the good of live in a room for ever ? there one go on 
 day after day , same old game , same up and down to town , 
 until you forget there be any other game . you ought to see 
 once in a way what be go on outside , if it be only nothing 
 particular after all . " 

 " I should just think you ought , " say Helen , sit on 
 the edge of the table . 

 the sound of a lady 's voice recall he from sincerity , 
 and he say : " curious it should all come about from read 
 something of Richard Jefferies . " 

 " excuse I , Mr. Bast , but you be wrong there . it 
 do not . it come from something far great . " 

 but she could not stop he . borrow be imminent after 
 Jefferies - Borrow , Thoreau , and sorrow . R. L. S. bring up 
 the rear , and the outburst end in a swamp of book . no 
 disrespect to these great name . the fault be ours , not 
 theirs . they mean we to use they for sign - post , and be 
 not to blame if , in our weakness , we mistake the sign - post 
 for the destination . and Leonard have reach the 
 destination . he have visit the county of Surrey when 
 darkness cover its amenity , and its cosy villa have 
 re - enter ancient night . every twelve hour this miracle 
 happen , but he have trouble to go and see for himself . 
 within his cramped little mind dwelt something that be 
 great than Jefferies ' book - the spirit that lead Jefferies 
 to write they ; and his dawn , though reveal nothing but 
 monotone , be part of the eternal sunrise that show George 
 Borrow Stonehenge . 

 " then you do not   think I be foolish ? " he ask , become 
 again the naive and sweet - temper boy for whom Nature have 
 intend he . 

 " Heavens , no ! " reply Margaret . 

 " Heaven help we if we do ! " reply Helen . 

 " I be very glad you say that . now , my wife would never 
 understand - not if I explain for day . " 

 " no , it be not   foolish ! " cry Helen , her eye aflame . 
 " you have   push back the boundary ; I think it splendid of you . " 

 " you have   not be content to dream as we have - " 

 " though we have walk , too - " 

 " I must show you a picture upstairs - " 

 here the door - bell rang . the hansom have come to take 
 they to their evening party . 

 " oh , bother , not to say dash - I have forget we be 
 din out ; but do , do , come round again and have a talk . " 

 " yes , you must - do , " echo Margaret . 

 Leonard , with extreme sentiment , reply : " no , I shall 
 not . it be well like this . " 

 " why well ? " ask Margaret . 

 " no , it be well not to risk a second interview . I 
 shall always look back on this talk with you as one of the 
 fine thing in my life . really . I mean this . we can 
 never repeat . it have do I real good , and there we have 
 well leave it . " 

 " that be rather a sad view of life , surely . " 

 " thing so often get spoil . " 

 " I know , " flash Helen , " but people do not . " 

 he could not understand this . he continue in a vein 
 which mingle true imagination and false . what he say 
 be not   wrong , but it be not   right , and a false note jarred . 
 one little twist , they feel , and the instrument might be in 
 tune . one little strain , and it might be silent for ever . 
 he thank the lady very much , but he would not call 
 again . there be a moment 's awkwardness , and then Helen 
 say : " go , then ; perhaps you know well ; but never forget 
 you be well than Jefferies . " and he go . their hansom 
 catch he up at the corner , pass with a waving of hand , 
 and vanish with its accomplished load into the evening . 

 London be begin to illuminate herself against the 
 night . electric light sizzle and jag in the main 
 thoroughfare , gas - lamp in the side street glimmer a 
 canary gold or green . the sky be a crimson battlefield of 
 spring , but London be not afraid . her smoke mitigate the 
 splendour , and the cloud down Oxford Street be a 
 delicately paint ceiling , which adorn while it do not 
 distract . she have never know the clear - cut army of the 
 purer air . Leonard hurry through her tinted wonder , very 
 much part of the picture . his be a grey life , and to 
 brighten it he have rule off a few corner for romance . the 
 Miss Schlegels - or , to speak more accurately , his interview 
 with they - be to fill such a corner , nor be it by any 
 mean the first time that he have talk intimately to 
 stranger . the habit be analogous to a debauch , an outlet , 
 though the bad of outlet , for instinct that would not be 
 deny . terrify he , it would beat down his suspicion 
 and prudence until he be confide secret to people whom 
 he have scarcely see . it bring he many fear and some 
 pleasant memory . perhaps the keen happiness he have 
 ever know be during a railway journey to Cambridge , where 
 a decent - mannered undergraduate have speak to he . they have 
 get into conversation , and gradually Leonard fling reticence 
 aside , tell some of his domestic trouble , and hint at the 
 rest . the undergraduate , suppose they could start a 
 friendship , ask he to " coffee after hall , " which he 
 accept , but afterwards grow shy , and take care not to stir 
 from the commercial hotel where he lodge . he do not want 
 romance to collide with the Porphyrion , still less with 
 Jacky , and people with full , happy life be slow to 
 understand this . to the schlegel , as to the undergraduate , 
 he be an interesting creature , of whom they want to see 
 more . but they to he be denizen of Romance , who must 
 keep to the corner he have assign they , picture that must 
 not walk out of their frame . 

 his behaviour over Margaret 's visit - card have be 
 typical . his have scarcely be a tragic marriage . where 
 there be no money and no inclination to violence tragedy 
 can not be generate . he could not leave his wife , and he 
 do not want to hit she . Petulance and squalor be 
 enough . here " that card " have come in . Leonard , though 
 furtive , be untidy , and leave it lie about . Jacky find 
 it , and then begin , " what be that card , eh ? " " yes , do not   you 
 wish you know what that card be ? " " Len , who be Miss 
 Schlegel ? " etc . month pass , and the card , now as a joke , 
 now as a grievance , be hand about , get dirty and 
 dirty . it follow they when they move from Cornelia 
 Road to Tulse Hill . it be submit to third party . a 
 few inch of pasteboard , it become the battlefield on which 
 the soul of Leonard and his wife contend . why do he not 
 say , " a lady take my umbrella , another give I this that I 
 might call for my umbrella " ? because Jacky would have 
 disbelieve he ? partly , but chiefly because he be 
 sentimental . no affection gather round the card , but it 
 symbolize the life of culture , that Jacky should never 
 spoil . at night he would say to himself , " well , at all 
 event , she do not   know about that card . yah ! do she there ! " 

 Poor Jacky ! she be not a bad sort , and have a great 
 deal to bear . she draw her own conclusion - she be only 
 capable of draw one conclusion - and in the fulness of 
 time she act upon it . all the Friday Leonard have refuse 
 to speak to she , and have spend the evening observe the 
 star . on the Saturday he go up , as usual , to town , but 
 he come not back Saturday night nor Sunday morning , nor 
 Sunday afternoon . the inconvenience grow intolerable , and 
 though she be now of a retire habit , and shy of woman , 
 she go up to Wickham Place . Leonard return in her 
 absence . the card , the fatal card , be go from the page 
 of Ruskin , and he guess what have happen . 

 " well ? " he have exclaim , greet she with peal of 
 laughter . " I know where you have   be , but you do not   know 
 where I have   be . " 

 Jacky sigh , say , " Len , I do think you might explain , " 
 and resume domesticity . 

 explanation be difficult at this stage , and Leonard 
 be too silly - or it be tempting to write , too sound a chap 
 to attempt they . his reticence be not entirely the shoddy 
 article that a business life promote , the reticence that 
 pretend that nothing be something , and hide behind the 
 DAILY TELEGRAPH . the adventurer , also , be reticent , and it 
 be an adventure for a clerk to walk for a few hour in 
 darkness . you may laugh at he , you who have sleep night 
 on the veldt , with your rifle beside you and all the 
 atmosphere of adventure past . and you also may laugh who 
 think adventure silly . but do not be surprised if Leonard 
 be shy whenever he meet you , and if the schlegel rather 
 than Jacky hear about the dawn . 

 that the schlegel have not think he foolish become a 
 permanent joy . he be at his good when he think of they . 
 it buoy he as he journey home beneath fading heaven . 
 somehow the barrier of wealth have fall , and there have 
 be - he could not phrase it - a general assertion of the 
 wonder of the world . " my conviction , " say the mystic , 
 " gain infinitely the moment another soul will believe in 
 it , " and they have agree that there be something beyond 
 life 's daily grey . he take off his top - hat and smooth it 
 thoughtfully . he have hitherto suppose the unknown to be 
 book , literature , clever conversation , culture . one raise 
 oneself by study , and get upside with the world . but in 
 that quick interchange a new light dawn . be that 
 something " walk in the dark among the surburban hill ? 

 he discover that he be go bareheade down Regent 
 Street . London come back with a rush . few be about at 
 this hour , but all whom he pass look at he with a 
 hostility that be the more impressive because it be 
 unconscious . he put his hat on . it be too big ; his head 
 disappear like a pudding into a basin , the ear bend 
 outward at the touch of the curly brim . he wear it a 
 little backwards , and its effect be greatly to elongate the 
 face and to bring out the distance between the eye and the 
 moustache . thus equip , he escape criticism . no one 
 feel uneasy as he tituppe along the pavement , the heart of 
 a man tick fast in his chest . 


 chapter 15 

 the sister go out to dinner full of their adventure , and 
 when they be both full of the same subject , there be few 
 dinner - party that could stand up against they . this 
 particular one , which be all lady , have more kick in it 
 than most , but succumb after a struggle . Helen at one 
 part of the table , Margaret at the other , would talk of Mr. 
 Bast and of no one else , and somewhere about the entree 
 their monologue collide , fall ruin , and become common 
 property . nor be this all . the dinner - party be really an 
 informal discussion club ; there be a paper after it , read 
 amid coffee - cup and laughter in the drawing - room , but 
 deal more or less thoughtfully with some topic of general 
 interest . after the paper come a debate , and in this debate 
 Mr. Bast also figure , appear now as a bright spot in 
 civilization , now as a dark spot , accord to the 
 temperament of the speaker . the subject of the paper have 
 be , " how ought I to dispose of my money ? " the reader 
 profess to be a millionaire on the point of death , 
 inclined to bequeath her fortune for the foundation of local 
 art gallery , but open to conviction from other source . 
 the various part have be assign beforehand , and some of 
 the speech be amusing . the hostess assume the 
 ungrateful role of " the millionaire 's eld son , " and 
 implore her expire parent not to dislocate Society by 
 allow such vast sum to pass out of the family . money 
 be the fruit of self - denial , and the second generation have 
 a right to profit by the self - denial of the first . what 
 right have " Mr. Bast " to profit ? the National Gallery be 
 good enough for the like of he . after property have have 
 its say - a saying that be necessarily ungracious - the 
 various philanthropist step forward . something must be 
 do for " Mr. Bast " : his condition must be improve without 
 impair his independence ; he must have a free library , or 
 free tennis - court ; his rent must be pay in such a way that 
 he do not know it be be pay ; it must be make worth his 
 while to join the Territorials ; he must be forcibly part 
 from his uninspire wife , the money go to she as 
 compensation ; he must be assign a Twin Star , some member 
 of the leisure class who would watch over he ceaselessly 
  groan from Helen ; he must be give food but no clothe , 
 clothe but no food , a third - return ticket to Venice , 
 without either food or clothe when he arrive there . in 
 short , he might be give anything and everything so long as 
 it be not the money itself . 

 and here Margaret interrupt . 

 " order , order , Miss Schlegel ! " say the reader of the 
 paper . " you be here , I understand , to advise I in the 
 interest of the Society for the Preservation of Places of 
 Historic Interest or Natural Beauty . I can not have you 
 speak out of your role . it make my poor head go round , 
 and I think you forget that I be very ill . " 

 " your head will not   go round if only you will listen to my 
 argument , " say Margaret . " why not give he the money 
 itself . you be suppose to have about thirty thousand a year . " 

 " have I ? I think I have a million . " 

 " be not   a million your capital ? dear I ! we ought to 
 have settle that . still , it do not   matter . whatever 
 you have   get , I order you to give as many poor man as you can 
 three hundred a year each . " 

 " but that would be pauperize they , " say an earnest 
 girl , who like the schlegel , but think they a little 
 unspiritual at time . 

 " not if you give they so much . a big windfall would not 
 pauperize a man . it be these little driblet , distribute 
 among too many , that do the harm . money 's educational . 
 it be far more educational than the thing it buy . " there 
 be a protest . " in a sense , " add Margaret , but the 
 protest continue . " well , be not   the most civilized thing 
 go , the man who have learn to wear his income properly ? " 

 " exactly what your Mr. Basts will not   do . " 

 " give they a chance . give they money . do not   dole they 
 out poetry - book and railway - ticket like baby . give they 
 the wherewithal to buy these thing . when your socialism 
 come it may be different , and we may think in term of 
 commodity instead of cash . till it come give people 
 cash , for it be the warp of civilization , whatever the woof 
 may be . the imagination ought to play upon money and 
 realize it vividly , for it be the - the second most important 
 thing in the world . it be so sluffe over and hush up , 
 there be so little clear thinking - oh , political economy , of 
 course , but so few of we think clearly about our own private 
 income , and admit that independent thought be in nine 
 case out of ten the result of independent mean . money : 
 give Mr. Bast money , and do not   bother about his ideal . 
 he will pick up those for himself . " 

 she leant back while the more earnest member of the 
 club begin to misconstrue she . the female mind , though 
 cruelly practical in daily life , can not bear to hear ideal 
 belittle in conversation , and Miss Schlegel be ask 
 however she could say such dreadful thing , and what it 
 would profit Mr. Bast if he gain the whole world and lose 
 his own soul . she answer , " nothing , but he would not gain 
 his soul until he have gain a little of the world . " then 
 they say , " no they do not believe it , " and she admit 
 that an overworked clerk may save his soul in the 
 superterrestrial sense , where the effort will be take for 
 the deed , but she deny that he will ever explore the 
 spiritual resource of this world , will ever know the rarer 
 joy of the body , or attain to clear and passionate 
 intercourse with his fellow . other have attack the 
 fabric of Society - Property , interest , etc . ; she only fix 
 her eye on a few human being , to see how , under present 
 condition , they could be make happy . do good to 
 humanity be useless : the many - colour effort thereto 
 spread over the vast area like film and result in an 
 universal grey . to do good to one , or , as in this case , to 
 a few , be the utmost she dare hope for . 

 between the idealist , and the political economist , 
 Margaret have a bad time . disagree elsewhere , they agree 
 in disown she , and in keep the administration of the 
 millionaire 's money in their own hand . the earnest girl 
 bring forward a scheme of " personal supervision and mutual 
 help , " the effect of which be to alter poor people until 
 they become exactly like people who be not so poor . the 
 hostess pertinently remark that she , as eld son , might 
 surely rank among the millionaire 's legatee . Margaret 
 weakly admit the claim , and another claim be at once set 
 up by Helen , who declare that she have be the 
 millionaire 's housemaid for over forty year , overfed and 
 underpaid ; be nothing to be do for she , so corpulent and 
 poor ? the millionaire then read out her last will and 
 testament , in which she leave the whole of her fortune to the 
 Chancellor of the Exchequer . then she die . the serious 
 part of the discussion have be of high merit than the 
 playful - in a man 's debate be the reverse more 
 general ? - but the meeting break up hilariously enough , and 
 a dozen happy lady disperse to their home . 

 Helen and Margaret walk the earnest girl as far as 
 Battersea Bridge Station , argue copiously all the way . 
 when she have go they be conscious of an alleviation , and 
 of the great beauty of the evening . they turn back 
 towards Oakley Street . the lamp and the plane - tree , 
 follow the line of the embankment , strike a note of 
 dignity that be rare in english city . the seat , almost 
 desert , be here and there occupy by gentlefolk in 
 evening dress , who have stroll out from the house behind 
 to enjoy fresh air and the whisper of the rise tide . 
 there be something continental about Chelsea Embankment . it 
 be an open space use rightly , a blessing more frequent in 
 Germany than here . as Margaret and Helen sit down , the city 
 behind they seem to be a vast theatre , an opera - house in 
 which some endless trilogy be perform , and they 
 themselves a pair of satisfied subscriber , who do not mind 
 lose a little of the second act . 

 " Cold ? " 

 " no . " 

 " tired ? " 

 " do not   matter . " 

 the earnest girl 's train rumble away over the bridge . 

 " I say , Helen - " 

 " well ? " 

 " be we really go to follow up Mr. Bast ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " I think we will not . " 

 " as you like . " 

 " it be no good , I think , unless you really mean to know 
 people . the discussion bring that home to I . we get on 
 well enough with he in a spirit of excitement , but think of 
 rational intercourse . we must not   play at friendship . no , 
 it be no good . " 

 " there be Mrs. Lanoline , too , " Helen yawn . " so dull . " 

 " just so , and possibly bad than dull . " 

 " I should like to know how he get hold of your card . " 

 " but he say - something about a concert and an umbrella - " 

 " then do the card see the wife - " 

 " Helen , come to bed . " 

 " no , just a little long , it be so beautiful . tell I ; 
 oh yes ; do you say money be the warp of the world ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " then what be the woof ? " 

 " very much what one choose , " say Margaret . " it be 
 something that be not   money - one can not   say more . " 

 " walk at night ? " 

 " probably . " 

 " for Tibby , Oxford ? " 

 " it seem so . " 

 " for you ? " 

 " now that we have to leave Wickham Place , I begin to 
 think it be that . for Mrs. Wilcox it be certainly howard End . " 

 One 's own name will carry immense distance . Mr. 
 Wilcox , who be sit with friend many seat away , hear 
 his , rise to his foot , and stroll along towards the speaker . 

 " it be sad to suppose that place may ever be more 
 important than people , " continue Margaret . 

 " why , Meg ? they be so much nice generally . I would rather 
 think of that forester 's house in Pomerania than of the fat 
 Herr Forstmeister who live in it . " 

 " I believe we shall come to care about people less and 
 less , Helen . the more people one know the easy it 
 become to replace they . it be one of the curse of London . 
 I quite expect to end my life care most for a place . " 

 here Mr. Wilcox reach they . it be several week 
 since they have meet . 

 " how do you do ? " he cry . " I think I recognize your 
 voice . whatever be you both do down here ? " 

 his tone be protective . he imply that one ought 
 not to sit out on Chelsea Embankment without a male escort . 
 Helen resent this , but Margaret accept it as part of the 
 good man 's equipment . 

 " what an age it be since I have   see you , Mr. Wilcox . I 
 meet Evie in the Tube , though , lately . I hope you have good 
 news of your son . " 

 " Paul ? " say Mr. Wilcox , extinguish his cigarette , 
 and sit down between they . " oh , Paul 's all right . we 
 have a line from Madeira . he will be at work again by now . " 

 " Ugh - " say Helen , shudder from complex cause . 

 " I beg your pardon ? " 

 " be not   the climate of Nigeria too horrible ? " 

 " someone be get to go , " he say simply . " England will 
 never keep her trade overseas unless she be prepared to make 
 sacrifice . unless we get firm in West Africa , Ger - untold 
 complication may follow . now tell I all your news . " 

 " oh , we have   have a splendid evening , " cry Helen , who 
 always wake up at the advent of a visitor . " we belong to a 
 kind of club that read paper , Margaret and I - all woman , 
 but there be a discussion after . this evening it be on how 
 one ought to leave one 's money - whether to one 's family , or 
 to the poor , and if so how - oh , most interesting . " 

 the man of business smile . since his wife 's death he 
 have almost double his income . he be an important figure 
 at last , a reassuring name on company prospectus , and life 
 have treat he very well . the world seem in his grasp as 
 he listen to the River Thames , which still flow inland 
 from the sea . so wonderful to the girl , it hold no 
 mystery for he . he have help to shorten its long tidal 
 trough by take share in the lock at Teddington , and if he 
 and other capitalist think good , some day it could be 
 shorten again . with a good dinner inside he and an 
 amiable but academic woman on either flank , he feel that his 
 hand be on all the rope of life , and that what he do 
 not know could not be worth know . 

 " sound a most original entertainment ! " he exclaim , 
 and laugh in his pleasant way . " I wish Evie would go to 
 that sort of thing . but she have not   the time . she be take 
 to breed Aberdeen terrier - jolly little dog . 

 " I expect we would well be do the same , really . " 

 " we pretend we be improve ourselves , you see , " say 
 Helen a little sharply , for the Wilcox glamour be not of the 
 kind that return , and she have bitter memory of the day 
 when a speech such as he have just make would have impress 
 she favourably . " we suppose it be a good thing to waste an 
 evening once a fortnight over a debate , but , as my sister 
 say , it may be well to breed dog . " 

 " not at all . I do not   agree with your sister . there be 
 nothing like a debate to teach one quickness . I often wish 
 I have go in for they when I be a youngster . it would 
 have help I no end . " 

 " Quickness - ? " 

 " yes . Quickness in argument . time after time I have 
 miss scoring a point because the other man have have the 
 gift of the gab and I have not . oh , I believe in these discussion . " 

 the patronizing tone think Margaret , come well enough 
 from a man who be old enough to be their father . she have 
 always maintain that Mr. Wilcox have a charm . in time of 
 sorrow or emotion his inadequacy have pain she , but it be 
 pleasant to listen to he now , and to watch his thick brown 
 moustache and high forehead confront the star . but 
 Helen be nettle . the aim of their debate she imply be 
 Truth . 

 " oh yes , it do not   much matter what subject you take , " 
 say he . 

 Margaret laugh and say , " but this be go to be far 
 well than the debate itself . " Helen recover herself and 
 laugh too . " no , I will not   go on , " she declare . " I will just 
 put our special case to Mr. Wilcox . " 

 " about Mr. Bast ? yes , do . he will be more lenient to a 
 special case . 

 " but , Mr. Wilcox , do first light another cigarette . 
 it be this . we have   just come across a young fellow , who be 
 evidently very poor , and who seem interest - " 

 " what be his profession ? " 

 " Clerk . " 

 " what in ? " 

 " do you remember , Margaret ? " 

 " Porphyrion Fire Insurance Company . " 

 " oh yes ; the nice people who give Aunt Juley a new 
 hearth - rug . he seem interesting , in some way very , and 
 one wish one could help he . he be married to a wife whom 
 he do not   seem to care for much . he like book , and what 
 one may roughly call adventure , and if he have a chance - but 
 he be so poor . he live a life where all the money be apt 
 to go on nonsense and clothe . one be so afraid that 
 circumstance will be too strong for he and that he will 
 sink . well , he get mix up in our debate . he be not   the 
 subject of it , but it seem to bear on his point . suppose 
 a millionaire die , and desire to leave money to help such 
 a man . how should he be help ? should he be give three 
 hundred pound a year direct , which be Margaret 's plan ? 
 Most of they think this would pauperize he . should he 
 and those like he be give free library ? I say ' no ! ' he 
 do not   want more book to read , but to read book rightly . 
 my suggestion be he should be give something every year 
 towards a summer holiday , but then there be his wife , and 
 they say she would have to go too . nothing seem quite 
 right ! now what do you think ? imagine that you be a 
 millionaire , and want to help the poor . what would you do ? " 

 Mr. Wilcox , whose fortune be not so very far below the 
 standard indicate , laugh exuberantly . " my dear Miss 
 Schlegel , I will not rush in where your sex have be unable 
 to tread . I will not add another plan to the numerous 
 excellent one that have be already suggest . my only 
 contribution be this : let your young friend clear out of the 
 Porphyrion Fire Insurance Company with all possible speed . " 

 " why ? " say Margaret . 

 he lower his voice . " this be between friend . it will 
 be in the Receiver 's hand before Christmas . it will smash , " 
 he add , think that she have not understand . 

 " dear I , Helen , listen to that . and he will have to get 
 another place ! " 

 " will have ? let he leave the ship before it sink . 
 let he get one now . " 

 " rather than wait , to make sure ? " 

 " decidedly . " 

 " why be that ? " 

 again the olympian laugh , and the lowered voice . 
 " naturally the man who be in a situation when he apply 
 stand a well chance , be in a strong position , than the 
 man who be not . it look as if he be worth something . I know 
 by myself -   this be let you into the State secret   - it 
 affect an employer greatly . human nature , I be afraid . " 

 " I have not   think of that , " murmur Margaret , while 
 Helen say , " our human nature appear to be the other way 
 round . we employ people because they be unemployed . the 
 boot man , for instance . " 

 " and how do he clean the boot ? " 

 " not well , " confess Margaret . 

 " there you be ! " 

 " then do you really advise we to tell this youth - " 

 " I advise nothing , " he interrupt , glance up and down 
 the Embankment , in case his indiscretion have be 
 overheard . " I ought not   to have speak - but I happen to 
 know , be more or less behind the scene . the 
 Porphyrion 's a bad , bad concern - now , do not   say I say so . 
 it be outside the Tariff Ring . " 

 " certainly I will not   say . in fact , I do not   know what that 
 mean . " 

 " I think an insurance company never smash , " be 
 Helen 's contribution . " do not   the other always run in and 
 save they ? " 

 " you be think of reinsurance , " say Mr. Wilcox 
 mildly . " it be exactly there that the Porphyrion be weak . 
 it have try to undercut , have be badly hit by a long 
 series of small fire , and it have not   be able to reinsure . 
 I be afraid that public company do not   save one another for love . " 

 " ' human nature , ' I suppose , " quote Helen , and he 
 laugh and agree that it be . when Margaret say that she 
 suppose that clerk , like every one else , find it 
 extremely difficult to get situation in these day , he 
 reply , " yes , extremely , " and rise to rejoin his friend . 
 he know by his own office - seldom a vacant post , and 
 hundred of applicant for it ; at present no vacant post . 

 " and how be howard end look ? " say Margaret , wish 
 to change the subject before they part . Mr. Wilcox be a 
 little apt to think one want to get something out of he . 

 " it be let . " 

 " really . and you wander homeless in long - haire 
 Chelsea ? how strange be the way of Fate ! " 

 " no ; it be let unfurnished . we have   move . " 

 " why , I think of you both as anchor there for ever . 
 Evie never tell I . " 

 " I dare say when you meet Evie the thing be not   settle . 
 we only move a week ago . Paul have rather a feeling for the 
 old place , and we hold on for he to have his holiday there ; 
 but , really , it be impossibly small . endless drawback . I 
 forget whether you have   be up to it ? " 

 " as far as the house , never . " 

 " well , howard end be one of those convert farm . 
 they do not   really do , spend what you will on they . we 
 mess away with a garage all among the wych - elm root , and 
 last year we enclose a bit of the meadow and attempt a 
 mockery . Evie get rather keen on Alpine plant . but it 
 do not   do - no , it do not   do . you remember , or your sister 
 will remember , the farm with those abominable guinea - fowl , 
 and the hedge that the old woman never would cut properly , 
 so that it all go thin at the bottom . and , inside the 
 house , the beam - and the staircase through a 
 door - picturesque enough , but not a place to live in . " he 
 glance over the parapet cheerfully . " full tide . and the 
 position be not   right either . the neighbourhood 's get 
 suburban . either be in London or out of it , I say ; so we have 
 take a house in Ducie Street , close to Sloane Street , and a 
 place right down in Shropshire - Oniton Grange . ever hear 
 of Oniton ? do come and see we - right away from everywhere , 
 up towards Wales . " 

 " what a change ! " say Margaret . but the change be in 
 her own voice , which have become most sad . " I can not   imagine 
 howard end or Hilton without you . " 

 " Hilton be not   without we , " he reply . " Charles be 
 there still . " 

 " still ? " say Margaret , who have not keep up with the 
 Charles ' . " but I think he be still at Epsom . they be 
 furnish that Christmas - one Christmas . how everything 
 alter ! I use to admire Mrs. Charles from our window very 
 often . be not   it Epsom ? " 

 " yes , but they move eighteen month ago . Charles , the 
 good chap " - his voice drop - " think I should be lonely . 
 I do not   want he to move , but he would , and take a house at 
 the other end of Hilton , down by the Six Hills . he have a 
 motor , too . there they all be , a very jolly party - he and 
 she and the two grandchild . " 

 " I manage other people 's affair so much well than 
 they manage they themselves , " say Margaret as they shake 
 hand . " when you move out of howard End , I should have 
 move Mr. Charles Wilcox into it . I should have keep so 
 remarkable a place in the family . " 

 " so it be , " he reply . " I have not   sell it , and do not 
 mean to . " 

 " no ; but none of you be there . " 

 " oh , we have   get a splendid tenant - Hamar Bryce , an 
 invalid . if Charles ever want it - but he will not . dolly be 
 so dependent on modern convenience . no , we have all 
 decide against howard End . we like it in a way , but now 
 we feel that it be neither one thing nor the other . one 
 must have one thing or the other . " 

 " and some people be lucky enough to have both . you be 
 do yourself proud , Mr. Wilcox . my congratulation . " 

 " and mine , " say Helen . 

 " do remind Evie to come and see we - two , Wickham Place . 
 we shall not   be there very long , either . " 

 " you , too , on the move ? " 

 " next September , " Margaret sigh . 

 " every one move ! good - bye . " 

 the tide have begin to ebb . Margaret leant over the 
 parapet and watch it sadly . Mr. Wilcox have forget his 
 wife , Helen her lover ; she herself be probably forget . 
 every one move . be it worth while attempt the past 
 when there be this continual flux even in the heart of man ? 

 Helen rouse she by say : " what a prosperous vulgarian 
 Mr. Wilcox have grow ! I have very little use for he in 
 these day . however , he do tell we about the Porphyrion . 
 let we write to Mr. Bast as soon as ever we get home , and 
 tell he to clear out of it at once . " 

 " do ; yes , that be worth do . let we . " 

 " let us ask he to tea . " 


 chapter 16 

 Leonard accept the invitation to tea next Saturday . but 
 he be right ; the visit prove a conspicuous failure . 

 " Sugar ? " say Margaret . 

 " Cake ? " say Helen . " the big cake or the little 
 deadlie ? I be afraid you think my letter rather odd , but 
 we will explain - we be not   odd , really - not affect , really . 
 we be over - expressive : that be all . " 

 as a lady 's lap - dog Leonard do not excel . he be not 
 an italian , still less a Frenchman , in whose blood there 
 run the very spirit of persiflage and of gracious 
 repartee . his wit be the Cockney 's ; it open no door 
 into imagination , and Helen be draw up short by " the more 
 a lady have to say , the well , " administer waggishly . 

 " oh , yes , " she say . 

 " lady brighten - " 

 " yes , I know . the darling be regular sunbeam . let 
 I give you a plate . " 

 " how do you like your work ? " interpose Margaret . 

 he , too , be draw up short . he would not have these 
 woman pry into his work . they be Romance , and so be 
 the room to which he have at last penetrate , with the queer 
 sketch of people bath upon its wall , and so be the 
 very tea - cup , with their delicate border of wild 
 strawberry . but he would not let Romance interfere with 
 his life . there be the devil to pay then . 

 " oh , well enough , " he answer . 

 " your company be the Porphyrion , be not   it ? " 

 " yes , that be so " - become rather offended . " it be funny 
 how thing get round . " 

 " why funny ? " ask Helen , who do not follow the 
 working of his mind . " it be write as large as life on 
 your card , and consider we write to you there , and that 
 you reply on the stamp paper - " 

 " would you call the Porphyrion one of the big Insurance 
 company ? " pursue Margaret . 

 " it depend what you call big . " 

 " I mean by big , a solid , well - establish concern , that 
 offer a reasonably good career to its employe . " 

 " I could not   say - some would tell you one thing and 
 other another , " say the employe uneasily . " for my own 
 part " - he shake his head - " I only believe half I hear . not 
 that even ; it be safe . those clever one come to the bad 
 grief , I have   often notice . ah , you can not   be too careful . " 

 he drank , and wipe his moustache , which be go to be 
 one of those moustache that always droop into 
 tea - cup - more bother than they be worth , surely , and not 
 fashionable either . 

 " I quite agree , and that be why I be curious to know : be 
 it a solid , well - establish concern ? " 

 Leonard have no idea . he understand his own corner of 
 the machine , but nothing beyond it . he desire to confess 
 neither knowledge nor ignorance , and under these 
 circumstance , another motion of the head seem safe . to 
 he , as to the british public , the Porphyrion be the 
 Porphyrion of the advertisement - a giant , in the classical 
 style , but drape sufficiently , who hold in one hand a 
 burn torch , and point with the other to St. Paul 's and 
 Windsor Castle . a large sum of money be inscribe below , 
 and you draw your own conclusion . this giant cause 
 Leonard to do arithmetic and write letter , to explain the 
 regulation to new client , and re - explain they to old 
 one . a giant be of an impulsive morality - one know that 
 much . he would pay for Mrs. Munt 's hearth - rug with 
 ostentatious haste , a large claim he would repudiate 
 quietly , and fight court by court . but his true fighting 
 weight , his antecedent , his amour with other member of 
 the commercial Pantheon - all these be as uncertain to 
 ordinary mortal as be the escapade of Zeus . while the 
 god be powerful , we learn little about they . it be only 
 in the day of their decadence that a strong light beat 
 into heaven . 

 " we be tell the Porphyrion 's no go , " blurt Helen . 
 " we want to tell you ; that be why we write . " 

 " a friend of ours do think that it be unsufficiently 
 reinsure , " say Margaret . 

 now Leonard have his clue . he must praise the 
 Porphyrion . " you can tell your friend , " he say , " that he be 
 quite wrong . " 

 " oh , good ! " 

 the young man colour a little . in his circle to be 
 wrong be fatal . the Miss Schlegels do not mind be 
 wrong . they be genuinely glad that they have be 
 misinformed . to they nothing be fatal but evil . 

 " wrong , so to speak , " he add . 

 " how ' so to speak ' ? " 

 " I mean I would not   say he be right altogether . " 

 but this be a blunder . " then he be right partly , " say 
 the eld woman , quick as lightning . 

 Leonard reply that every one be right partly , if it 
 come to that . 

 " Mr. Bast , I do not   understand business , and I dare say 
 my question be stupid , but can you tell I what make a 
 concern ' right ' or ' wrong ' ? " 

 Leonard sit back with a sigh . 

 " our friend , who be also a business man , be so 
 positive . he say before Christmas - " 

 " and advise you to clear out of it , " conclude Helen . 
 " but I do not   see why he should know well than you do . " 

 Leonard rub his hand . he be tempt to say that he 
 know nothing about the thing at all . but a commercial 
 training be too strong for he . nor could he say it be a 
 bad thing , for this would be give it away ; nor yet that it 
 be good , for this would be give it away equally . he 
 attempt to suggest that it be something between the two , 
 with vast possibility in either direction , but break down 
 under the gaze of four sincere eye . as yet he scarcely 
 distinguish between the two sister . one be more 
 beautiful and more lively , but " the Miss schlegel " still 
 remain a composite indian god , whose wave arm and 
 contradictory speech be the product of a single mind . 

 " one can but see , " he remark , add , " as Ibsen say , 
 ' thing happen . ' " he be itch to talk about book and 
 make the most of his romantic hour . Minute after minute 
 slip away , while the lady , with imperfect skill , 
 discuss the subject of reinsurance or praise their 
 anonymous friend . Leonard grow annoy - perhaps rightly . 
 he make vague remark about not be one of those who 
 mind their affair be talk over by other , but they 
 do not take the hint . man might have show more tact . 
 woman , however tactful elsewhere , be heavy - handed here . 
 they can not see why we should shroud our income and our 
 prospect in a veil . " how much exactly have you , and how 
 much do you expect to have next June ? " and these be woman 
 with a theory , who hold that reticence about money matter 
 be absurd , and that life would be truer if each would state 
 the exact size of the golden island upon which he stand , 
 the exact stretch of warp over which he throw the woof that 
 be not money . how can we do justice to the pattern 
 otherwise ? 

 and the precious minute slip away , and Jacky and 
 squalor come nearer . at last he could bear it no long , 
 and break in , recite the name of book feverishly . there 
 be a moment of pierce joy when Margaret say , " so you 
 like Carlyle , " and then the door open , and " Mr. Wilcox , 
 Miss Wilcox " enter , precede by two prance puppy . 

 " oh , the dear ! oh , Evie , how too impossibly sweet ! " 
 scream Helen , fall on her hand and knee . 

 " we bring the little fellow round , " say Mr. Wilcox . 

 " I breed them myself . " 

 " oh , really ! Mr. Bast , come and play with puppy . " 

 " I have   get to be go now , " say Leonard sourly . 

 " but play with puppy a little first . " 

 " this be Ahab , that be Jezebel , " say Evie , who be one 
 of those who name animal after the less successful 
 character of Old Testament history . 

 " I have   get to be go . " 

 Helen be too much occupy with puppy to notice he . 

 " Mr. Wilcox , Mr. Ba - must you be really ? good - bye ! " 

 " come again , " say Helen from the floor . 

 then Leonard 's gorge arise . why should he come again ? 
 what be the good of it ? he say roundly : " no , I shall not ; I 
 know it would be a failure . " 

 Most people would have let he go . " a little mistake . 
 we try know another class - impossible . " but the 
 schlegel have never play with life . they have attempt 
 friendship , and they would take the consequence . Helen 
 retort , " I call that a very rude remark . what do you want 
 to turn on I like that for ? " and suddenly the drawing - room 
 re - echo to a vulgar row . 

 " you ask I why I turn on you ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " what do you want to have I here for ? " 

 " to help you , you silly boy ! " cry Helen . " and do not   shout . " 

 " I do not   want your patronage . I do not   want your tea . I 
 be quite happy . what do you want to unsettle I for ? " he 
 turn to Mr. Wilcox . " I put it to this gentleman . I ask 
 you , sir , be to have my brain pick ? " 

 Mr. Wilcox turn to Margaret with the air of humorous 
 strength that he could so well command . " be we intrude , 
 Miss Schlegel ? can we be of any use or shall we go ? " 

 but Margaret ignore he . 

 " I be connect with a lead insurance company , sir . I 
 receive what I take to be an invitation from these - lady " 
  he drawl the word . " I come , and it be to have my brain 
 pick . I ask you , be it fair ? " 

 " highly unfair , " say Mr. Wilcox , draw a gasp from 
 Evie , who know that her father be become dangerous . 

 " there , you hear that ? most unfair , the gentleman 
 say . there ! not content with " - pointing at Margaret - " you 
 can not   deny it . " his voice rise : he be fall into the 
 rhythm of a scene with Jacky . " but as soon as I be useful 
 it be a very different thing . ' oh yes , send for he . 
 cross - question he . pick his brain . ' oh yes . now , take I 
 on the whole , I be a quiet fellow : I be law - abide , I do not 
 wish any unpleasantness ; but I - I - " 

 " you , " say Margaret - " you - you - " 

 Laughter from Evie , as at a repartee . 

 " you be the man who try to walk by the Pole Star . " 

 More laughter . 

 " you see the sunrise . " 

 Laughter . 

 " you try to get away from the fog that be stifle 
 we all - away past book and house to the truth . you be 
 look for a real home . " 

 " I fail to see the connection , " say Leonard , hot with 
 stupid anger . 

 " so do I. " there be a pause . " you be that last 
 Sunday - you be this today . Mr. Bast ! I and my sister have 
 talk you over . we want to help you ; we also suppose 
 you might help we . we do not have you here out of 
 charity - which bore we - but because we hop there would be 
 a connection between last Sunday and other day . what be 
 the good of your star and tree , your sunrise and the wind , 
 if they do not enter into our daily life ? they have never 
 enter into mine , but into your , we think - have not   we 
 all to struggle against life 's daily greyness , against 
 pettiness , against mechanical cheerfulness , against 
 suspicion ? I struggle by remember my friend ; other I 
 have know by remember some place - some beloved place or 
 tree - we think you one of these . " 

 " of course , if there be be any misunderstanding , " 
 mumble Leonard , " all I can do be to go . but I beg to 
 state - " he pause . Ahab and Jezebel dance at his boot 
 and make he look ridiculous . " you be pick my brain 
 for official information - I can prove it - I - he blow his 
 nose and leave they . 

 " can I help you now ? " say Mr. Wilcox , turn to 
 Margaret . " may I have one quiet word with he in the hall ? " 

 " Helen , go after he - do anything - anything - to make the 
 noodle understand . " 

 Helen hesitate . 

 " but really - " say their visitor . " ought she to ? " 

 at once she go . 

 he resume . " I would have chime in , but I feel that 
 you could polish he off for yourself - I do not 
 interfere . you be splendid , Miss Schlegel - absolutely 
 splendid . you can take my word for it , but there be very 
 few woman who could have manage he . " 

 " oh yes , " say Margaret distractedly . 

 " bowl he over with those long sentence be what 
 fetch I , " cry Evie . 

 " yes , indeed , " chuckle her father ; " all that part about 
 ' mechanical cheerfulness ' - oh , fine ! " 

 " I be very sorry , " say Margaret , collect herself . 
 " he be a nice creature really . I can not think what set he 
 off . it have be most unpleasant for you . " 

 " oh , I do not   mind . " then he change his mood . he 
 ask if he might speak as an old friend , and , permission 
 give , say : " ought not   you really to be more careful ? " 

 Margaret laugh , though her thought still stray 
 after Helen . " do you realize that it be all your fault ? " she 
 say . " you be responsible . " 

 " I ? " 

 " this be the young man whom we be to warn against the 
 Porphyrion . we warn he , and - look ! " 

 Mr. Wilcox be annoy . " I hardly consider that a fair 
 deduction , " he say . 

 " obviously unfair , " say Margaret . " I be only think 
 how tangled thing be . it be our fault mostly - neither 
 your nor his . " 

 " not his ? " 

 " no . " 

 " Miss Schlegel , you be too kind . " 

 " yes , indeed , " nod Evie , a little contemptuously . 

 " you behave much too well to people , and then they 
 impose on you . I know the world and that type of man , and 
 as soon as I enter the room I see you have not be 
 treat he properly . you must keep that type at a 
 distance . otherwise they forget themselves . Sad , but 
 true . they be not   our sort , and one must face the fact . " 

 " ye - es . " 

 " do admit that we should never have have the outburst if 
 he be a gentleman . " 

 " I admit it willingly , " say Margaret , who be pace up 
 and down the room . " a gentleman would have keep his 
 suspicion to himself . " 

 Mr. Wilcox watch she with a vague uneasiness . 

 " what do he suspect you of ? " 

 " of want to make money out of he . " 

 " intolerable brute ! but how be you to benefit ? " 

 " exactly . how indeed ! just horrible , corroding 
 suspicion . one touch of thought or of goodwill would have 
 brush it away . just the senseless fear that do make man 
 intolerable brute . " 

 " I come back to my original point . you ought to be more 
 careful , Miss Schlegel . your servant ought to have order 
 not to let such people in . " 

 she turn to he frankly . " let I explain exactly why 
 we like this man , and want to see he again . " 

 " that be your clever way of thinking . I shall never 
 believe you like he . " 

 " I do . firstly , because he care for physical 
 adventure , just as you do . yes , you go motor and 
 shooting ; he would like to go camp out . secondly , he 
 care for something special in adventure . it be quick to 
 call that special something poetry - " 

 " oh , he be one of that writer sort . " 

 " no - oh no ! I mean he may be , but it would be loathsome 
 stiff . his brain be fill with the husk of book , 
 culture - horrible ; we want he to wash out his brain and go 
 to the real thing . we want to show he how he may get 
 upside with life . as I say , either friend or the 
 country , some " - she hesitate - " either some very dear person 
 or some very dear place seem necessary to relieve life 's 
 daily grey , and to show that it be grey . if possible , one 
 should have both . " 

 some of her word run past Mr. Wilcox . he let they run 
 past . other he catch and criticize with admirable lucidity . 

 " your mistake be this , and it be a very common mistake . 
 this young bounder have a life of his own . what right have 
 you to conclude it be an unsuccessful life , or , as you call 
 it , ' grey ' ? " 

 " because - " 

 " one minute . you know nothing about he . he probably 
 have his own joy and interest - wife , child , snug little 
 home . that be where we practical fellow " - he smile - " be 
 more tolerant than you intellectual . we live and let live , 
 and assume that thing be jog on fairly well elsewhere , 
 and that the ordinary plain man may be trust to look after 
 his own affair . I quite grant - I look at the face of the 
 clerk in my own office , and observe they to be dull , but I 
 do not   know what be go on beneath . so , by the way , with 
 London . I have hear you rail against London , Miss 
 Schlegel , and it seem a funny thing to say but I be very 
 angry with you . what do you know about London ? you only 
 see civilization from the outside . I do not   say in your 
 case , but in too many case that attitude lead to 
 morbidity , discontent , and socialism . " 

 she admit the strength of his position , though it 
 undermine imagination . as he speak , some outpost of 
 poetry and perhaps of sympathy fall ruin , and she 
 retreat to what she call she ' second line " - to the 
 special fact of the case . 

 " his wife be an old bore , " she say simply . " he never 
 come home last Saturday night because he want to be alone , 
 and she think he be with we . " 

 " with you ? " 

 " yes . " Evie tittered . " he have not   get the cosy home that 
 you assume . he need outside interest . " 

 " naughty young man ! " cry the girl . 

 " Naughty ? " say Margaret , who hat naughtiness more 
 than sin . " when you be married , Miss Wilcox , will not   you want 
 outside interest ? " 

 " he have apparently get they , " put in Mr. Wilcox slyly . 

 " yes , indeed , Father . " 

 " he be tramp in Surrey , if you mean that , " say 
 Margaret , pace away rather crossly . 

 " oh , I dare say ! " 

 " Miss Wilcox , he be ! " 

 " M - m - m - m ! " from Mr. Wilcox , who think the episode 
 amusing , if risque . with most lady he would not have 
 discuss it , but he be trade on Margaret 's reputation as 
 an emanicipated woman . 

 " he say so , and about such a thing he would not   lie . " 

 they both begin to laugh . 

 " that be where I differ from you . man lie about their 
 position and prospect , but not about a thing of that sort . " 

 he shake his head . " Miss Schlegel , excuse I , but I 
 know the type . " 

 " I say before - he be not   a type . he care about 
 adventure rightly . he be certain that our smug existence 
 be not   all . he be vulgar and hysterical and bookish , but I 
 do not   think that sum he up . there be manhood in he as 
 well . yes , that be what I be try to say . he be a real man . " 

 as she speak their eye meet , and it be as if Mr. 
 Wilcox 's defence fall . she see back to the real man in 
 he . unwittingly she have touch his emotion . a woman and 
 two man - they have form the magic triangle of sex , and the 
 male be thrill to jealousy , in case the female be 
 attract by another male . love , say the ascetic , reveal 
 our shameful kinship with the beast . be it so : one can 
 bear that ; jealousy be the real shame . it be jealousy , not 
 love , that connect we with the farmyard intolerably , and 
 call up vision of two angry cock and a complacent hen . 
 Margaret crush complacency down because she be 
 civilized . Mr. Wilcox , uncivilized , continue to feel anger 
 long after he have rebuild his defence , and be again 
 present a bastion to the world . 

 " Miss Schlegel , you be a pair of dear creature , but you 
 really must be careful in this uncharitable world . what 
 do your brother say ? " 

 " I forget . " 

 " surely he have some opinion ? " 

 " he laugh , if I remember correctly . " 

 " he be very clever , be not   he ? " say Evie , who have meet and 
 detest Tibby at Oxford . 

 " yes , pretty well - but I wonder what Helen 's doing . " 

 " she be very young to undertake this sort of thing , " 
 say Mr. Wilcox . 

 Margaret go out into the landing . she hear no sound , 
 and Mr. Bast 's topper be miss from the hall . 

 " Helen ! " she call . 

 " yes ! " reply a voice from the library . 

 " you in there ? " 

 " yes - he be go some time . " 

 Margaret go to she . " why , you be all alone , " she say . 

 " yes - it be all right , Meg - Poor , poor creature - " 

 " come back to the Wilcoxes and tell I later - Mr. W. 
 much concerned , and slightly titillate . " 

 " oh , I have   no patience with he . I hate he . poor dear 
 Mr. Bast ! he want to talk literature , and we would talk 
 business . such a muddle of a man , and yet so worth pull 
 through . I like he extraordinarily . " 

 " well do , " say Margaret , kiss she , " but come into 
 the drawing - room now , and do not   talk about he to the 
 Wilcoxes . make light of the whole thing . " 

 Helen come and behave with a cheerfulness that 
 reassure their visitor - this hen at all event be fancy - free . 

 " he be go with my blessing , " she cry , " and now for puppy . " 

 as they drive away , Mr. Wilcox say to his daughter : 

 " I be really concerned at the way those girl go on . 
 they be as clever as you make them , but unpractical - God 
 bless I ! one of these day they will go too far . girl like 
 that ought not   to live alone in London . until they marry , 
 they ought to have someone to look after they . we must look 
 in more often - we be well than no one . you like they , 
 do not   you , Evie ? " 

 Evie reply : " Helen 's right enough , but I can not   stand 
 the toothy one . and I should not   have call either of they girl . " 

 Evie have grow up handsome . dark - eye , with the glow of 
 youth under sunburn , build firmly and firm - lipped , she be 
 the good the Wilcoxes could do in the way of feminine 
 beauty . for the present , puppy and her father be the 
 only thing she love , but the net of matrimony be be 
 prepare for she , and a few day later she be attract to 
 a Mr. Percy Cahill , an uncle of Mrs. Charles , and he be 
 attract to she . 


 chapter 17 

 the Age of Property hold bitter moment even for a 
 proprietor . when a move be imminent , furniture become 
 ridiculous , and Margaret now lie awake at night wonder 
 where , where on earth they and all their belonging would be 
 deposit in September next . chair , table , picture , 
 book , that have rumble down to they through the 
 generation , must rumble forward again like a slide of 
 rubbish to which she long to give the final push , and send 
 topple into the sea . but there be all their father 's 
 book - they never read they , but they be their father 's , 
 and must be keep . there be the marble - top 
 chiffoni - their mother have set store by it , they could not 
 remember why . round every knob and cushion in the house 
 sentiment gather , a sentiment that be at time personal , 
 but more often a faint piety to the dead , a prolongation of 
 rite that might have end at the grave . 

 it be absurd , if you come to think of it ; Helen and 
 Tibby come to think of it : Margaret be too busy with the 
 house - agent . the feudal ownership of land do bring 
 dignity , whereas the modern ownership of movable be 
 reduce we again to a nomadic horde . we be revert to 
 the civilization of luggage , and historian of the future 
 will note how the middle class accrete possession 
 without take root in the earth , and may find in this the 
 secret of their imaginative poverty . the schlegel be 
 certainly the poor for the loss of Wickham Place . it have 
 help to balance their life , and almost to counsel they . 
 nor be their ground - landlord spiritually the rich . he have 
 build flat on its site , his motor - car grow swifter , his 
 exposure of socialism more trenchant . but he have spill the 
 precious distillation of the year , and no chemistry of his 
 can give it back to society again . 

 Margaret grow depressed ; she be anxious to settle on a 
 house before they leave town to pay their annual visit to 
 Mrs. Munt . she enjoy this visit , and want to have she 
 mind at ease for it . swanage , though dull , be stable , and 
 this year she long more than usual for its fresh air and 
 for the magnificent down that guard it on the north . but 
 London thwart she ; in its atmosphere she could not 
 concentrate . London only stimulate , it can not sustain ; and 
 Margaret , hurry over its surface for a house without 
 know what sort of a house she want , be pay for many 
 a thrilling sensation in the past . she could not even break 
 loose from culture , and her time be waste by concert 
 which it would be a sin to miss , and invitation which it 
 would never do to refuse . at last she grow desperate ; she 
 resolve that she would go nowhere and be at home to no one 
 until she find a house , and break the resolution in half an 
 hour . 

 once she have humorously lament that she have never be 
 to Simpson 's restaurant in the Strand . now a note arrive 
 from Miss Wilcox , ask she to lunch there . Mr. Cahill be 
 come , and the three would have such a jolly chat , and 
 perhaps end up at the Hippodrome . Margaret have no strong 
 regard for Evie , and no desire to meet her fiance , and she 
 be surprised that Helen , who have be far funny about 
 Simpson 's , have not be ask instead . but the invitation 
 touch she by its intimate tone . she must know Evie Wilcox 
 well than she suppose , and declare that she ' simply 
 must , " she accept . 

 but when she see Evie at the entrance of the restaurant , 
 star fiercely at nothing after the fashion of athletic 
 woman , her heart fail she anew . Miss Wilcox have change 
 perceptibly since her engagement . her voice be gruffer , 
 her manner more downright , and she be inclined to patronize 
 the more foolish virgin . Margaret be silly enough to be 
 pain at this . depressed at her isolation , she see not 
 only house and furniture , but the vessel of life itself 
 slip past she , with people like Evie and Mr. Cahill on board . 

 there be moment when virtue and wisdom fail we , and 
 one of they come to she at Simpson 's in the Strand . as she 
 trod the staircase , narrow , but carpet thickly , as she 
 enter the eating - room , where saddle of mutton be be 
 trundle up to expectant clergyman , she have a strong , if 
 erroneous , conviction of her own futility , and wish she 
 have never come out of her backwater , where nothing happen 
 except art and literature , and where no one ever get marry 
 or succeed in remain engage . then come a little 
 surprise . " Father might be of the party - yes , Father be . " 
 with a smile of pleasure she move forward to greet he , and 
 her feeling of loneliness vanish . 

 " I think I would get round if I could , " say he . " Evie 
 tell I of her little plan , so I just slip in and secure 
 a table . always secure a table first . Evie , do not   pretend 
 you want to sit by your old father , because you do not . Miss 
 Schlegel , come in my side , out of pity . my goodness , but 
 you look tired ! be worry round after your young clerk ? " 

 " no , after house , " say Margaret , edge past he into 
 the box . " I be hungry , not tired ; I want to eat heap . " 

 " that be good . what will you have ? " 

 " fish pie , " say she , with a glance at the menu . 

 " fish pie ! Fancy come for fish pie to Simpson 's . 
 it be not a bit the thing to go for here . " 

 " go for something for I , then , " say Margaret , pull 
 off her glove . her spirit be rise , and his reference 
 to Leonard Bast have warm her curiously . 

 " Saddle of mutton , " say he after profound reflection : 
 " and cider to drink . that be the type of thing . I like this 
 place , for a joke , once in a way . it be so thoroughly old 
 English . do not   you agree ? " 

 " yes , " say Margaret , who do not . the order be give , 
 the joint roll up , and the carver , under Mr. Wilcox 's 
 direction , cut the meat where it be succulent , and pile 
 their plate high . Mr. Cahill insist on sirloin , but 
 admit that he have make a mistake later on . he and Evie 
 soon fall into a conversation of the " no , I do not ; yes , you 
 do " type - conversation which , though fascinating to those 
 who be engage in it , neither desire nor deserve the 
 attention of other . 

 " it be a golden rule to tip the carver . Tip everywhere be 
 my motto . " 

 " perhaps it do make life more human . " 

 " then the fellow know one again . especially in the 
 East , if you tip , they remember you from year 's end to 
 year 's end . 

 " have you be in the East ? " 

 " oh , Greece and the Levant . I use to go out for sport 
 and business to Cyprus ; some military society of a sort 
 there . a few piastre , properly distribute , help to keep 
 one 's memory green . but you , of course , think this 
 shockingly cynical . how be your discussion society get 
 on ? any new Utopias lately ? " 

 " no , I be house - hunting , Mr. Wilcox , as I have   already tell 
 you once . do you know of any house ? " 

 " Afraid I do not . " 

 " well , what be the point of be practical if you can not 
 find two distressed female a house ? we merely want a small 
 house with large room , and plenty of they . " 

 " Evie , I like that ! Miss Schlegel expect I to turn 
 house agent for she ! " 

 " what be that , Father ? 

 " I want a new home in September , and someone must find 
 it . I can not . " 

 " Percy , do you know of anything ? " 

 " I can not   say I do , " say Mr. Cahill . 

 " how like you ! you be never any good . " 

 " never any good . just listen to she ! never any good . 
 oh , come ! " 

 " well , you be not . Miss Schlegel , be he ? " 

 the torrent of their love , have splash these drop 
 at Margaret , sweep away on its habitual course . she 
 sympathize with it now , for a little comfort have restore 
 her geniality . Speech and silence please she equally , and 
 while Mr. Wilcox make some preliminary inquiry about 
 cheese , her eye survey the restaurant , and admire its 
 well - calculate tribute to the solidity of our past . 
 though no more Old English than the work of Kipling , it have 
 select its reminiscence so adroitly that her criticism 
 be lull , and the guest whom it be nourish for 
 imperial purpose bear the outer semblance of Parson Adams 
 or Tom Jones . scrap of their talk jar oddly on the 
 ear . " right you be ! I will cable out to Uganda this 
 evening , " come from the table behind . " their Emperor want 
 war ; well , let he have it , " be the opinion of a 
 clergyman . she smile at such incongruity . " next time , " 
 she say to Mr. Wilcox , " you shall come to lunch with I at 
 Mr. Eustace Miles 's . " 

 " with pleasure . " 

 " no , you would hate it , " she say , push her glass towards 
 he for some more cider . " it be all proteid and 
 body - building , and people come up to you and beg your 
 pardon , but you have such a beautiful aura . " 

 " a what ? " 

 " never hear of an aura ? oh , happy , happy man ! I scrub 
 at mine for hour . nor of an astral plane ? " 

 he have hear of astral plane , and censure they . 

 " just so . luckily it be Helen 's aura , not mine , and 
 she have to chaperone it and do the politeness . I just sit 
 with my handkerchief in my mouth till the man go . " 

 " funny experience seem to come to you two girl . no 
 one 's ever ask I about my - what d'ye call it ? perhaps 
 I have   not get one . " 

 " you be bind to have one , but it may be such a terrible 
 colour that no one dare mention it . " 

 " tell I , though , Miss Schlegel , do you really believe 
 in the supernatural and all that ? " 

 " too difficult a question . " 

 " why be that ? Gruyere or Stilton ? " 

 " Gruyere , please . " 

 " well have Stilton . " 

 " Stilton . because , though I do not   believe in aura , and 
 think Theosophy be only a halfway - house - " 

 " - yet there may be something in it all the same , " he 
 conclude , with a frown . 

 " not even that . it may be halfway in the wrong 
 direction . I can not   explain . I do not   believe in all these 
 fad , and yet I do not   like say that I do not   believe in they . " 

 he seem unsatisfied , and say : " so you would not   give 
 I your word that you don't hold with astral body and all 
 the rest of it ? " 

 " I could , " say Margaret , surprise that the point be 
 of any importance to he . " indeed , I will . when I talk 
 about scrub my aura , I be only try to be funny . but 
 why do you want this settle ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " now , Mr. Wilcox , you do know . " 

 " yes , I be , " " no , you be not , " burst from the lover 
 opposite . Margaret be silent for a moment , and then 
 change the subject . 

 " how be your house ? " 

 " much the same as when you honour it last week . " 

 " I do not   mean Ducie Street . howard End , of course . " 

 " why ' of course ' ? " 

 " can not   you turn out your tenant and let it to we ? we be 
 nearly demented . " 

 " let I think . I wish I could help you . but I think 
 you want to be in town . one bit of advice : fix your 
 district , then fix your price , and then do not   budge . that be 
 how I get both Ducie Street and Oniton . I say to myself , 
 ' I mean to be exactly here , ' and I be , and Oniton be a place 
 in a thousand . " 

 " but I do budge . gentleman seem to mesmerize 
 house - cow they with an eye , and up they come , tremble . 
 lady can not . it be the house that be mesmerize I . 
 I have   no control over the saucy thing . house be alive . no ? " 

 " I be out of my depth , " he say , and add : " do not   you 
 talk rather like that to your office boy ? " 

 " do I ? - I mean I do , more or less . I talk the same 
 way to every one - or try to . " 

 " yes , I know . and how much do you suppose that he 
 understand of it ? " 

 " that be his lookout . I do not   believe in suit my 
 conversation to my company . one can doubtless hit upon some 
 medium of exchange that seem to do well enough , but it be no 
 more like the real thing than money be like food . there be 
 no nourishment in it . you pass it to the low class , and 
 they pass it back to you , and this you call ' social 
 intercourse ' or ' mutual endeavour , ' when it be mutual 
 priggishness if it be anything . our friend at Chelsea do not 
 see this . they say one ought to be at all cost 
 intelligible , and sacrifice - " 

 " low class , " interrupt Mr. Wilcox , as it be 
 thrust his hand into her speech . " well , you do admit 
 that there be rich and poor . that be something . " 

 Margaret could not reply . be he incredibly stupid , or 
 do he understand she well than she understand herself ? 

 " you do admit that , if wealth be divide up equally , in 
 a few year there would be rich and poor again just the 
 same . the hard - work man would come to the top , the 
 wastrel sink to the bottom . " 

 " every one admit that . " 

 " your Socialists do not . " 

 " my Socialists do . your may not ; but I strongly suspect 
 your of be not socialist , but ninepin , which you have 
 construct for your own amusement . I can not   imagine any 
 living creature who would bowl over quite so easily . " 

 he would have resent this have she not be a woman . 
 but woman may say anything - it be one of his holy 
 belief - and he only retort , with a gay smile : " I do not 
 care . you have   make two damaging admission , and I be heartily 
 with you in both . " 

 in time they finish lunch , and Margaret , who have 
 excuse herself from the Hippodrome , take she leave . Evie 
 have scarcely address she , and she suspect that the 
 entertainment have be plan by the father . he and she 
 be advance out of their respective family towards a 
 more intimate acquaintance . it have begin long ago . she have 
 be his wife 's friend , and , as such , he have give she that 
 silver vinaigrette as a memento . it be pretty of he to 
 have give that vinaigrette , and he have always prefer she 
 to Helen - unlike most man . but the advance have be 
 astonishing lately . they have do more in a week than in 
 two year , and be really begin to know each other . 

 she do not forget his promise to sample Eustace Miles , 
 and ask he as soon as she could secure Tibby as his 
 chaperon . he come , and partook of body - building dish with 
 humility . 

 next morning the schlegel leave for Swanage . they have 
 not succeed in find a new home . 


 chapter 18 

 as they be seat at Aunt Juley 's breakfast - table at the 
 bay , parry her excessive hospitality and enjoy the 
 view of the bay , a letter come for Margaret and throw she 
 into perturbation . it be from Mr. Wilcox . it announce an 
 " important change " in his plan . owe to Evie 's marriage , 
 he have decide to give up his house in Ducie Street , and be 
 willing to let it on a yearly tenancy . it be a 
 businesslike letter , and state frankly what he would do for 
 they and what he would not do . also the rent . if they 
 approve , Margaret be to come up AT once - the word be 
 underline , as be necessary when deal with woman - and to 
 go over the house with he . if they disapprove , a wire 
 would oblige , as he should put it into the hand of an agent . 

 the letter perturb , because she be not sure what it 
 mean . if he like she , if he have manoeuvre to get she to 
 Simpson 's , might this be a manoeuvre to get she to London , 
 and result in an offer of marriage ? she put it to herself 
 as indelicately as possible , in the hope that her brain 
 would cry , " Rubbish , you be a self - conscious fool ! " but her 
 brain only tingle a little and be silent , and for a time 
 she sit gaze at the mince wave , and wonder whether 
 the news would seem strange to the other . 

 as soon as she begin speak , the sound of her own 
 voice reassure she . there could be nothing in it . the 
 reply also be typical , and in the buff of conversation 
 her fear vanish . 

 " you need not   go though - " begin her hostess . 

 " I need not , but have not   I well ? it be really get 
 rather serious . we let chance after chance slip , and the 
 end of it be we shall be bundle out bag and baggage into 
 the street . we do not   know what we want , that be the mischief 
 with we - " 

 " no , we have no real tie , " say Helen , help herself 
 to toast . 

 " shall not   I go up to town today , take the house if it be 
 the least possible , and then come down by the afternoon 
 train tomorrow , and start enjoy myself . I shall be no 
 fun to myself or to other until this business be off my mind . " 

 " but you will not   do anything rash , Margaret ? " 

 " there be nothing rash to do . " 

 " who be the Wilcoxes ? " say Tibby , a question that 
 sound silly , but be really extremely subtle , as his aunt 
 find to her cost when she try to answer it . " I do not 
 manage the Wilcoxes ; I do not   see where they come in . " 

 " no more do I , " agree Helen . " it be funny that we just 
 do not   lose sight of they . out of all our hotel 
 acquaintance , Mr. Wilcox be the only one who have stick . it 
 be now over three year , and we have drift away from far 
 more interesting people in that time . 

 " interesting people do not   get one house . " 

 " Meg , if you start in your honest - english vein , I shall 
 throw the treacle at you . " 

 " it be a well vein than the cosmopolitan , " say 
 Margaret , get up . " now , child , which be it to be ? 
 you know the Ducie Street house . shall I say yes or shall I 
 say no ? Tibby love - which ? I be specially anxious to pin 
 you both . " 

 " it all depend what mean you attach to the word ' possi - ' " 

 " it depend on nothing of the sort . say ' yes . ' " 

 " say ' no . ' " 

 then Margaret speak rather seriously . " I think , " she 
 say , " that our race be degenerate . we can not settle even 
 this little thing ; what will it be like when we have to 
 settle a big one ? " 

 " it will be as easy as eat , " return Helen . 

 " I be think of Father . how could he settle to leave 
 Germany as he do , when he have fight for it as a young man , 
 and all his feeling and friend be Prussian ? how could 
 he break loose with patriotism and begin aim at something 
 else ? it would have kill I . when he be nearly forty he 
 could change country and ideal - and we , at our age , can not 
 change house . it be humiliating . " 

 " your father may have be able to change country , " 
 say Mrs. Munt with asperity , " and that may or may not be a 
 good thing . but he could change house no well than you 
 can , in fact , much bad . never shall I forget what poor 
 Emily suffer in the move from Manchester . " 

 " I know it , " cry Helen . " I tell you so . it be the 
 little thing one bungle at . the big , real one be 
 nothing when they come . " 

 " Bungle , my dear ! you be too little to recollect - in 
 fact , you be not   there . but the furniture be actually in 
 the van and on the move before the lease for Wickham Place 
 be sign , and Emily take train with baby - who be Margaret 
 then - and the small luggage for London , without so much as 
 know where her new home would be . get away from that 
 house may be hard , but it be nothing to the misery that we 
 all go through get you into it . " 

 Helen , with her mouth full , cry : " and that be the man 
 who beat the Austrians , and the Danes , and the French , and 
 who beat the Germans that be inside himself . and we be 
 like he . " 

 " speak for yourself , " say Tibby . " remember that I be 
 cosmopolitan , please . " 

 " Helen may be right . " 

 " of course she be right , " say Helen . 

 Helen might be right , but she do not go up to London . 
 Margaret do that . an interrupted holiday be the bad of 
 the minor worry , and one may be pardon for feel 
 morbid when a business letter snatch one away from the sea 
 and friend . she could not believe that her father have ever 
 feel the same . her eye have be trouble she lately , so 
 that she could not read in the train , and it bore she to 
 look at the landscape , which she have see but yesterday . at 
 Southampton she " wave " to Frieda : Frieda be on her way 
 down to join they at Swanage , and Mrs. Munt have calculate 
 that their train would cross . but Frieda be look the 
 other way , and Margaret travel on to town feeling 
 solitary and old - maidish . how like an old maid to fancy 
 that Mr. Wilcox be court she ! she have once visit a 
 spinster - poor , silly , and unattractive - whose mania it be 
 that every man who approach she fall in love . how 
 Margaret 's heart have bleed for the deluded thing ! how she 
 have lecture , reason , and in despair acquiesce ! " I may 
 have be deceive by the curate , my dear , but the young 
 fellow who bring the midday post really be fond of I , and 
 have , as a matter fact - " it have always seem to she the 
 most hideous corner of old age , yet she might be drive into 
 it herself by the mere pressure of virginity . 

 Mr. Wilcox meet she at Waterloo himself . she feel 
 certain that he be not the same as usual ; for one thing , he 
 take offence at everything she say . 

 " this be awfully kind of you , " she begin , " but I be 
 afraid it be not go to do . the house have not be build 
 that suit the Schlegel family . " 

 " what ! have you come up determined not to deal ? " 

 " not exactly . " 

 " not exactly ? in that case let us be start . " 

 she linger to admire the motor , which be new and a 
 fairer creature than the vermilion giant that have bear Aunt 
 Juley to her doom three year before . 

 " presumably it be very beautiful , " she say . " how do you 
 like it , Crane ? " 

 " come , let us be start , " repeat her host . " how on 
 earth do you know that my chauffeur be call Crane ? " 

 " why , I know crane : I have   be for a drive with Evie 
 once . I know that you have   get a parlourmaid call Milton . 
 I know all sort of thing . " 

 " Evie ! " he echo in injure tone . " you will not   see 
 she . she be go out with Cahill . it be no fun , I can tell 
 you , be leave so much alone . I have   get my work all 
 day - indeed , a great deal too much of it - but when I come 
 home in the evening , I tell you , I can not   stand the house . " 

 " in my absurd way , I be lonely too , " Margaret reply . 
 " it be heart - break to leave one 's old home . I scarcely 
 remember anything before Wickham Place , and Helen and Tibby 
 be bear there . Helen say - " 

 " you , too , feel lonely ? " 

 " horribly . Hullo , Parliament 's back ! " 

 Mr. Wilcox glance at Parliament contemptuously . the 
 more important rope of life lie elsewhere . " yes , they be 
 talk again . " say he . " but you be go to say - " 

 " only some rubbish about furniture . Helen say it alone 
 endure while man and house perish , and that in the end the 
 world will be a desert of chair and sofas - just imagine 
 it ! - roll through infinity with no one to sit upon they . " 

 " your sister always like her little joke . 

 " she say ' yes , ' my brother say ' no , ' to Ducie Street . 
 it be no fun help we , Mr. Wilcox , I assure you . " 

 " you be not as unpractical as you pretend . I shall 
 never believe it . " 

 Margaret laugh . but she be - quite as unpractical . 
 she could not concentrate on detail . Parliament , the 
 Thames , the irresponsive chauffeur , would flash into the 
 field of house - hunting , and all demand some comment or 
 response . it be impossible to see modern life steadily and 
 see it whole , and she have choose to see it whole . Mr. 
 Wilcox see steadily . he never bother over the mysterious 
 or the private . the Thames might run inland from the sea , 
 the chauffeur might conceal all passion and philosophy 
 beneath his unhealthy skin . they know their own business , 
 and he know his . 

 yet she like be with he . he be not a rebuke , but 
 a stimulus , and banish morbidity . some twenty year her 
 senior , he preserve a gift that she suppose herself to 
 have already lose - not youth 's creative power , but its 
 self - confidence and optimism . he be so sure that it be a 
 very pleasant world . his complexion be robust , his hair 
 have recede but not thin , the thick moustache and the 
 eye that Helen have compare to brandy - ball have an 
 agreeable menace in they , whether they be turn towards 
 the slum or towards the star . some day - in the 
 millennium - there may be no need for his type . at present , 
 homage be due to it from those who think themselves 
 superior , and who possibly be . " 

 " at all event you respond to my telegram promptly , " 
 he remark . 

 " oh , even I know a good thing when I see it . " 

 " I be glad you do not   despise the good of this world . " 

 " Heavens , no ! only idiot and prig do that . " 

 " I be glad , very glad , " he repeat , suddenly soften 
 and turn to she , as if the remark have please he . 
 " there be so much can not talk in would - be intellectual 
 circle . I be glad you do not   share it . self - denial be all 
 very well as a means of strengthen the character . but I 
 can not   stand those people who run down comfort . they have 
 usually some axe to grind . can you ? " 

 " Comforts be of two kind , " say Margaret , who be 
 keep herself in hand - " those we can share with other , 
 like fire , weather , or music ; and those we can not   - food , for 
 instance . it depend . " 

 " I mean reasonable comfort , of course . I should not 
 like to think that you - " he bend near ; the sentence die 
 unfinished . Margaret 's head turn very stupid , and the 
 inside of it seem to revolve like the beacon in a 
 lighthouse . he do not kiss she , for the hour be half - past 
 twelve , and the car be pass by the stable of Buckingham 
 Palace . but the atmosphere be so charge with emotion that 
 people only seem to exist on her account , and she be 
 surprised that Crane do not realize this , and turn round . 
 Idiot though she might be , surely Mr. Wilcox be more - how 
 should one put it ? - more psychological than usual . always 
 a good judge of character for business purpose , he seem 
 this afternoon to enlarge his field , and to note quality 
 outside neatness , obedience , and decision . 

 " I want to go over the whole house , " she announce when 
 they arrive . " as soon as I get back to Swanage , which will 
 be tomorrow afternoon , I will talk it over once more with 
 Helen and Tibby , and wire you ' yes ' or ' no . ' " 

 " right . the dining - room . " and they begin their survey . 

 the dining - room be big , but over - furnish . Chelsea 
 would have moan aloud . Mr. Wilcox have eschew those 
 decorative scheme that wince , and relent , and refrain , and 
 achieve beauty by sacrifice comfort and pluck . after so 
 much self - colour and self - denial , Margaret view with 
 relief the sumptuous dado , the frieze , the gild 
 wall - paper , amid whose foliage parrot sing . it would never 
 do with her own furniture , but those heavy chair , that 
 immense side - board load with presentation plate , stand up 
 against its pressure like man . the room suggest man , and 
 Margaret , keen to derive the modern capitalist from the 
 warrior and hunter of the past , see it as an ancient 
 guest - hall , where the lord sit at meat among his thane . 
 even the Bible - the Dutch Bible that Charles have bring 
 back from the Boer War - fall into position . such a room 
 admit loot . 

 " now the entrance - hall . " 

 the entrance - hall be pave . 

 " here we fellow smoke . " 

 we fellow smoke in chair of maroon leather . it be 
 as if a motor - car have spawn . " oh , jolly ! " say Margaret , 
 sink into one of they . 

 " you do like it ? " he say , fix his eye on her 
 upturned face , and surely betray an almost intimate 
 note . " it be all rubbish not make oneself comfortable . 
 be not   it ? " 

 " ye - es . Semi - rubbish . be those Cruikshanks ? " 

 " Gillrays . shall we go on upstairs ? " 

 " do all this furniture come from howard End ? " 

 " the howard end furniture have all go to Oniton . " 

 " do - however , I be concerned with the house , not the 
 furniture . how big be this smoking - room ? " 

 " Thirty by fifteen . no , wait a minute . fifteen and a half ? . " 

 " ah , well . Mr. Wilcox , be not   you ever amuse at the 
 solemnity with which we middle class approach the subject 
 of house ? " 

 they proceed to the drawing - room . Chelsea manage 
 well here . it be sallow and ineffective . one could 
 visualize the lady withdraw to it , while their lord 
 discuss life 's reality below , to the accompaniment of 
 cigar . have Mrs. Wilcox 's drawing - room look thus at 
 howard End ? just as this thought enter Margaret 's brain , 
 Mr. Wilcox do ask she to be his wife , and the knowledge 
 that she have be right so overcome she that she nearly faint . 

 but the proposal be not to rank among the world 's great 
 love scene . 

 " Miss Schlegel " - his voice be firm - " I have have you up 
 on false pretence . I want to speak about a much more 
 serious matter than a house . " 

 Margaret almost answer : " I know - " 

 " could you be induce to share my - be it probable - " 

 " oh , Mr. Wilcox ! " she interrupt , hold the piano and 
 avert her eye . " I see , I see . I will write to you 
 afterwards if I may . " 

 he begin to stammer . " Miss Schlegel - Margaret - you 
 do not   understand . " 

 " oh yes ! indeed , yes ! " say Margaret . 

 " I be ask you to be my wife . " 

 so deep already be her sympathy , that when he say , " I 
 be ask you to be my wife , " she make herself give a little 
 start . she must show surprise if he expect it . an 
 immense joy come over she . it be indescribable . it have 
 nothing to do with humanity , and most resemble the 
 all - pervade happiness of fine weather . fine weather be 
 due to the sun , but Margaret could think of no central 
 radiance here . she stand in his drawing - room happy , and 
 longing to give happiness . on leave he she realize that 
 the central radiance have be love . 

 " you be not   offend , Miss Schlegel ? " 

 " how could I be offend ? " 

 there be a moment 's pause . he be anxious to get rid 
 of she , and she know it . she have too much intuition to look 
 at he as he struggle for possession that money can not 
 buy . he desire comradeship and affection , but he fear 
 they , and she , who have teach herself only to desire , and 
 could have clothe the struggle with beauty , hold back , and 
 hesitate with he . 

 " good - bye , " she continue . " you will have a letter from 
 I - I be go back to Swanage tomorrow . 

 " thank you . " 

 " good - bye , and it be you I thank . " 

 " I may order the motor round , may not   I ? " 

 " that would be most kind . " 

 " I wish I have write instead . ought I to have write ? " 

 " not at all . " 

 " there be just one question - " 

 she shake her head . he look a little bewildered , and 
 they part . 

 they part without shake hand : she have keep the 
 interview , for his sake , in tint of the quiet grey . yet 
 she thrill with happiness ere she reach her own house . 
 other have love she in the past , if one may apply to their 
 brief desire so grave a word , but those other have be 
 " ninny " - young man who have nothing to do , old man who 
 could find nobody well . and she have often " love , " too , 
 but only so far as the fact of sex demand : mere yearning 
 for the masculine , to be dismiss for what they be worth , 
 with a smile . never before have her personality be 
 touch . she be not young or very rich , and it amaze she 
 that a man of any standing should take she seriously . as 
 she sit try to do account in her empty house , amidst 
 beautiful picture and noble book , wave of emotion break , 
 as if a tide of passion be flow through the night air . 
 she shake her head , try to concentrate her attention , and 
 fail . in vain do she repeat : " but I have   be through this 
 sort of thing before . " she have never be through it ; the 
 big machinery , as oppose to the little , have be set in 
 motion , and the idea that Mr. Wilcox love , obsess she 
 before she come to love he in return . 

 she would come to no decision yet . " oh , sir , this be so 
 sudden " - that prudish phrase exactly express she when she 
 time come . premonition be not preparation . she must 
 examine more closely her own nature and his ; she must talk 
 it over judicially with Helen . it have be a strange 
 love - scene - the central radiance unacknowledge from first 
 to last . she , in his place , would have say " ich liebe 
 dich , " but perhaps it be not his habit to open the heart . 
 he might have do it if she have press he - as a matter of 
 duty , perhaps ; England expect every man to open his heart 
 once ; but the effort would have jar he , and never , if 
 she could avoid it , should he lose those defence that he 
 have choose to raise against the world . he must never be 
 bother with emotional talk , or with a display of 
 sympathy . he be an elderly man now , and it would be futile 
 and impudent to correct he . 

 Mrs. Wilcox stray in and out , ever a welcome ghost ; 
 survey the scene , think Margaret , without one hint of 
 bitterness . 


 chapter 19 

 if one want to show a foreigner England , perhaps the 
 wise course would be to take he to the final section of 
 the Purbeck Hills , and stand he on their summit , a few 
 mile to the east of Corfe . then system after system of our 
 island would roll together under his foot . beneath he be 
 the valley of the Frome , and all the wild land that come 
 toss down from Dorchester , black and gold , to mirror 
 their gorse in the expanse of Poole . the valley of the 
 Stour be beyond , unaccountable stream , dirty at Blandford , 
 pure at Wimborne - the Stour , slide out of fat field , to 
 marry the Avon beneath the tower of Christchurch . the 
 valley of the Avon - invisible , but far to the north the 
 train eye may see Clearbury Ring that guard it , and the 
 imagination may leap beyond that on to Salisbury Plain 
 itself , and beyond the Plain to all the glorious down of 
 Central England . nor be suburbia absent . Bournemouth 's 
 ignoble coast cower to the right , herald the pine - tree 
 that mean , for all their beauty , red house , and the Stock 
 Exchange , and extend to the gate of London itself . so 
 tremendous be the City 's trail ! but the cliff of 
 Freshwater it shall never touch , and the island will guard 
 the Island 's purity till the end of time . see from the 
 west , the Wight be beautiful beyond all law of beauty . it 
 be as if a fragment of England float forward to greet the 
 foreigner - chalk of our chalk , turf of our turf , epitome of 
 what will follow . and behind the fragment lie Southampton , 
 hostess to the nation , and Portsmouth , a latent fire , and 
 all around it , with double and treble collision of tide , 
 swirl the sea . how many village appear in this view ! how 
 many castle ! how many church , vanish or triumphant ! 
 how many ship , railway , and road ! what incredible 
 variety of man work beneath that lucent sky to what final 
 end ! the reason fail , like a wave on the Swanage beach ; 
 the imagination swell , spread , and deepen , until it 
 become geographic and encircle England . 

 so Frieda Mosebach , now Frau Architect Liesecke , and 
 mother to her husband 's baby , be bring up to these 
 height to be impressed , and , after a prolong gaze , she 
 say that the hill be more swell here than in 
 Pomerania , which be true , but do not seem to Mrs. Munt 
 apposite . Poole Harbour be dry , which lead she to praise 
 the absence of muddy foreshore at Friedrich Wilhelms Bad , 
 Rugen , where beech - tree hang over the tideless Baltic , and 
 cow may contemplate the brine . rather unhealthy Mrs. Munt 
 think this would be , water be safe when it move about . 

 " and your english lake - Vindermere , grasmere - be they , 
 then , unhealthy ? " 

 " no , Frau Liesecke ; but that be because they be fresh 
 water , and different . salt water ought to have tide , and 
 go up and down a great deal , or else it smell . look , for 
 instance , at an aquarium . " 

 " an aquarium ! oh , MEESIS Munt , you mean to tell I that 
 fresh aquarium stink less than salt ? why , when Victor , my 
 brother - in - law , collect many tadpole - " 

 " you be not to say ' stink , ' " interrupt Helen ; " at 
 least , you may say it , but you must pretend you be be 
 funny while you say it . " 

 " then ' smell . ' and the mud of your Pool down there - do 
 it not smell , or may I say ' stink , ha , ha ' ? " 

 " there always have be mud in Poole Harbour , " say Mrs. 
 Munt , with a slight frown . " the river bring it down , and a 
 most valuable oyster - fishery depend upon it . " 

 " yes , that be so , " concede Frieda ; and another 
 international incident be close . 

 " ' Bournemouth be , ' " resume their hostess , quote a 
 local rhyme to which she be much attach - " ' Bournemouth 
 be , Poole be , and Swanage be to be the most important town 
 of all and big of the three . ' now , Frau Liesecke , I have 
 show you Bournemouth , and I have show you Poole , so let we 
 walk backward a little , and look down again at Swanage . " 

 " Aunt Juley , would not   that be Meg 's train ? " 

 a tiny puff of smoke have be circle the harbour , and 
 now be bear southward towards they over the black and 
 the gold . 

 " oh , dearest Margaret , I do hope she will not   be overtire . " 

 " oh , I do wonder - I do wonder whether she be take the house . " 

 " I hope she have not   be hasty . " 

 " so do I - oh , so do I. " 

 " will it be as beautiful as Wickham Place ? " Frieda ask . 

 " I should think it would . trust Mr. Wilcox for do 
 himself proud . all those Ducie Street house be beautiful 
 in their modern way , and I can not   think why he do not   keep 
 on with it . but it be really for Evie that he go there , 
 and now that Evie be go to be marry - " 

 " ah ! " 

 " you have   never see Miss Wilcox , Frieda . how absurdly 
 matrimonial you be ! " 

 " but sister to that Paul ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and to that Charles , " say Mrs. Munt with feeling . 
 " oh , Helen , Helen , what a time that be ! " 

 Helen laugh . " Meg and I have not   get such tender 
 heart . if there be a chance of a cheap house , we go for it . " 

 " now look , Frau Liesecke , at my niece 's train . you see , 
 it be come towards we - come , come ; and , when it get 
 to Corfe , it will actually go through the down , on which we 
 be stand , so that , if we walk over , as I suggest , and 
 look down on Swanage , we shall see it come on the other 
 side . shall we ? " 

 Frieda assent , and in a few minute they have cross 
 the ridge and exchange the great view for the less . 
 rather a dull valley lie below , back by the slope of the 
 coastward down . they be look across the Isle of 
 Purbeck and on to Swanage , soon to be the most important 
 town of all , and ugly of the three . Margaret 's train 
 reappear as promise , and be greet with approval by her 
 aunt . it come to a standstill in the middle distance , and 
 there it have be plan that Tibby should meet she , and 
 drive she , and a tea - basket , up to join they . 

 " you see , " continue Helen to her cousin , " the Wilcoxes 
 collect house as your Victor collect tadpole . they have , 
 one , Ducie Street ; two , howard end , where my great rumpus 
 be ; three , a country seat in Shropshire ; four , Charles have 
 a house in Hilton ; and five , another near Epsom ; and six , 
 Evie will have a house when she marry , and probably a 
 pie - a - terre in the country - which make seven . oh yes , and 
 Paul a hut in Africa make eight . I wish we could get 
 howard End . that be something like a dear little house ! 
 do not   you think so , Aunt Juley ? " 

 " I have too much to do , dear , to look at it , " say Mrs. 
 Munt , with a gracious dignity . " I have everything to settle 
 and explain , and Charles Wilcox to keep in his place 
 besides . it be not   likely I should remember much . I just 
 remember have lunch in your bedroom . " 

 " yes so do I. But , oh dear , dear , how dead it all 
 seem ! and in the autumn there begin this anti - pauline 
 movement - you , and Frieda , and Meg , and Mrs. Wilcox , all 
 obsess with the idea that I might yet marry Paul . " 

 " you yet may , " say Frieda despondently . 

 Helen shake her head . " the great Wilcox Peril will 
 never return . if I be certain of anything it be of that . " 

 " one be certain of nothing but the truth of one 's own emotion . " 

 the remark fall damply on the conversation . but Helen 
 slip her arm round her cousin , somehow like she the 
 well for make it . it be not an original remark , nor 
 have Frieda appropriate it passionately , for she have a 
 patriotic rather than a philosophic mind . yet it betray 
 that interest in the universal which the average Teuton 
 possesse and the average Englishman do not . it be , 
 however illogically , the good , the beautiful , the true , as 
 oppose to the respectable , the pretty , the adequate . it 
 be a landscape of Bocklin 's beside a landscape of Leader 's , 
 strident and ill - consider , but quiver into supernatural 
 life . it sharpen idealism , stir the soul . it may have 
 be a bad preparation for what follow . 

 " look ! " cry Aunt Juley , hurry away from 
 generality over the narrow summit of the down . " stand 
 where I stand , and you will see the pony - cart coming . I see 
 the pony - cart coming . " 

 they stand and see the pony - cart coming . Margaret and 
 Tibby be presently see come in it . leave the 
 outskirt of Swanage , it drive for a little through the 
 bud lane , and then begin the ascent . 

 " have you get the house ? " they shout , long before she 
 could possibly hear . 

 Helen run down to meet she . the highroad pass over a 
 saddle , and a track go thence at right angle along the 
 ridge of the down . 

 " have you get the house ? " 

 Margaret shake her head . 

 " oh , what a nuisance ! so we be as we be ? " 

 " not exactly . " 

 she get out , look tired . 

 " some mystery , " say Tibby . " we be to be enlighten presently . " 

 Margaret come close up to she and whisper that she have 
 have a proposal of marriage from Mr. Wilcox . 

 Helen be amuse . she open the gate on to the down 
 so that her brother might lead the pony through . " it be just 
 like a widower , " she remark . " they have   cheek enough for 
 anything , and invariably select one of their first wife 's friend . " 

 Margaret 's face flash despair . 

 " that type - " she break off with a cry . " Meg , not 
 anything wrong with you ? " 

 " wait one minute , " say Margaret , whisper always . 

 " but you have   never conceivably - you have   never - " she 
 pull herself together . " tibby , hurry up through ; I can not 
 hold this gate indefinitely . Aunt Juley ! I say , Aunt 
 Juley , make the tea , will you , and Frieda ; we have   get to talk 
 house , and I will come on afterwards . " and then , turn she 
 face to her sister 's , she burst into tear . 

 Margaret be stupefy . she hear herself say , " oh , 
 really - " she feel herself touch with a hand that tremble . 

 " do not , " sob Helen , " do not , do not , Meg , do not ! " she 
 seem incapable of say any other word . Margaret , 
 tremble herself , lead she forward up the road , till they 
 stray through another gate on to the down . 

 " do not , do not   do such a thing ! I tell you not 
 to - do not ! I know - do not ! " 

 " what do you know ? " 

 " panic and emptiness , " sob Helen . " do not ! " 

 then Margaret think , " Helen be a little selfish . I 
 have never behave like this when there have seem a chance 
 of her marrying . she say : " but we would still see each 
 other very often , and - " 

 " it be not a thing like that , " sob Helen . and she 
 break right away and wander distractedly upwards , 
 stretch her hand towards the view and cry . 

 " what be happen to you ? " call Margaret , follow 
 through the wind that gather at sundown on the northern 
 slope of hill . " but it be stupid ! " and suddenly stupidity 
 seize she , and the immense landscape be blur . but 
 Helen turn back . 

 " Meg - " 

 " I do not   know what be happen to either of we , " say 
 Margaret , wipe her eye . " we must both have go mad . " 
 then Helen wipe her , and they even laugh a little . 

 " look here , sit down . " 

 " all right ; I will sit down if you will sit down . " 

 " there .   one kiss .   now , whatever , whatever be the matter ? " 

 " I do mean what I say . do not ; it would not   do . " 

 " oh , Helen , stop say ' do not ' ! it be ignorant . it be 
 as if your head be not   out of the slime . ' do not ' be 
 probably what Mrs. Bast say all the day to Mr. Bast . " 

 Helen be silent . 

 " well ? " 

 " tell I about it first , and meanwhile perhaps I will have 
 get my head out of the slime . " 

 " that be well . well , where shall I begin ? when I 
 arrive at Waterloo - no , I will go back before that , because 
 I be anxious you should know everything from the first . the 
 ' first ' be about ten day ago . it be the day Mr. Bast 
 come to tea and lose his temper . I be defend he , and 
 Mr. Wilcox become jealous about I , however slightly . I 
 think it be the involuntary thing , which man can not   help 
 any more than we can . you know - at least , I know in my own 
 case - when a man have say to I , ' so - and - so be a pretty 
 girl , ' I be seize with a momentary sourness against 
 so - and - so , and long to tweak her ear . it be a tiresome 
 feeling , but not an important one , and one easily manage 
 it . but it be not   only this in Mr. Wilcox 's case , I gather now . " 

 " then you love he ? " 

 Margaret consider . " it be wonderful know that a 
 real man care for you , " she say . " the mere fact of that 
 grow more tremendous . remember , I have   know and like he 
 steadily for nearly three year . 

 " but love he ? " 

 Margaret peer into her past . it be pleasant to 
 analyze feeling while they be still only feeling , and 
 unembodie in the social fabric . with her arm round Helen , 
 and her eye shift over the view , as if this county or 
 that could reveal the secret of her own heart , she meditate 
 honestly , and say , " no . " 

 " but you will ? " 

 " yes , " say Margaret , " of that I be pretty sure . indeed , 
 I begin the moment he speak to I . " 

 " and have settle to marry he ? " 

 " I have , but be want a long talk about it now . what 
 be it against he , Helen ? you must try and say . " 

 Helen , in her turn , look outward . " it be ever since 
 Paul , " she say finally . 

 " but what have Mr. Wilcox to do with Paul ? " 

 " but he be there , they be all there that morning when 
 I come down to breakfast , and see that Paul be 
 frightened - the man who love I frighten and all his 
 paraphernalia fall , so that I know it be impossible , 
 because personal relation be the important thing for ever 
 and ever , and not this outer life of telegram and anger . " 

 she pour the sentence forth in one breath , but her 
 sister understand it , because it touch on thought that 
 be familiar between they . 

 " that be foolish . in the first place , I disagree about 
 the outer life . well , we have   often argue that . the real 
 point be that there be the wide gulf between my 
 love - making and your . your - be romance ; mine will be 
 prose . I be not run it down - a very good kind of prose , 
 but well consider , well think out . for instance , I know 
 all Mr. Wilcox 's fault . he be afraid of emotion . he care 
 too much about success , too little about the past . his 
 sympathy lack poetry , and so be not   sympathy really . I would 
 even say " - she look at the shin lagoon - " that , 
 spiritually , he be not as honest as I be . do not   that 
 satisfy you ? " 

 " no , it do not , " say Helen . " it make I feel bad 
 and bad . you must be mad . " 

 Margaret make a movement of irritation . 

 " I do not   intend he , or any man or any woman , to be all 
 my life - good heaven , no ! there be heap of thing in I 
 that he do not , and shall never , understand . " 

 thus she speak before the wedding ceremony and the 
 physical union , before the astonishing glass shade have 
 fall that interpose between married couple and the 
 world . she be to keep her independence more than do most 
 woman as yet . marriage be to alter her fortune rather 
 than her character , and she be not far wrong in boast 
 that she understand her future husband . yet he do alter 
 her character - a little . there be an unforeseen surprise , 
 a cessation of the wind and odour of life , a social 
 pressure that would have she think conjugally . 

 " so with he , " she continue . " there be heap of 
 thing in he - more especially thing that he do - that 
 will always be hide from I . he have all those public 
 quality which you so despise and enable all this - " she 
 wave her hand at the landscape , which confirm anything . 
 " if Wilcoxes have not   work and die in England for thousand 
 of year , you and I could not   sit here without have our 
 throat cut . there would be no train , no ship to carry we 
 literary people about in , no field even . just savagery . 
 no - perhaps not even that . without their spirit life might 
 never have move out of protoplasm . More and more do I 
 refuse to draw my income and sneer at those who guarantee 
 it . there be time when it seem to I - " 

 " and to I , and to all woman . so one kiss Paul . " 

 " that be brutal , " say Margaret . " mine be an absolutely 
 different case . I have   think thing out . " 

 " it make no difference think thing out . they come 
 to the same . " 

 " Rubbish ! " 

 there be a long silence , during which the tide return 
 into Poole Harbour . " one would lose something , " murmur 
 Helen , apparently to herself . the water creep over the 
 mud - flat towards the gorse and the blacken heather . 
 Branksea Island lose its immense foreshore , and become a 
 sombre episode of tree . Frome be force inward towards 
 Dorchester , Stour against Wimborne , Avon towards Salisbury , 
 and over the immense displacement the sun preside , lead 
 it to triumph ere he sink to rest . England be alive , 
 throb through all her estuary , cry for joy through 
 the mouth of all her gull , and the north wind , with 
 contrary motion , blow strong against her rise sea . 
 what do it mean ? for what end be her fair complexity , 
 her change of soil , her sinuous coast ? do she belong to 
 those who have mould she and make she fear by other 
 land , or to those who have add nothing to her power , but 
 have somehow see she , see the whole island at once , lie 
 as a jewel in a silver sea , sail as a ship of soul , with 
 all the brave world 's fleet accompany she towards 
 eternity ? 


 chapter 20 

 Margaret have often wonder at the disturbance that take 
 place in the world 's water , when Love , who seem so tiny a 
 pebble , slip in . whom do Love concern beyond the beloved 
 and the lover ? yet his impact deluge a hundred shore . no 
 doubt the disturbance be really the spirit of the 
 generation , welcome the new generation , and chafing 
 against the ultimate Fate , who hold all the sea in the 
 palm of her hand . but Love can not understand this . he 
 can not comprehend another 's infinity ; he be conscious only 
 of his own - fly sunbeam , fall rose , pebble that ask 
 for one quiet plunge below the fret interplay of space 
 and time . he know that he will survive at the end of 
 thing , and be gather by Fate as a jewel from the slime , 
 and be hand with admiration round the assembly of the 
 god . " man do produce this , " they will say , and , say , 
 they will give man immortality . but meanwhile - what 
 agitation meanwhile ! the foundation of Property and 
 Propriety be lay bare , twin rock ; Family Pride flounder 
 to the surface , puff and blow , and refuse to be 
 comfort ; theology , vaguely ascetic , get up a nasty ground 
 swell . then the lawyer be arouse - cold brood - and creep 
 out of their hole . they do what they can ; they tidy up 
 Property and Propriety , reassure Theology and Family Pride . 
 half - guineas be pour on the troubled water , the lawyer 
 creep back , and , if all have go well , Love join one man 
 and woman together in Matrimony . 

 Margaret have expect the disturbance , and be not 
 irritate by it . for a sensitive woman she have steady 
 nerve , and could bear with the incongruous and the 
 grotesque ; and , besides , there be nothing excessive about 
 her love - affair . good - humour be the dominant note of her 
 relation with Mr. Wilcox , or , as I must now call he , 
 Henry . Henry do not encourage romance , and she be no girl 
 to fidget for it . an acquaintance have become a lover , might 
 become a husband , but would retain all that she have note in 
 the acquaintance ; and love must confirm an old relation 
 rather than reveal a new one . 

 in this spirit she promise to marry he . 

 he be in Swanage on the morrow , bear the 
 engagement - ring . they greet one another with a hearty 
 cordiality that impress Aunt Juley . Henry din at the 
 bay , but he have engage a bedroom in the principal hotel : 
 he be one of those man who know the principal hotel by 
 instinct . after dinner he ask Margaret if she would not 
 care for a turn on the Parade . she accept , and could not 
 repress a little tremor ; it would be her first real love 
 scene . but as she put on her hat she burst out laugh . 
 Love be so unlike the article serve up in book : the joy , 
 though genuine , be different ; the mystery an unexpected 
 mystery . for one thing , Mr. Wilcox still seem a stranger . 

 for a time they talk about the ring ; then she say : 

 " do you remember the Embankment at Chelsea ? it can not   be 
 ten day ago . " 

 " yes , " he say , laugh . " and you and your sister be 
 head and ear deep in some quixotic scheme . ah well ! " 

 " I little think then , certainly . do you ? " 

 " I do not   know about that ; I should not   like to say . " 

 " why , be it early ? " she cry . " do you think of I 
 this way early ! how extraordinarily interesting , Henry ! 
 tell I . " 

 but Henry have no intention of telling . perhaps he could 
 not have tell , for his mental state become obscure as soon 
 as he have pass through they . he mislike the very word 
 " interesting , " connote it with waste energy and even with 
 morbidity . hard fact be enough for he . 

 " I do not   think of it , " she pursue . " no ; when you 
 speak to I in the drawing - room , that be practically the 
 first . it be all so different from what it be suppose to 
 be . on the stage , or in book , a proposal be - how shall I 
 put it ? - a full - blow affair , a kind of bouquet ; it lose 
 its literal meaning . but in life a proposal really be a proposal - " 

 " by the way - " 

 " - a suggestion , a seed , " she conclude ; and the thought 
 fly away into darkness . 

 " I be think , if you do not   mind , that we ought to 
 spend this evening in a business talk ; there will be so much 
 to settle . " 

 " I think so too . tell I , in the first place , how do 
 you get on with Tibby ? " 

 " with your brother ? " 

 " yes , during cigarette . " 

 " oh , very well . " 

 " I be so glad , " she answer , a little surprised . " what 
 do you talk about ? I , presumably . " 

 " About Greece too . " 

 " Greece be a very good card , Henry . Tibby 's only a boy 
 still , and one have to pick and choose subject a little . 
 well do . " 

 " I be tell he I have share in a currant - farm near Calamata . 

 " what a delightful thing to have share in ! can not   we go 
 there for our honeymoon ? " 

 " what to do ? " 

 " to eat the currant . and be not   there marvellous scenery ? " 

 " moderately , but it be not the kind of place one could 
 possibly go to with a lady . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " no hotel . " 

 " some lady do without hotel . be you aware that 
 Helen and I have walk alone over the Apennines , with our 
 luggage on our back ? " 

 " I be not   aware , and , if I can manage it , you will never 
 do such a thing again . " 

 she say more gravely : " you have not   find time for a 
 talk with Helen yet , I suppose ? " 

 " no . " 

 " do , before you go . I be so anxious you two should be friend . " 

 " your sister and I have always hit it off , " he say 
 negligently . " but we be drift away from our business . 
 let I begin at the beginning . you know that Evie be go 
 to marry Percy Cahill . " 

 " dolly 's uncle . " 

 " exactly . the girl be madly in love with he . a very 
 good sort of fellow , but he demand - and rightly - a suitable 
 provision with she . and in the second place , you will 
 naturally understand , there be Charles . before leave 
 town , I write Charles a very careful letter . you see , he 
 have an increase family and increase expense , and the I. 
 and W. A. be nothing particular just now , though capable of 
 development . 

 " poor fellow ! " murmur Margaret , look out to sea , 
 and not understand . 

 " Charles be the eld son , some day Charles will have 
 howard End ; but I be anxious , in my own happiness , not to 
 be unjust to other . " 

 " of course not , " she begin , and then give a little cry . 
 " you mean money . how stupid I be ! of course not ! " 

 oddly enough , he wince a little at the word . " yes . 
 money , since you put it so frankly . I be determined to be 
 just to all - just to you , just to they . I be determine 
 that my child shall have no case against I . " 

 " be generous to they , " she say sharply . " Bother justice ! " 

 " I be determined - and have already write to Charles to 
 that effect - " 

 " but how much have you get ? " 

 " what ? " 

 " how much have you a year ? I have   six hundred . " 

 " my income ? " 

 " yes . we must begin with how much you have , before we 
 can settle how much you can give Charles . Justice , and even 
 generosity , depend on that . " 

 " I must say you be a downright young woman , " he 
 observe , pat her arm and laugh a little . " what a 
 question to spring on a fellow ! " 

 " do not   you know your income ? or do not   you want to tell 
 it I ? " 

 " i - " 

 " that be all right " - now she pat he - " do not   tell I . 
 I do not   want to know . I can do the sum just as well by 
 proportion . divide your income into ten part . how many 
 part would you give to Evie , how many to Charles , how many 
 to Paul ? " 

 " the fact be , my dear , I have not   any intention of 
 bother you with detail . I only want to let you know 
 that - well , that something must be do for the other , and 
 you have   understand I perfectly , so let us pass on to the next 
 point . " 

 " yes , we have   settle that , " say Margaret , undisturbe by 
 his strategic blundering . " go ahead ; give away all you 
 can , bear in mind I have   a clear six hundred . what a mercy 
 it be to have all this money about one ! " 

 " we have   none too much , I assure you ; you be marry a 
 poor man . 

 " Helen would not   agree with I here , " she continue . 
 " Helen dare not   slang the rich , be rich herself , but she 
 would like to . there be an odd notion , that I have not   yet 
 get hold of , run about at the back of her brain , that 
 poverty be somehow ' real . ' she dislike all organization , 
 and probably confuse wealth with the technique of wealth . 
 sovereign in a stocking would not   bother she ; cheque do . 
 Helen be too relentless . one can not   deal in her high - handed 
 manner with the world . " 

 " there be this other point , and then I must go back to my 
 hotel and write some letter . what be to be do now about 
 the house in Ducie Street ? " 

 " keep it on - at least , it depend . when do you want to 
 marry I ? " 

 she raise her voice , as too often , and some youth , who 
 be also take the evening air , overheard she . " get a 
 bit hot , eh ? " say one . Mr. Wilcox turn on they , and say 
 sharply , " I say ! " there be silence . " take care I do not 
 report you to the police . " they move away quietly enough , 
 but be only bid their time , and the rest of the 
 conversation be punctuate by peal of ungovernable laughter . 

 lower his voice and infuse a hint of reproof into 
 it , he say : " Evie will probably be marry in September . 
 we could scarcely think of anything before then . " 

 " the early the nicer , Henry . female be not suppose 
 to say such thing , but the early the nicer . " 

 " how about September for we too ? " he ask , rather dryly . 

 " right . shall we go into Ducie Street ourselves in 
 September ? or shall we try to bounce Helen and Tibby into 
 it ? that be rather an idea . they be so unbusinesslike , we 
 could make they do anything by judicious management . look 
 here - yes . we will do that . and we ourselves could live at 
 howard end or Shropshire . " 

 he blow out his cheek . " Heavens ! how you woman do fly 
 round ! my head be in a whirl . point by point , Margaret . 
 howard End 's impossible . I let it to Hamar Bryce on a 
 three year ' agreement last March . do not   you remember ? 
 Oniton . well , that be much , much too far away to rely on 
 entirely . you will be able to be down there entertain a 
 certain amount , but we must have a house within easy reach 
 of Town . only Ducie Street have huge drawback . there be a 
 mew behind . " 

 Margaret could not help laugh . it be the first she 
 have hear of the mew behind Ducie Street . when she be a 
 possible tenant it have suppress itself , not consciously , 
 but automatically . the breezy Wilcox manner , though 
 genuine , lack the clearness of vision that be imperative 
 for truth . when Henry live in Ducie Street he remember 
 the mew ; when he try to let he forgot it ; and if anyone 
 have remark that the mew must be either there or not , he 
 would have feel annoyed , and afterwards have find some 
 opportunity of stigmatize the speaker as academic . so 
 do my grocer stigmatize I when I complain of the quality 
 of his sultana , and he answer in one breath that they be 
 the good sultanas , and how can I expect the good sultanas at 
 that price ? it be a flaw inherent in the business mind , and 
 Margaret may do well to be tender to it , consider all 
 that the business mind have do for England . 

 " yes , in summer especially , the mews be a serious 
 nuisance . the smoking room , too , be an abominable little 
 den . the house opposite have be take by operatic people . 
 Ducie Street be go down , it be my private opinion . " 

 " how sad ! it be only a few year since they build those 
 pretty house . " 

 " show thing be move . good for trade . " 

 " I hate this continual flux of London . it be an epitome 
 of we at our bad - eternal formlessness ; all the quality , 
 good , bad , and indifferent , stream away - stream , 
 stream for ever . that be why I dread it so . I mistrust 
 river , even in scenery . now , the sea - " 

 " high tide , yes . " 

 " Hoy toid " - from the promenade youth . 

 " and these be the man to whom we give the vote , " 
 observe Mr. Wilcox , omit to add that they be also the 
 man to whom he give work as clerk - work that scarcely 
 encourage they to grow into other man . " however , they have 
 their own life and interest . let us get on . " 

 he turn as he speak , and prepare to see she back to 
 the Bays . the business be over . his hotel be in the 
 opposite direction , and if he accompany she his letter 
 would be late for the post . she implore he not to come , 
 but he be obdurate . 

 " a nice beginning , if your aunt see you slip in alone ! " 

 " but I always do go about alone . consider I have 
 walk over the Apennines , it be common sense . you will make 
 I so angry . I do not   the least take it as a compliment . " 

 he laugh , and light a cigar . " it be not   mean as a 
 compliment , my dear . I just will not   have you go about in 
 the dark . such people about too ! it be dangerous . " 

 " can not   I look after myself ? I do wish - " 

 " come along , Margaret ; no wheedling . " 

 a young woman might have resent his masterly way , 
 but Margaret have too firm a grip of life to make a fuss . 
 she be , in her own way , as masterly . if he be a fortress 
 she be a mountain peak , whom all might tread , but whom the 
 snow make nightly virginal . disdain the heroic outfit , 
 excitable in her method , garrulous , episodical , shrill , she 
 mislead her lover much as she have mislead her aunt . he 
 mistook her fertility for weakness . he suppose she " as 
 clever as they make them , " but no more , not realize that 
 she be penetrate to the depth of his soul , and approve 
 of what she find there . 

 and if insight be sufficient , if the inner life be 
 the whole of life , their happiness have be assure . 

 they walk ahead briskly . the parade and the road 
 after it be well light , but it be dark in Aunt 
 Juley 's garden . as they be go up by the side - path , 
 through some rhododendron , Mr. Wilcox , who be in front , 
 say " Margaret " rather huskily , turn , drop his cigar , 
 and take she in his arm . 

 she be startle , and nearly scream , but recover 
 herself at once , and kiss with genuine love the lip that 
 be press against her own . it be their first kiss , and 
 when it be over he see she safely to the door and ring the 
 bell for she , but disappear into the night before the maid 
 answer it . on look back , the incident displease she . 
 it be so isolated . nothing in their previous conversation 
 have herald it , and , bad still , no tenderness have 
 ensue . if a man can not lead up to passion he can at all 
 event lead down from it , and she have hop , after she 
 complaisance , for some interchange of gentle word . but he 
 have hurry away as if ashame , and for an instant she be 
 remind of Helen and Paul . 


 chapter 21 

 Charles have just be scold his dolly . she deserve the 
 scolding , and have bend before it , but her head , though 
 bloody , be unsubdue , and her chirruping begin to mingle 
 with his retreating thunder . 

 " you have   wake the baby . I know you would .   Rum - ti - foo , 
 rackety - tackety Tompkin !   I be not responsible for what Uncle 
 Percy do , nor for anybody else or anything , so there ! " 

 " who ask he while I be away ? who ask my sister 
 down to meet he ? who send they out in the motor day after day ? " 

 " Charles , that remind I of some poem . " 

 " do it indeed ? we shall all be dance to a very 
 different music presently . Miss Schlegel have fairly get we 
 on toast . " 

 " I could simply scratch that woman 's eye out , and to 
 say it be my fault be most unfair . " 

 " it be your fault , and five month ago you admit it . " 

 " I do not . " 

 " you do . " 

 " Tootle , tootle , play on the pootle ! " exclaim 
 dolly , suddenly devote herself to the child . 

 " it be all very well to turn the conversation , but Father 
 would never have dream of marry as long as Evie be 
 there to make he comfortable . but you must need start 
 match - making . besides , Cahill 's too old . " 

 " of course , if you be go to be rude to Uncle Percy - " 

 " Miss Schlegel always mean to get hold of howard End , 
 and , thank to you , she be get it . " 

 " I call the way you twist thing round and make they 
 hang together most unfair . you could not   have be nasty 
 if you have catch I flirt . could he , diddum ? " 

 " we be in a bad hole , and must make the good of it . I 
 shall answer the pater 's letter civilly . he be evidently 
 anxious to do the decent thing . but I do not intend to 
 forget these schlegel in a hurry . as long as they be on 
 their good behaviour - dolly , be you listen ? - we will 
 behave , too . but if I find they give themselves air , or 
 monopolize my father , or at all ill - treat he , or 
 worry he with their artistic beastliness , I intend to 
 put my foot down , yes , firmly . take my mother 's place ! 
 Heaven know what poor old Paul will say when the news 
 reach he . " 

 the interlude close . it have take place in Charles 's 
 garden at Hilton . he and dolly be sit in deck - chair , 
 and their motor be regard they placidly from its garage 
 across the lawn . a short - frocked edition of Charles also 
 regard they placidly ; a perambulator edition be squeak ; 
 a third edition be expect shortly . nature be turn out 
 Wilcoxes in this peaceful abode , so that they may inherit 
 the earth . 


 chapter 22 

 Margaret greet her lord with peculiar tenderness on the 
 morrow . Mature as he be , she might yet be able to help he 
 to the building of the rainbow bridge that should connect 
 the prose in we with the passion . without it we be 
 meaningless fragment , half monk , half beast , unconnected 
 arch that have never join into a man . with it love be 
 bear , and alight on the high curve , glow against the 
 grey , sober against the fire . happy the man who see from 
 either aspect the glory of these outspread wing . the road 
 of his soul lie clear , and he and his friend shall find easy - go . 

 it be hard - go in the road of Mr. Wilcox 's soul . 
 from boyhood he have neglect they . " I be not a fellow who 
 bother about my own inside . " outwardly he be cheerful , 
 reliable , and brave ; but within , all have revert to chaos , 
 rule , so far as it be rule at all , by an incomplete 
 asceticism . whether as boy , husband , or widower , he have 
 always the sneaking belief that bodily passion be bad , a 
 belief that be desirable only when hold passionately . 
 Religion have confirm he . the word that be read aloud 
 on Sunday to he and to other respectable man be the word 
 that have once kindle the soul of St. Catharine and St. 
 Francis into a white - hot hatred of the carnal . he could - not 
 be as the saint and love the Infinite with a seraphic 
 ardour , but he could be a little ashamed of love a wife . 
 " Amabat , amare timebat . " and it be here that Margaret 
 hop to help he . 

 it do not seem so difficult . she need trouble he with 
 no gift of her own . she would only point out the salvation 
 that be latent in his own soul , and in the soul of every 
 man . only connect ! that be the whole of her sermon . only 
 connect the prose and the passion , and both will be exalt , 
 and human love will be see at its height . live in 
 fragment no long . only connect , and the beast and the 
 monk , rob of the isolation that be life to either , will die . 

 nor be the message difficult to give . it need not take 
 the form of a good " talk . " by quiet indication the 
 bridge would be build and span their life with beauty . 

 but she fail . for there be one quality in Henry for 
 which she be never prepare , however much she remind 
 herself of it : his obtuseness . he simply do not notice 
 thing , and there be no more to be say . he never notice 
 that Helen and Frieda be hostile , or that Tibby be not 
 interested in currant plantation ; he never notice the 
 light and shade that exist in the gray conversation , 
 the finger - post , the milestone , the collision , the 
 illimitable view . once - on another occasion - she scold 
 he about it . he be puzzle , but reply with a laugh : " my 
 motto be Concentrate . I have   no intention of frittering away 
 my strength on that sort of thing . " " it be not   fritter 
 away the strength , " she protest . " it be enlarge the 
 space in which you may be strong . " he answer : " you be a 
 clever little woman , but my motto 's Concentrate . " and this 
 morning he concentrate with a vengeance . 

 they meet in the rhododendron of yesterday . in the 
 daylight the bush be inconsiderable and the path be 
 bright in the morning sun . she be with Helen , who have be 
 ominously quiet since the affair be settle . " here we all 
 be ! " she cry , and take he by one hand , retain her 
 sister 's in the other . 

 " here we be . good - morning , Helen . " 

 Helen reply , " good - morning , Mr. Wilcox . " 

 " Henry , she have have such a nice letter from the queer , 
 cross boy - do you remember he ? he have a sad moustache , but 
 the back of his head be young . " 

 " I have have a letter too . not a nice one - I want to 
 talk it over with you : " for Leonard Bast be nothing to he 
 now that she have give he her word ; the triangle of sex be 
 break for ever . 

 " thank to your hint , he be clear out of the Porphyrion . " 

 " not a bad business that porphyrion , " he say absently , 
 as he take his own letter out of his pocket . 

 " not a bad - " she exclaim , drop his hand . 
 " surely , on Chelsea Embankment - " 

 " here be our hostess . good - morning , Mrs. Munt . fine 
 rhododendron . good morning , Frau Liesecke ; we manage to 
 grow flower in England , do not   we ? " 

 " not a bad business ? " 

 " no . my letter 's about howard End . Bryce have be 
 order abroad , and want to sublet it . I be far from sure 
 that I shall give he permission . there be no clause in 
 the agreement . in my opinion , sublet be a mistake . if 
 he can find I another tenant , whom I consider suitable , I 
 may cancel the agreement . Morning , Schlegel . do not   you 
 think that be well than sublet ? " 

 Helen have drop her hand now , and he have steer she 
 past the whole party to the seaward side of the house . 
 beneath they be the bourgeois little bay , which must have 
 yearn all through the century for just such a 
 watering - place as Swanage to be build on its margin . the 
 wave be colourless , and the Bournemouth steamer give a 
 further touch of insipidity , draw up against the pier and 
 hoot wildly for excursionist . 

 " when there be a sublet I find that damage - " 

 " do excuse I , but about the Porphyrion . I do not   feel 
 easy - might I just bother you , Henry ? " 

 her manner be so serious that he stop , and ask she 
 a little sharply what she want . 

 " you say on Chelsea Embankment , surely , that it be a 
 bad concern , so we advise this clerk to clear out . he 
 write this morning that he be take our advice , and now you 
 say it be not a bad concern . " 

 " a clerk who clear out of any concern , good or bad , 
 without secure a berth somewhere else first , be a fool , 
 and I have   no pity for he . " 

 " he have not do that . he be go into a bank in Camden 
 Town , he say . the salary 's much low , but he hop to 
 manage - a branch of Dempster 's Bank . be that all right ? " 

 " Dempster ! my goodness I , yes . " 

 " more right than the porphyrion ? " 

 " yes , yes , yes ; safe as house - safe . " 

 " very many thank . I be sorry - if you sublet - ? " 

 " if he sublet , I shall not   have the same control . in 
 theory there should be no more damage do at howard End ; 
 in practice there will be . thing may be do for which no 
 money can compensate . for instance , I should not   want that 
 fine wych - elm spoilt . it hang - Margaret , we must go and 
 see the old place some time . it be pretty in its way . we will 
 motor down and have lunch with Charles . " 

 " I should enjoy that , " say Margaret bravely . 

 " what about next Wednesday ? " 

 " Wednesday ? no , I could not   well do that . Aunt Juley 
 expect we to stop here another week at least . " 

 " but you can give that up now . " 

 " Er - no , " say Margaret , after a moment 's thought . 

 " oh , that will be all right . I will speak to she . " 

 " this visit be a high solemnity . my aunt count on it 
 year after year . she turn the house upside down for we ; 
 she invite our special friend - she scarcely know Frieda , 
 and we can not   leave she on her hand . I miss one day , and 
 she would be so hurt if I do not   stay the full ten . " 

 " but I will say a word to she . do not   you bother . " 

 " Henry , I will not   go . do not   bully I . " 

 " you want to see the house , though ? " 

 " very much - I have   hear so much about it , one way or the 
 other . be not   there pig ' tooth in the wych - elm ? " 

 " pigs ' tooth ? " 

 " and you chew the bark for toothache . " 

 " what a rum notion ! of course not ! " 

 " perhaps I have confuse it with some other tree . there 
 be still a great number of sacred tree in England , it seem . " 

 but he leave she to intercept Mrs. Munt , whose voice 
 could be hear in the distance : to be intercept himself by 
 Helen . 

 " oh , Mr. Wilcox , about the Porphyrion - " she begin , and 
 go scarlet all over her face . 

 " it be all right , " call Margaret , catch they up . 
 " Dempster 's Bank 's well . " 

 " but I think you tell we the Porphyrion be bad , and 
 would smash before Christmas . " 

 " do I ? it be still outside the Tariff Ring , and have 
 to take rotten policy . lately it come in - safe as house now . " 

 " in other word , Mr. Bast need never have leave it . " 

 " no , the fellow need not . " 

 " - and need not   have start life elsewhere at a greatly 
 reduce salary . " 

 " he only say ' reduced , ' " correct Margaret , see 
 trouble ahead . 

 " with a man so poor , every reduction must be great . I 
 consider it a deplorable misfortune . " 

 Mr. Wilcox , intent on his business with Mrs. Munt , be 
 go steadily on , but the last remark make he say : " what ? 
 what be that ? do you mean that I be responsible ? " 

 " you be ridiculous , Helen . " 

 " you seem to think - " he look at his watch . " let I 
 explain the point to you . it be like this . you seem to 
 assume , when a business concern be conduct a delicate 
 negotiation , it ought to keep the public informed stage by 
 stage . the Porphyrion , accord to you , be bind to say , 
 ' I be try all I can to get into the Tariff Ring . I be 
 not sure that I shall succeed , but it be the only thing that 
 will save I from insolvency , and I be try . ' my dear Helen - " 

 " be that your point ? a man who have little money have 
 less - that be mine . " 

 " I be grieve for your clerk . but it be all in the 
 day 's work . it be part of the battle of life . " 

 " a man who have little money , " she repeat , " have less , 
 owe to we . under these circumstance I do not consider 
 ' the battle of life ' a happy expression . " 

 " oh come , come ! " he protest pleasantly . " you be not 
 to blame . no one be to blame . " 

 " be no one to blame for anything ? " 

 " I would not   say that , but you be take it far too 
 seriously . who be this fellow ? " 

 " we have tell you about the fellow twice already , " say 
 Helen . " you have even meet the fellow . he be very poor and 
 his wife be an extravagant imbecile . he be capable of 
 well thing . we - we , the upper class - think we would 
 help he from the height of our superior knowledge - and 
 here be the result ! " 

 he raise his finger . " now , a word of advice . " 

 " I require no more advice . " 

 " a word of advice . do not   take up that sentimental 
 attitude over the poor . see that she do not , Margaret . 
 the poor be poor , and one be sorry for they , but there it 
 be . as civilization move forward , the shoe be bind to 
 pinch in place , and it be absurd to pretend that anyone be 
 responsible personally . neither you , nor I , nor my 
 informant , nor the man who inform he , nor the director 
 of the Porphyrion , be to blame for this clerk 's loss of 
 salary . it be just the shoe pinch - no one can help it ; 
 and it might easily have be bad . " 

 Helen quiver with indignation . 

 " by all mean subscribe to charity - subscribe to they 
 largely - but do not   get carry away by absurd scheme of 
 Social Reform . I see a good deal behind the scene , and you 
 can take it from I that there be no Social Question - except 
 for a few journalist who try to get a living out of the 
 phrase . there be just rich and poor , as there always have 
 be and always will be . point I out a time when man have 
 be equal - " 

 " I do not   say - " 

 " point I out a time when desire for equality have make 
 they happy . no , no . you can not . there always have be 
 rich and poor . I be no fatalist . Heaven forbid ! but our 
 civilization be mould by great impersonal force "   his 
 voice grow complacent ; it always do when he eliminate the 
 personal , " and there always will be rich and poor . you 
 can not   deny it "   and now it be a respectful voice   - " and you 
 can not   deny that , in spite of all , the tendency of 
 civilization have on the whole be upward . " 

 " owe to God , I suppose , " flash Helen . 

 he star at she . 

 " you grab the dollar . God do the rest . " 

 it be no good instruct the girl if she be go to 
 talk about God in that neurotic modern way . fraternal to 
 the last , he leave she for the quieter company of Mrs. Munt . 
 he think , " she rather remind I of Dolly . " 

 Helen look out at the sea . 

 " do not   even discuss political economy with Henry , " 
 advise her sister . " it will only end in a cry . " 

 " but he must be one of those man who have reconcile 
 science with religion , " say Helen slowly . " I do not   like 
 those man . they be scientific themselves , and talk of the 
 survival of the fit , and cut down the salary of their 
 clerk , and stunt the independence of all who may menace 
 their comfort , but yet they believe that somehow good - and 
 it be always that sloppy ' somehow ' - will be the outcome , and 
 that in some mystical way the Mr. Basts of the future will 
 benefit because the Mr. Basts of today be in pain . " 

 " he be such a man in theory . but oh , Helen , in theory ! " 

 " but oh , Meg , what a theory ! " 

 " why should you put thing so bitterly , dearie ? " 

 " because I be an old maid , " say Helen , bite her lip . 
 " I can not   think why I go on like this myself . " she shake off 
 her sister 's hand and go into the house . Margaret , 
 distressed at the day 's beginning , follow the Bournemouth 
 steamer with her eye . she see that Helen 's nerve be 
 exasperate by the unlucky Bast business beyond the bound 
 of politeness . there might at any minute be a real 
 explosion , which even Henry would notice . Henry must be remove . 

 " Margaret ! " her aunt call . " Magsy ! it be not   true , 
 surely , what Mr. Wilcox say , that you want to go away early 
 next week ? " 

 " not ' want , ' " be Margaret 's prompt reply ; " but there be 
 so much to be settle , and I do want to see the Charles ' . " 

 " but go away without take the Weymouth trip , or 
 even the Lulworth ? " say Mrs. Munt , come nearer . " without 
 go once more up nine barrow down ? " 

 " I be afraid so . " 

 Mr. Wilcox rejoin she with , " good ! I do the breaking 
 of the ice . " 

 a wave of tenderness come over she . she put a hand on 
 either shoulder , and look deeply into the black , bright 
 eye . what be behind their competent stare ? she know , but 
 be not disquiet . 


 chapter 23 

 Margaret have no intention of let thing slide , and the 
 evening before she leave Swanage she give her sister a 
 thorough scolding . she censure she , not for disapprove 
 of the engagement , but for throw over her disapproval a 
 veil of mystery . Helen be equally frank . " yes , " she say , 
 with the air of one look inward , " there be a mystery . I 
 can not   help it . it be not my fault . it be the way life have 
 be make . " Helen in those day be over - interested in the 
 subconscious self . she exaggerate the Punch and Judy 
 aspect of life , and speak of mankind as puppet , whom an 
 invisible showman twitch into love and war . Margaret 
 point out that if she dwelt on this she , too , would 
 eliminate the personal . Helen be silent for a minute , and 
 then burst into a queer speech , which clear the air . " go 
 on and marry he . I think you be splendid ; and if anyone 
 can pull it off , you will . " Margaret deny that there be 
 anything to " pull off , " but she continue : " yes , there be , 
 and I be not   up to it with Paul . I can only do what be 
 easy . I can only entice and be entice . I can not , and will not 
 attempt difficult relation . if I marry , it will either be 
 a man who be strong enough to boss I or whom I be strong 
 enough to boss . so I shall not   ever marry , for there be not 
 such man . and Heaven help any one whom I do marry , for I 
 shall certainly run away from he before you can say ' Jack 
 Robinson . ' there ! because I be uneducated . but you , you be 
 different ; you be a heroine . " 

 " oh , Helen ! be I ? will it be as dreadful for poor 
 Henry as all that ? " 

 " you mean to keep proportion , and that be heroic , it be 
 Greek , and I do not   see why it should not   succeed with you . 
 go on and fight with he and help he . do not   ask I for 
 help , or even for sympathy . Henceforward I be go my own 
 way . I mean to be thorough , because thoroughness be easy . 
 I mean to dislike your husband , and to tell he so . I mean 
 to make no concession to Tibby . if Tibby want to live 
 with I , he must lump I . I mean to love you more than 
 ever . yes , I do . you and I have build up something real , 
 because it be purely spiritual . there be no veil of mystery 
 over we . unreality and mystery begin as soon as one touch 
 the body . the popular view be , as usual , exactly the wrong 
 one . our bother be over tangible thing - money , husband , 
 house - hunting . but Heaven will work of itself . " 

 Margaret be grateful for this expression of affection , 
 and answer , " perhaps . " all vista close in the unseen - no 
 one doubt it - but Helen close they rather too quickly for 
 her taste . at every turn of speech one be confront with 
 reality and the absolute . perhaps Margaret grow too old for 
 metaphysic , perhaps Henry be wean she from they , but 
 she feel that there be something a little unbalanced in the 
 mind that so readily shred the visible . the business man 
 who assume that this life be everything , and the mystic who 
 assert that it be nothing , fail , on this side and on that , 
 to hit the truth . " yes , I see , dear ; it be about halfway 
 between , " Aunt Juley have hazard in early year . no ; 
 truth , be alive , be not halfway between anything . it 
 be only to be find by continuous excursion into either 
 realm , and though proportion be the final secret , to espouse 
 it at the outset be to insure sterility . 

 Helen , agree here , disagree there , would have 
 talk till midnight , but Margaret , with her pack to do , 
 focusse the conversation on Henry . she might abuse Henry 
 behind his back , but please would she always , be civil to 
 he in company ? " I definitely dislike he , but I will do what 
 I can , " promise Helen . " do what you can with my friend in 
 return . " 

 this conversation make Margaret easy . their inner 
 life be so safe that they could bargain over external in a 
 way that would have be incredible to Aunt Juley , and 
 impossible for Tibby or Charles . there be moment when the 
 inner life actually " pay , " when year of self - scrutiny , 
 conduct for no ulterior motive , be suddenly of practical 
 use . such moment be still rare in the West ; that they 
 come at all promise a fair future . Margaret , though 
 unable to understand her sister , be assure against 
 estrangement , and return to London with a more peaceful mind . 

 the following morning , at eleven o'clock , she present 
 herself at the office of the Imperial and west african 
 Rubber Company . she be glad to go there , for Henry have 
 imply his business rather than describe it , and the 
 formlessness and vagueness that one associate with Africa 
 have hitherto brood over the main source of his wealth . 
 not that a visit to the office clear thing up . there be 
 just the ordinary surface scum of ledger and polished 
 counter and brass bar that begin and stop for no 
 possible reason , of electric - light globe blossom in 
 triplet , of little rabbit hutch face with glass or wire , 
 of little rabbit . and even when she penetrate to the 
 inner depth , she find only the ordinary table and Turkey 
 carpet , and though the map over the fireplace do depict a 
 helping of West Africa , it be a very ordinary map . another 
 map hang opposite , on which the whole continent appear , 
 look like a whale mark out for blubber , and by its side 
 be a door , shut , but Henry 's voice come through it , 
 dictate a ' strong " letter . she might have be at the 
 Porphyrion , or Dempster 's Bank , or her own wine - merchant 's . 
 everything seem just alike in these day . but perhaps she 
 be see the imperial side of the company rather than its 
 West African , and Imperialism always have be one of her 
 difficulty . 

 " one minute ! " call Mr. Wilcox on receive her name . 
 he touch a bell , the effect of which be to produce Charles . 

 Charles have write his father an adequate letter - more 
 adequate than Evie 's , through which a girlish indignation 
 throb . and he greet his future stepmother with propriety . 

 " I hope that my wife - how do you do ? - will give you a 
 decent lunch , " be his opening . " I leave instruction , but 
 we live in a rough - and - ready way . she expect you back to 
 tea , too , after you have have a look at howard End . I 
 wonder what you will think of the place . I would not   touch it 
 with tong myself . do sit down ! it be a measly little place . " 

 " I shall enjoy see it , " say Margaret , feel , for 
 the first time , shy . 

 " you will see it at its bad , for Bryce decamp abroad 
 last Monday without even arrange for a charwoman to clear 
 up after he . I never see such a disgraceful mess . it be 
 unbelievable . he be not   in the house a month . " 

 " I have   more than a little bone to pick with Bryce , " 
 call Henry from the inner chamber . 

 " why do he go so suddenly ? " 

 " invalid type ; could not   sleep . " 

 " poor fellow ! " 

 " poor fiddlestick ! " say Mr. Wilcox , join they . " he 
 have the impudence to put up notice - board without as much as 
 say with your leave or by your leave . Charles fling they 
 down . " 

 " yes , I fling they down , " say Charles modestly . 

 " I have   send a telegram after he , and a pretty sharp one , 
 too . he , and he in person be responsible for the upkeep of 
 that house for the next three year . " 

 " the key be at the farm ; we would not   have the key . " 

 " quite right . " 

 " dolly would have take they , but I be in , fortunately . " 

 " what be Mr. Bryce like ? " ask Margaret . 

 but nobody care . Mr. Bryce be the tenant , who have no 
 right to sublet ; to have define he far be a waste of 
 time . on his misdeed they descant profusely , until the 
 girl who have be type the strong letter come out with 
 it . Mr. Wilcox add his signature . " now we will be off , " 
 say he . 

 a motor - drive , a form of felicity detest by Margaret , 
 await she . Charles see they in , civil to the last , and in 
 a moment the office of the Imperial and West African Rubber 
 Company fade away . but it be not an impressive drive . 
 perhaps the weather be to blame , be grey and bank high 
 with weary cloud . perhaps Hertfordshire be scarcely 
 intend for motorist . do not a gentleman once motor so 
 quickly through Westmoreland that he miss it ? and if 
 Westmoreland can be miss , it will fare ill with a county 
 whose delicate structure particularly need the attentive 
 eye . Hertfordshire be England at its quiet , with little 
 emphasis of river and hill ; it be England meditative . if 
 Drayton be with we again to write a new edition of his 
 incomparable poem , he would sing the nymph of Hertfordshire 
 as indeterminate of feature , with hair obfuscate by the 
 London smoke . their eye would be sad , and avert from 
 their fate towards the northern flat , their leader not isis 
 or Sabrina , but the slowly flow Lea . no glory of raiment 
 would be theirs , no urgency of dance ; but they would be real 
 nymph . 

 the chauffeur could not travel as quickly as he have 
 hop , for the Great North Road be full of Easter traffic . 
 but he go quite quick enough for Margaret , a poor - spirit 
 creature , who have chicken and child on the brain . 

 " they be all right , " say Mr. Wilcox . " they will 
 learn - like the swallow and the telegraph - wire . " 

 " yes , but , while they be learn - " 

 " the motor 's come to stay , " he answer . " one must get 
 about . there be a pretty church - oh , you be not   sharp 
 enough . well , look out , if the road worry you - right 
 outward at the scenery . " 

 she look at the scenery . it heave and merge like 
 porridge . presently it congeal . they have arrive . 

 Charles 's house on the left ; on the right the swell 
 form of the Six Hills . their appearance in such a 
 neighbourhood surprise she . they interrupt the stream of 
 residence that be thicken up towards Hilton . beyond 
 they she see meadow and a wood , and beneath they she 
 settle that soldier of the good kind lie bury . she 
 hat war and like soldier - it be one of her amiable 
 inconsistency . 

 but here be dolly , dress up to the nine , stand at 
 the door to greet they , and here be the first drop of the 
 rain . they run in gaily , and after a long wait in the 
 drawing - room sit down to the rough - and - ready lunch , every 
 dish in which conceal or exude cream . Mr. Bryce be the 
 chief topic of conversation . dolly describe his visit with 
 the key , while her father - in - law give satisfaction by 
 chaff she and contradict all she say . it be 
 evidently the custom to laugh at dolly . he chaff 
 Margaret , too , and Margaret , rouse from a grave meditation , 
 be pleased , and chaff he back . dolly seem surprised , 
 and eye her curiously . after lunch the two child come 
 down . Margaret dislike baby , but hit it off well with 
 the two - year - old , and send dolly into fit of laughter by 
 talk sense to he . " kiss they now , and come away , " say 
 Mr. Wilcox . she come , but refuse to kiss they : it be such 
 hard luck on the little thing , she say , and though dolly 
 proffer Chorly - worly and Porgly - woggle in turn , she be obdurate . 

 by this time it be rain steadily . the car come 
 round with the hood up , and again she lose all sense of 
 space . in a few minute they stop , and Crane open the 
 door of the car . 

 " what be happen ? " ask Margaret . 

 " what do you suppose ? " say Henry . 

 a little porch be close up against her face . 

 " be we there already ? " 

 " we be . " 

 " well , I never ! in year ago it seem so far away . " 

 smile , but somehow disillusioned , she jump out , and 
 her impetus carry she to the front - door . she be about to 
 open it , when Henry say : " that be no good ; it be lock . 
 who be get the key ? " 

 as he have himself forget to call for the key at the 
 farm , no one reply . he also want to know who have leave 
 the front gate open , since a cow have stray in from the 
 road , and be spoil the croquet lawn . then he say 
 rather crossly : " Margaret , you wait in the dry . I will go 
 down for the key . it be not   a hundred yard . 

 " may not   I come too ? " 

 " no ; I shall be back before I be go . " 

 then the car turn away , and it be as if a curtain have 
 rise . for the second time that day she see the appearance 
 of the earth . 

 there be the greengage - tree that Helen have once 
 describe , there the tennis lawn , there the hedge that would 
 be glorious with dog - rose in June , but the vision now be 
 of black and palest green . down by the dell - hole more vivid 
 colour be awakening , and Lent Lilies stand sentinel on 
 its margin , or advance in battalion over the grass . 
 tulip be a tray of jewel . she could not see the 
 wych - elm tree , but a branch of the celebrate vine , stud 
 with velvet knob , have cover the porch . she be strike by 
 the fertility of the soil ; she have seldom be in a garden 
 where the flower look so well , and even the weed she be 
 idly pluck out of the porch be intensely green . why 
 have poor Mr. Bryce flee from all this beauty ? for she have 
 already decide that the place be beautiful . 

 " naughty cow ! go away ! " cry Margaret to the cow , but 
 without indignation . 

 Harder come the rain , pour out of a windless sky , and 
 spatter up from the notice - board of the house - agent , 
 which lie in a row on the lawn where Charles have hurl 
 they . she must have interview Charles in another 
 world - where one do have interview . how Helen would revel 
 in such a notion ! Charles dead , all people dead , nothing 
 alive but house and garden . the obvious dead , the 
 intangible alive , and - no connection at all between they ! 
 Margaret smile . would that her own fancy be as 
 clear - cut ! would that she could deal as high - handedly with 
 the world ! smile and sighing , she lay her hand upon the 
 door . it open . the house be not lock up at all . 

 she hesitate . ought she to wait for Henry ? he feel 
 strongly about property , and might prefer to show she over 
 himself . on the other hand , he have tell she to keep in the 
 dry , and the porch be begin to drip . so she go in , 
 and the drought from inside slam the door behind . 

 Desolation greet she . dirty finger - print be on the 
 hall - window , flue and rubbish on its unwashed board . the 
 civilization of luggage have be here for a month , and then 
 decamp . dining - room and draw room - right and 
 leave - be guess only by their wall - paper . they be 
 just room where one could shelter from the rain . across 
 the ceiling of each run a great beam . the dining - room and 
 hall reveal theirs openly , but the drawing - room 's be 
 match - board - because the fact of life must be conceal 
 from lady ? drawing - room , dining - room , and hall - how petty 
 the name sound ! here be simply three room where 
 child could play and friend shelter from the rain . yes , 
 and they be beautiful . 

 then she open one of the door opposite - there be 
 two - and exchange wall - paper for whitewash . it be the 
 servant ' part , though she scarcely realize that : just 
 room again , where friend might shelter . the garden at the 
 back be full of flower cherry and plum . far on 
 be hint of the meadow and a black cliff of pine . yes , 
 the meadow be beautiful . 

 pen in by the desolate weather , she recapture the 
 sense of space which the motor have try to rob from she . 
 she remember again that ten square mile be not ten time 
 as wonderful as one square mile , that a thousand square 
 mile be not practically the same as heaven . the phantom 
 of bigness , which London encourage , be lay for ever when 
 she pace from the hall at howard end to its kitchen and 
 hear the rain run this way and that where the watershed of 
 the roof divide they . 

 now Helen come to her mind , scrutinize half wessex 
 from the ridge of the Purbeck Downs , and say : " you will 
 have to lose something . " she be not so sure . for instance , 
 she would double her kingdom by open the door that 
 conceal the stair . 

 now she think of the map of Africa ; of empire ; of her 
 father ; of the two supreme nation , stream of whose life 
 warm her blood , but , mingling , have cool her brain . she 
 pace back into the hall , and as she do so the house reverberate . 

 " be that you , Henry ? " she call . 

 there be no answer , but the house reverberate again . 

 " Henry , have you get in ? " 

 but it be the heart of the house beating , faintly at 
 first , then loudly , martially . it dominate the rain . 

 it be the starve imagination , not the well - nourish , 
 that be afraid . Margaret fling open the door to the 
 stair . a noise as of drum seem to deafen she . a woman , 
 an old woman , be descend , with figure erect , with face 
 impassive , with lip that part and say dryly : 

 " oh ! well , I take you for Ruth Wilcox . " 

 Margaret stammer : " I - Mrs. Wilcox - I ? " 

 " in fancy , of course - in fancy . you have her way of 
 walk . good - day . " and the old woman pass out into the 
 rain . 


 chapter 24 

 " it give she quite a turn , " say Mr. Wilcox , when retailing 
 the incident to dolly at tea - time . " none of you girl have 
 any nerve , really . of course , a word from I put it all 
 right , but silly old Miss Avery - she frighten you , do not 
 she , Margaret ? there you stand clutch a bunch of weed . 
 she might have say something , instead of come down the 
 stair with that alarm bonnet on . I pass she as I come 
 in . enough to make the car shy . I believe Miss Avery go 
 in for be a character ; some old maid do . " he light a 
 cigarette . " it be their last resource . Heaven know what 
 she be do in the place ; but that be Bryce 's business , not 
 mine . " 

 " I be not   as foolish as you suggest , " say Margaret . 
 " she only startle I , for the house have be silent so long . " 

 " do you take she for a spook ? " ask dolly , for whom 
 ' spook " and " go to church " summarize the unseen . 

 " not exactly . " 

 " she really do frighten you , " say Henry , who be far 
 from discourage timidity in female . " Poor Margaret ! and 
 very naturally . uneducated class be so stupid . " 

 " be Miss Avery uneducated class ? " Margaret ask , and 
 find herself look at the decoration scheme of Dolly 's 
 drawing - room . 

 " she be just one of the crew at the farm . People like 
 that always assume thing . she assume you would know who she 
 be . she leave all the howard end key in the front lobby , 
 and assume that you would see they as you come in , that you would 
 lock up the house when you have do , and would bring they on 
 down to she . and there be her niece hunting for they down 
 at the farm . lack of education make people very casual . 
 Hilton be full of woman like Miss Avery once . " 

 " I should not   have dislike it , perhaps . " 

 " or Miss Avery give I a wedding present , " say dolly . 

 which be illogical but interesting . through dolly , 
 Margaret be destine to learn a good deal . 

 " but Charles say I must try not to mind , because she 
 have know his grandmother . " 

 " as usual , you have   get the story wrong , my good Dorothea . " 

 " I mean great - grandmother - the one who leave Mrs. Wilcox 
 the house . be not   both of they and Miss Avery friend when 
 howard end , too , be a farm ? " 

 her father - in - law blow out a shaft of smoke . his 
 attitude to his dead wife be curious . he would allude to 
 she , and hear she discuss , but never mention she by 
 name . nor be he interested in the dim , bucolic past . 
 dolly be - for the following reason . 

 " then have not   Mrs. Wilcox a brother - or be it an uncle ? 
 anyhow , he pop the question , and Miss Avery , she say 
 ' no . ' just imagine , if she have say ' yes , ' she would have be 
 Charles 's aunt .   oh , I say , - that be rather good ! ' Charlie 's 
 Aunt ' ! I must chaff he about that this evening .   and the 
 man go out and be kill . yes , I be certain I have   get it 
 right now . Tom Howard - he be the last of they . " 

 " I believe so , " say Mr. Wilcox negligently . 

 " I say ! howard end - Howard 's end ! " cry dolly . 
 " I be rather on the spot this evening , eh ? " 

 " I wish you would ask whether Crane 's end . " 

 " oh , Mr. Wilcox , how can you ? " 

 " because , if he have have enough tea , we ought to 
 go . - dolly be a good little woman , " he continue , " but a 
 little of she go a long way . I could not   live near she if 
 you pay I . " 

 Margaret smile . though present a firm front to 
 outsider , no Wilcox could live near , or near the 
 possession of , any other Wilcox . they have the colonial 
 spirit , and be always make for some spot where the white 
 man might carry his burden unobserved . of course , howard 
 end be impossible , so long as the young couple be 
 establish in Hilton . his objection to the house be 
 plain as daylight now . 

 Crane have have enough tea , and be send to the garage , 
 where their car have be trickle muddy water over 
 Charles 's . the downpour have surely penetrate the Six Hills 
 by now , bring news of our restless civilization . 
 " curious mound , " say , Henry , " but in with you now ; another 
 time . " he have to be up in London by seven - if possible , by 
 six - thirty . once more she lose the sense of space ; once 
 more tree , house , people , animal , hill , merge and 
 heave into one dirtiness , and she be at Wickham Place . 

 her evening be pleasant . the sense of flux which have 
 haunt she all the year disappear for a time . she forget 
 the luggage and the motor - car , and the hurry man who 
 know so much and connect so little . she recapture the 
 sense of space , which be the basis of all earthly beauty , 
 and , start from howard End , she attempt to realize 
 England . she fail - vision do not come when we try , 
 though they may come through try . but an unexpected love 
 of the island awake in she , connect on this side with the 
 joy of the flesh , on that with the inconceivable . Helen 
 and her father have know this love , poor Leonard Bast be 
 grope after it , but it have be hide from Margaret till 
 this afternoon . it have certainly come through the house and 
 old Miss Avery . through they : the notion of " through " 
 persist ; her mind tremble towards a conclusion which only 
 the unwise have put into word . then , veer back into 
 warmth , it dwelt on ruddy brick , flower plum - tree , and 
 all the tangible joy of , spring . 

 Henry , after allay her agitation , have take she over 
 his property , and have explain to she the use and 
 dimension of the various room . he have sketch the 
 history of the little estate . " it be so unlucky , " run the 
 monologue , " that money be not   put into it about fifty year 
 ago . then it have four - five - time the land - thirty acre at 
 least . one could have make something out of it then - a 
 small park , or at all event shrubbery , and rebuild the 
 house far away from the road . what be the good of take 
 it in hand now ? nothing but the meadow leave , and even that 
 be heavily mortgaged when I first have to do with 
 thing - yes , and the house too . oh , it be no joke . " she 
 see two woman as he speak , one old , the other young , 
 watch their inheritance melt away . she see they greet 
 he as a deliverer . " Mismanagement do it - besides , the 
 day for small farm be over . it do not   pay - except with 
 intensive cultivation . small holding , back to the 
 land - ah ! philanthropic bunkum . take it as a rule that 
 nothing pay on a small scale . Most of the land you see 
  they be stand at an upper window , the only one which 
 face west   belong to the people at the Park - they make 
 their pile over copper - good chap . Avery 's Farm , 
 Sishe 's - what they call the Common , where you see that 
 ruin oak - one after the other fall in , and so do this , as 
 near as be no matter . " but Henry have save it ; without fine 
 feeling or deep insight , but he have save it , and she love 
 he for the deed . " when I have more control I do what I 
 could : sell off the two and a half animal , and the mangy 
 pony , and the superannuated tool ; pull down the 
 outhouse ; drain ; thin out I do not   know how many 
 guelder - rose and elder - tree ; and inside the house I turn 
 the old kitchen into a hall , and make a kitchen behind where 
 the dairy be . garage and so on come later . but one could 
 still tell it be be an old farm . and yet it be not   the 
 place that would fetch one of your artistic crew . " no , it 
 be not ; and if he do not quite understand it , the artistic 
 crew would still less : it be English , and the wych - elm that 
 she see from the window be an english tree . no report have 
 prepare she for its peculiar glory . it be neither 
 warrior , nor lover , nor god ; in none of these role do the 
 English excel . it be a comrade , bend over the house , 
 strength and adventure in its root , but in its utmost 
 finger tenderness , and the girth , that a dozen man could 
 not have span , become in the end evanescent , till pale 
 bud cluster seem to float in the air . it be a comrade . 
 House and tree transcend any simile of sex . Margaret 
 think of they now , and be to think of they through many a 
 windy night and London day , but to compare either to man , to 
 woman , always dwarf the vision . yet they keep within 
 limit of the human . their message be not of eternity , but 
 of hope on this side of the grave . as she stand in the one , 
 gaze at the other , true relationship have gleam . 

 another touch , and the account of her day be finish . 
 they enter the garden for a minute , and to Mr. Wilcox 's 
 surprise she be right . tooth , pig ' tooth , could be see 
 in the bark of the wych - elm tree - just the white tip of 
 they show . " Extraordinary ! " he cry . " who tell you ? " 

 " I hear of it one winter in London , " be her answer , 
 for she , too , avoid mention Mrs. Wilcox by name . 


 chapter 25 

 Evie hear of her father 's engagement when she be in for a 
 tennis tournament , and her play go simply to pot . that 
 she should marry and leave he have seem natural enough ; 
 that he , leave alone , should do the same be deceitful ; and 
 now Charles and Dolly say that it be all her fault . " but 
 I never dream of such a thing , " she grumble . " Dad take I 
 to call now and then , and make I ask she to Simpson 's . 
 well , I be altogether off Dad . " it be also an insult to 
 their mother 's memory ; there they be agree , and Evie have 
 the idea of return Mrs. Wilcox 's lace and jewellery " as a 
 protest . " against what it would protest she be not clear ; 
 but be only eighteen , the idea of renunciation appeal 
 to she , the more as she do not care for jewellery or lace . 
 dolly then suggest that she and Uncle Percy should pretend 
 to break off their engagement , and then perhaps Mr. Wilcox 
 would quarrel with Miss Schlegel , and break off his ; or Paul 
 might be cable for . but at this point Charles tell they 
 not to talk nonsense . so Evie settle to marry as soon as 
 possible ; it be no good hang about with these schlegel 
 eye she . the date of her wedding be consequently put 
 forward from September to August , and in the intoxication of 
 present she recover much of her good - humour . 

 Margaret find that she be expect to figure at this 
 function , and to figure largely ; it would be such an 
 opportunity , say Henry , for she to get to know his set . 
 Sir James Bidder would be there , and all the Cahills and the 
 Fussells , and his sister - in - law , Mrs. Warrington Wilcox , have 
 fortunately get back from her tour round the world . Henry 
 she love , but his set promise to be another matter . he 
 have not the knack of surround himself with nice 
 people - indeed , for a man of ability and virtue his choice 
 have be singularly unfortunate ; he have no guide principle 
 beyond a certain preference for mediocrity ; he be content 
 to settle one of the great thing in life haphazard , and 
 so , while his investment go right , his friend generally 
 go wrong . she would be tell , " oh , so - and - so be a good 
 sort - a thunder good sort , " and find , on meet he , 
 that he be a brute or a bore . if Henry have show real 
 affection , she would have understand , for affection explain 
 everything . but he seem without sentiment . the 
 " thunder good sort " might at any moment become " a fellow 
 for whom I never do have much use , and have less now , " and 
 be shake off cheerily into oblivion . Margaret have do the 
 same as a schoolgirl . now she never forget anyone for whom 
 she have once care ; she connect , though the connection 
 might be bitter , and she hop that some day Henry would do 
 the same . 

 Evie be not to be marry from Ducie Street . she have a 
 fancy for something rural , and , besides , no one would be in 
 London then , so she leave her box for a few week at Oniton 
 Grange , and her bann be duly publish in the parish 
 church , and for a couple of day the little town , dream 
 between the ruddy hill , be rouse by the clang of our 
 civilization , and draw up by the roadside to let the motor 
 pass . Oniton have be a discovery of Mr. Wilcox 's - a 
 discovery of which he be not altogether proud . it be up 
 towards the Welsh border , and so difficult of access that he 
 have conclude it must be something special . a ruin castle 
 stand in the ground . but have get there , what be one to 
 do ? the shooting be bad , the fishing indifferent , and 
 woman - folk report the scenery as nothing much . the place 
 turn out to be in the wrong part of Shropshire , damn it , 
 and though he never damn his own property aloud , he be 
 only wait to get it off his hand , and then to let fly . 
 Evie 's marriage be its last appearance in public . as soon 
 as a tenant be find , it become a house for which he never 
 have have much use , and have less now , and , like howard end , 
 fade into Limbo . 

 but on Margaret Oniton be destine to make a lasting 
 impression . she regard it as her future home , and be 
 anxious to start straight with the clergy , etc . , and , if 
 possible , to see something of the local life . it be a 
 market - town - as tiny a one as England possess - and have for 
 age serve that lonely valley , and guard our march 
 against the Kelt . in spite of the occasion , in spite of the 
 numbing hilarity that greet she as soon as she get into 
 the reserved saloon at Paddington , her sens be awake and 
 watching , and though Oniton be to prove one of she 
 innumerable false start , she never forget it , nor the 
 thing that happen there . 

 the London party only number eight - the Fussells , 
 father and son , two anglo - indian lady name Mrs. 
 Plynlimmon and Lady Edser , Mrs. Warrington Wilcox and her 
 daughter , and lastly , the little girl , very smart and quiet , 
 who figure at so many wedding , and who keep a watchful eye 
 on Margaret , the bride - elect , dolly be absent - a domestic 
 event detain she at Hilton ; Paul have cable a humorous 
 message ; Charles be to meet they with a trio of motor at 
 Shrewsbury . Helen have refuse her invitation ; Tibby have 
 never answer his . the management be excellent , as be to 
 be expect with anything that Henry undertake ; one be 
 conscious of his sensible and generous brain in the 
 background . they be his guest as soon as they reach 
 the train ; a special label for their luggage ; a courier ; a 
 special lunch ; they have only to look pleasant and , where 
 possible , pretty . Margaret think with dismay of her own 
 nuptial - presumably under the management of Tibby . " Mr. 
 Theobald Schlegel and Miss Helen Schlegel request the 
 pleasure of Mrs. Plynlimmon 's company on the occasion of the 
 marriage of their sister Margaret . " the formula be 
 incredible , but it must soon be print and send , and though 
 Wickham Place need not compete with Oniton , it must feed its 
 guest properly , and provide they with sufficient chair . 
 her wedding would either be ramshackly or bourgeois - she 
 hop the latter . such an affair as the present , stag 
 with a deftness that be almost beautiful , lie beyond her 
 power and those of her friend . 

 the low rich purr of a great western express be not the 
 bad background for conversation , and the journey pass 
 pleasantly enough . nothing could have exceed the kindness 
 of the two man . they raise window for some lady , and 
 lower they for other , they ring the bell for the servant , 
 they identify the college as the train slip past 
 Oxford , they catch book or bag - purse in the act of 
 tumble on to the floor . yet there be nothing finicky 
 about their politeness : it have the Public School touch , and , 
 though sedulous , be virile . More battle than Waterloo 
 have be win on our playing - field , and Margaret bow to a 
 charm of which she do not wholly approve , and say nothing 
 when the Oxford college be identify wrongly . " male and 
 female create he they " ; the journey to Shrewsbury confirm 
 this questionable statement , and the long glass saloon , that 
 move so easily and feel so comfortable , become a 
 force - house for the idea of sex . 

 at Shrewsbury come fresh air . Margaret be all for 
 sight - seeing , and while the other be finish their tea 
 at the Raven , she annex a motor and hurry over the 
 astonishing city . her chauffeur be not the faithful Crane , 
 but an Italian , who dearly love make she late . Charles , 
 watch in hand , though with a level brow , be stand in 
 front of the hotel when they return . it be perfectly all 
 right , he tell she ; she be by no mean the last . and then 
 he dive into the coffee - room , and she hear he say , " for 
 God 's sake , hurry the woman up ; we shall never be off , " and 
 Albert Fussell reply , " not I ; I have   do my share , " and 
 Colonel Fussell opine that the lady be get 
 themselves up to kill . presently Myra   Mrs. Warrington 's 
 daughter   appear , and as she be his cousin , Charles blow 
 she up a little : she have be change her smart travel 
 hat for a smart motor hat . then Mrs. Warrington herself , 
 lead the quiet child ; the two anglo - indian lady be 
 always last . maid , courier , heavy luggage , have already 
 go on by a branch - line to a station nearer Oniton , but 
 there be five hat - box and four dressing - bag to be 
 pack , and five dust - cloak to be put on , and to be put off 
 at the last moment , because Charles declare they not 
 necessary . the man preside over everything with unfailing 
 good - humour . by half - past five the party be ready , and 
 go out of Shrewsbury by the Welsh Bridge . 

 Shropshire have not the reticence of Hertfordshire . 
 though rob of half its magic by swift movement , it still 
 convey the sense of hill . they be near the 
 buttress that force the severn eastern and make it an 
 english stream , and the sun , sink over the Sentinels of 
 Wales , be straight in their eye . have pick up another 
 guest , they turn southward , avoid the great 
 mountain , but conscious of an occasional summit , rounded 
 and mild , whose colour differ in quality from that of 
 the low earth , and whose contour alter more slowly . 
 quiet mystery be in progress behind those tossing 
 horizon : the West , as ever , be retreat with some secret 
 which may not be worth the discovery , but which no practical 
 man will ever discover . 

 they speak of Tariff Reform . 

 Mrs. Warrington be just back from the Colonies . like 
 many other critic of Empire , her mouth have be stop 
 with food , and she could only exclaim at the hospitality 
 with which she have be receive , and warn the Mother 
 Country against trifle with young Titans . " they threaten 
 to cut the painter , " she cry , " and where shall we be 
 then ? Miss Schlegel , you will undertake to keep Henry sound 
 about tariff reform ? it be our last hope . " 

 Margaret playfully confess herself on the other side , 
 and they begin to quote from their respective hand - book 
 while the motor carry they deep into the hill . curious 
 these be , rather than impressive , for their outline 
 lack beauty , and the pink field - on their summit 
 suggest the handkerchief of a giant spread out to dry . 
 an occasional outcrop of rock , an occasional wood , an 
 occasional " forest , " treeless and brown , all hint at 
 wildness to follow , but the main colour be an agricultural 
 green . the air grow cool ; they have surmount the last 
 gradient , and Oniton lie below they with its church , its 
 radiating house , its castle , its river - girt peninsula . 
 close to the castle be a grey mansion , unintellectual but 
 kindly , stretch with its ground across the peninsula 's 
 neck - the sort of mansion that be build all over England in 
 the beginning of the last century , while architecture be 
 still an expression of the national character . that be the 
 Grange , remark Albert , over his shoulder , and then he 
 jam the brake on , and the motor slow down and stop . 
 " I be sorry , " say he , turn round . " do you mind get 
 out - by the door on the right ? Steady on ! " 

 " what be happen ? " ask Mrs. Warrington . 

 then the car behind they draw up , and the voice of 
 Charles be hear say : " get out the woman at once . " there 
 be a concourse of male , and Margaret and her companion 
 be hustle out and receive into the second car . what have 
 happen ? as it start off again , the door of a cottage 
 open , and a girl scream wildly at they . 

 " what be it ? " the lady cry . 

 Charles drive they a hundred yard without speak . 
 then he say : " it be all right . your car just touch a dog . " 

 " but stop ! " cry Margaret , horrify . 

 " it do not   hurt he . " 

 " do not   really hurt he ? " ask Myra . 

 " no . " 

 " do PLEASE stop ! " say Margaret , lean forward . she 
 be stand up in the car , the other occupant hold she 
 knee to steady she . " I want to go back , please . " 

 Charles take no notice . 

 " we have   leave Mr. Fussell behind , " say another ; " and 
 Angelo , and Crane . " 

 " yes , but no woman . " 

 " I expect a little of " - Mrs. Warrington scratch she 
 palm - " will be more to the point than one of we ! " 

 " the insurance company see to that , " remark Charles , 
 " and Albert will do the talking . " 

 " I want to go back , though , I say ! " repeat Margaret , 
 get angry . 

 Charles take no notice . the motor , load with 
 refugee , continue to travel very slowly down the hill . 
 " the man be there , " chorus the other . " man will see to it . " 

 " the man can't see to it . oh , this be ridiculous ! 
 Charles , I ask you to stop . " 

 " stop 's no good , " drawl Charles . 

 " be not   it ? " say Margaret , and jump straight out of 
 the car . 

 she fall on her knee , cut her glove , shake her hat 
 over her ear . cry of alarm follow she . " you have   hurt 
 yourself , " exclaim Charles , jump after she . 

 " of course I have   hurt myself ! " she retort . 

 " may I ask what - " 

 " there be nothing to ask , " say Margaret . 

 " your hand 's bleeding . " 

 " I know . " 

 " I be in for a frightful row from the pater . " 

 " you should have think of that soon , Charles . " 

 Charles have never be in such a position before . it 
 be a woman in revolt who be hobble away from he , and 
 the sight be too strange to leave any room for anger . he 
 recover himself when the other catch they up : their sort 
 he understand . he command they to go back . 

 Albert Fussell be see walk towards they . 

 " it be all right ! " he call . " it be not   a dog , it be a 
 cat . " 

 " there ! " exclaim Charles triumphantly . " it be only a 
 rotten cat . 

 " Got room in your car for a little un ? I cut as soon as 
 I see it be not   a dog ; the chauffeur be tackle the 
 girl . " but Margaret walk forward steadily . why should 
 the chauffeur tackle the girl ? lady shelter behind 
 man , man shelter behind servant - the whole system 's 
 wrong , and she must challenge it . 

 " Miss Schlegel ! ' pon my word , you have   hurt your hand . " 

 " I be just go to see , " say Margaret . " do not   you 
 wait , Mr. Fussell . " 

 the second motor come round the corner . " lt be all 
 right , madam , " say Crane in his turn . he have take to 
 call her madam . 

 " what be all right ? the cat ? " 

 " yes , madam . the girl will receive compensation for it . " 

 " she be a very ruda girla , " say Angelo from the third 
 motor thoughtfully . 

 " would not   you have be rude ? " 

 the Italian spread out his hand , imply that he have 
 not think of rudeness , but would produce it if it please 
 she . the situation become absurd . the gentleman be again 
 buzz round Miss Schlegel with offer of assistance , and 
 Lady Edser begin to bind up her hand . she yield , 
 apologize slightly , and be lead back to the car , and soon 
 the landscape resume its motion , the lonely cottage 
 disappear , the castle swell on its cushion of turf , and 
 they have arrive . no doubt she have disgrace herself . but 
 she feel their whole journey from London have be unreal . 
 they have no part with the earth and its emotion . they be 
 dust , and a stink , and cosmopolitan chatter , and the girl 
 whose cat have be kill have live more deeply than they . 

 " oh , Henry , " she exclaim , " I have be so naughty , " 
 for she have decide to take up this line . " we run over a 
 cat . Charles tell I not to jump out , but I would , and 
 look ! " she hold out her bandaged hand . " your poor Meg go 
 such a flop . " 

 Mr. Wilcox look bewildered . in evening dress , he be 
 stand to welcome his guest in the hall . 

 " think it be a dog , " add Mrs. Warrington . 

 " ah , a dog 's a companion ! " say Colonel Fussell . " a 
 dog'll remember you . " 

 " have you hurt yourself , Margaret ? " 

 " not to speak about ; and it be my left hand . " 

 " well , hurry up and change . " 

 she obey , as do the other . Mr. Wilcox then turn 
 to his son . 

 " now , Charles , what be happen ? " 

 Charles be absolutely honest . he describe what he 
 believe to have happen . Albert have flatten out a cat , 
 and Miss Schlegel have lose her nerve , as any woman might . 
 she have be get safely into the other car , but when it be 
 in motion have leapt out - again , in spite of all that they 
 could say . after walk a little on the road , she have 
 calm down and have say that she be sorry . his father 
 accept this explanation , and neither know that Margaret 
 have artfully prepare the way for it . it fit in too well 
 with their view of feminine nature . in the smoking - room , 
 after dinner , the Colonel put forward the view that Miss 
 Schlegel have jump it out of devilry . well he remember 
 as a young man , in the harbour of Gibraltar once , how a 
 girl - a handsome girl , too - have jump overboard for a bet . 
 he could see she now , and all the lad overboard after she . 
 but Charles and Mr. Wilcox agree it be much more probably 
 nerve in Miss Schlegel 's case . Charles be depressed . 
 that woman have a tongue . she would bring bad disgrace on 
 his father before she have do with they . he stroll out 
 on to the castle mound to think the matter over . the 
 evening be exquisite . on three side of he a little river 
 whisper , full of message from the west ; above his head 
 the ruin make pattern against the sky . he carefully 
 review their dealing with this family , until he fit 
 Helen , and Margaret , and Aunt Juley into an orderly 
 conspiracy . paternity have make he suspicious . he have two 
 child to look after , and more coming , and day by day they 
 seem less likely to grow up rich man . " it be all very 
 well , " he reflect , " the pater say that he will be just 
 to all , but one can not   be just indefinitely . money be not 
 elastic . what be to happen if Evie have a family ? and , come 
 to that , so may the pater . there will not be enough to go 
 round , for there be none come in , either through dolly or 
 Percy . it be damnable ! " he look enviously at the Grange , 
 whose window pour light and laughter . first and last , 
 this wedding would cost a pretty penny . two lady be 
 stroll up and down the garden terrace , and as the 
 syllable " imperialism " be waft to his ear , he guess 
 that one of they be his aunt . she might have help he , 
 if she too have not have a family to provide for . " every one 
 for himself , " he repeat - a maxim which have cheer he in 
 the past , but which ring grimly enough among the ruin of 
 Oniton . he lack his father 's ability in business , and so 
 have an ever high regard for money ; unless he could inherit 
 plenty , he fear to leave his child poor . 

 as he sit think , one of the lady leave the terrace 
 and walk into the meadow ; he recognize she as Margaret by 
 the white bandage that gleam on her arm , and put out his 
 cigar , lest the gleam should betray he . she climb up the 
 mound in zigzag , and at time stoop down , as if she be 
 stroke the turf . it sound absolutely incredible , but for 
 a moment Charles think that she be in love with he , and 
 have come out to tempt he . Charles believe in temptress , 
 who be indeed the strong man 's necessary complement , and 
 have no sense of humour , he could not purge himself of the 
 thought by a smile . Margaret , who be engage to his 
 father , and his sister 's wedding - guest , keep on her way 
 without notice he , and he admit that he have wrong 
 she on this point . but what be she do ? why be she 
 stumble about amongst the rubble and catch her dress in 
 bramble and burr ? as she edge round the keep , she must 
 have get to leeward and smell his cigar - smoke , for she 
 exclaim , " Hullo ! who be that ? " 

 Charles make no answer . 

 " Saxon or Kelt ? " she continue , laugh in the 
 darkness . " but it do not   matter . whichever you be , you 
 will have to listen to I . I love this place . I love 
 Shropshire . I hate London . I be glad that this will be my 
 home . ah , dear " - she be now move back towards the 
 house - " what a comfort to have arrive ! " 

 " that woman mean mischief , " think Charles , and 
 compress his lip . in a few minute he follow she 
 indoor , as the ground be get damp . mist be rise 
 from the river , and presently it become invisible , though it 
 whisper more loudly . there have be a heavy downpour in 
 the Welsh hill . 


 chapter 26 

 next morning a fine mist cover the peninsula . the weather 
 promise well , and the outline of the castle mound grow 
 clear each moment that Margaret watch it . presently she 
 see the keep , and the sun paint the rubble gold , and 
 charge the white sky with blue . the shadow of the house 
 gather itself together and fall over the garden . a cat 
 look up at her window and mew . lastly the river 
 appear , still hold the mist between its bank and its 
 overhang alder , and only visible as far as a hill , which 
 cut off its upper reach . 

 Margaret be fascinate by Oniton . she have say that 
 she love it , but it be rather its romantic tension that 
 hold she . the rounded Druids of whom she have catch 
 glimpse in her drive , the river hurry down from they to 
 England , the carelessly model mass of the low hill , 
 thrill she with poetry . the house be insignificant , but 
 the prospect from it would be an eternal joy , and she 
 think of all the friend she would have to stop in it , and 
 of the conversion of Henry himself to a rural life . 
 Society , too , promise favourably . the rector of the parish 
 have din with they last night , and she find that he be a 
 friend of her father 's , and so know what to find in she . 
 she like he . he would introduce she to the town . while , 
 on her other side , Sir James Bidder sit , repeat that she 
 only have to give the word , and he would whip up the county 
 family for twenty mile round . whether Sir James , who be 
 Garden Seeds , have promise what he could perform , she 
 doubt , but so long as Henry mistake they for the county 
 family when they do call , she be content . 

 Charles and Albert Fussell now cross the lawn . they 
 be go for a morning dip , and a servant follow they 
 with their bathing - dress . she have mean to take a stroll 
 herself before breakfast , but see that the day be still 
 sacred to man , and amuse herself by watch their 
 contretemp . in the first place the key of the bathing - shed 
 could not be find . Charles stand by the riverside with 
 fold hand , tragical , while the servant shout , and be 
 misunderstood by another servant in the garden . then come a 
 difficulty about a spring - board , and soon three people be 
 run backwards and forwards over the meadow , with order 
 and counter order and recrimination and apology . if 
 Margaret want to jump from a motor - car , she jump ; if 
 Tibby think paddling would benefit his ankle , he paddle ; 
 if a clerk desire adventure , he take a walk in the dark . 
 but these athlete seem paralysed . they could not bathe 
 without their appliance , though the morning sun be call 
 and the last mist be rise from the dimple stream . 
 have they find the life of the body after all ? could not 
 the man whom they despise as milksop beat they , even on 
 their own ground ? 

 she think of the bathing arrangement as they should 
 be in her day - no worrying of servant , no appliance , 
 beyond good sense . her reflection be disturb by the 
 quiet child , who have come out to speak to the cat , but be 
 now watch she watch the man . she call , " good - morning , 
 dear , " a little sharply . her voice spread consternation . 
 Charles look round , and though completely attire in 
 indigo blue , vanish into the shed , and be see no more . 

 " Miss Wilcox be up - " the child whisper , and then 
 become unintelligible . 

 " what be that ? " 

 it sound like , " - cut - yoke - sack back - " 

 " I can not   hear . " 

 " - on the bed - tissue - paper - " 

 gather that the wedding - dress be on view , and that a 
 visit would be seemly , she go to Evie 's room . all be 
 hilarity here . Evie , in a petticoat , be dance with one 
 of the anglo - indian lady , while the other be adore 
 yard of white satin . they scream , they laugh , they 
 sing , and the dog bark . 

 Margaret scream a little too , but without conviction . 
 she could not feel that a wedding be so funny . perhaps 
 something be miss in her equipment . 

 Evie gasp : " dolly be a rotter not to be here ! oh , we 
 would rag just then ! " then Margaret go down to breakfast . 

 Henry be already instal ; he eat slowly and speak 
 little , and be , in Margaret 's eye , the only member of 
 their party who dodge emotion successfully . she could not 
 suppose he indifferent either to the loss of his daughter 
 or to the presence of his future wife . yet he dwelt intact , 
 only issue order occasionally - order that promote the 
 comfort of his guest . he inquire after her hand ; he set 
 she to pour out the coffee and Mrs. Warrington to pour out 
 the tea . when Evie come down there be a moment 's 
 awkwardness , and both lady rise to vacate their place . 
 " Burton , " call Henry , ' serve tea and coffee from the 
 side - board ! " it be not   genuine tact , but it be tact , of a 
 sort - the sort that be as useful as the genuine , and save 
 even more situation at Board meeting . Henry treat a 
 marriage like a funeral , item by item , never raise his 
 eye to the whole , and " Death , where be thy sting ? love , 
 where be thy victory ? " one would exclaim at the close . 

 after breakfast she claim a few word with he . it 
 be always good to approach he formally . she ask for the 
 interview , because he be go on to shoot grouse tomorrow , 
 and she be return to Helen in town . 

 " certainly , dear , " say he . " of course , I have the 
 time . what do you want ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " I be afraid something have go wrong . " 

 " no ; I have nothing to say , but you may talk . " 

 Glancing at his watch , he talk of the nasty curve at 
 the lych - gate . she hear he with interest . her surface 
 could always respond to his without contempt , though all her 
 deep being might be yearn to help he . she have 
 abandon any plan of action . love be the good , and the 
 more she let herself love he , the more chance be there 
 that he would set his soul in order . such a moment as this , 
 when they sit under fair weather by the walk of their 
 future home , be so sweet to she that its sweetness would 
 surely pierce to he . each lift of his eye , each parting 
 of the thatched lip from the clean - shaven , must prelude the 
 tenderness that kill the Monk and the Beast at a single 
 blow . disappoint a hundred time , she still hop . she 
 love he with too clear a vision to fear his cloudiness . 
 whether he drone triviality , as today , or sprang kiss 
 on she in the twilight , she could pardon he , she could respond . 

 " if there be this nasty curve , " she suggest , " could not 
 we walk to the church ? not , of course , you and Evie ; but 
 the rest of we might very well go on first , and that would 
 mean few carriage . " 

 " one can not   have lady walk through the Market 
 Square . the Fussells would not   like it ; they be awfully 
 particular at Charles 's wedding . my - she - one of our party 
 be anxious to walk , and certainly the church be just round 
 the corner , and I should not   have mind ; but the Colonel 
 make a great point of it . " 

 " you man should not   be so chivalrous , " say Margaret thoughtfully . 

 " why not ? " 

 she know why not , but say that she do not know . 

 he then announce that , unless she have anything special 
 to say , he must visit the wine - cellar , and they go off 
 together in search of Burton . though clumsy and a little 
 inconvenient , Oniton be a genuine country house . they 
 clatter down flagged passage , look into room after 
 room , and scar unknown maid from the performance of 
 obscure duty . the wedding - breakfast must be in readiness 
 when they come back from church , and tea would be serve in 
 the garden . the sight of so many agitated and serious 
 people make Margaret smile , but she reflect that they be 
 pay to be serious , and enjoy be agitate . here be 
 the low wheel of the machine that be toss Evie up 
 into nuptial glory . a little boy block their way with 
 pig - tail . his mind could not grasp their greatness , and he 
 say : " by your leave ; let I pass , please . " Henry ask he 
 where Burton be . but the servant be so new that they 
 do not know one another 's name . in the still - room sit the 
 band , who have stipulate for champagne as part of their fee , 
 and who be already drink beer . scent of Araby come 
 from the kitchen , mingle with cry . Margaret know what 
 have happen there , for it happen at Wickham Place . one 
 of the wedding dish have boil over , and the cook be 
 throw cedar - shaving to hide the smell . at last they 
 come upon the butler . Henry give he the key , and hand 
 Margaret down the cellar - stair . two door be unlocked . 
 she , who keep all her wine at the bottom of the 
 linen - cupboard , be astonish at the sight . " we shall 
 never get through it ! " she cry , and the two man be 
 suddenly draw into brotherhood , and exchange smile . she 
 feel as if she have again jump out of the car while it be move . 

 certainly Oniton would take some digesting . it would be 
 no small business to remain herself , and yet to assimilate 
 such an establishment . she must remain herself , for his 
 sake as well as her own , since a shadowy wife degrade the 
 husband whom she accompany ; and she must assimilate for 
 reason of common honesty , since she have no right to marry a 
 man and make he uncomfortable . her only ally be the power 
 of home . the loss of Wickham Place have teach she more than 
 its possession . howard end have repeat the lesson . she 
 be determined to create new sanctity among these hill . 

 after visit the wine - cellar , she dress , and then 
 come the wedding , which seem a small affair when compare 
 with the preparation for it . everything go like one 
 o'clock . Mr. Cahill materialize out of space , and be 
 wait for his bride at the church door . no one drop 
 the ring or mispronounce the response , or trod on Evie 's 
 train , or cry . in a few minute - the clergyman perform 
 their duty , the register be sign , and they be back in 
 their carriage , negotiate the dangerous curve by the 
 lych - gate . Margaret be convince that they have not be 
 marry at all , and that the Norman church have be intent 
 all the time on other business . 

 there be more document to sign at the house , and the 
 breakfast to eat , and then a few more people drop in for 
 the garden party . there have be a great many refusal , and 
 after all it be not a very big affair - not as big as 
 Margaret 's would be . she note the dish and the strip of 
 red carpet , that outwardly she might give Henry what be 
 proper . but inwardly she hop for something well than 
 this blend of Sunday church and fox - hunting . if only 
 someone have be upset ! but this wedding have go off so 
 particularly well - " quite like a Durbar " in the opinion of 
 Lady Edser , and she thoroughly agree with she . 

 so the waste day lumber forward , the bride and 
 bridegroom drive off , yell with laughter , and for the 
 second time the sun retreat towards the hill of Wales . 
 Henry , who be more tired than he own , come up to she in 
 the castle meadow , and , in tone of unusual softness , say 
 that he be pleased . everything have go off so well . she 
 feel that he be praise she , too , and blush ; certainly 
 she have do all she could with his intractable friend , and 
 have make a special point of kowtow to the man . they be 
 break camp this evening : only the Warringtons and quiet 
 child would stay the night , and the other be already 
 move towards the house to finish their packing . " I think 
 it do go off well , " she agree . " since I have to jump out 
 of the motor , I be thankful I light on my left hand . I be 
 so very glad about it , Henry dear ; I only hope that the 
 guest at ours may be half as comfortable . you must all 
 remember that we have no practical person among we , except 
 my aunt , and she be not use to entertainment on a large scale . " 

 " I know , " he say gravely . " under the circumstance , it 
 would be well to put everything into the hand of Harrod 's 
 or Whiteley 's , or even to go to some hotel . " 

 " you desire a hotel ? " 

 " yes , because - well , I must not   interfere with you . no 
 doubt you want to be marry from your old home . " 

 " my old home be fall into piece , Henry . I only want 
 my new . be not   it a perfect evening - " 

 " the Alexandrina be not   bad - " 

 " the Alexandrina , " she echo , more occupy with the 
 thread of smoke that be issue from their chimney , and 
 rule the sunlit slope with parallel of grey . 

 " it be off Curzon Street . " 

 " be it ? let us be marry from off Curzon Street . " 

 then she turn westward , to gaze at the swirl gold . 
 just where the river round the hill the sun catch it . 
 Fairyland must lie above the bend , and its precious liquid 
 be pour towards they past Charles 's bathing - shed . she 
 gaze so long that her eye be dazzle , and when they 
 move back to the house , she could not recognize the face 
 of people who be come out of it . a parlour - maid be 
 precede they . 

 " who be those people ? " she ask . 

 " they be caller ! " exclaim Henry . " it be too late for caller . " 

 " perhaps they be town people who want to see the wedding 
 present . " 

 " I be not at home yet to townee . " 

 " well , hide among the ruin , and if I can stop they , I will . " 

 he thank she . 

 Margaret go forward , smile socially . she suppose 
 that these be unpunctual guest , who would have to be 
 content with vicarious civility , since Evie and Charles be 
 go , Henry tired , and the other in their room . she 
 assume the air of a hostess ; not for long . for one of the 
 group be Helen - Helen in her old clothe , and dominate 
 by that tense , wound excitement that have make she a 
 terror in their nursery day . 

 " what be it ? " she call . " oh , what be wrong ? be Tibby ill ? " 

 Helen speak to her two companion , who fall back . then 
 she bear forward furiously . 

 " they be starve ! " she shout . " I find they starve ! " 

 " who ? why have you come ? " 

 " the Basts . " 

 " oh , Helen ! " moan Margaret . " whatever have you do now ? " 

 " he have lose his place . he have be turn out of his 
 bank . yes , he be do for . we upper class have ruin 
 he , and I suppose you will tell I it be the battle of life . 
 starve . his wife be ill . starve . she faint in the train . " 

 " Helen , be you mad ? " 

 " perhaps . yes . if you like , I be mad . but I have   bring 
 they . I will stand injustice no long . I will show up the 
 wretchedness that lie under this luxury , this talk of 
 impersonal force , this can not about God do what we be too 
 slack to do ourselves . " 

 " have you actually bring two starve people from 
 London to Shropshire , Helen ? " 

 Helen be check . she have not think of this , and her 
 hysteria abate . " there be a restaurant car on the train , " 
 she say . 

 " do not   be absurd . they be not   starve , and you know 
 it . now , begin from the beginning . I will not   have such 
 theatrical nonsense . how dare you ! yes , how dare you ! " she 
 repeat , as anger fill she , " burst in to Evie 's 
 wedding in this heartless way . my goodness ! but you have   a 
 pervert notion of philanthropy . look " - she indicate the 
 house - ' servant , people out of the window . they think 
 it be some vulgar scandal , and I must explain , ' oh no , it be 
 only my sister scream , and only two hanger - on of our , 
 whom she have bring here for no conceivable reason . ' " 

 " kindly take back that word ' hanger - on , ' " say Helen , 
 ominously calm . 

 " very well , " concede Margaret , who for all her wrath 
 be determined to avoid a real quarrel . " I , too , be sorry 
 about they , but it beat I why you have   bring they here , or 
 why you be here yourself . 

 " it be our last chance of see Mr. Wilcox . " 

 Margaret move towards the house at this . she be 
 determined not to worry Henry . 

 " he be go to Scotland . I know he be . I insist on 
 see he . " 

 " yes , tomorrow . " 

 " I know it be our last chance . " 

 " how do you do , Mr. Bast ? " say Margaret , try to 
 control her voice . " this be an odd business . what view do 
 you take of it ? " 

 " there be Mrs. Bast , too , " prompt Helen . 

 Jacky also shake hand . she , like her husband , be shy , 
 and , furthermore , ill , and furthermore , so bestially stupid 
 that she could not grasp what be happen . she only know 
 that the lady have sweep down like a whirlwind last night , 
 have pay the rent , redeem the furniture , provide they 
 with a dinner and breakfast , and order they to meet she at 
 Paddington next morning . Leonard have feebly protest , and 
 when the morning come , have suggest that they should not 
 go . but she , half mesmerize , have obey . the lady have 
 tell they to , and they must , and their bed - sit - room have 
 accordingly change into Paddington , and Paddington into a 
 railway carriage , that shake , and grow hot , and grow cold , 
 and vanish entirely , and reappear amid torrent of 
 expensive scent . " you have faint , " say the lady in an 
 awe - strike voice . " perhaps the air will do you good . " and 
 perhaps it have , for here she be , feel rather well 
 among a lot of flower . 

 " I be sure I do not   want to intrude , " begin Leonard , in 
 answer to Margaret 's question . " but you have be so kind 
 to I in the past in warn I about the Porphyrion that I 
 wonder - why , I wonder whether - " 

 " whether we could get he back into the porphyrion 
 again , " supply Helen . " Meg , this have be a cheerful 
 business . a bright evening 's work that be on Chelsea Embankment . " 

 Margaret shake her head and return to Mr. Bast . 

 " I do not   understand . you leave the Porphyrion because we 
 suggest it be a bad concern , do not   you ? " 

 " that be right . " 

 " and go into a bank instead ? " 

 " I tell you all that , " say Helen ; " and they reduce 
 their staff after he have be in a month , and now he be 
 penniless , and I consider that we and our informant be 
 directly to blame . " 

 " I hate all this , " Leonard mutter . 

 " I hope you do , Mr. Bast . but it be no good mincing 
 matter . you have do yourself no good by come here . if 
 you intend to confront Mr. Wilcox , and to call he to 
 account for a chance remark , you will make a very great mistake . " 

 " I bring they . I do it all , " cry Helen . 

 " I can only advise you to go at once . my sister have put 
 you in a false position , and it be kind to tell you so . 
 it be too late to get to town , but you will find a comfortable 
 hotel in Oniton , where Mrs. Bast can rest , and I hope you will 
 be my guest there . " 

 " that be not   what I want , Miss Schlegel , " say Leonard . 
 " you be very kind , and no doubt it be a false position , but 
 you make I miserable . I seem no good at all . " 

 " it be work he want , " interpret Helen . " can not   you see ? " 

 then he say : " Jacky , let us go . we be more bother than 
 we be worth . we be cost these lady pound and pound 
 already to get work for we , and they never will . there be 
 nothing we be good enough to do . " 

 " we would like to find you work , " say Margaret rather 
 conventionally . " we want to - I , like my sister . you be 
 only down in your luck . go to the hotel , have a good 
 night 's rest , and some day you shall pay I back the bill , 
 if you prefer it . " 

 but Leonard be near the abyss , and at such moment man 
 see clearly . " you do not   know what you be talk about , " he 
 say . " I shall never get work now . if rich people fail at 
 one profession , they can try another . not I. I have my 
 groove , and I have   get out of it . I could do one particular 
 branch of insurance in one particular office well enough to 
 command a salary , but that be all . Poetry 's nothing , Miss 
 Schlegel . one 's thought about this and that be nothing . 
 your money , too , be nothing , if you will understand I . I 
 mean if a man over twenty once lose his own particular job , 
 it be all over with he . I have see it happen to other . 
 their friend give they money for a little , but in the end 
 they fall over the edge . it be no good . it be the whole 
 world pull . there always will be rich and poor . " 

 he cease . 

 " will not   you have something to eat ? " say Margaret . " I 
 do not   know what to do . it be not   my house , and though Mr. 
 Wilcox would have be glad to see you at any other time - as 
 I say , I do not   know what to do , but I undertake to do what I 
 can for you . Helen , offer they something . do try a 
 sandwich , Mrs. Bast . " 

 they move to a long table behind which a servant be 
 still stand . iced cake , sandwich innumerable , coffee , 
 claret - cup , champagne , remain almost intact : their overfe 
 guest could do no more . Leonard refuse . Jacky think 
 she could manage a little . Margaret leave they whispering 
 together and have a few more word with Helen . 

 she say : " Helen , I like Mr. Bast . I agree that he be 
 worth help . I agree that we be directly responsible . " 

 " no , indirectly . Via Mr. Wilcox . " 

 " let I tell you once for all that if you take up that 
 attitude , I will do nothing . no doubt you be right logically , 
 and be entitle to say a great many scathing thing about 
 Henry . only , I will not   have it . so choose . 

 Helen look at the sunset . 

 " if you promise to take they quietly to the George , I 
 will speak to Henry about they - in my own way , mind ; there 
 be to be none of this absurd scream about justice . I 
 have no use for justice . if it be only a question of 
 money , we could do it ourselves . but he want work , and 
 that we can not   give he , but possibly Henry can . " 

 " it be his duty to , " grumble Helen . 

 " nor be I concerned with duty . I be concerned with the 
 character of various people whom we know , and how , thing 
 be as they be , thing may be make a little well . Mr. 
 Wilcox hat be ask favour : all business man do . but 
 I be go to ask he , at the risk of a rebuff , because I 
 want to make thing a little well . " 

 " very well . I promise . you take it very calmly . " 

 " take they off to the George , then , and I will try . poor 
 creature ! but they look try . " as they part , she 
 add : " I have not   nearly do with you , though , Helen . you 
 have be most self - indulgent . I can not   get over it . you 
 have less restraint rather than more as you grow old . 
 think it over and alter yourself , or we shall not   have happy life . " 

 she rejoin Henry . fortunately he have be sit 
 down : these physical matter be important . " be it 
 townee ? " he ask , greet she with a pleasant smile . 

 " you will never believe I , " say Margaret , sit down 
 beside he . " it be all right now , but it be my sister . " 

 " Helen here ? " he cry , prepare to rise . " but she 
 refuse the invitation . I think she despise wedding . " 

 " do not   get up . she have not come to the wedding . I have 
 bundle she off to the George . " 

 inherently hospitable , he protest . 

 " no ; she have two of her protege with she , and must keep 
 with they . " 

 " let them all come . " 

 " my dear Henry , do you see they ? " 

 " I do catch sight of a brown bunch of a woman , certainly . 

 " the brown bunch be Helen , but do you catch sight of a 
 sea - green and salmon bunch ? " 

 " what ! be they out beanfeaste ? " 

 " no ; business . they want to see I , and later on I 
 want to talk to you about they . " 

 she be ashamed of her own diplomacy . in deal with a 
 Wilcox , how tempting it be to lapse from comradeship , and 
 to give he the kind of woman that he desire ! Henry take 
 the hint at once , and say : " why later on ? tell I now . no 
 time like the present . " 

 " Shall I ? " 

 " if it be not   a long story . " 

 " oh , not five minute ; but there be a sting at the end of 
 it , for I want you to find the man some work in your office . " 

 " what be his qualification ? " 

 " I do not   know . he be a clerk . " 

 " how old ? " 

 " twenty - five , perhaps . " 

 " what be his name ? " 

 " Bast , " say Margaret , and be about to remind he that 
 they have meet at Wickham Place , but stop herself . it have 
 not be a successful meeting . 

 " where be he before ? " 

 " Dempster 's Bank . " 

 " why do he leave ? " he ask , still remember nothing . 

 " they reduce their staff . " 

 " all right ; I will see he . " 

 it be the reward of her tact and devotion through the 
 day . now she understand why some woman prefer influence to 
 right . Mrs. Plynlimmon , when condemn suffragette , have 
 say : " the woman who can not   influence her husband to vote the 
 way she want ought to be ashamed of herself . " Margaret have 
 wince , but she be influence Henry now , and though 
 please at her little victory , she know that she have win it 
 by the method of the harem . 

 " I should be glad if you take he , " she say , " but I 
 do not   know whether he be qualified . " 

 " I will do what I can . but , Margaret , this must not   be 
 take as a precedent . " 

 " no , of course - of course - " 

 " I can not   fit in your protege every day . business would 
 suffer . " 

 " I can promise you he be the last . he - he be rather a 
 special case . " 

 " protege always be . " 

 she let it stand at that . he rise with a little extra 
 touch of complacency , and hold out his hand to help she up . 
 how wide the gulf between Henry as he be and Henry as Helen 
 think he ought to be ! and she herself - hover as usual 
 between the two , now accept man as they be , now yearn 
 with her sister for Truth . love and Truth - their warfare 
 seem eternal . perhaps the whole visible world rest on it , 
 and if they be one , life itself , like the spirit when 
 Prospero be reconcile to his brother , might vanish into 
 air , into thin air . 

 " your protege have make we late , " say he . " the Fussells 
 will just be start . " 

 on the whole she side with man as they be . Henry 
 would save the Basts as he have save howard End , while 
 Helen and her friend be discuss the ethic of 
 salvation . his be a slap - dash method , but the world have 
 be build slap - dash , and the beauty of mountain and river 
 and sunset may be but the varnish with which the unskilled 
 artificer hide his join . Oniton , like herself , be 
 imperfect . its apple - tree be stunt , its castle 
 ruinous . it , too , have suffer in the border warfare 
 between the Anglo Saxon and the Kelt , between thing as they 
 be and as they ought to be . once more the west be 
 retreat , once again the orderly star be dot the 
 eastern sky . there be certainly no rest for we on the 
 earth . but there be happiness , and as Margaret descend 
 the mound on her lover 's arm , she feel that she be have 
 her share . 

 to her annoyance , Mrs. Bast be still in the garden ; the 
 husband and Helen have leave she there to finish her meal 
 while they go to engage room . Margaret find this woman 
 repellent . she have feel , when shake her hand , an 
 overpowering shame . she remember the motive of her call 
 at Wickham Place , and smell again odour from the 
 abyss - odour the more disturbing because they be 
 involuntary . for there be no malice in Jacky . there she 
 sit , a piece of cake in one hand , an empty champagne glass 
 in the other , do no harm to anybody . 

 " she be overtire , " Margaret whisper . 

 " she be something else , " say Henry . " this will not   do . I 
 can not   have she in my garden in this state . " 

 " be she - " Margaret hesitate to add " drunk . " now that 
 she be go to marry he , he have grow particular . he 
 discountenance risque conversation now . 

 Henry go up to the woman . she raise her face , which 
 gleam in the twilight like a puff - ball . 

 " Madam , you will be more comfortable at the hotel , " he 
 say sharply . 

 Jacky reply : " if it be not   hen ! " 

 " Ne crois pas que le mari lui ressemble , " apologize 
 Margaret . " Il est tout a fait different . " 

 " Henry ! " she repeat , quite distinctly . 

 Mr. Wilcox be much annoyed . " I can not   congratulate you 
 on your protege , " he remark . 

 " Hen , do not   go . you do love I , dear , do not   you ? " 

 " bless we , what a person ! " sigh Margaret , gather up 
 her skirt . 

 Jacky point with her cake . " you be a nice boy , you 
 be . " she yawn . " there now , I love you . " 

 " Henry , I be awfully sorry . " 

 " and pray why ? " he ask , and look at she so sternly 
 that she fear he be ill . he seem more scandalize than 
 the fact demand . 

 " to have bring this down on you . " 

 " pray do not   apologize . " 

 the voice continue . 

 " why do she call you ' hen ' ? " say Margaret 
 innocently . " have she ever see you before ? " 

 " see hen before ! " say Jacky . " who have not   see Hen ? 
 he be serve you like I , my dear . these boy ! you 
 wait - still we love them . " 

 " be you now satisfied ? " Henry ask . 

 Margaret begin to grow frightened . " I do not   know what 
 it be all about , " she say . " let us come in . " 

 but he think she be act . he think he be 
 trap . he see his whole life crumble . " do not   you 
 indeed ? " he say bitingly . " I do . allow I to congratulate 
 you on the success of your plan . " 

 " this be Helen 's plan , not mine . " 

 " I now understand your interest in the Basts . very well 
 think out . I be amuse at your caution , Margaret . you 
 be quite right - it be necessary . I be a man , and have 
 live a man 's past . I have the honour to release you from 
 your engagement . " 

 still she could not understand . she know of life 's 
 seamy side as a theory ; she could not grasp it as a fact . 
 More word from Jacky be necessary - word unequivocal , undenied . 

 " so that - " burst from she , and she go indoor . she 
 stop herself from say more . 

 " so what ? " ask Colonel Fussell , who be get ready 
 to start in the hall . 

 " we be say - Henry and I be just have the 
 fierce argument , my point be - " seize his fur coat 
 from a footman , she offer to help he on . he protest , 
 and there be a playful little scene . 

 " no , let I do that , " say Henry , follow . 

 " thank so much ! you see - he have forgive I ! " 

 the Colonel say gallantly : " I do not   expect there be much 
 to forgive . 

 he get into the car . the lady follow he after an 
 interval . maid , courier , and heavy luggage have be send 
 on early by the branch - line . still chatter , still 
 thank their host and patronize their future hostess , 
 the guest be home away . 

 then Margaret continue : " so that woman have be your mistress ? " 

 " you put it with your usual delicacy , " he reply . 

 " when , please ? " 

 " why ? " 

 " when , please ? " 

 " ten year ago . " 

 she leave he without a word . for it be not her 
 tragedy : it be Mrs. Wilcox 's . 


 chapter 27 

 Helen begin to wonder why she have spend a matter of eight 
 pound in make some people ill and other angry . now that 
 the wave of excitement be ebb , and have leave she , Mr. 
 Bast , and Mrs. Bast strand for the night in a Shropshire 
 hotel , she ask herself what force have make the wave 
 flow . at all event , no harm be do . Margaret would play 
 the game properly now , and though Helen disapprove of her 
 sister 's method , she know that the Basts would benefit by 
 they in the long run . 

 " Mr. Wilcox be so illogical , " she explain to Leonard , 
 who have put his wife to bed , and be sit with she in the 
 empty coffee - room . " if we tell he it be his duty to take 
 you on , he might refuse to do it . the fact be , he be not 
 properly educate . I do not   want to set you against he , but 
 you will find he a trial . " 

 " I can never thank you sufficiently , Miss Schlegel , " be 
 all that Leonard feel equal to . 

 " I believe in personal responsibility . do not   you ? and 
 in personal everything . I hate - I suppose I ought not   to say 
 that - but the Wilcoxes be on the wrong tack surely . or 
 perhaps it be not   their fault . perhaps the little thing that 
 say ' I ' be miss out of the middle of their head , and 
 then it be a waste of time to blame they . there be a 
 nightmare of a theory that say a special race be be bear 
 which will rule the rest of we in the future just because it 
 lack the little thing that say ' I. ' have you hear that ? " 

 " I get no time for read . " 

 " have you think it , then ? that there be two kind of 
 people - our kind , who live straight from the middle of their 
 head , and the other kind who can not , because their head 
 have no middle ? they can not   say ' I. ' they AREN'T in fact , 
 and so they be superman . Pierpont Morgan have never say ' I ' 
 in his life . " 

 Leonard rouse himself . if his benefactress want 
 intellectual conversation , she must have it . she be more 
 important than his ruin past . " I never get on to 
 Nietzsche , " he say . " but I always understand that those 
 superman be rather what you may call egoist . " 

 " oh , no , that be wrong , " reply Helen . " no superman 
 ever say ' I want , ' because ' I want ' must lead to the 
 question , ' who be I ? ' and so to Pity and to Justice . he 
 only say ' want . ' ' want Europe , ' if he be Napoleon ; ' want 
 wife , ' if he be Bluebeard ; ' want Botticelli , ' if he be 
 Pierpont Morgan . never the ' I ' ; and if you could pierce 
 through he , you would find panic and emptiness in the middle . " 

 Leonard be silent for a moment . then he say : " may I 
 take it , Miss Schlegel , that you and I be both the sort 
 that say ' I ' ? " 

 " of course . " 

 " and your sister too ? " 

 " of course , " repeat Helen , a little sharply . she be 
 annoy with Margaret , but do not want she discuss . " all 
 presentable people say ' i. ' " 

 " but Mr. Wilcox - he be not perhaps - " 

 " I do not   know that it be any good discuss Mr. Wilcox either . " 

 " quite so , quite so , " he agree . Helen ask herself 
 why she have snub he . once or twice during the day she 
 have encourage he to criticize , and then have pull he up 
 short . be she afraid of he presume ? if so , it be 
 disgusting of she . 

 but he be think the snub quite natural . everything 
 she do be natural , and incapable of cause offence . 
 while the Miss Schlegels be together he have feel they 
 scarcely human - a sort of admonitory whirligig . but a Miss 
 Schlegel alone be different . she be in Helen 's case 
 unmarried , in Margaret 's about to be marry , in neither 
 case an echo of her sister . a light have fall at last into 
 this rich upper world , and he see that it be full of man 
 and woman , some of whom be more friendly to he than 
 other . Helen have become " his " Miss Schlegel , who scold 
 he and correspond with he , and have sweep down yesterday 
 with grateful vehemence . Margaret , though not unkind , be 
 severe and remote . he would not presume to help she , for 
 instance . he have never like she , and begin to think that 
 his original impression be true , and that her sister do 
 not like she either . Helen be certainly lonely . she , who 
 give away so much , be receive too little . Leonard be 
 pleased to think that he could spare her vexation by hold 
 his tongue and conceal what he know about Mr. Wilcox . 
 Jacky have announce her discovery when he fetch she from 
 the lawn . after the first shock , he do not mind for 
 himself . by now he have no illusion about his wife , and 
 this be only one new stain on the face of a love that have 
 never be pure . to keep perfection perfect , that should be 
 his ideal , if the future give he time to have ideal . 
 Helen , and Margaret for Helen 's sake , must not know . 

 Helen disconcert he by fume the conversation to his 
 wife . " Mrs. Bast - do she ever say ' I ' ? " she ask , half 
 mischievously , and then , " be she very tired ? " 

 " it be well she stop in her room , " say Leonard . 

 " shall I sit up with she ? " 

 " no , thank you ; she do not need company . " 

 " Mr. Bast , what kind of woman be your wife ? " 

 Leonard blush up to his eye . 

 " you ought to know my way by now . do that question 
 offend you ? " 

 " no , oh no , Miss Schlegel , no . " 

 " because I love honesty . do not   pretend your marriage 
 have be a happy one . you and she can have nothing in common . " 

 he do not deny it , but say shyly : " I suppose that be 
 pretty obvious ; but Jacky never mean to do anybody any 
 harm . when thing go wrong , or I hear thing , I use to 
 think it be her fault , but , look back , it be more mine . 
 I need not   have marry she , but as I have I must stick to 
 she and keep she . " 

 " how long have you be marry ? " 

 " nearly three year . " 

 " what do your people say ? " 

 " they will not have anything to do with we . they have a 
 sort of family council when they hear I be marry , and 
 cut we off altogether . " 

 Helen begin to pace up and down the room . " my good boy , 
 what a mess ! " she say gently . " who be your people ? " 

 he could answer this . his parent , who be dead , have 
 be in trade ; his sister have marry commercial 
 traveller ; his brother be a lay - reader . 

 " and your grandparent ? " 

 Leonard tell she a secret that he have hold shameful up 
 to now . " they be just nothing at all , " he say , 
 " - agricultural labourer and that sort . " 

 " so ! from which part ? " 

 " Lincolnshire mostly , but my mother 's father - he , oddly 
 enough , come from these part round here . " 

 " from this very Shropshire . yes , that be odd . my 
 mother 's people be Lancashire . but why do your brother 
 and your sister object to Mrs. Bast ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know . " 

 " excuse I , you do know . I be not a baby . I can bear 
 anything you tell I , and the more you tell the more I shall 
 be able to help . have they hear anything against she ? " 

 he be silent . 

 " I think I have guess now , " say Helen very gravely . 

 " I do not   think so , Miss Schlegel ; I hope not . " 

 " we must be honest , even over these thing . I have 
 guess . I be frightfully , dreadfully sorry , but it do 
 not make the least difference to I . I shall feel just the 
 same to both of you . I blame , not your wife for these 
 thing , but man . " 

 Leonard leave it at that - so long as she do not guess 
 the man . she stand at the window and slowly pull up the 
 blind . the hotel look over a dark square . the mist have 
 begin . when she turn back to he her eye be shin . 

 " do not   you worry , " he plead . " I can not   bear that . we 
 shall be all right if I get work . if I could only get 
 work - something regular to do . then it would not   be so bad 
 again . I do not   trouble after book as I use . I can 
 imagine that with regular work we should settle down again . 
 it stop one thinking . " 

 " settle down to what ? " 

 " oh , just settle down . " 

 " and that be to be life ! " say Helen , with a catch in her 
 throat . " how can you , with all the beautiful thing to see 
 and do - with music - with walk at night - " 

 " walk be well enough when a man 's in work , " he 
 answer . " oh , I do talk a lot of nonsense once , but 
 there be nothing like a bailiff in the house to drive it out 
 of you . when I see he finger my ruskin and Stevensons , 
 I seem to see life straight real , and it be not   a pretty 
 sight . my book be back again , thank to you , but they will 
 never be the same to I again , and I shall not   ever again think 
 night in the wood be wonderful . " 

 " why not ? " ask Helen , throw up the window . 

 " because I see one must have money . " 

 " well , you be wrong . " 

 " I wish I be wrong , but - the clergyman - he have money of 
 his own , or else he be pay ; the poet or the musician - just 
 the same ; the tramp - he be no different . the tramp go to 
 the workhouse in the end , and be pay for with other 
 people 's money . Miss Schlegel , the real thing 's money and 
 all the rest be a dream . " 

 " you be still wrong . you have   forget death . " 

 Leonard could not understand . 

 " if we live for ever what you say would be true . but 
 we have to die , we have to leave life presently . injustice 
 and greed would be the real thing if we live for ever . as 
 it be , we must hold to other thing , because death be 
 come . I love death - not morbidly , but because he 
 explain . he show I the emptiness of money . death and 
 Money be the eternal foe . not death and life . never mind 
 what lie behind Death , Mr. Bast , but be sure that the poet 
 and the musician and the tramp will be happy in it than 
 the man who have never learn to say , ' I be i. ' " 

 " I wonder . " 

 " we be all in a mist - I know but I can help you this 
 far - man like the Wilcoxes be deep in the mist than any . 
 Sane , sound Englishmen ! build up empire , level all 
 the world into what they call common sense . but mention 
 death to they and they be offend , because Death 's really 
 Imperial , and he cry out against they for ever . " 

 " I be as afraid of Death as any one . " 

 " but not of the idea of death . " 

 " but what be the difference ? " 

 " infinite difference , " say Helen , more gravely than before . 

 Leonard look at her wondering , and have the sense of 
 great thing sweep out of the shrouded night . but he 
 could not receive they , because his heart be still full of 
 little thing . as the lost umbrella have spoil the concert 
 at Queen 's Hall , so the lost situation be obscure the 
 diviner harmony now . death , Life and Materialism be 
 fine word , but would Mr. Wilcox take he on as a clerk ? 
 talk as one would , Mr. Wilcox be king of this world , the 
 superman , with his own morality , whose head remain in the cloud . 

 " I must be stupid , " he say apologetically . 

 while to Helen the paradox become clear and clear . 
 " death destroy a man : the idea of Death save he . " behind 
 the coffin and the skeleton that stay the vulgar mind lie 
 something so immense that all that be great in we respond 
 to it . man of the world may recoil from the charnel - house 
 that they will one day enter , but love know well . death 
 be his foe , but his peer , and in their age - long struggle the 
 thews of Love have be strengthen , and his vision 
 clear , until there be no one who can stand against he . 

 " so never give in , " continue the girl , and restate 
 again and again the vague yet convince plea that the 
 invisible lodge against the Visible . her excitement grow 
 as she try to cut the rope that fasten Leonard to the 
 earth . woven of bitter experience , it resist she . 
 presently the waitress enter and give she a letter from 
 Margaret . another note , address to Leonard , be inside . 
 they read they , listen to the murmuring of the river . 


 chapter 28 

 for many hour Margaret do nothing ; then she control 
 herself , and write some letter . she be too bruised to 
 speak to Henry ; she could pity he , and even determine to 
 marry he , but as yet all lie too deep in her heart for 
 speech . on the surface the sense of his degradation be too 
 strong . she could not command voice or look , and the gentle 
 word that she force out through her pen seem to proceed 
 from some other person . 

 " my dearest boy , " she begin , " this be not to part we . 
 it be everything or nothing , and I mean it to be nothing . 
 it happen long before we ever meet , and even if it have 
 happen since , I should be write the same , I hope . I do 
 understand . " 

 but she cross out " I do understand " ; it strike a false 
 note . Henry could not bear to be understand . she also 
 cross out , " it be everything or nothing . " Henry would 
 resent so strong a grasp of the situation . she must not 
 comment ; comment be unfeminine . 

 " I think that will about do , " she think . 

 then the sense of his degradation choke she . be he 
 worth all this bother ? to have yield to a woman of that 
 sort be everything , yes , it be , and she could not be his 
 wife . she try to translate his temptation into her own 
 language , and her brain reel . man must be different , even 
 to want to yield to such a temptation . her belief in 
 comradeship be stifle , and she see life as from that glass 
 saloon on the great Western , which shelter male and female 
 alike from the fresh air . be the sex really race , each 
 with its own code of morality , and their mutual love a mere 
 device of Nature to keep thing go ? Strip human 
 intercourse of the propriety , and be it reduce to this ? 
 her judgment tell she no . she know that out of Nature 's 
 device we have build a magic that will win we immortality . 
 far more mysterious than the call of sex to sex be the 
 tenderness that we throw into that call ; far wider be the 
 gulf between we and the farmyard than between the farm - yard 
 and the garbage that nourish it . we be evolve , in way 
 that Science can not measure , to end that Theology dare not 
 contemplate . " man do produce one jewel , " the god will 
 say , and , say , will give we immortality . Margaret know 
 all this , but for the moment she could not feel it , and 
 transform the marriage of Evie and Mr. Cahill into a 
 carnival of fool , and her own marriage - too miserable to 
 think of that , she tear up the letter , and then write 
 another : 


 Dear Mr. Bast , 

 I have speak to Mr. Wilcox about you , as I promise , 
 and be sorry to say that he have no vacancy for you . 

  your truly , 
  M. J. Schlegel 


 she enclose this in a note to Helen , over which she 
 take less trouble than she might have do ; but her head be 
 ache , and she could not stop to pick her word : 


 Dear Helen , 

 give he this . the Basts be no good . Henry find 
 the woman drunk on the lawn . I be have a room get 
 ready for you here , and will you please come round at 
 once on get this ? the bast be not at all the type 
 we should trouble about . I may go round to they myself 
 in the morning , and do anything that be fair . 

  M 


 in write this , Margaret feel that she be be 
 practical . something might be arrange for the Basts later 
 on , but they must be silence for the moment . she hop to 
 avoid a conversation between the woman and Helen . she ring 
 the bell for a servant , but no one answer it ; Mr. Wilcox 
 and the Warringtons be go to bed , and the kitchen be 
 abandon to Saturnalia . consequently she go over to the 
 George herself . she do not enter the hotel , for discussion 
 would have be perilous , and , say that the letter be 
 important , she give it to the waitress . as she recrosse 
 the square she see Helen and Mr. Bast look out of the 
 window of the coffee - room , and fear she be already too 
 late . her task be not yet over ; she ought to tell Henry 
 what she have do . 

 this come easily , for she see he in the hall . the 
 night wind have be rattle the picture against the wall , 
 and the noise have disturb he . 

 " who be there ? " he call , quite the householder . 

 Margaret walk in and past he . 

 " I have ask Helen to sleep , " she say . " she be good 
 here ; so do not   lock the front - door . " 

 " I think someone have get in , " say Henry . 

 " at the same time I tell the man that we could do 
 nothing for he . I do not   know about later , but now the 
 Basts must clearly go . " 

 " do you say that your sister be sleep here , after all ? " 

 " probably . " 

 " be she to be show up to your room ? " 

 " I have naturally nothing to say to she ; I be go to 
 bed . will you tell the servant about Helen ? could someone 
 go to carry her bag ? " 

 he tap a little gong , which have be buy to summon 
 the servant . 

 " you must make more noise than that if you want they to hear . " 

 Henry open a door , and down the corridor come shout 
 of laughter . " far too much scream there , " he say , and 
 strode towards it . Margaret go upstairs , uncertain 
 whether to be glad that they have meet , or sorry . they have 
 behave as if nothing have happen , and her deep 
 instinct tell she that this be wrong . for his own sake , 
 some explanation be due . 

 and yet - what could an explanation tell she ? a date , a 
 place , a few detail , which she could imagine all too 
 clearly . now that the first shock be over , she see that 
 there be every reason to premise a Mrs. Bast . Henry 's 
 inner life have long lay open to she - his intellectual 
 confusion , his obtuseness to personal influence , his strong 
 but furtive passion . should she refuse he because his 
 outer life correspond ? perhaps . perhaps , if the 
 dishonour have be do to she , but it be do long before 
 her day . she struggle against the feeling . she tell 
 herself that Mrs. Wilcox 's wrong be her own . but she be 
 not a bargain theorist . as she undress , her anger , her 
 regard for the dead , her desire for a scene , all grow weak . 
 Henry must have it as he like , for she love he , and some 
 day she would use her love to make he a well man . 

 Pity be at the bottom of her action all through this 
 crisis . pity , if one may generalize , be at the bottom of 
 woman . when man like we , it be for our well quality , 
 and however tender their liking , we dare not be unworthy of 
 it , or they will quietly let we go . but unworthiness 
 stimulate woman . it bring out her deep nature , for good 
 or for evil . 

 here be the core of the question . Henry must be 
 forgive , and make well by love ; nothing else matter . 
 Mrs. Wilcox , that unquiet yet kindly ghost , must be leave to 
 her own wrong . to she everything be in proportion now , and 
 she , too , would pity the man who be blunder up and down 
 their life . have Mrs. Wilcox know of his trespass ? an 
 interesting question , but Margaret fall asleep , tether by 
 affection , and lull by the murmur of the river that 
 descend all the night from Wales . she feel herself at one 
 with her future home , colour it and colour by it , and 
 awake to see , for the second time , Oniton Castle conquer 
 the morning mist . 


 chapter 29 

 " Henry dear - " be her greeting . 

 he have finish his breakfast , and be begin the 
 TIMES . his sister - in - law be pack . she kneel by he and 
 take the paper from he , feel that it be unusually heavy 
 and thick . then , put her face where it have be , she 
 look up in his eye . 

 " Henry dear , look at I . no , I will not   have you 
 shirk . look at I . there . that be all . " 

 " you be refer to last evening , " he say huskily . " I 
 have release you from your engagement . I could find 
 excuse , but I will not . no , I will not . a thousand time no . 
 I be a bad lot , and must be leave at that . " 

 expel from his old fortress , Mr. Wilcox be build 
 a new one . he could no long appear respectable to she , so 
 he defend himself instead in a lurid past . it be not 
 true repentance . 

 " leave it where you will , boy . it be not go to 
 trouble we : I know what I be talk about , and it will make 
 no difference . " 

 " no difference ? " he inquire . " no difference , when you 
 find that I be not the fellow you think ? " he be annoy 
 with Miss Schlegel here . he would have prefer she to be 
 prostrate by the blow , or even to rage . against the tide 
 of his sin flow the feeling that she be not altogether 
 womanly . her eye gaze too straight ; they have read book 
 that be suitable for man only . and though he have dread a 
 scene , and though she have determine against one , there be 
 a scene , all the same . it be somehow imperative . 

 " I be unworthy of you , " he begin . " have I be worthy , I 
 should not have release you from your engagement . I know 
 what I be talk about . I can not   bear to talk of such 
 thing . we have well leave it . " 

 she kiss his hand . he jerk it from she , and , rise 
 to his foot , go on : " you , with your sheltered life , and 
 refined pursuit , and friend , and book , you and your 
 sister , and woman like you - I say , how can you guess the 
 temptation that lie round a man ? " 

 " it be difficult for we , " say Margaret ; " but if we be 
 worth marry , we do guess . " 

 " cut off from decent society and family tie , what do 
 you suppose happen to thousand of young fellow overseas ? 
 isolate . no one near . I know by bitter experience , and 
 yet you say it make ' no difference . ' " 

 " not to I . " 

 he laugh bitterly . Margaret go to the side - board 
 and help herself to one of the breakfast dish . be 
 the last down , she turn out the spirit - lamp that keep they 
 warm . she be tender , but grave . she know that Henry be 
 not so much confess his soul as point out the gulf 
 between the male soul and the female , and she do not desire 
 to hear he on this point . 

 " do Helen come ? " she ask . 

 he shake his head . 

 " but that will not   do at all , at all ! we do not   want she 
 gossip with Mrs. Bast . " 

 " Good God ! no ! " he exclaim , suddenly natural . then 
 he catch himself up . " let they gossip . my game be up , 
 though I thank you for your unselfishness - little as my 
 thank be worth . " 

 " do not   she send I a message or anything ? " 

 " I hear of none . " 

 " would you ring the bell , please ? " 

 " what to do ? " 

 " why , to inquire . " 

 he swagger up to it tragically , and sound a peal . 
 Margaret pour herself out some coffee . the butler come , 
 and say that Miss Schlegel have sleep at the George , so far 
 as he have hear . should he go round to the George ? 

 " I will go , thank you , " say Margaret , and dismiss he . 

 " it be no good , " say Henry . " those thing leak out ; 
 you can not stop a story once it have start . I have know 
 case of other man - I despise they once , I think that I'M 
 different , I shall never be tempt . oh , Margaret - " he 
 come and sit down near she , improvise emotion . she could 
 not bear to listen to he . " we fellow all come to grief 
 once in our time . will you believe that ? there be moment 
 when the strong man - ' let he who standeth , take heed 
 lest he fall . ' that be true , be not   it ? if you know all , you 
 would excuse I . I be far from good influence - far even 
 from England . I be very , very lonely , and long for a 
 woman 's voice . that be enough . I have tell you too much 
 already for you to forgive I now . " 

 " yes , that be enough , dear . " 

 " I have " - he lower his voice - " I have be through hell . " 

 gravely she consider this claim . have he ? have he 
 suffer torture of remorse , or have it be , " there ! 
 that be over . now for respectable life again " ? the latter , 
 if she read he rightly . a man who have be through hell 
 do not boast of his virility . he be humble and hide it , 
 if , indeed , it still exist . only in legend do the sinner 
 come forth penitent , but terrible , to conquer pure woman by 
 his resistless power . Henry be anxious to be terrible , but 
 have not get it in he . he be a good average Englishman , 
 who have slip . the really culpable point - his 
 faithlessness to Mrs. Wilcox - never seem to strike he . 
 she long to mention Mrs. Wilcox . 

 and bit by bit the story be tell she . it be a very 
 simple story . ten year ago be the time , a garrison town 
 in Cyprus the place . now and then he ask she whether she 
 could possibly forgive he , and she answer , " I have 
 already forgive you , Henry . " she choose her word carefully , 
 and so save he from panic . she play the girl , until he 
 could rebuild his fortress and hide his soul from the 
 world . when the butler come to clear away , Henry be in a 
 very different mood - ask the fellow what he be in such a 
 hurry for , complain of the noise last night in the 
 servant ' hall . Margaret look intently at the butler . 
 he , as a handsome young man , be faintly attractive to she 
 as a woman - an attraction so faint as scarcely to be 
 perceptible , yet the sky would have fall if she have 
 mention it to Henry . 

 on her return from the George the building operation 
 be complete , and the old Henry front she , competent , 
 cynical , and kind . he have make a clean breast , have be 
 forgive , and the great thing now be to forget his failure , 
 and to send it the way of other unsuccessful investment . 
 Jacky rejoin howard end and Ducie Street , and the 
 vermilion motor - car , and the Argentine Hard Dollars , and all 
 the thing and people for whom he have never have much use and 
 have less now . their memory hamper he . he could scarcely 
 attend to Margaret who bring back disquieting news from 
 the George . Helen and her client have go . 

 " well , let they go - the man and his wife , I mean , for 
 the more we see of your sister the well . " 

 " but they have go separately - Helen very early , the 
 Basts just before I arrive . they have leave no message . 
 they have answer neither of my note . I do not   like to 
 think what it all mean . " 

 " what do you say in the note ? " 

 " I tell you last night . " 

 " oh - ah - yes ! dear , would you like one turn in the garden ? " 

 Margaret take his arm . the beautiful weather soothe 
 she . but the wheel of Evie 's wedding be still at work , 
 toss the guest outward as deftly as they have draw they 
 in , and she could not be with he long . it have be 
 arrange that they should motor to Shrewsbury , whence he 
 would go north , and she back to London with the 
 Warringtons . for a fraction of time she be happy . then 
 her brain recommence . 

 " I be afraid there have be gossip of some kind at 
 the George . Helen would not have leave unless she have hear 
 something . I mismanage that . it be wretched . I ought 
 to - have part she from that woman at once . 

 " Margaret ! " he exclaim , loose her arm impressively . 

 " yes - yes , Henry ? " 

 " I be far from a saint - in fact , the reverse - but you 
 have take I , for well or bad . bygone must be 
 bygone . you have promise to forgive I . Margaret , a 
 promise be a promise . never mention that woman again . " 

 " except for some practical reason - never . " 

 " practical ! you practical ! " 

 " yes , I be practical , " she murmur , stoop over the 
 mowing - machine and play with the grass which trickle 
 through her finger like sand . 

 he have silence she , but her fear make he uneasy . not 
 for the first time , he be threaten with blackmail . he 
 be rich and suppose to be moral ; the Basts know that he 
 be not , and might find it profitable to hint as much . 

 " at all event , you must not   worry , " he say . " this be a 
 man 's business . " he think intently . " on no account 
 mention it to anybody . " 

 Margaret flush at advice so elementary , but he be 
 really pave the way for a lie . if necessary he would deny 
 that he have ever know Mrs. Bast , and prosecute she for 
 libel . perhaps he never have know she . here be Margaret , 
 who behave as if he have not . there the house . round they 
 be half a dozen gardener , clear up after his 
 daughter 's wedding . all be so solid and spruce , that the 
 past fly up out of sight like a spring - blind , leave only 
 the last five minute unroll . 

 glance at these , he see that the car would be round 
 during the next five , and plunge into action . gong be 
 tap , order issue , Margaret be send to dress , and the 
 housemaid to sweep up the long trickle of grass that she have 
 leave across the hall . as be Man to the Universe , so be the 
 mind of Mr. Wilcox to the mind of some man - a concentrated 
 light upon a tiny spot , a little Ten Minutes move 
 self - contain through its appoint year . no Pagan he , 
 who live for the now , and may be wise than all 
 philosopher . he live for the five minute that have past , 
 and the five to come ; he have the business mind . 

 how do he stand now , as his motor slip out of Oniton 
 and breast the great round hill ? Margaret have hear a 
 certain rumour , but be all right . she have forgive he , 
 God bless she , and he feel the manly for it . Charles and 
 Evie have not hear it , and never must hear . no more must 
 Paul . over his child he feel great tenderness , which he 
 do not try to track to a cause : Mrs. Wilcox be too far 
 back in his life . he do not connect she with the sudden 
 ache love that he feel for Evie . poor little Evie ! he 
 trust that Cahill would make she a decent husband . 

 and Margaret ? how do she stand ? 

 she have several minor worry . clearly her sister have 
 hear something . she dread meet she in town . and she 
 be anxious about Leonard , for whom they certainly be 
 responsible . nor ought Mrs. Bast to starve . but the main 
 situation have not alter . she still love Henry . his 
 action , not his disposition , have disappoint she , and she 
 could bear that . and she love her future home . stand 
 up in the car , just where she have leapt from it two day 
 before , she gaze back with deep emotion upon Oniton . 
 besides the Grange and the Castle keep , she could now pick 
 out the church and the black - and - white gable of the 
 George . there be the bridge , and the river nibble its 
 green peninsula . she could even see the bathing - shed , but 
 while she be look for Charles 's new springboard , the 
 forehead of the hill rise up and hide the whole scene . 

 she never see it again . day and night the river flow 
 down into England , day after day the sun retreat into the 
 Welsh mountain , and the tower chime , " see the Conquering 
 Hero . " but the Wilcoxes have no part in the place , nor in 
 any place . it be not their name that recur in the parish 
 register . it be not their ghost that sigh among the alder 
 at evening . they have sweep into the valley and sweep out 
 of it , leave a little dust and a little money behind . 


 chapter 30 

 Tibby be now approach his last year at Oxford . he have 
 move out of college , and be contemplate the Universe , or 
 such portion of it as concern he , from his comfortable 
 lodging in Long Wall . he be not concerned with much . 
 when a young man be untrouble by passion and sincerely 
 indifferent to public opinion , his outlook be necessarily 
 limited . Tibby neither wish to strengthen the position of 
 the rich nor to improve that of the poor , and so be well 
 content to watch the elm nod behind the mildly 
 embattle parapet of Magdalen . there be bad life . 
 though selfish , he be never cruel ; though affect in 
 manner , he never pose . like Margaret , he disdain the 
 heroic equipment , and it be only after many visit that man 
 discover Schlegel to possess a character and a brain . he 
 have do well in mod , much to the surprise of those who 
 attend lecture and take proper exercise , and be now 
 glance disdainfully at Chinese in case he should some day 
 consent to qualify as a Student Interpreter . to he thus 
 employ Helen enter . a telegram have precede she . 

 he notice , in a distant way , that his sister have 
 alter . as a rule he find she too pronounced , and have 
 never come across this look of appeal , pathetic yet 
 dignified - the look of a sailor who have lose everything at sea . 

 " I have come from Oniton , " she begin . " there have be a 
 great deal of trouble there . " 

 " who be for lunch ? " say Tibby , pick up the claret , 
 which be warm in the hearth . Helen sit down 
 submissively at the table . " why such an early start ? " he ask . 

 " sunrise or something - when I could get away . " 

 " so I surmise . why ? " 

 " I do not   know what be to be do , Tibby . I be very much 
 upset at a piece of news that concern Meg , and do not want 
 to face she , and I be not go back to Wickham Place . I 
 stop here to tell you this . " 

 the landlady come in with the cutlet . Tibby put a 
 marker in the leaf of his Chinese Grammar and help 
 they . Oxford - the Oxford of the vacation - dream and 
 rustle outside , and indoor the little fire be coat with 
 grey where the sunshine touch it . Helen continue her odd 
 story . 

 " give Meg my love and say that I want to be alone . I 
 mean to go to Munich or else Bonn . " 

 " such a message be easily give , " say her brother . 

 " as regard Wickham Place and my share of the furniture , 
 you and she be to do exactly as you like . my own feeling 
 be that everything may just as well be sell . what do one 
 want with dusty economic , book , which have make the world 
 no well , or with mother 's hideous chiffonier ? I have 
 also another commission for you . I want you to deliver a 
 letter . " she get up . " I have not   write it yet . why 
 should not   I post it , though ? " she sit down again . " my head 
 be rather wretched . I hope that none of your friend be 
 likely to come in . " 

 Tibby lock the door . his friend often find it in 
 this condition . then he ask whether anything have go 
 wrong at Evie 's wedding . 

 " not there , " say Helen , and burst into tear . 

 he have know her hysterical - it be one of her aspect 
 with which he have no concern - and yet these tear touch 
 he as something unusual . they be near the thing that 
 do concern he , such as music . he lay down his knife and 
 look at her curiously . then , as she continue to sob , he 
 go on with his lunch . 

 the time come for the second course , and she be still 
 cry . Apple Charlotte be to follow , which spoil by 
 wait . " do you mind Mrs. Martlett come in ? " he ask , 
 " or shall I take it from she at the door ? " 

 " could I bathe my eye , Tibby ? " 

 he take she to his bedroom , and introduce the pudding 
 in her absence . have help himself , he put it down to 
 warm in the hearth . his hand stretch towards the Grammar , 
 and soon he be turn over the page , raise his eyebrow 
 scornfully , perhaps at human nature , perhaps at Chinese . to 
 he thus employ Helen return . she have pull herself 
 together , but the grave appeal have not vanish from her eye . 

 " now for the explanation , " she say . " why do not   I 
 begin with it ? I have find out something about Mr. 
 Wilcox . he have behave very wrongly indeed , and ruin two 
 people 's life . it all come on I very suddenly last night ; 
 I be very much upset , and I do not know what to do . Mrs. Bast - " 

 " oh , those people ! " 

 Helen seem silence . 

 " shall I lock the door again ? " 

 " no , thank , Tibbikins . you be be very good to I . 
 I want to tell you the story before I go abroad . you must 
 do exactly what you like - treat it as part of the 
 furniture . Meg can not have hear it yet , I think . but I 
 can not face she and tell she that the man she be go to 
 marry have misconduct himself . I do not   even know whether 
 she ought to be tell . know as she do that I dislike 
 he , she will suspect I , and think that I want to ruin her 
 match . I simply do not   know what to make of such a thing . I 
 trust your judgment . what would you do ? " 

 " I gather he have have a mistress , " say Tibby . 

 Helen flush with shame and anger . " and ruin two 
 people 's life . and go about say that personal action 
 count for nothing , and there always will be rich and poor . 
 he meet she when he be try to get rich out in Cyprus - I 
 do not   wish to make he bad than he be , and no doubt she 
 be ready enough to meet he . but there it be . they meet . 
 he go his way and she go her . what do you suppose be 
 the end of such woman ? " 

 he concede that it be a bad business . 

 " they end in two way : either they sink till the lunatic 
 asylum and the workhouse be full of they , and cause Mr. 
 Wilcox to write letter to the paper complain of our 
 national degeneracy , or else they entrap a boy into marriage 
 before it be too late . she - I can not   blame she . 

 " but this be not   all , " she continue after a long pause , 
 during which the landlady serve they with coffee . " I come 
 now to the business that take we to Oniton . we go all 
 three . act on Mr. Wilcox 's advice , the man throw up a 
 secure situation and take an insecure one , from which he be 
 dismiss . there be certain excuse , but in the main Mr. 
 Wilcox be to blame , as Meg herself admit . it be only 
 common justice that he should employ the man himself . but 
 he meet the woman , and , like the cur that he be , he 
 refuse , and try to get rid of they . he make Meg write . 
 two note come from she late that evening - one for I , one 
 for Leonard , dismiss he with barely a reason . I 
 could not   understand . then it come out that Mrs. Bast have 
 speak to Mr. Wilcox on the lawn while we leave she to get 
 room , and be still speak about he when Leonard come 
 back to she . this Leonard know all along . he think it 
 natural he should be ruin twice . natural ! could you have 
 contain yourself ? . 

 " it be certainly a very bad business , " say Tibby . 

 his reply seem to calm his sister . " I be afraid that 
 I see it out of proportion . but you be right outside it , 
 and you must know . in a day or two - or perhaps a week - take 
 whatever step you think fit . I leave it in your hand . " 

 she conclude her charge . 

 " the fact as they touch Meg be all before you , " she 
 add ; and Tibby sigh and feel it rather hard that , 
 because of his open mind , he should be empanel to serve 
 as a juror . he have never be interested in human being , 
 for which one must blame he , but he have have rather too much 
 of they at Wickham Place . just as some people cease to 
 attend when book be mention , so Tibby 's attention 
 wander when " personal relation " come under discussion . 
 ought Margaret to know what Helen know the Basts to know ? 
 similar question have vex he from infancy , and at Oxford 
 he have learn to say that the importance of human being 
 have be vastly overrate by specialist . the epigram , with 
 its faint whiff of the eighty , mean nothing . but he 
 might have let it off now if his sister have not be 
 ceaselessly beautiful . 

 " you see , Helen - have a cigarette - I do not   see what I be 
 to do . " 

 " then there be nothing to be do . I dare say you be 
 right . let they marry . there remain the question of 
 compensation . " 

 " do you want I to adjudicate that too ? have you not 
 well consult an expert ? " 

 " this part be in confidence , " say Helen . " it have 
 nothing to do with Meg , and do not mention it to she . the 
 compensation - I do not see who be to pay it if I do not , and 
 I have already decide on the minimum sum . as soon as 
 possible I be place it to your account , and when I be in 
 Germany you will pay it over for I . I shall never forget 
 your kindness , Tibbikins , if you do this . " 

 " what be the sum ? " 

 " five thousand . " 

 " good God alive ! " say Tibby , and go crimson . 

 " now , what be the good of driblet ? to go through life 
 have do one thing - to have raise one person from the 
 abyss : not these puny gift of shilling and 
 blanket - make the grey more grey . no doubt people will 
 think I extraordinary . " 

 " I do not   care a damn what people think ! " cry he , 
 heat to unusual manliness of diction . " but it be half what 
 you have . " 

 " not nearly half . " she spread out her hand over her 
 soil skirt . " I have far too much , and we settle at 
 Chelsea last spring that three hundred a year be necessary 
 to set a man on his foot . what I give will bring in a 
 hundred and fifty between two . it be not   enough . " 

 he could not recover . he be not angry or even shock , 
 and he see that Helen would still have plenty to live on . 
 but it amaze he to think what haycock people can make of 
 their life . his delicate intonation would not work , and 
 he could only blurt out that the five thousand pound would 
 mean a great deal of bother for he personally . 

 " I do not   expect you to understand I . " 

 " I ? I understand nobody . " 

 " but you will do it ? " 

 " apparently . " 

 " I leave you two commission , then . the first concern 
 Mr. Wilcox , and you be to use your discretion . the second 
 concern the money , and be to be mention to no one , and 
 carry out literally . you will send a hundred pound on 
 account tomorrow . " 

 he walk with she to the station , pass through those 
 street whose serrie beauty never bewilder he and never 
 fatigue . the lovely creature raise dome and spire into 
 the cloudless blue , and only the ganglion of vulgarity round 
 Carfax show how evanescent be the phantom , how faint its 
 claim to represent England . Helen , rehearse her 
 commission , notice nothing : the Basts be in her brain , 
 and she retell the crisis in a meditative way , which might 
 have make other man curious . she be see whether it 
 would hold . he ask she once why she have take the bast 
 right into the heart of Evie 's wedding . she stop like a 
 frightened animal and say , " do that seem to you so odd ? " 
 her eye , the hand lay on the mouth , quite haunt he , 
 until they be absorb into the figure of St. Mary the 
 Virgin , before whom he pause for a moment on the walk home . 

 it be convenient to follow he in the discharge of his 
 duty . Margaret summon he the next day . she be 
 terrify at Helen 's flight , and he have to say that she have 
 call in at Oxford . then she say : " do she seem worried 
 at any rumour about Henry ? " he answer , " yes . " " I know it 
 be that ! " she exclaim . " I will write to she . " Tibby be relieve . 

 he then send the cheque to the address that Helen give 
 he , and state that later on he be instruct to forward 
 five thousand pound . an answer come back , very civil and 
 quiet in tone - such an answer as Tibby himself would have 
 give . the cheque be return , the legacy refuse , the 
 writer be in no need of money . Tibby forward this to 
 Helen , add in the fulness of his heart that Leonard Bast 
 seem somewhat a monumental person after all . Helen 's 
 reply be frantic . he be to take no notice . he be to go 
 down at once and say that she command acceptance . he 
 go . a scurf of book and china ornament await they . 
 the Basts have just be evict for not pay their rent , 
 and have wander no one know whither . Helen have begin 
 bungle with her money by this time , and have even sell out 
 her share in the Nottingham and Derby Railway . for some 
 week she do nothing . then she reinveste , and , owe to 
 the good advice of her stockbroker , become rather rich 
 than she have be before . 


 chapter 31 

 Houses have their own way of die , fall as variously as 
 the generation of man , some with a tragic roar , some 
 quietly , but to an after - life in the city of ghost , while 
 from other - and thus be the death of Wickham Place - the 
 spirit slip before the body perishe . it have decay in 
 the spring , disintegrate the girl more than they know , 
 and cause either to accost unfamiliar region . by 
 September it be a corpse , void of emotion , and scarcely 
 hallow by the memory of thirty year of happiness . 
 through its round - top doorway pass furniture , and 
 picture , and book , until the last room be gutte and the 
 last van have rumble away . it stand for a week or two 
 long , open - eye , as if astonish at its own emptiness . 
 then it fall . navvy come , and spill it back into the 
 grey . with their muscle and their beery good temper , they 
 be not the bad of undertaker for a house which have 
 always be human , and have not mistake culture for an end . 

 the furniture , with a few exception , go down into 
 Hertfordshire , Mr. Wilcox have most kindly offer howard 
 end as a warehouse . Mr. Bryce have die abroad - an 
 unsatisfactory affair - and as there seem little guarantee 
 that the rent would be pay regularly , he cancel the 
 agreement , and resume possession himself . until he relet 
 the house , the schlegel be welcome to stack their 
 furniture in the garage and low room . Margaret demur , 
 but Tibby accept the offer gladly ; it save he from 
 come to any decision about the future . the plate and the 
 more valuable picture find a safe home in London , but the 
 bulk of the thing go country - way , and be entrust to 
 the guardianship of Miss Avery . 

 shortly before the move , our hero and heroine be 
 married . they have weather the storm , and may reasonably 
 expect peace . to have no illusion and yet to love - what 
 strong surety can a woman find ? she have see she 
 husband 's past as well as his heart . she know her own heart 
 with a thoroughness that commonplace people believe 
 impossible . the heart of Mrs. Wilcox be alone hide , and 
 perhaps it be superstitious to speculate on the feeling of 
 the dead . they be marry quietly - really quietly , for as 
 the day approach she refuse to go through another 
 Oniton . her brother give she away , her aunt , who be out of 
 health , preside over a few colourless refreshment . the 
 Wilcoxes be represent by Charles , who witness the 
 marriage settlement , and by Mr. Cahill . Paul do send a 
 cablegram . in a few minute , and without the aid of music , 
 the clergyman make they man and wife , and soon the glass 
 shade have fall that cut off marry couple from the 
 world . she , a monogamist , regret the cessation of some 
 of life 's innocent odour ; he , whose instinct be 
 polygamous , feel morally brace by the change , and less 
 liable to the temptation that have assail he in the past . 

 they spend their honeymoon near Innsbruck . Henry know 
 of a reliable hotel there , and Margaret hop for a meeting 
 with her sister . in this she be disappoint . as they 
 come south , Helen retreat over the Brenner , and write an 
 unsatisfactory postcard from the shore of the Lake of 
 Garda , say that her plan be uncertain and have well 
 be ignore . evidently she dislike meet Henry . two 
 month be surely enough to accustom an outsider to a 
 situation which a wife have accept in two day , and 
 Margaret have again to regret her sister 's lack of 
 self - control . in a long letter she point out the need of 
 charity in sexual matter : so little be know about they ; it 
 be hard enough for those who be personally touch to 
 judge ; then how futile must be the verdict of Society . " I 
 do not   say there be no standard , for that would destroy 
 morality ; only that there can be no standard until our 
 impulse be classified and well understand . " Helen 
 thank she for her kind letter - rather a curious reply . 
 she move south again , and speak of winter in Naples . 

 Mr. Wilcox be not sorry that the meeting fail . Helen 
 leave he time to grow skin over his wound . there be still 
 moment when it pain he . have he only know that Margaret 
 be await he - Margaret , so lively and intelligent , and 
 yet so submissive - he would have keep himself worthy of 
 she . incapable of group the past , he confuse the 
 episode of Jacky with another episode that have take place 
 in the day of his bachelorhood . the two make one crop of 
 wild oat , for which he be heartily sorry , and he could not 
 see that those oat be of a dark stock which be root 
 in another 's dishonour . unchastity and infidelity be as 
 confuse to he as to the Middle Ages , his only moral 
 teacher . Ruth   poor old Ruth !   do not enter into his 
 calculation at all , for poor old Ruth have never find he out . 

 his affection for his present wife grow steadily . her 
 cleverness give he no trouble , and , indeed , he like to see 
 her read poetry or something about social question ; it 
 distinguish she from the wife of other man . he have only 
 to call , and she clap the book up and be ready to do 
 what he wish . then they would argue so jollily , and once 
 or twice she have he in quite a tight corner , but as soon as 
 he grow really serious , she give in . man be for war , woman 
 for the recreation of the warrior , but he do not dislike 
 it if she make a show of fight . she can not win in a real 
 battle , have no muscle , only nerve . nerve make she 
 jump out of a move motor - car , or refuse to be marry 
 fashionably . the warrior may well allow she to triumph on 
 such occasion ; they move not the imperishable plinth of 
 thing that touch his peace . 

 Margaret have a bad attack of these nerve during the 
 honeymoon . he tell she - casually , as be his habit - that 
 Oniton Grange be let . she show her annoyance , and ask 
 rather crossly why she have not be consult . 

 " I do not   want to bother you , " he reply . " besides , I 
 have only hear for certain this morning . " 

 " where be we to live ? " say Margaret , try to laugh . 
 " I love the place extraordinarily . do not   you believe in 
 have a permanent home , Henry ? " 

 he assure she that she misunderstood he . it be home 
 life that distinguish we from the foreigner . but he do 
 not believe in a damp home . 

 " this be news . I never hear till this minute that 
 Oniton be damp . " 

 " my dear girl ! " - he fling out his hand - " have you eye ? 
 have you a skin ? how could it be anything but damp in such 
 a situation ? in the first place , the Grange be on clay , and 
 build where the castle moat must have be ; then there be 
 that destestable little river , steam all night like a 
 kettle . feel the cellar wall ; look up under the eave . 
 ask Sir James or anyone . those Shropshire valley be 
 notorious . the only possible place for a house in 
 Shropshire be on a hill ; but , for my part , I think the 
 country be too far from London , and the scenery nothing 
 special . " 

 Margaret could not resist say , " why do you go there , 
 then ? " 

 " I - because - " he draw his head back and grow rather 
 angry . " why have we come to the Tyrol , if it come to 
 that ? one might go on ask such question indefinitely . " 

 one might ; but he be only gain time for a plausible 
 answer . out it come , and he believe it as soon as it be speak . 

 " the truth be , I take Oniton on account of Evie . do not 
 let this go any far . " 

 " certainly not . " 

 " I should not   like she to know that she nearly let I in 
 for a very bad bargain . no soon do I sign the agreement 
 than she get engage . poor little girl ! she be so keen on 
 it all , and would not   even wait to make proper inquiry 
 about the shooting . Afraid it would get snap up - just 
 like all of your sex . well , no harm be do . she have have 
 her country wedding , and I have   get rid of my house to some 
 fellow who be start a preparatory school . " 

 " where shall we live , then , Henry ? I should enjoy 
 live somewhere . " 

 " I have not yet decide . what about Norfolk ? " 

 Margaret be silent . marriage have not save she from 
 the sense of flux . London be but a foretaste of this 
 nomadic civilization which be alter human nature so 
 profoundly , and throw upon personal relation a stress 
 great than they have ever bear before . under 
 cosmopolitanism , if it come , we shall receive no help from 
 the earth . tree and meadow and mountain will only be a 
 spectacle , and the bind force that they once exercise on 
 character must be entrust to Love alone . may Love be 
 equal to the task ! 

 " it be now what ? " continue Henry . " nearly October . 
 let we camp for the winter at Ducie Street , and look out for 
 something in the spring . 

 " if possible , something permanent . I can not   be as young 
 as I be , for these alteration do not   suit I . " 

 " but , my dear , which would you rather have - alteration 
 or rheumatism ? " 

 " I see your point , " say Margaret , get up . " if 
 Oniton be really damp , it be impossible , and must be 
 inhabit by little boy . only , in the spring , let we look 
 before we leap . I will take warning by Evie , and not hurry 
 you . remember that you have a free hand this time . these 
 endless move must be bad for the furniture , and be 
 certainly expensive . " 

 " what a practical little woman it be ! what be it be 
 read ? theo - theo - how much ? " 

 " Theosophy . " 

 so Ducie Street be her first fate - a pleasant enough 
 fate . the house , be only a little large than Wickham 
 Place , train she for the immense establishment that be 
 promise in the spring . they be frequently away , but at 
 home life run fairly regularly . in the morning Henry go 
 to the business , and his sandwich - a relic this of some 
 prehistoric craving - be always cut by her own hand . he do 
 not rely upon the sandwich for lunch , but like to have it 
 by he in case he grow hungry at eleven . when he have go , 
 there be the house to look after , and the servant to 
 humanize , and several kettle of Helen 's to keep on the 
 boil . her conscience prick she a little about the Basts ; 
 she be not sorry to have lose sight of they . no doubt 
 Leonard be worth help , but be Henry 's wife , she 
 prefer to help someone else . as for theatre and 
 discussion society , they attract she less and less . she 
 begin to " miss " new movement , and to spend her spare time 
 re - reading or thinking , rather to the concern of her Chelsea 
 friend . they attribute the change to her marriage , and 
 perhaps some deep instinct do warn she not to travel 
 far from her husband than be inevitable . yet the main 
 cause lie deeply still ; she have outgrow stimulant , and be 
 pass from word to thing . it be doubtless a pity not 
 to keep up with Wedekind or John , but some closing of the 
 gate be inevitable after thirty , if the mind itself be to 
 become a creative power . 


 chapter 32 

 she be look at plan one day in the following 
 spring - they have finally decide to go down into Sussex and 
 build - when Mrs. Charles Wilcox be announce . 

 " have you hear the news ? " dolly cry , as soon as she 
 enter the room . " Charles be so ang - I mean he be sure you 
 know about it , or rather , that you do not   know . " 

 " why , dolly ! " say Margaret , placidly kiss she . 
 " here be a surprise ! how be the boy and the baby ? " 

 boy and the baby be well , and in describe a great 
 row that there have be at Hilton Tennis Club , dolly forget 
 her news . the wrong people have try to get in . the 
 rector , as represent the old inhabitant , have 
 say - Charles have say - the tax - collector have say - Charles 
 have regret not say - and she close the description 
 with , " but lucky you , with four court of your own at Midhurst . " 

 " it will be very jolly , " reply Margaret . 

 " be those the plan ? do it matter I see they ? " 

 " of course not . " 

 " Charles have never see the plan . " 

 " they have only just arrive . here be the ground 
 floor - no , that be rather difficult . try the elevation . we 
 be to have a good many gable and a picturesque sky - line . " 

 " what make it smell so funny ? " say dolly , after a 
 moment 's inspection . she be incapable of understand 
 plan or map . 

 " I suppose the paper . " 

 " and which way up be it ? " 

 " just the ordinary way up . that be the sky - line , and the 
 part that smell strong be the sky . " 

 " well , ask I another . Margaret - oh - what be I go 
 to say ? how be Helen ? " 

 " quite well . " 

 " be she never come back to England ? every one think 
 it be awfully odd she do not . " 

 " so it be , " say Margaret , try to conceal her 
 vexation . she be get rather sore on this point . 
 " Helen be odd , awfully . she have now be away eight month . 

 " but have not   she any address ? " 

 " a poste restante somewhere in Bavaria be her address . 
 do write she a line . I will look it up for you . " 

 " no , do not   bother . that be eight month she have be 
 away , surely ? " 

 " exactly . she leave just after Evie 's wedding . it would 
 be eight month . " 

 " just when baby be bear , then ? " 

 " just so . " 

 dolly sigh , and star enviously round the 
 drawing - room . she be begin to lose her brightness and 
 good look . the Charles ' be not well off , for Mr. Wilcox , 
 have bring up his child with expensive taste , 
 believe in let they shift for themselves . after all , 
 he have not treat they generously . yet another baby be 
 expect , she tell Margaret , and they would have to give up 
 the motor . Margaret sympathize , but in a formal fashion , 
 and dolly little imagine that the step - mother be urge 
 Mr. Wilcox to make they a more liberal allowance . she 
 sigh again , and at last the particular grievance be 
 remember . " oh yes , " she cry , " that be it : Miss Avery 
 have be unpack your packing - case . " 

 " why have she do that ? how unnecessary ! " 

 " ask another . I suppose you order she to . " 

 " I give no such order . perhaps she be air the 
 thing . she do undertake to light an occasional fire . " 

 " it be far more than an air , " say dolly solemnly . 
 " the floor sound cover with book . Charles send I to 
 know what be to be do , for he feel certain you do not   know . " 

 " book ! " cry Margaret , move by the holy word . 
 " dolly , be you serious ? have she be touch our book ? " 

 " have not   she , though ! what use to be the hall 's full of 
 they . Charles think for certain you know of it . " 

 " I be very much oblige to you , dolly . what can have 
 come over Miss Avery ? I must go down about it at once . 
 some of the book be my brother 's , and be quite valuable . 
 she have no right to open any of the case . " 

 " I say she be dotty . she be the one that never get 
 marry , you know . oh , I say , perhaps she think your book 
 be wedding - present to herself . old maid be take that 
 way sometimes . Miss Avery hat we all like poison ever 
 since her frightful dust - up with Evie . " 

 " I have not   hear of that , " say Margaret . a visit from 
 dolly have its compensation . 

 " do not   you know she give Evie a present last August , 
 and Evie return it , and then - oh , golosh ! you never 
 read such a letter as Miss Avery write . " 

 " but it be wrong of Evie to return it . it be not   like 
 she to do such a heartless thing . " 

 " but the present be so expensive . " 

 " why do that make any difference , dolly ? " 

 " still , when it cost over five pound - I do not   see it , 
 but it be a lovely enamel pendant from a Bond Street shop . 
 you can not   very well accept that kind of thing from a farm 
 woman . now , can you ? " 

 " you accept a present from Miss Avery when you be marry . 

 " oh , mine be old earthenware stuff - not worth a 
 halfpenny . Evie 's be quite different . you would have to ask 
 anyone to the wedding who give you a pendant like that . 
 Uncle Percy and Albert and father and Charles all say it 
 be quite impossible , and when four man agree , what be a 
 girl to do ? Evie do not   want to upset the old thing , so 
 think a sort of joke letter well , and return the 
 pendant straight to the shop to save Miss Avery trouble . " 

 " but Miss Avery say - " 

 Dolly 's eye grow round . " it be a perfectly awful 
 letter . Charles say it be the letter of a madman . in the 
 end she have the pendant back again from the shop and throw 
 it into the duckpond . 

 " do she give any reason ? " 

 " we think she mean to be invite to Oniton , and so 
 climb into society . " 

 " she be rather old for that , " say Margaret pensively . 
 " may not she have give the present to Evie in remembrance 
 of her mother ? " 

 " that be a notion . give every one their due , eh ? well , 
 I suppose I ought to be toddle . come along , Mr. Muff - you 
 want a new coat , but I do not   know who will give it you , I be 
 sure ; " and address her apparel with mournful humour , 
 dolly move from the room . 

 Margaret follow she to ask whether Henry know about 
 Miss Avery 's rudeness . 

 " oh yes . " 

 " I wonder , then , why he let I ask she to look after the 
 house . " 

 " but she be only a farm woman , " say dolly , and her 
 explanation prove correct . Henry only censure the low 
 class when it suit he . he bear with Miss Avery as with 
 Crane - because he could get good value out of they . " I have 
 patience with a man who know his job , " he would say , really 
 have patience with the job , and not the man . Paradoxical 
 as it may sound , he have something of the artist about he ; 
 he would pass over an insult to his daughter soon than 
 lose a good charwoman for his wife . 

 Margaret judge it well to settle the little trouble 
 herself . party be evidently ruffle . with Henry 's 
 permission , she write a pleasant note to Miss Avery , ask 
 she to leave the case untouched . then , at the first 
 convenient opportunity , she go down herself , intend to 
 repack her belonging and store they properly in the local 
 warehouse : the plan have be amateurish and a failure . 
 Tibby promise to accompany she , but at the last moment 
 beg to be excuse . so , for the second time in her life , 
 she enter the house alone . 


 chapter 33 

 the day of her visit be exquisite , and the last of 
 unclouded happiness that she be to have for many month . 
 her anxiety about Helen 's extraordinary absence be still 
 dormant , and as for a possible brush with Miss Avery - that 
 only give zest to the expedition . she have also elude 
 dolly 's invitation to luncheon . walk straight up from 
 the station , she cross the village green and enter the 
 long chestnut avenue that connect it with the church . the 
 church itself stand in the village once . but it there 
 attract so many worshipper that the devil , in a pet , 
 snatch it from its foundation , and poise it on an 
 inconvenient knoll , three - quarter of a mile away . if this 
 story be true , the chestnut avenue must have be plant by 
 the angel . no more tempting approach could be imagine for 
 the luke - warm Christian , and if he still find the walk too 
 long , the devil be defeat all the same , Science have 
 build Holy Trinity , a Chapel of Ease , near the Charles ' , and 
 roof it with tin . 

 up the avenue Margaret stroll slowly , stop to 
 watch the sky that gleam through the upper branch of the 
 chestnut , or to finger the little horseshoe on the low 
 branch . why have not england a great mythology ? our 
 folklore have never advance beyond daintiness , and the 
 great melody about our country - side have all issue 
 through the pipe of Greece . Deep and true as the native 
 imagination can be , it seem to have fail here . it have 
 stop with the witch and the fairy . it can not vivify 
 one fraction of a summer field , or give name to half a 
 dozen star . England still wait for the supreme moment of 
 her literature - for the great poet who shall voice she , or , 
 well still , for the thousand little poet whose voice 
 shall pass into our common talk . 

 at the church the scenery change . the chestnut avenue 
 open into a road , smooth but narrow , which lead into the 
 untouched country . she follow it for over a mile . its 
 little hesitation please she . have no urgent destiny , 
 it stroll downhill or up as it wish , take no trouble 
 about the gradient , nor about the view , which nevertheless 
 expand . the great estate that throttle the south of 
 Hertfordshire be less obtrusive here , and the appearance 
 of the land be neither aristocratic nor suburban . to 
 define it be difficult , but Margaret know what it be not : 
 it be not snobbish . though its contours be slight , there 
 be a touch of freedom in their sweep to which Surrey will 
 never attain , and the distant brow of the Chilterns tower 
 like a mountain . " leave to itself , " be Margaret 's opinion , 
 " this county would vote Liberal . " the comradeship , not 
 passionate , that be our high gift as a nation , be 
 promise by it , as by the low brick farm where she call 
 for the key . 

 but the inside of the farm be disappointing . a most 
 finish young person receive she . " yes , Mrs. Wilcox ; no , 
 Mrs. Wilcox ; oh yes , Mrs. Wilcox , auntie receive your 
 letter quite duly . auntie have go up to your little place 
 at the present moment . shall I send the servant to direct 
 you ? " follow by : " of course , auntie do not generally 
 look after your place ; she only do it to oblige a 
 neighbour as something exceptional . it give she something 
 to do . she spend quite a lot of her time there . my 
 husband say to I sometimes , ' where be auntie ? ' I say , ' need 
 you ask ? she be at howard End . ' yes , Mrs. Wilcox . Mrs. 
 Wilcox , could I prevail upon you to accept a piece of cake ? 
 not if I cut it for you ? " 

 Margaret refuse the cake , but unfortunately this 
 acquire her gentility in the eye of Miss Avery 's niece . 

 " I can not let you go on alone . now do not . you really 
 must not . I will direct you myself if it come to that . I 
 must get my hat . now " - roguishly - " Mrs. Wilcox , do not   you 
 move while I be go . " 

 stun , Margaret do not move from the good parlour , 
 over which the touch of art nouveau have fall . but the 
 other room look in keeping , though they convey the 
 peculiar sadness of a rural interior . here have live an 
 elder race , to which we look back with disquietude . the 
 country which we visit at week - end be really a home to it , 
 and the graver side of life , the death , the parting , the 
 yearning for love , have their deep expression in the 
 heart of the field . all be not sadness . the sun be 
 shin without . the thrush sing his two syllable on the 
 bud guelder - rose . some child be play 
 uproariously in heap of golden straw . it be the presence 
 of sadness at all that surprised Margaret , and end by 
 give she a feeling of completeness . in these english 
 farm , if anywhere , one might see life steadily and see it 
 whole , group in one vision its transitoriness and its 
 eternal youth , connect - connect without bitterness until all 
 man be brother . but her thought be interrupt by the 
 return of Miss Avery 's niece , and be so tranquillizing 
 that she suffer the interruption gladly . 

 it be quick to go out by the back door , and , after 
 due explanation , they go out by it . the niece be now 
 mortify by unnumerable chicken , who rush up to her foot 
 for food , and by a shameless and maternal sow . she do not 
 know what animal be come to . but her gentility 
 wither at the touch of the sweet air . the wind be 
 rise , scatter the straw and ruffle the tail of the 
 duck as they float in family over Evie 's pendant . one 
 of those delicious gale of spring , in which leave stiff in 
 bud seem to rustle , sweep over the land and then fall 
 silent . " Georgia , " sing the thrush . " Cuckoo , " come 
 furtively from the cliff of pine - tree . " Georgia , pretty 
 Georgia , " and the other bird join in with nonsense . the 
 hedge be a half - paint picture which would be finish in 
 a few day . celandine grow on its bank , lord and lady 
 and primrose in the defended hollow ; the wild rose - bush , 
 still bear their withered hip , show also the promise 
 of blossom . spring have come , clothe in no classical garb , yet 
 fair than all spring ; fair even than she who walk 
 through the myrtle of Tuscany with the grace before she 
 and the zephyr behind . 

 the two woman walk up the lane full of outward 
 civility . but Margaret be think how difficult it be to 
 be earnest about furniture on such a day , and the niece be 
 think about hat . thus engage , they reach howard 
 end . petulant cry of " Auntie ! " sever the air . there 
 be no reply , and the front door be lock . 

 " be you sure that Miss Avery be up here ? " ask Margaret . 

 " oh yes , Mrs. Wilcox , quite sure . she be here daily . " 

 Margaret try to look in through the dining - room 
 window , but the curtain inside be draw tightly . so with 
 the drawing - room and the hall . the appearance of these 
 curtain be familiar , yet she do not remember they be 
 there on her other visit : her impression be that Mr. Bryce 
 have take everything away . they try the back . here again 
 they receive no answer , and could see nothing ; the 
 kitchen - window be fit with a blind , while the pantry and 
 scullery have piece of wood prop up against they , which 
 look ominously like the lid of packing - case . Margaret 
 think of her book , and she lift up her voice also . at 
 the first cry she succeed . 

 " well , well ! " reply someone inside the house . " if it 
 be not   Mrs. Wilcox come at last ! " 

 " have you get the key , auntie ? " 

 " Madge , go away , " say Miss Avery , still invisible . 

 " Auntie , it be Mrs. Wilcox - " 

 Margaret support she . " your niece and I have come together - " 

 " Madge , go away . this be no moment for your hat . " 

 the poor woman go red . " auntie get more eccentric 
 lately , " she say nervously . 

 " Miss Avery ! " call Margaret . " I have come about the 
 furniture . could you kindly let I in ? " 

 " yes , Mrs. Wilcox , " say the voice , " of course . " but 
 after that come silence . they call again without 
 response . they walk round the house disconsolately . 

 " I hope Miss Avery be not ill , " hazard Margaret . 

 " well , if you will excuse I , " say Madge , " perhaps I 
 ought to be leave you now . the servant need see to at 
 the farm . auntie be so odd at time . " gather up her 
 elegancie , she retire defeat , and , as if her departure 
 have loose a spring , the front door open at once . 

 Miss Avery say , " well , come right in , Mrs. Wilcox ! " 
 quite pleasantly and calmly . 

 " thank you so much , " begin Margaret , but break off at 
 the sight of an umbrella - stand . it be her own . 

 " come right into the hall first , " say Miss Avery . she 
 draw the curtain , and Margaret utter a cry of despair . 
 for an appalling thing have happen . the hall be fit up 
 with the content of the library from Wickham Place . the 
 carpet have be lay , the big work - table draw up near the 
 window ; the bookcase fill the wall opposite the 
 fireplace , and her father 's sword - this be what bewilder 
 her particularly - have be draw from its scabbard and hung 
 naked amongst the sober volume . Miss Avery must have 
 work for day . 

 " I be afraid this be not   what we mean , " she begin . " Mr. 
 Wilcox and I never intend the case to be touch . for 
 instance , these book be my brother 's . we be store they 
 for he and for my sister , who be abroad . when you kindly 
 undertake to look after thing , we never expect you to do 
 so much . " 

 " the house have be empty long enough , " say the old woman . 

 Margaret refuse to argue . " I dare say we do not 
 explain , " she say civilly . " it have be a mistake , and 
 very likely our mistake . " 

 " Mrs. Wilcox , it have be mistake upon mistake for fifty 
 year . the house be Mrs. Wilcox 's , and she would not desire 
 it to stand empty any long . " 

 to help the poor decaying brain , Margaret say : 

 " yes , Mrs. Wilcox 's house , the mother of Mr. Charles . " 

 " Mistake upon mistake , " say Miss Avery . " Mistake upon mistake . " 

 " well , I do not   know , " say Margaret , sit down in one 
 of her own chair . " I really do not   know what be to be 
 do . " she could not help laugh . 

 the other say : " yes , it should be a merry house enough . " 

 " I do not   know - I dare say . well , thank you very much , 
 Miss Avery . yes , that be all right . delightful . " 

 " there be still the parlour . " she go through the door 
 opposite and draw a curtain . Light flood the drawing - room 
 and the drawing - room furniture from Wickham Place . " and the 
 dining - room . " More curtain be draw , more window be 
 fling open to the spring . " then through here - " Miss Avery 
 continue pass and repasse through the hall . her voice 
 be lose , but Margaret hear she pull up the kitchen 
 blind . " I have   not finish here yet , " she announce , 
 return . " there be still a deal to do . the farm lad will 
 carry your great wardrobe upstairs , for there be no need to 
 go into expense at Hilton . " 

 " it be all a mistake , " repeat Margaret , feel that 
 she must put her foot down . " a misunderstanding . Mr. 
 Wilcox and I be not go to live at howard End . " 

 " oh , indeed . on account of his hay fever ? " 

 " we have settle to build a new home for ourselves in 
 Sussex , and part of this furniture - my part - will go down 
 there presently . " she look at Miss Avery intently , try 
 to understand the kink in her brain . here be no maunder 
 old woman . her wrinkle be shrewd and humorous . she 
 look capable of scathing wit and also of high but 
 unostentatious nobility . 

 " you think that you will not   come back to live here , Mrs. 
 Wilcox , but you will . " 

 " that remain to be see , " say Margaret , smile . " we 
 have no intention of do so for the present . we happen to 
 need a much large house . circumstance oblige we to give 
 big party . of course , some day - one never know , do one ? " 

 Miss Avery retort : " some day ! tcha ! tcha ! do not 
 talk about some day . you be live here now . " 

 " be I ? " 

 " you be live here , and have be for the last ten 
 minute , if you ask I . " 

 it be a senseless remark , but with a queer feeling of 
 disloyalty Margaret rise from her chair . she feel that 
 Henry have be obscurely censure . they go into the 
 dining - room , where the sunlight pour in upon her mother 's 
 chiffoni , and upstairs , where many an old god peep from 
 a new niche . the furniture fit extraordinarily well . in 
 the central room - over the hall , the room that Helen have 
 sleep in four year ago - Miss Avery have place Tibby 's old 
 bassinette . 

 " the nursery , " she say . 

 Margaret turn away without speak . 

 at last everything be see . the kitchen and lobby be 
 still stack with furniture and straw , but , as far as she 
 could make out , nothing have be break or scratch . a 
 pathetic display of ingenuity ! then they take a friendly 
 stroll in the garden . it have go wild since her last 
 visit . the gravel sweep be weedy , and grass have spring up 
 at the very jaw of the garage . and Evie 's rockery be only 
 bump . perhaps Evie be responsible for Miss Avery 's 
 oddness . but Margaret suspect that the cause lie deeply , 
 and that the girl 's silly letter have but loose the 
 irritation of year . 

 " it be a beautiful meadow , " she remark . it be one of 
 those open - air drawing - room that have be form , hundred 
 of year ago , out of the small field . so the boundary 
 hedge zigzag down the hill at right angle , and at the 
 bottom there be a little green annex - a sort of 
 powder - closet for the cow . 

 " yes , the maidy 's well enough , " say Miss Avery , " for 
 those that be , who do not   suffer from sneeze . " and she 
 cackle maliciously . " I have   see Charlie Wilcox go out to my 
 lad in hay time - oh , they ought to do this - they must not   do 
 that - he would learn they to be lad . and just then the 
 tickling take he . he have it from his father , with other 
 thing . there be not one Wilcox that can stand up against a 
 field in June - I laugh fit to burst while he be court Ruth . " 

 " my brother get hay fever too , " say Margaret . 

 " this house lie too much on the land for they . 
 naturally , they be glad enough to slip in at first . but 
 Wilcoxes be well than nothing , as I see you have   find . " 

 Margaret laugh . 

 " they keep a place go , do not   they ? yes , it be just that . " 

 " they keep England go , it be my opinion . " 

 but Miss Avery upset she by reply : " ay , they bree 
 like rabbit . well , well , it be a funny world . but he who 
 make it know what he want in it , I suppose . if Mrs. 
 Charlie be expect her fourth , it be not   for we to repine . " 

 " they breed and they also work , " say Margaret , 
 conscious of some invitation to disloyalty , which be echo 
 by the very breeze and by the song of the bird . " it 
 certainly be a funny world , but so long as man like my 
 husband and his son govern it , I think it will never be a bad 
 one - never really bad . " 

 " no , better'n nothing , " say Miss Avery , and turn to 
 the wych - elm . 

 on their way back to the farm she speak of her old 
 friend much more clearly than before . in the house Margaret 
 have wonder whether she quite distinguish the first wife 
 from the second . now she say : " I never see much of Ruth 
 after her grandmother die , but we stay civil . it be a 
 very civil family . Old Mrs. Howard never speak against 
 anybody , nor let anyone be turn away without food . then 
 it be never ' trespasser will be prosecute ' in their land , 
 but would people please not come in . Mrs. Howard be never 
 create to run a farm . " 

 " have they no man to help they ? " Margaret ask . 

 Miss Avery reply : " thing go on until there be no man . " 

 " until Mr. Wilcox come along , " correct Margaret , 
 anxious that her husband should receive his due . 

 " I suppose so ; but Ruth should have marry a - no 
 disrespect to you to say this , for I take it you be 
 intend to get Wilcox any way , whether she get he first or 
 no . " 

 " whom should she have marry ? " 

 " a soldier ! " exclaim the old woman . " some real soldier . " 

 Margaret be silent . it be a criticism of Henry 's 
 character far more trenchant than any of her own . she feel 
 dissatisfied . 

 " but that be all over , " she go on . " a well time be 
 come now , though you have   keep I long enough wait . in a 
 couple of week I will see your light shin through the 
 hedge of an evening . have you order in coal ? " 

 " we be not come , " say Margaret firmly . she 
 respect Miss Avery too much to humour she . " no . not 
 come . never come . it have all be a mistake . the 
 furniture must be repacke at once , and I be very sorry but 
 I be make other arrangement , and must ask you to give I 
 the key . " 

 " certainly , Mrs. Wilcox , " say Miss Avery , and resign 
 her duty with a smile . 

 relieve at this conclusion , and have send she 
 compliment to Madge , Margaret walk back to the station . 
 she have intend to go to the furniture warehouse and give 
 direction for removal , but the muddle have turn out more 
 extensive than she expect , so she decide to consult 
 Henry . it be as well that she do this . he be strongly 
 against employ the local man whom he have previously 
 recommend , and advise she to store in London after all . 

 but before this could be do an unexpected trouble fall 
 upon she . 


 chapter 34 

 it be not unexpected entirely . Aunt Juley 's health have 
 be bad all the winter . she have have a long series of cold 
 and cough , and have be too busy to get rid of they . she 
 have scarcely promise her niece " to really take my tiresome 
 chest in hand , " when she catch a chill and develop acute 
 pneumonia . Margaret and Tibby go down to Swanage . Helen 
 be telegraph for , and that spring party that after all 
 gather in that hospitable house have all the pathos of fair 
 memory . on a perfect day , when the sky seem blue 
 porcelain , and the wave of the discreet little bay beat 
 gentlest of tattoo upon the sand , Margaret hurry up 
 through the rhododendron , confront again by the 
 senselessness of death . one death may explain itself , but 
 it throw no light upon another : the groping inquiry must 
 begin anew . preacher or scientist may generalize , but we 
 know that no generality be possible about those whom we 
 love ; not one heaven await they , not even one oblivion . 
 Aunt Juley , incapable of tragedy , slip out of life with 
 odd little laugh and apology for have stop in it so 
 long . she be very weak ; she could not rise to the 
 occasion , or realize the great mystery which all agree must 
 await she ; it only seem to she that she be quite do 
 up - more do up than ever before ; that she see and hear 
 and feel less every moment ; and that , unless something 
 change , she would soon feel nothing . her spare strength 
 she devote to plan : could not Margaret take some steamer 
 expedition ? be mackerel cook as Tibby like they ? she 
 worry herself about Helen 's absence , and also that she 
 could be the cause of Helen 's return . the nurse seem to 
 think such interest quite natural , and perhaps hers be an 
 average approach to the Great Gate . but Margaret see death 
 strip of any false romance ; whatever the idea of death 
 may contain , the process can be trivial and hideous . 

 " Important - Margaret dear , take the Lulworth when Helen come . " 

 " Helen will not   be able to stop , Aunt Juley . she have 
 telegraph that she can only get away just to see you . she 
 must go back to Germany as soon as you be well . " 

 " how very odd of Helen ! Mr. Wilcox - " 

 " yes , dear ? " 

 " can he spare you ? " 

 Henry wish she to come , and have be very kind . yet 
 again Margaret say so . 

 Mrs. Munt do not die . quite outside her will , a more 
 dignified power take hold of she and check she on the 
 downward slope . she return , without emotion , as fidgety 
 as ever . on the fourth day she be out of danger . 

 " Margaret - important , " it go on : " I should like you to 
 have some companion to take walk with . do try Miss Conder . " 

 " I have be a little walk with Miss Conder . " 

 " but she be not really interesting . if only you have Helen . " 

 " I have Tibby , Aunt Juley . " 

 " no , but he have to do his Chinese . some real companion 
 be what you need . really , Helen be odd . " 

 " Helen be odd , very , " agree Margaret . 

 " not content with go abroad , why do she want to go 
 back there at once ? " 

 " no doubt she will change her mind when she see we . 
 she have not the least balance . " 

 that be the stock criticism about Helen , but Margaret 's 
 voice tremble as she make it . by now she be deeply pain 
 at her sister 's behaviour . it may be unbalanced to fly out 
 of England , but to stop away eight month argue that the 
 heart be awry as well as the head . a sick - bed could recall 
 Helen , but she be deaf to more human call ; after a glimpse 
 at her aunt , she would retire into her nebulous life behind 
 some poste restante . she scarcely exist ; her letter have 
 become dull and infrequent ; she have no want and no 
 curiosity . and it be all put down to poor Henry 's 
 account ! Henry , long pardon by his wife , be still too 
 infamous to be greet by his sister - in - law . it be morbid , 
 and , to her alarm , Margaret fancy that she could trace the 
 growth of morbidity back in Helen 's life for nearly four 
 year . the flight from Oniton ; the unbalanced patronage of 
 the Basts ; the explosion of grief up on the Downs - all 
 connect with Paul , an insignificant boy whose lip have 
 kiss her for a fraction of time . Margaret and Mrs. 
 Wilcox have fear that they might kiss again . foolishly : 
 the real danger be reaction . reaction against the Wilcoxes 
 have eat into her life until she be scarcely sane . at 
 twenty - five she have an idee fixe . what hope be there for 
 she as an old woman ? 

 the more Margaret think about it the more alarmed she 
 become . for many month she have put the subject away , but 
 it be too big to be slight now . there be almost a taint 
 of madness . be all Helen 's action to be govern by a 
 tiny mishap , such as may happen to any young man or woman ? 
 can human nature be construct on line so insignificant ? 
 the blundering little encounter at howard end be vital . 
 it propagate itself where graver intercourse lie barren ; it 
 be strong than sisterly intimacy , strong than reason or 
 book . in one of her mood Helen have confess that she 
 still " enjoy " it in a certain sense . Paul have fade , but 
 the magic of his caress endure . and where there be 
 enjoyment of the past there may also be 
 reaction - propagation at both end . 

 well , it be odd and sad that our mind should be such 
 seed - bed , and we without power to choose the seed . but man 
 be an odd , sad creature as yet , intent on pilfer the 
 earth , and heedless of the growth within himself . he 
 can not be bored about psychology . he leave it to the 
 specialist , which be as if he should leave his dinner to be 
 eat by a steam - engine . he can not be bother to digest 
 his own soul . Margaret and Helen have be more patient , 
 and it be suggest that Margaret have succeed - so far as 
 success be yet possible . she do understand herself , she 
 have some rudimentary control over her own growth . whether 
 Helen have succeed one can not say . 

 the day that Mrs. Munt rally Helen 's letter arrive . 
 she have post it at Munich , and would be in London herself 
 on the morrow . it be a disquieting letter , though the 
 opening be affectionate and sane . 


 Dearest Meg , 

 give Helen 's love to Aunt Juley . tell she that I 
 love , and have love , her ever since I can remember . I 
 shall be in London Thursday . 

 my address will be care of the banker . I have not 
 yet settle on a hotel , so write or wire to I there and 
 give I detailed news . if Aunt Juley be much well , or 
 if , for a terrible reason , it would be no good my come 
 down to Swanage , you must not think it odd if I do not 
 come . I have all sort of plan in my head . I be live 
 abroad at present , and want to get back as quickly as 
 possible . will you please tell I where our furniture 
 be . I should like to take out one or two book ; the rest 
 be for you . 

 forgive I , dear Meg . this must read like rather 
 a tiresome letter , but all letter be from your love 

  Helen 


 it be a tiresome letter , for it tempt Margaret to 
 tell a lie . if she write that Aunt Juley be still in 
 danger her sister would come . unhealthiness be contagious . 
 we can not be in contact with those who be in a morbid state 
 without ourselves deteriorate . to " act for the good " 
 might do Helen good , but would do herself harm , and , at the 
 risk of disaster , she keep her colour fly a little 
 long . she reply that their aunt be much well , and 
 await development . 

 Tibby approve of her reply . mellow rapidly , he be 
 a pleasanter companion than before . Oxford have do much 
 for he . he have lose his peevishness , and could hide his 
 indifference to people and his interest in food . but he have 
 not grow more human . the year between eighteen and 
 twenty - two , so magical for most , be lead he gently 
 from boyhood to middle age . he have never know 
 young - manliness , that quality which warm the heart till 
 death , and give Mr. Wilcox an imperishable charm . he be 
 frigid , through no fault of his own , and without cruelty . 
 he think Helen wrong and Margaret right , but the family 
 trouble be for he what a scene behind footlight be for 
 most people . he have only one suggestion to make , and that 
 be characteristic . 

 " why do not   you tell Mr. Wilcox ? " 

 " about Helen ? " 

 " perhaps he have come across that sort of thing . " 

 " he would do all he could , but - " 

 " oh , you know well . but he be practical . " 

 it be the student 's belief in expert . Margaret 
 demur for one or two reason . presently Helen 's answer 
 come . she send a telegram request the address of the 
 furniture , as she would now return at once . Margaret 
 reply , " certainly not ; meet I at the banker at four . " 
 she and Tibby go up to London . Helen be not at the 
 banker , and they be refuse her address . Helen have 
 pass into chaos . 

 Margaret put her arm round her brother . he be all that 
 she have leave , and never have he seem more unsubstantial . 

 " Tibby love , what next ? " 

 he reply : " it be extraordinary . " 

 " dear , your judgment be often clear than mine . have 
 you any notion what be at the back ? " 

 " none , unless it be something mental . " 

 " oh - that ! " say Margaret . " quite impossible . " but the 
 suggestion have be utter , and in a few minute she take 
 it up herself . nothing else explain . and London agree 
 with Tibby . the mask fall off the city , and she see it for 
 what it really be - a caricature of infinity . the familiar 
 barrier , the street along which she move , the house 
 between which she have make her little journey for so many 
 year , become negligible suddenly . Helen seem one with 
 grimy tree and the traffic and the slowly - flow slab of 
 mud . she have accomplish a hideous act of renunciation and 
 return to the one . Margaret 's own faith hold firm . she 
 know the human soul will be merge , if it be merge at all , 
 with the star and the sea . yet she feel that her sister 
 have be go amiss for many year . it be symbolic the 
 catastrophe should come now , on a London afternoon , while 
 rain fall slowly . 

 Henry be the only hope . Henry be definite . he might 
 know of some path in the chaos that be hide from they , 
 and she determine to take Tibby 's advice and lie the whole 
 matter in his hand . they must call at his office . he 
 could not well make it bad . she go for a few moment 
 into St. Paul 's , whose dome stand out of the welter so 
 bravely , as if preach the gospel of form . but within , 
 St. Paul 's be as its surrounding - echo and whisper , 
 inaudible song , invisible mosaic , wet footmark crossing 
 and recrosse the floor . Si monumentum requiris , 
 circumspice : it point we back to London . there be no hope 
 of Helen here . 

 Henry be unsatisfactory at first . that she have 
 expect . he be overjoyed to see she back from Swanage , 
 and slow to admit the growth of a new trouble . when they 
 tell he of their search , he only chaff Tibby and the 
 schlegel generally , and declare that it be " just like 
 Helen " to lead her relative a dance . 

 " that be what we all say , " reply Margaret . " but why 
 should it be just like Helen ? why should she be allow to 
 be so queer , and to grow queerer ? " 

 " do not   ask I . I be a plain man of business . I live and 
 let live . my advice to you both be , do not   worry . Margaret , 
 you have   get black mark again under your eye . you know 
 that be strictly forbidden . first your aunt - then your 
 sister . no , we be not   go to have it . be we , 
 Theobald ? " he ring the bell . " I will give you some tea , and 
 then you go straight to Ducie Street . I can not   have my girl 
 look as old as her husband . " 

 " all the same , you have not quite see our point , " say Tibby . 

 Mr. Wilcox , who be in good spirit , retort , " I do not 
 suppose I ever shall . " he leant back , laugh at the 
 gifted but ridiculous family , while the fire flicker over 
 the map of Africa . Margaret motion to her brother to go 
 on . rather diffident , he obey she . 

 " Margaret 's point be this , " he say . " our sister may be 
 mad . " 

 Charles , who be work in the inner room , look round . 

 " come in , Charles , " say Margaret kindly . " could you 
 help we at all ? we be again in trouble . " 

 " I be afraid I can not . what be the fact ? we be all 
 mad more or less , you know , in these day . " 

 " the fact be as follow , " reply Tibby , who have at 
 time a pedantic lucidity . " the fact be that she have be 
 in England for three day and will not see we . she have 
 forbid the banker to give we her address . she refuse 
 to answer question . Margaret find her letter 
 colourless . there be other fact , but these be the most 
 striking . " 

 " she have never behave like this before , then ? " ask Henry . 

 " of course not ! " say his wife , with a frown . 

 " well , my dear , how be I to know ? " 

 a senseless spasm of annoyance come over she . " you know 
 quite well that Helen never sin against affection , " she 
 say . " you must have notice that much in she , surely . " 

 " oh yes ; she and I have always hit it off together . " 

 " no , Henry - can not   you see ? - I do not   mean that . " 

 she recover herself , but not before Charles have 
 observe she . stupid and attentive , he be watch the scene . 

 " I be mean that when she be eccentric in the past , 
 one could trace it back to the heart in the long run . she 
 behave oddly because she care for someone , or want to 
 help they . there be no possible excuse for she now . she be 
 grieve we deeply , and that be why I be sure that she be 
 not well . ' mad ' be too terrible a word , but she be not 
 well . I shall never believe it . I should not   discuss my 
 sister with you if I think she be well - trouble you about 
 she , I mean . " 

 Henry begin to grow serious . Ill - health be to he 
 something perfectly definite . generally well himself , he 
 could not realize that we sink to it by slow gradation . 
 the sick have no right ; they be outside the pale ; one 
 could lie to they remorselessly . when his first wife be 
 seize , he have promise to take she down into Hertfordshire , 
 but meanwhile arrange with a nursing - home instead . Helen , 
 too , be ill . and the plan that he sketch out for her 
 capture , clever and well - meaning as it be , draw its ethic 
 from the wolf - pack . 

 " you want to get hold of she ? " he say . " that be the 
 problem , be not   it ? she have get to see a doctor . " 

 " for all I know she have see one already . " 

 " yes , yes ; do not   interrupt . " he rise to his foot and 
 think intently . the genial , tentative host disappear , 
 and they see instead the man who have carve money out of 
 Greece and Africa , and buy forest from the native for a 
 few bottle of gin . " I have   get it , " he say at last . " it be 
 perfectly easy . leave it to I . we will send she down to 
 howard End . " 

 " how will you do that ? " 

 " after her book . tell she that she must unpack they 
 herself . then you can meet she there . " 

 " but , Henry , that be just what she will not   let I do . it be 
 part of she - whatever it be - never to see I . " 

 " of course you will not   tell she you be go . when she be 
 there , look at the case , you will just stroll in . if 
 nothing be wrong with she , so much the well . but there will 
 be the motor round the corner , and we can run she up to a 
 specialist in no time . " 

 Margaret shake her head . " it be quite impossible . " 

 " why ? " 

 " it do not   seem impossible to I , " say Tibby ; " it be 
 surely a very tippy plan . " 

 " it be impossible , because - " she look at her husband 
 sadly . " it be not the particular language that Helen and I 
 talk if you see my meaning . it would do splendidly for 
 other people , whom I do not   blame . " 

 " but Helen do not   talk , " say Tibby . " that be our whole 
 difficulty . she will not   talk your particular language , and on 
 that account you think she be ill . " 

 " no , Henry ; it be sweet of you , but I could not . " 

 " I see , " he say ; " you have scruple . " 

 " I suppose so . " 

 " and soon than go against they you would have your 
 sister suffer . you could have get she down to Swanage by a 
 word , but you have scruple . and scruple be all very 
 well . I be as scrupulous as any man alive , I hope ; but when 
 it be a case like this , when there be a question of madness - " 

 " I deny it be madness . " 

 " you say just now - " 

 " it be madness when I say it , but not when you say it . " 

 Henry shrug his shoulder . " Margaret ! Margaret ! " he 
 groan . " no education can teach a woman logic . now , my 
 dear , my time be valuable . do you want I to help you or not ? " 

 " not in that way . " 

 " answer my question . plain question , plain answer . do - " 

 Charles surprise they by interrupt . " Pater , we may 
 as well keep howard end out of it , " he say . 

 " why , Charles ? " 

 Charles could give no reason ; but Margaret feel as if , 
 over tremendous distance , a salutation have pass between they . 

 " the whole house be at six and seven , " he say 
 crossly . " we do not   want any more mess . " 

 " who be ' we ' ? " ask his father . " my boy , pray , who be ' we ' ? " 

 " I be sure I beg your pardon , " say Charles . " I appear 
 always to be intrude . " 

 by now Margaret wish she have never mention she 
 trouble to her husband . Retreat be impossible . he be 
 determined to push the matter to a satisfactory conclusion , 
 and Helen fade as he talk . her fair , fly hair and 
 eager eye count for nothing , for she be ill , without 
 right , and any of her friend might hunt she . sick at 
 heart , Margaret join in the chase . she write her sister a 
 lie letter , at her husband 's dictation ; she say the 
 furniture be all at howard End , but could be see on 
 Monday next at 3 p.m. , when a charwoman would be in 
 attendance . it be a cold letter , and the more plausible 
 for that . Helen would think she be offend . and on 
 Monday next she and Henry be to lunch with dolly , and then 
 ambush themselves in the garden . 

 after they have go , Mr. Wilcox say to his son : " I 
 can not   have this sort of behaviour , my boy . Margaret 's too 
 sweet - natured to mind , but I mind for she . " 

 Charles make no answer . 

 " be anything wrong with you , Charles , this afternoon ? " 

 " no , pater ; but you may be take on a big business 
 than you reckon . " 

 " how ? " 

 " do not   ask I . " 


 Chapter 35 

 one speak of the mood of spring , but the day that be her 
 true child have only one mood ; they be all full of the 
 rise and drop of wind , and the whistling of bird . 
 new flower may come out , the green embroidery of the hedge 
 increase , but the same heaven brood overhead , soft , thick , 
 and blue , the same figure , see and unseen , be wander 
 by coppice and meadow . the morning that Margaret have spend 
 with Miss Avery , and the afternoon she set out to entrap 
 Helen , be the scale of a single balance . time might 
 never have move , rain never have fall , and man alone , 
 with his scheme and ailment , be troubling nature until he 
 see she through a veil of tear . 

 she protest no more . whether Henry be right or 
 wrong , he be most kind , and she know of no other standard 
 by which to judge he . she must trust he absolutely . as 
 soon as he have take up a business , his obtuseness 
 vanish . he profit by the slight indication , and the 
 capture of Helen promise to be stag as deftly as the 
 marriage of Evie . 

 they go down in the morning as arrange , and he 
 discover that their victim be actually in Hilton . on his 
 arrival he call at all the livery - stable in the village , 
 and have a few minute ' serious conversation with the 
 proprietor . what he say , Margaret do not know - perhaps 
 not the truth ; but news arrive after lunch that a lady have 
 come by the London train , and have take a fly to howard End . 

 " she be bind to drive , " say Henry . " there will be 
 her book . 

 " I can not make it out , " say Margaret for the hundredth time . 

 " finish your coffee , dear . we must be off . " 

 " yes , Margaret , you know you must take plenty , " say dolly . 

 Margaret try , but suddenly lift her hand to her 
 eye . dolly steal glance at her father - in - law which he do 
 not answer . in the silence the motor come round to the door . 

 " you be not fit for it , " he say anxiously . " let I go 
 alone . I know exactly what to do . " 

 " oh yes , I be fit , " say Margaret , uncover her face . 
 " only most frightfully worried . I can not feel that Helen be 
 really alive . her letter and telegram seem to have come 
 from someone else . her voice be not   in they . I do not 
 believe your driver really see she at the station . I wish 
 I have never mention it . I know that Charles be vex . yes , 
 he be - " she seize Dolly 's hand and kiss it . " there , 
 dolly will forgive I . there . now we will be off . " 

 Henry have be look at she closely . he do not like 
 this breakdown . 

 " do not   you want to tidy yourself ? " he ask . 

 " have I time ? " 

 " yes , plenty . " 

 she go to the lavatory by the front door , and as soon 
 as the bolt slip , Mr. Wilcox say quietly : 

 " dolly , I be go without she . " 

 dolly 's eye light up with vulgar excitement . she 
 follow he on tip - toe out to the car . 

 " tell she I think it well . " 

 " yes , Mr. Wilcox , I see . " 

 " say anything you like . all right . " 

 the car start well , and with ordinary luck would have 
 get away . but Porgly - woggle , who be play in the 
 garden , choose this moment to sit down in the middle of the 
 path . crane , in try to pass he , run one wheel over a 
 bed of wallflower . dolly scream . Margaret , hear the 
 noise , rush out hatless , and be in time to jump on the 
 footboard . she say not a single word : he be only treat 
 she as she have treat Helen , and her rage at his dishonesty 
 only help to indicate what Helen would feel against they . 
 she think , " I deserve it : I be punish for lower my 
 colour . " and she accept his apology with a calmness 
 that astonish he . 

 " I still consider you be not fit for it , " he keep say . 

 " perhaps I be not at lunch . but the whole thing be 
 spread clearly before I now . " 

 " I be mean to act for the good . " 

 " just lend I your scarf , will you ? this wind take 
 one 's hair so . " 

 " certainly , dear girl . be you all right now ? " 

 " look ! my hand have stop tremble . " 

 " and have quite forgive I ? then listen . her cab 
 should already have arrive at Howards End .   we be a little 
 late , but no matter .   our first move will be to send it down 
 to wait at the farm , as , if possible , one do not   want a 
 scene before servant . a certain gentleman " - he point at 
 Crane 's back - " will not   drive in , but will wait a little short 
 of the front gate , behind the laurel . have you still the 
 key of the house ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " well , they be not   want . do you remember how the 
 house stand ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " if we do not   find she in the porch , we can stroll round 
 into the garden . our object - " 

 here they stop to pick up the doctor . 

 " I be just say to my wife , Mansbridge , that our main 
 object be not to frighten Miss Schlegel . the house , as you 
 know , be my property , so it should seem quite natural for we 
 to be there . the trouble be evidently nervous - would not   you 
 say so , Margaret ? " 

 the doctor , a very young man , begin to ask question 
 about Helen . be she normal ? be there anything congenital 
 or hereditary ? have anything occur that be likely to 
 alienate she from her family ? 

 " nothing , " answer Margaret , wonder what would have 
 happen if she have add : " though she do resent my 
 husband 's immorality . " 

 " she always be highly string , " pursue Henry , lean 
 back in the car as it shoot past the church . " a tendency to 
 spiritualism and those thing , though nothing serious . 
 Musical , literary , artistic , but I should say normal - a very 
 charming girl . " 

 Margaret 's anger and terror increase every moment . how 
 dare these man label her sister ! what horror lay ahead ! 
 what impertinence that shelter under the name of science ! 
 the pack be turn on Helen , to deny her human right , and 
 it seem to Margaret that all schlegel be threaten 
 with she . " be they normal ? " what a question to ask ! and 
 it be always those who know nothing about human nature , who 
 be bore by psychology and shock by physiology , who ask 
 it . however piteous her sister 's state , she know that she 
 must be on her side . they would be mad together if the 
 world choose to consider they so . 

 it be now five minute past three . the car slow down 
 by the farm , in the yard of which Miss Avery be stand . 
 Henry ask she whether a cab have go past . she nod , 
 and the next moment they catch sight of it , at the end of 
 the lane . the car run silently like a beast of prey . so 
 unsuspicious be Helen that she be sit on the porch , 
 with she back to the road . she have come . only her head and 
 shoulder be visible . she sit frame in the vine , and one 
 of her hand play with the bud . the wind ruffle her 
 hair , the sun glorify it ; she be as she have always be . 

 Margaret be seat next to the door . before her 
 husband could prevent she , she slip out . she run to the 
 garden gate , which be shut , pass through it , and 
 deliberately push it in his face . the noise alarm 
 Helen . Margaret see her rise with an unfamiliar movement , 
 and , rush into the porch , learn the simple explanation 
 of all their fear - her sister be with child . 

 " be the truant all right ? " call Henry . 

 she have time to whisper : " oh , my darling - " the key of 
 the house be in her hand . she unlock howard end and 
 thrust Helen into it . " yes , all right , " she say , and stand 
 with she back to the door . 


 chapter 36 

 " Margaret , you look upset ! " say Henry . Mansbridge have 
 follow . Crane be at the gate , and the flyman have stand 
 up on the box . Margaret shake her head at they ; she could 
 not speak any more . she remain clutch the key , as if 
 all their future depend on they . Henry be ask more 
 question . she shake her head again . his word have no 
 sense . she hear he wonder why she have let Helen in . " you 
 might have give I a knock with the gate , " be another of 
 his remark . presently she hear herself speak . she , or 
 someone for she , say " go away . " Henry come nearer . he 
 repeat , " Margaret , you look upset again . my dear , give I 
 the key . what be you do with Helen ? " 

 " oh , dearest , do go away , and I will manage it all . " 

 " manage what ? " 

 he stretch out his hand for the key . she might have 
 obey if it have not be for the doctor . 

 " stop that at least , " she say piteously ; the doctor have 
 turn back , and be question the driver of Helen 's cab . 
 a new feeling come over she ; she be fight for woman 
 against man . she do not care about right , but if man come 
 into howard End , it should be over her body . 

 " come , this be an odd beginning , " say her husband . 

 the doctor come forward now , and whisper two word to 
 Mr. Wilcox - the scandal be out . sincerely horrify , Henry 
 stand gaze at the earth . 

 " I can not help it , " say Margaret . " do wait . it be not 
 my fault . please all four of you to go away now . " 

 now the flyman be whisper to Crane . 

 " we be rely on you to help we , Mrs. Wilcox , " say 
 the young doctor . " could you go in and persuade your sister 
 to come out ? " 

 " on what ground ? " say Margaret , suddenly look he 
 straight in the eye . 

 think it professional to prevaricate , he murmur 
 something about a nervous breakdown . 

 " I beg your pardon , but it be nothing of the sort . you 
 be not qualified to attend my sister , Mr. Mansbridge . if 
 we require your service , we will let you know . " 

 " I can diagnose the case more bluntly if you wish , " he retort . 

 " you could , but you have not . you be , therefore , not 
 qualified to attend my sister . " 

 " come , come , Margaret ! " say Henry , never raise his 
 eye . " this be a terrible business , an appalling business . 
 it be doctor 's order . open the door . " 

 " forgive I , but I will not . " 

 " I do not   agree . " 

 Margaret be silent . 

 " this business be as broad as it be long , " contribute 
 the doctor . " we have well all work together . you need we , 
 Mrs. Wilcox , and we need you . " 

 " quite so , " say Henry . 

 " I do not need you in the least , " say Margaret . 

 the two man look at each other anxiously . 

 " no more do my sister , who be still many week from 
 her confinement . " 

 " Margaret , Margaret ! " 

 " well , Henry , send your doctor away . what possible use 
 be he now ? " 

 Mr. Wilcox run his eye over the house . he have a vague 
 feeling that he must stand firm and support the doctor . he 
 himself might need support , for there be trouble ahead . 

 " it all turn on affection now , " say Margaret . 
 " Affection . do not   you see ? " resume her usual method , 
 she write the word on the house with her finger . " surely 
 you see . I like Helen very much , you not so much . Mr. 
 Mansbridge do not   know she . that be all . and affection , 
 when reciprocate , give right . put that down in your 
 notebook , Mr. Mansbridge . it be a useful formula . " 

 Henry tell she to be calm . 

 " you do not   know what you want yourself , " say 
 Margaret , fold her arm . " for one sensible remark I will 
 let you in . but you can not make it . you would trouble my 
 sister for no reason . I will not permit it . I will stand 
 here all the day soon . " 

 " Mansbridge , " say Henry in a low voice , " perhaps not now . " 

 the pack be break up . at a sign from his master , 
 Crane also go back into the car . 

 " now , Henry , you , " she say gently . none of her 
 bitterness have be direct at he . " go away now , dear . I 
 shall want your advice later , no doubt . forgive I if I 
 have be cross . but , seriously , you must go . " 

 he be too stupid to leave she . now it be Mr. 
 Mansbridge who call in a low voice to he . 

 " I shall soon find you down at Dolly 's , " she call , as 
 the gate at last clang between they . the fly move out of 
 the way , the motor back , turn a little , back again , 
 and turn in the narrow road . a string of farm cart come 
 up in the middle ; but she wait through all , for there be 
 no hurry . when all be over and the car have start , she 
 open the door . " oh , my darling ! " she say . " my darling , 
 forgive I . " Helen be stand in the hall . 


 chapter 37 

 Margaret bolt the door on the inside . then she would have 
 kiss her sister , but Helen , in a dignified voice , that 
 come strangely from she , say : 

 " convenient ! you do not tell I that the book be 
 unpacked . I have find nearly everything that I want . 

 " I tell you nothing that be true . " 

 " it have be a great surprise , certainly . have Aunt 
 Juley be ill ? " 

 " Helen , you would not   think I would invent that ? " 

 " I suppose not , " say Helen , turn away , and cry a 
 very little . " but one lose faith in everything after this . " 

 " we think it be illness , but even then - I have not 
 behave worthily . " 

 Helen select another book . 

 " I ought not to have consult anyone . what would our 
 father have think of I ? " 

 she do not think of question her sister , nor of 
 rebuke she . both might be necessary in the future , but 
 she have first to purge a great crime than any that Helen 
 could have commit - that want of confidence that be the 
 work of the devil . 

 " yes , I be annoy , " reply Helen . " my wish should 
 have be respect . I would have go through this meeting 
 if it be necessary , but after Aunt Juley recover , it be 
 not necessary . plan my life , as I now have to do - " 

 " come away from those book , " call Margaret . " Helen , 
 do talk to I . " 

 " I be just say that I have stop live 
 haphazard . one can not   go through a great deal of " - she 
 miss out the noun - " without plan one 's action in 
 advance . I be go to have a child in June , and in the 
 first place conversation , discussion , excitement , be not 
 good for I . I will go through they if necessary , but only 
 then . in the second place I have no right to trouble 
 people . I can not fit in with England as I know it . I have 
 do something that the English never pardon . it would not 
 be right for they to pardon it . so I must live where I be 
 not know . " 

 " but why do not   you tell I , dearest ? " 

 " yes , " reply Helen judicially . " I might have , but 
 decide to wait . " 

 " I believe you would never have tell I . " 

 " oh yes , I should . we have take a flat in Munich . " 

 Margaret glance out of window . 

 " by ' we ' I mean myself and Monica . but for she , I be 
 and have be and always wish to be alone . " 

 " I have not hear of Monica . " 

 " you would not   have . she be an italian - by birth at 
 least . she make she live by journalism . I meet she 
 originally on Garda . Monica be much the good person to see 
 I through . " 

 " you be very fond of she , then . " 

 " she have be extraordinarily sensible with I . " 

 Margaret guess at Monica 's type - " Italiano Inglesiato " 
 they have name it : the crude feminist of the South , whom one 
 respect but avoid . and Helen have turn to it in she 
 need ! 

 " you must not think that we shall never meet , " say 
 Helen , with a measured kindness . " I shall always have a 
 room for you when you can be spar , and the long you can 
 be with I the well . but you have not   understand yet , Meg , 
 and of course it be very difficult for you . this be a shock 
 to you . it be not   to I , who have be think over our 
 future for many month , and they will not   be change by a 
 slight contretemp , such as this . I can not live in England . " 

 " Helen , you have   not forgive I for my treachery . you 
 couldn't talk like this to I if you have . " 

 " oh , Meg dear , why do we talk at all ? " she drop a 
 book and sigh wearily . then , recover herself , she 
 say : " tell I , how be it that all the book be down here ? " 

 " series of mistake . " 

 " and a great deal of the furniture have be unpack . " 

 " All . " 

 " who live here , then ? " 

 " no one . " 

 " I suppose you be let it though - " 

 " the house be dead , " say Margaret with a frown . " why 
 worry on about it ? " 

 " but I be interested . you talk as if I have lose all my 
 interest in life . I be still Helen , I hope . now this 
 have not   the feel of a dead house . the hall seem more alive 
 even than in the old day , when it hold the Wilcoxes ' own thing . " 

 " interested , be you ? very well , I must tell you , I 
 suppose . my husband lend it on condition we - but by a 
 mistake all our thing be unpacked , and Miss Avery , 
 instead of - " she stop . " look here , I can not   go on like 
 this . I warn you I will not . Helen , why should you be so 
 miserably unkind to I , simply because you hate Henry ? " 

 " I do not   hate he now , " say Helen . " I have stop 
 be a schoolgirl , and , Meg , once again , I be not be 
 unkind . but as for fitting in with your english life - no , 
 put it out of your head at once . imagine a visit from I at 
 Ducie Street ! it be unthinkable . " 

 Margaret could not contradict she . it be appal to 
 see she quietly move forward with her plan , not bitter or 
 excitable , neither assert innocence nor confess guilt , 
 merely desire freedom and the company of those who would 
 not blame she . she have be through - how much ? Margaret 
 do not know . but it be enough to part she from old habit 
 as well as old friend . 

 " tell I about yourself , " say Helen , who have choose she 
 book , and be linger over the furniture . 

 " there be nothing to tell . " 

 " but your marriage have be happy , Meg ? " 

 " yes , but I do not   feel inclined to talk . " 

 " you feel as I do . " 

 " not that , but I can not . " 

 " no more can I. it be a nuisance , but no good try . " 

 something have come between they . perhaps it be 
 Society , which henceforward would exclude Helen . perhaps it 
 be a third life , already potent as a spirit . they could 
 find no meeting - place . both suffer acutely , and be not 
 comfort by the knowledge that affection survive . 

 " look here , Meg , be the coast clear ? " 

 " you mean that you want to go away from I ? " 

 " I suppose so - dear old lady ! it be not   any use . I know 
 we should have nothing to say . give my love to Aunt Juley 
 and Tibby , and take more yourself than I can say . promise 
 to come and see I in Munich later . " 

 " certainly , dearest . " 

 " for that be all we can do . " 

 it seem so . most ghastly of all be Helen 's common 
 sense : Monica have be extraordinarily good for she . 

 " I be glad to have see you and the thing . " she look 
 at the bookcase lovingly , as if she be say farewell to 
 the past . 

 Margaret unbolt the door . she remark : " the car have 
 go , and here be your cab . " 

 she lead the way to it , glance at the leaf and the 
 sky . the spring have never seem more beautiful . the 
 driver , who be lean on the gate , call out , " please , 
 lady , a message , " and hand her Henry 's visit - card 
 through the bar . 

 " how do this come ? " she ask . 

 Crane have return with it almost at once . 

 she read the card with annoyance . it be cover with 
 instruction in domestic French . when she and her sister 
 have talk she be to come back for the night to Dolly 's . 
 " Il faut dormir sur ce sujet . " while Helen be to be find 
 " une comfortable chambre a l'hotel . " the final sentence 
 displease she greatly until she remember that the 
 Charles ' have only one spare room , and so could not invite a 
 third guest . 

 " Henry would have do what he could , " she interpret . 

 Helen have not follow she into the garden . the door 
 once open , she lose her inclination to fly . she remain in 
 the hall , go from bookcase to table . she grow more like 
 the old Helen , irresponsible and charming . 

 " this be Mr. Wilcox 's house ? " she inquire . 

 " surely you remember howard End ? " 

 " remember ? I who remember everything ! but it look to 
 be ours now . " 

 " Miss Avery be extraordinary , " say Margaret , her own 
 spirit lighten a little . again she be invade by a 
 slight feeling of disloyalty . but it bring her relief , 
 and she yield to it . " she love Mrs. Wilcox , and would 
 rather furnish her house with our thing than think of it 
 empty . in consequence here be all the library book . " 

 " not all the book . she have not   unpack the Art Books , 
 in which she may show her sense . and we never use to have 
 the sword here . " 

 " the sword look well , though . " 

 " magnificent . " 

 " yes , do not   it ? " 

 " where be the piano , Meg ? " 

 " I warehouse that in London . why ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " curious , too , that the carpet fit . " 

 " the carpet be a mistake , " announce Helen . " I know that 
 we have it in London , but this floor ought to be bare . it be 
 far too beautiful . " 

 " you still have a mania for under - furnishing . would you 
 care to come into the dining - room before you start ? there be 
 no carpet there . 

 they go in , and each minute their talk become more natural . 

 " oh , what a place for mother 's chiffoni ! " cry Helen . 

 " look at the chair , though . " 

 " oh , look at they ! Wickham Place face north , do not   it ? " 

 " north - west . " 

 " anyhow , it be thirty year since any of those chair 
 have feel the sun . feel . their little back be quite warm . " 

 " but why have Miss Avery make they set to partner ? I 
 shall just - " 

 " over here , Meg . put it so that any one sitting will 
 see the lawn . " 

 Margaret move a chair . Helen sit down in it . 

 " ye - es . the window 's too high . " 

 " try a drawing - room chair . " 

 " no , I do not   like the drawing - room so much . the beam 
 have be match - board . it would have be so beautiful 
 otherwise . " 

 " Helen , what a memory you have for some thing ! you be 
 perfectly right . it be a room that man have spoil through 
 try to make it nice for woman . man do not   know what we 
 want - " 

 " and never will . " 

 " I do not   agree . in two thousand year they will know . " 

 " but the chair show up wonderfully . look where Tibby 
 spill the soup . " 

 " Coffee . it be coffee surely . " 

 Helen shake her head . " impossible . Tibby be far too 
 young to be give coffee at that time . " 

 " be Father alive ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " then you be right and it must have be soup . I be 
 think of much later - that unsuccessful visit of Aunt 
 Juley 's , when she do not   realize that Tibby have grow up . 
 it be coffee then , for he throw it down on purpose . there 
 be some rhyme , ' tea , coffee - coffee , tea , ' that she say to 
 he every morning at breakfast . wait a minute - how do it go ? " 

 " I know - no , I do not . what a detestable boy Tibby be ! " 

 " but the rhyme be simply awful . no decent person could 
 have put up with it . " 

 " ah , that greengage tree , " cry Helen , as if the garden 
 be also part of their childhood . " why do I connect it with 
 dumbbell ? and there come the chicken . the grass want 
 cut . I love yellow - hammer - " 

 Margaret interrupt she . " I have get it , " she 
 announce . 

  ' Tea , tea , coffee , tea , BR 
  or chocolaritee . ' 


 " that every morning for three week . no wonder Tibby 
 be wild . " 

 " Tibby be moderately a dear now , " say Helen . 

 " there ! I know you would say that in the end . of course 
 he be a dear . " 

 a bell rang . 

 " listen ! what be that ? " 

 Helen say , " perhaps the Wilcoxes be begin the siege . " 

 " what nonsense - listen ! " 

 and the triviality fade from their face , though it 
 leave something behind - the knowledge that they never could 
 be part because their love be root in common thing . 
 explanation and appeal have fail ; they have try for a 
 common meeting - ground , and have only make each other 
 unhappy . and all the time their salvation be lie round 
 they - the past sanctify the present ; the present , with 
 wild heart - throb , declare that there would after all be a 
 future , with laughter and the voice of child . Helen , 
 still smile , come up to her sister . she say , " it be 
 always Meg . " they look into each other 's eye . the inner 
 life have pay . 

 solemnly the clapper toll . no one be in the front . 
 Margaret go to the kitchen , and struggle between 
 packing - case to the window . their visitor be only a 
 little boy with a tin can . and triviality return . 

 " little boy , what do you want ? " 

 " please , I be the milk . " 

 " do Miss Avery send you ? " say Margaret , rather sharply . 

 " yes , please . " 

 " then take it back and say we require no milk . " while 
 she call to Helen , " no , it be not the siege , but possibly 
 an attempt to provision we against one . " 

 " but I like milk , " cry Helen . " why send it away ? " 

 " do you ? oh , very well . but we have   nothing to put it 
 in , and he want the can . " 

 " please , I be to call in the morning for the can , " say 
 the boy . 

 " the house will be lock up then . " 

 " in the morning would I bring egg , too ? " 

 " be you the boy whom I see play in the stack last week ? " 

 the child hang his head . 

 " well , run away and do it again . " 

 " nice little boy , " whisper Helen . " I say , what be your 
 name ? mine 's Helen . " 

 " Tom . " 

 that be Helen all over . the Wilcoxes , too , would ask a 
 child its name , but they never tell their name in return . 

 " Tom , this one here be Margaret . and at home we have 
 another call Tibby . " 

 " mine be lop - eared , " reply Tom , suppose Tibby to be 
 a rabbit . 

 " you be a very good and rather a clever little boy . 
 mind you come again . - be not   he charming ? " 

 " undoubtedly , " say Margaret . " he be probably the son of 
 Madge , and Madge be dreadful . but this place have wonderful power . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " because I probably agree with you . " 

 " it kill what be dreadful and make what be beautiful live . " 

 " I do agree , " say Helen , as she sip the milk . " but 
 you say that the house be dead not half an hour ago . " 

 " mean that I be dead . I feel it . " 

 " yes , the house have a surer life than we , even if it be 
 empty , and , as it be , I can not   get over that for thirty year 
 the sun have never shine full on our furniture . after all , 
 Wickham Place be a grave . Meg , I have   a startling idea . " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " drink some milk to steady you . " 

 Margaret obey . 

 " no , I will not   tell you yet , " say Helen , " because you may 
 laugh or be angry . let us go upstairs first and give the 
 room an airing . " 

 they open window after window , till the inside , too , 
 be rustle to the spring . curtain blew , picture - frame 
 tap cheerfully . Helen utter cry of excitement as she 
 find this bed obviously in its right place , that in its 
 wrong one . she be angry with Miss Avery for not have 
 move the wardrobe up . " then one would see really . " she 
 admire the view . she be the Helen who have write the 
 memorable letter four year ago . as they leant out , 
 look westward , she say : " about my idea . could not   you 
 and I camp out in this house for the night ? " 

 " I do not   think we could well do that , " say Margaret . 

 " here be bed , table , towel - " 

 " I know ; but the house be not   suppose to be sleep in , 
 and Henry 's suggestion be - " 

 " I require no suggestion . I shall not alter anything 
 in my plan . but it would give I so much pleasure to have 
 one night here with you . it will be something to look back 
 on . oh , Meg lovey , do let us ! " 

 " but , Helen , my pet , " say Margaret , " we can not   without 
 get Henry 's leave . of course , he would give it , but you 
 say yourself that you could not   visit at Ducie Street now , 
 and this be equally intimate . " 

 " Ducie Street be his house . this be ours . our 
 furniture , our sort of people come to the door . do let we 
 camp out , just one night , and Tom shall feed we on egg and 
 milk . why not ? it be a moon . " 

 Margaret hesitate . " I feel Charles would not   like it , " 
 she say at last . " even our furniture annoy he , and I 
 be go to clear it out when Aunt Juley 's illness 
 prevent I . I sympathize with Charles . he feel it be his 
 mother 's house . he love it in rather an untaking way . 
 Henry I could answer for - not Charles . " 

 " I know he will not   like it , " say Helen . " but I be go 
 to pass out of their life . what difference will it make in 
 the long run if they say , ' and she even spend the night at 
 howard End ' ? " 

 " how do you know you will pass out of their life ? we 
 have think that twice before . " 

 " because my plan - " 

 " - which you change in a moment . " 

 " then because my life be great and theirs be little , " 
 say Helen , take fire . " I know of thing they can not   know 
 of , and so do you . we know that there be poetry . we know 
 that there be death . they can only take they on hearsay . we 
 know this be our house , because it feel ours . oh , they may 
 take the title - deed and the doorkey , but for this one 
 night we be at home . " 

 " it would be lovely to have you once more alone , " say 
 Margaret . " it may be a chance in a thousand . " 

 " yes , and we could talk . " she drop her voice . " it 
 will not   be a very glorious story . but under that 
 wych - elm - honestly , I see little happiness ahead . can not I 
 have this one night with you ? " 

 " I need not   say how much it would mean to I . " 

 " then let we . " 

 " it be no good hesitating . shall I drive down to Hilton 
 now and get leave ? " 

 " oh , we do not   want leave . " 

 but Margaret be a loyal wife . in spite of imagination 
 and poetry - perhaps on account of they - she could sympathize 
 with the technical attitude that Henry would adopt . if 
 possible , she would be technical , too . a night 's 
 lodging - and they demand no more - need not involve the 
 discussion of general principle . 

 " Charles may say no , " grumble Helen . 

 " we shall not   consult he . " 

 " go if you like ; I should have stop without leave . " 

 it be the touch of selfishness , which be not enough to 
 mar Helen 's character , and even add to its beauty . she 
 would have stop without leave , and escape to Germany the 
 next morning . Margaret kiss she . 

 " expect I back before dark . I be look forward to it 
 so much . it be like you to have think of such a beautiful 
 thing . " 

 " not a thing , only an ending , " say Helen rather sadly ; 
 and the sense of tragedy close in on Margaret again as soon 
 as she leave the house . 

 she be afraid of Miss Avery . it be disquieting to 
 fulfil a prophecy , however superficially . she be glad to 
 see no watch figure as she drive past the farm , but only 
 little Tom , turn somersault in the straw . 


 chapter 38 

 the tragedy begin quietly enough , and like many another 
 talk , by the man 's deft assertion of his superiority . Henry 
 hear she argue with the driver , step out and settle 
 the fellow , who be inclined to be rude , and then lead the 
 way to some chair on the lawn . dolly , who have not be 
 " tell , " run out with offer of tea . he refuse they , and 
 order she to wheel baby 's perambulator away , as they 
 desire to be alone . 

 " but the diddum can not   listen ; he be not   nine month 
 old , " she plead . 

 " that be not what I be say , " retort her father - in - law . 

 Baby be wheel out of earshot , and do not hear about 
 the crisis till later year . it be now the turn of Margaret . 

 " be it what we fear ? " he ask . 

 " it be . " 

 " dear girl , " he begin , " there be a troublesome business 
 ahead of we , and nothing but the most absolute honesty and 
 plain speech will see we through . " Margaret bend her head . 
 " I be oblige to question you on subject we would both prefer 
 to leave untouched . as you know , I be not one of your 
 Bernard Shaws who consider nothing sacred . to speak as I 
 must will pain I , but there be occasion - we be husband 
 and wife , not child . I be a man of the world , and you 
 be a most exceptional woman . " 

 all Margaret 's sens forsook she . she blush , and 
 look past he at the Six Hills , cover with spring 
 herbage . note her colour , he grow still more kind . 

 " I see that you feel as I feel when - my poor little 
 wife ! oh , be brave ! just one or two question , and I have 
 do with you . be your sister wear a wedding - ring ? " 

 Margaret stammer a " no . " 

 there be an appalling silence . 

 " Henry , I really come to ask a favour about howard End . " 

 " one point at a time . I be now oblige to ask for the 
 name of her seducer . " 

 she rise to her foot and hold the chair between they . 
 her colour have ebb , and she be grey . it do not 
 displease he that she should receive his question thus . 

 " take your time , " he counsel she . " remember that 
 this be far bad for I than for you . " 

 she sway ; he fear she be go to faint . then 
 speech come , and she say slowly : " Seducer ? no ; I do not 
 know her seducer 's name . " 

 " would she not tell you ? " 

 " I never even ask she who seduce she , " say Margaret , 
 dwell on the hateful word thoughtfully . 

 " that be singular . " then he change his mind . " natural 
 perhaps , dear girl , that you should not   ask . but until his 
 name be know , nothing can be do . sit down . how terrible 
 it be to see you so upset ! I know you be not   fit for it . 
 I wish I have not   take you . " 

 Margaret answer , " I like to stand , if you do not   mind , 
 for it give I a pleasant view of the Six Hills . " 

 " as you like . " 

 " have you anything else to ask I , Henry ? " 

 " next you must tell I whether you have gather 
 anything . I have often notice your insight , dear . I only 
 wish my own be as good . you may have guess something , 
 even though your sister say nothing . the slight hint 
 would help we . " 

 " who be ' we ' ? " 

 " I think it well to ring up Charles . " 

 " that be unnecessary , " say Margaret , grow warmer . 
 " this news will give Charles disproportionate pain . " 

 " he have at once go to call on your brother . " 

 " that too be unnecessary . " 

 " let I explain , dear , how the matter stand . you do not 
 think that I and my son be other than gentleman ? it be in 
 Helen 's interest that we be act . it be still not too 
 late to save her name . " 

 then Margaret hit out for the first time . " be we to 
 make her seducer marry she ? " she ask . 

 " if possible . yes . " 

 " but , Henry , suppose he turn out to be marry 
 already ? one have hear of such case . " 

 " in that case he must pay heavily for his misconduct , 
 and be thrash within an inch of his life . " 

 so her first blow miss . she be thankful of it . what 
 have tempt she to imperil both of their life ? Henry 's 
 obtuseness have save she as well as himself . exhaust with 
 anger , she sit down again , blink at he as he tell she as 
 much as he think fit . at last she say : " may I ask you my 
 question now ? " 

 " certainly , my dear . " 

 " Tomorrow Helen go to Munich - " 

 " well , possibly she be right . " 

 " Henry , let a lady finish . tomorrow she go ; tonight , 
 with your permission , she would like to sleep at howard End . " 

 it be the crisis of his life . again she would have 
 recall the word as soon as they be utter . she have 
 not lead up to they with sufficient care . she long to warn 
 he that they be far more important than he suppose . she 
 see he weigh they , as if they be a business proposition . 

 " why howard end ? " he say at last . " would she not be 
 more comfortable , as I suggest , at the hotel ? " 

 Margaret hasten to give he reason . " it be an odd 
 request , but you know what Helen be and what woman in her 
 state be . " he frown , and move irritably . " she have the 
 idea that one night in your house would give her pleasure 
 and do she good . I think she be right . be one of those 
 imaginative girl , the presence of all our book and 
 furniture soothe she . this be a fact . it be the end of 
 her girlhood . her last word to I be , ' a beautiful ending . ' " 

 " she value the old furniture for sentimental reason , 
 in fact . " 

 " exactly . you have quite understand . it be her last 
 hope of be with it . " 

 " I do not   agree there , my dear ! Helen will have she 
 share of the good wherever she go - possibly more than she 
 share , for you be so fond of she that you would give she 
 anything of yours that she fancy , would not   you ? and I would 
 raise no objection . I could understand it if it be her old 
 home , because a home , or a house " - he change the word , 
 designedly ; he have think of a telling point - " because a 
 house in which one have once live become in a sort of way 
 sacred , I do not   know why . association and so on . now 
 Helen have no association with howard End , though I and 
 Charles and Evie have . I do not see why she want to stay 
 the night there . she will only catch cold . " 

 " leave it that you do not   see , " cry Margaret . " call it 
 fancy . but realize that fancy be a scientific fact . Helen 
 be fanciful , and want to . " 

 then he surprise she - a rare occurrence . he shoot an 
 unexpected bolt . " if she want to sleep one night , she may 
 want to sleep two . we shall never get she out of the house , 
 perhaps . " 

 " well ? " say Margaret , with the precipice in sight . 
 " and suppose we do not   get she out of the house ? would it 
 matter ? she would do no one any harm . " 

 again the irritated gesture . 

 " no , Henry , " she pant , recede . " I do not   mean 
 that . we will only trouble howard end for this one night . 
 I take she to London tomorrow - " 

 " do you intend to sleep in a damp house , too ? " 

 " she can not be leave alone . " 

 " that be quite impossible ! madness . you must be here to 
 meet Charles . " 

 " I have already tell you that your message to Charles 
 be unnecessary , and I have no desire to meet he . " 

 " Margaret - my Margaret - " 

 " what have this business to do with Charles ? if it 
 concern I little , it concern you less , and Charles not at 
 all . " 

 " as the future owner of howard End , " say Mr. Wilcox , 
 arch his finger , " I should say that it do concern Charles . " 

 " in what way ? will Helen 's condition depreciate the property ? " 

 " my dear , you be forget yourself . " 

 " I think you yourself recommend plain speak . " 

 they look at each other in amazement . the precipice 
 be at their foot now . 

 " Helen command my sympathy , " say Henry . " as your 
 husband , I shall do all for she that I can , and I have no 
 doubt that she will prove more sin against than sin . 
 but I can not treat she as if nothing have happen . I should 
 be false to my position in society if I do . " 

 she control herself for the last time . " no , let we 
 go back to Helen 's request , " she say . " it be unreasonable , 
 but the request of an unhappy girl . tomorrow she will go to 
 Germany , and trouble society no long . tonight she ask to 
 sleep in your empty house - a house which you do not care 
 about , and which you have not occupy for over a year . May 
 she ? will you give my sister leave ? will you forgive 
 she - as you hope to be forgive , and as you have actually 
 be forgive ? forgive she for one night only . that will 
 be enough . " 

 " as I have actually be forgive - ? " 

 " never mind for the moment what I mean by that , " say 
 Margaret . " answer my question . " 

 perhaps some hint of her meaning do dawn on he . if 
 so , he blot it out . straight from his fortress he 
 answer : " I seem rather unaccommodating , but I have some 
 experience of life , and know how one thing lead to 
 another . I be afraid that your sister have well sleep at 
 the hotel . I have my child and the memory of my dear 
 wife to consider . I be sorry , but see that she leave my 
 house at once . " 

 " you mention Mrs. Wilcox . " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " 

 " a rare occurrence . in reply , may I mention Mrs. Bast ? " 

 " you have not be yourself all day , " say Henry , and 
 rise from his seat with face unmove . Margaret rush at 
 he and seize both his hand . she be transfigure . 

 " not any more of this ! " she cry . " you shall see the 
 connection if it kill you , Henry ! you have have a 
 mistress - I forgave you . my sister have a lover - you drive 
 she from the house . do you see the connection ? stupid , 
 hypocritical , cruel - oh , contemptible ! - a man who insult 
 his wife when she be alive and cant with her memory when 
 she be dead . a man who ruin a woman for his pleasure , and 
 cast she off to ruin other man . and give bad financial 
 advice , and then say he be not responsible . these , man , 
 be you . you can not   recognize they , because you can not 
 connect . I have   have enough of your unweeded kindness . I have 
 spoil you long enough . all your life you have be 
 spoil . Mrs. Wilcox spoil you . no one have ever tell 
 what you be - muddle , criminally muddle . man like you use 
 repentance as a blind , so do not   repent . only say to 
 yourself , ' what Helen have do , I have   do . ' " 

 " the two case be different , " Henry stammer . his 
 real retort be not quite ready . his brain be still in a 
 whirl , and he want a little long . 

 " in what way different ? you have betray Mrs. Wilcox , 
 Helen only herself . you remain in society , Helen can not . 
 you have have only pleasure , she may die . you have the 
 insolence to talk to I of difference , Henry ? " 

 oh , the uselessness of it ! Henry 's retort come . 

 " I perceive you be attempt blackmail . it be 
 scarcely a pretty weapon for a wife to use against her 
 husband . my rule through life have be never to pay the 
 least attention to threat , and I can only repeat what I 
 say before : I do not give you and your sister leave to 
 sleep at howard End . " 

 Margaret loose his hand . he go into the house , 
 wipe first one and then the other on his handkerchief . 
 for a little she stand look at the Six Hills , tomb of 
 warrior , breast of the spring . then she pass out into 
 what be now the evening . 


 chapter 39 

 Charles and Tibby meet at Ducie Street , where the latter be 
 stay . their interview be short and absurd . they have 
 nothing in common but the English language , and try by its 
 help to express what neither of they understand . Charles 
 see in Helen the family foe . he have single she out as the 
 most dangerous of the schlegel , and , angry as he be , 
 look forward to tell his wife how right he have be . 
 his mind be make up at once : the girl must be get out of 
 the way before she disgrace they far . if occasion 
 offer she might be married to a villain or , possibly , to a 
 fool . but this be a concession to morality , it form no 
 part of his main scheme . honest and hearty be Charles 's 
 dislike , and the past spread itself out very clearly before 
 he ; hatred be a skilful compositor . as if they be head 
 in a note - book , he run through all the incident of the 
 schlegel ' campaign : the attempt to compromise his brother , 
 his mother 's legacy , his father 's marriage , the introduction 
 of the furniture , the unpacking of the same . he have not yet 
 hear of the request to sleep at howard End ; that be to be 
 their master - stroke and the opportunity for his . but he 
 already feel that howard end be the objective , and , though 
 he dislike the house , be determined to defend it . 

 Tibby , on the other hand , have no opinion . he stand 
 above the convention : his sister have a right to do what she 
 think right . it be not difficult to stand above the 
 convention when we leave no hostage among they ; man can 
 always be more unconventional than woman , and a bachelor of 
 independent mean need encounter no difficulty at all . 
 unlike Charles , Tibby have money enough ; his ancestor have 
 earn it for he , and if he shock the people in one set 
 of lodging he have only to move into another . his be the 
 leisure without sympathy - an attitude as fatal as the 
 strenuous : a little cold culture may be raise on it , but no 
 art . his sister have see the family danger , and have never 
 forget to discount the gold islet that raise they from 
 the sea . Tibby give all the praise to himself , and so 
 despise the struggling and the submerge . 

 hence the absurdity of the interview ; the gulf between 
 they be economic as well as spiritual . but several fact 
 pass : Charles press for they with an impertinence that 
 the undergraduate could not withstand . on what date have 
 Helen go abroad ? to whom ?   Charles be anxious to fasten 
 the scandal on Germany .   then , change his tactic , he say 
 roughly : " I suppose you realize that you be your sister 's 
 protector ? " 

 " in what sense ? " 

 " if a man play about with my sister , I would send a bullet 
 through he , but perhaps you do not   mind . " 

 " I mind very much , " protest Tibby . 

 " who d'ye suspect , then ? speak out , man . one always 
 suspect someone . " 

 " no one . I do not   think so . " involuntarily he blush . 
 he have remember the scene in his Oxford room . 

 " you be hide something , " say Charles . as interview 
 go , he get the good of this one . " when you see she last , 
 do she mention anyone 's name ? yes , or no ! " he thunder , 
 so that Tibby start . 

 " in my room she mention some friend , call the Basts - " 

 " who be the Basts ? " 

 " People - friend of her at Evie 's wedding . " 

 " I do not   remember . but , by great Scott ! I do . my aunt 
 tell I about some tag - rag . be she full of they when you 
 see she ? be there a man ? do she speak of the man ? 
 or - look here - have you have any dealing with he ? " 

 Tibby be silent . without intend it , he have betray 
 his sister 's confidence ; he be not enough interested in 
 human life to see where thing will lead to . he have a 
 strong regard for honesty , and his word , once give , have 
 always be keep up to now . he be deeply vex , not only 
 for the harm he have do Helen , but for the flaw he have 
 discover in his own equipment . 

 " I see - you be in his confidence . they meet at your 
 room . oh , what a family , what a family ! God help the poor 
 pater - " 

 and Tibby find himself alone . 


 chapter 40 

 Leonard - he would figure at length in a newspaper report , 
 but that evening he do not count for much . the foot of the 
 tree be in shadow , since the moon be still hide behind 
 the house . but above , to right , to left , down the long 
 meadow the moonlight be stream . Leonard seem not a 
 man , but a cause . 

 perhaps it be Helen 's way of fall in love - a curious 
 way to Margaret , whose agony and whose contempt of Henry 
 be yet imprint with his image . Helen forget people . 
 they be husk that have enclose her emotion . she could 
 pity , or sacrifice herself , or have instinct , but have she 
 ever love in the noble way , where man and woman , have 
 lose themselves in sex , desire to lose sex itself in 
 comradeship ? 

 Margaret wonder , but say no word of blame . this be 
 Helen 's evening . trouble enough lie ahead of she - the loss 
 of friend and of social advantage , the agony , the supreme 
 agony , of motherhood , which be even yet not a matter of 
 common knowledge . for the present let the moon shine 
 brightly and the breeze of the spring blow gently , die 
 away from the gale of the day , and let the earth , who bring 
 increase , bring peace . not even to herself dare she blame 
 Helen . she could not assess her trespass by any moral code ; 
 it be everything or nothing . morality can tell we that 
 murder be bad than steal , and group most sin in an 
 order all must approve , but it can not group Helen . the 
 surer its pronouncement on this point , the surer may we be 
 that morality be not speak . Christ be evasive when they 
 question he . it be those that can not connect who hasten 
 to cast the first stone . 

 this be Helen 's evening - win at what cost , and not to 
 be mar by the sorrow of other . of her own tragedy 
 Margaret never utter a word . 

 " one isolate , " say Helen slowly . " I isolate Mr. 
 Wilcox from the other force that be pull Leonard 
 downhill . consequently , I be full of pity , and almost of 
 revenge . for week I have blame Mr. Wilcox only , and so , 
 when your letter come - " 

 " I need never have write they , " sigh Margaret . 
 " they never shield Henry . how hopeless it be to tidy away 
 the past , even for other ! " 

 " I do not know that it be your own idea to dismiss the 
 bast . " 

 " look back , that be wrong of I . " 

 " look back , darling , I know that it be right . it be 
 right to save the man whom one love . I be less 
 enthusiastic about justice now . but we both think you 
 write at his dictation . it seem the last touch of his 
 callousness . be very much work up by this time - and 
 Mrs. Bast be upstairs . I have not see she , and have talk 
 for a long time to Leonard - I have snub he for no reason , 
 and that should have warn I I be in danger . so when the 
 note come I want we to go to you for an explanation . he 
 say that he guess the explanation - he know of it , and you 
 must not   know . I press he to tell I . he say no one 
 must know ; it be something to do with his wife . right up 
 to the end we be Mr. Bast and Miss Schlegel . I be go 
 to tell he that he must be frank with I when I see his 
 eye , and guess that Mr. Wilcox have ruin he in two 
 way , not one . I draw he to I . I make he tell I . I 
 feel very lonely myself . he be not to blame . he would have 
 go on worship I . I want never to see he again , 
 though it sound appalling . I want to give he money and 
 feel finish . oh , Meg , the little that be know about 
 these thing ! " 

 she lay her face against the tree . 

 " the little , too , that be know about growth ! both 
 time it be loneliness , and the night , and panic 
 afterwards . do Leonard grow out of Paul ? " 

 Margaret do not speak for a moment . so tired be she 
 that her attention have actually wander to the tooth - the 
 tooth that have be thrust into the tree 's bark to medicate 
 it . from where she sit she could see they gleam . she have 
 be try to count they . " Leonard be a well growth than 
 madness , " she say . " I be afraid that you would react 
 against Paul until you go over the verge . " 

 " I do react until I find poor Leonard . I be steady 
 now . I shall not   ever like your Henry , dear Meg , or even 
 speak kindly about he , but all that blind hate be over . 
 I shall never rave against Wilcoxes any more . I understand 
 how you marry he , and you will now be very happy . " 

 Margaret do not reply . 

 " yes , " repeat Helen , her voice grow more tender , " I 
 do at last understand . " 

 " except Mrs. Wilcox , dearest , no one understand our 
 little movement . " 

 " because in death - I agree . " 

 " not quite . I feel that you and I and Henry be only 
 fragment of that woman 's mind . she know everything . she 
 be everything . she be the house , and the tree that lean 
 over it . People have their own death as well as their own 
 life , and even if there be nothing beyond death , we shall 
 differ in our nothingness . I can not believe that knowledge 
 such as hers will perish with knowledge such as mine . she 
 know about reality . she know when people be in love , 
 though she be not in the room . I do not   doubt that she know 
 when Henry deceive she . " 

 " good - night , Mrs. Wilcox , " call a voice . 

 " oh , good - night , Miss Avery . " 

 " why should Miss Avery work for we ? " Helen murmur . 

 " why , indeed ? " 

 Miss Avery cross the lawn and merge into the hedge 
 that divide it from the farm . an old gap , which Mr. Wilcox 
 have fill up , have reappear , and her track through the dew 
 follow the path that he have turf over , when he improve 
 the garden and make it possible for game . 

 " this be not quite our house yet , " say Helen . " when 
 Miss Avery call , I feel we be only a couple of tourist . " 

 " we shall be that everywhere , and for ever . " 

 " but affectionate tourist - " 

 " but tourist who pretend each hotel be their home . " 

 " I can not   pretend very long , " say Helen . " sit under 
 this tree one forget , but I know that tomorrow I shall see 
 the moon rise out of Germany . not all your goodness can 
 alter the fact of the case . unless you will come with I . " 

 Margaret think for a moment . in the past year she have 
 grow so fond of England that to leave it be a real grief . 
 yet what detain she ? no doubt Henry would pardon she 
 outburst , and go on bluster and muddle into a ripe old 
 age . but what be the good ? she have just as soon vanish 
 from his mind . 

 " be you serious in ask I , Helen ? should I get on 
 with your Monica ? " 

 " you would not , but I be serious in ask you . " 

 " still , no more plan now . and no more reminiscence . " 

 they be silent for a little . it be Helen 's evening . 

 the present flow by they like a stream . the tree 
 rustle . it have make music before they be bear , and would 
 continue after their death , but its song be of the 
 moment . the moment have pass . the tree rustle again . 
 their sens be sharpen , and they seem to apprehend 
 life . life pass . the tree nestle again . 

 " sleep now , " say Margaret . 

 the peace of the country be enter into she . it have 
 no commerce with memory , and little with hope . Least of all 
 be it concerned with the hope of the next five minute . it 
 be the peace of the present , which pass understand . 
 its murmur come " now , " and " now " once more as they trod the 
 gravel , and " now , " as the moonlight fall upon their father 's 
 sword . they pass upstairs , kiss , and amidst the endless 
 iteration fall asleep . the house have enshadowe the tree 
 at first , but as the moon rise higher the two disentangle , 
 and be clear for a few moment at midnight . Margaret 
 awake and look into the garden . how incomprehensible that 
 Leonard Bast should have win she this night of peace ! be 
 he also part of Mrs. Wilcox 's mind ? 


 chapter 41 

 far different be Leonard 's development . the month after 
 Oniton , whatever minor trouble they might bring he , be 
 all overshadow by remorse . when Helen look back she 
 could philosophize , or she could look into the future and 
 plan for her child . but the father see nothing beyond his 
 own sin . week afterwards , in the midst of other 
 occupation , he would suddenly cry out , " Brute - you brute , I 
 could not   have - " and be rent into two people who hold 
 dialogue . or brown rain would descend , blot out face 
 and the sky . even Jacky notice the change in he . Most 
 terrible be his suffering when he awake from sleep . 
 sometimes he be happy at first , but grow conscious of a 
 burden hang to he and weigh down his thought when 
 they would move . or little iron scorch his body . or a 
 sword stab he . he would sit at the edge of his bed , 
 hold his heart and moaning , " oh what shall I do , whatever 
 shall I do ? " nothing bring ease . he could put distance 
 between he and the trespass , but it grow in his soul . 

 remorse be not among the eternal verity . the Greeks 
 be right to dethrone she . her action be too capricious , 
 as though the Erinyes select for punishment only certain 
 man and certain sin . and of all mean to regeneration 
 remorse be surely the most wasteful . it cut away healthy 
 tissue with the poisoned . it be a knife that probe far 
 deep than the evil . Leonard be drive straight through 
 its torment and emerge pure , but enfeeble - a well man , 
 who would never lose control of himself again , but also a 
 small , who have less to control . nor do purity mean 
 peace . the use of the knife can become a habit as hard to 
 shake off as passion itself , and Leonard continue to start 
 with a cry out of dream . 

 he build up a situation that be far enough from the 
 truth . it never occur to he that Helen be to blame . 
 he forget the intensity of their talk , the charm that have 
 be lend he by sincerity , the magic of Oniton under 
 darkness and of the whispering river . Helen love the 
 absolute . Leonard have be ruin absolutely , and have 
 appear to she as a man apart , isolate from the world . a 
 real man , who care for adventure and beauty , who desire to 
 live decently and pay his way , who could have travel more 
 gloriously through life than the Juggernaut car that be 
 crush he . Memories of Evie 's wedding have warp she , 
 the starched servant , the yard of uneaten food , the rustle 
 of overdressed woman , motor - car ooze grease on the 
 gravel , rubbish on a pretentious band . she have taste the 
 lee of this on her arrival : in the darkness , after failure , 
 they intoxicate she . she and the victim seem alone in a 
 world of unreality , and she love he absolutely , perhaps 
 for half an hour . 

 in the morning she be go . the note that she leave , 
 tender and hysterical in tone , and intend to be most kind , 
 hurt her lover terribly . it be as if some work of art have 
 be break by he , some picture in the National Gallery 
 slash out of its frame . when he recall her talent and 
 her social position , he feel that the first passerby have a 
 right to shoot he down . he be afraid of the waitress and 
 the porter at the railway - station . he be afraid at first 
 of his wife , though later he be to regard she with a 
 strange new tenderness , and to think , " there be nothing to 
 choose between we , after all . " 

 the expedition to Shropshire cripple the bast 
 permanently . Helen in her flight forgot to settle the hotel 
 bill , and take their return ticket away with she ; they have 
 to pawn Jacky 's bangle to get home , and the smash come a 
 few day afterwards . it be true that Helen offer he five 
 thousand pound , but such a sum mean nothing to he . he 
 could not see that the girl be desperately right 
 herself , and try to save something out of the disaster , 
 if it be only five thousand pound . but he have to live 
 somehow . he turn to his family , and degrade himself to a 
 professional beggar . there be nothing else for he to do . 

 " a letter from Leonard , " think Blanche , his sister ; 
 " and after all this time . " she hide it , so that her husband 
 should not see , and when he have go to his work read it 
 with some emotion , and send the prodigal a little money out 
 of her dress allowance . 

 " a letter from Leonard ! " say the other sister , Laura , a 
 few day later . she show it to her husband . he write a 
 cruel insolent reply , but send more money than Blanche , so 
 Leonard soon write to he again . 

 and during the winter the system be develop . Leonard 
 realize that they need never starve , because it would be 
 too painful for his relative . Society be base on the 
 family , and the clever wastrel can exploit this 
 indefinitely . without a generous thought on either side , 
 pound and pound pass . the donor dislike Leonard , and 
 he grow to hate they intensely . when Laura censure his 
 immoral marriage , he think bitterly , " she mind that ! 
 what would she say if she know the truth ? " when Blanche 's 
 husband offer he work , he find some pretext for avoid 
 it . he have want work keenly at Oniton , but too much 
 anxiety have shatter he ; he be join the unemployable . 
 when his brother , the lay - reader , do not reply to a letter , 
 he write again , say that he and Jacky would come down to 
 his village on foot . he do not intend this as blackmail . 
 still , the brother send a postal order , and it become part 
 of the system . and so pass his winter and his spring . 

 in the horror there be two bright spot . he never 
 confuse the past . he remain alive , and bless be those 
 who live , if it be only to a sense of sinfulness . the 
 anodyne of muddledom , by which most man blur and blend their 
 mistake , never pass Leonard 's lip - 

  and if I drink oblivion of a day , 
  so shorten I the stature of my soul . 

 it be a hard saying , and a hard man write it , but it 
 lie at the foot of all character . 

 and the other bright spot be his tenderness for Jacky . 
 he pity she with nobility now - not the contemptuous pity 
 of a man who stick to a woman through thick and thin . he 
 try to be less irritable . he wonder what her hungry 
 eye desire - nothing that she could express , or that he or 
 any man could give she . would she ever receive the justice 
 that be mercy - the justice for by - product that the world be 
 too busy to bestow ? she be fond of flower , generous with 
 money , and not revengeful . if she have bear he a child he 
 might have care for she . unmarried , Leonard would never 
 have beg ; he would have flicker out and die . but the 
 whole of life be mixed . he have to provide for Jacky , and 
 go down dirty path that she might have a few feather and 
 dish of food that suit she . 

 one day he catch sight of Margaret and her brother . he 
 be in St. Paul 's . he have enter the cathedral partly to 
 avoid the rain and partly to see a picture that have educate 
 he in former year . but the light be bad , the picture ill 
 place , and Time and Judgment be inside he now . death 
 alone still charm he , with her lap of poppy , on which 
 all man shall sleep . he take one glance , and turn 
 aimlessly away towards a chair . then down the nave he see 
 Miss Schlegel and her brother . they stand in the fairway of 
 passenger , and their face be extremely grave . he be 
 perfectly certain that they be in trouble about their sister . 

 once outside - and he flee immediately - he wish that he 
 have speak to they . what be his life ? what be a few 
 angry word , or even imprisonment ? he have do wrong - that 
 be the true terror . whatever they might know , he would 
 tell they everything he know . he re - enter St. Paul 's . 
 but they have move in his absence , and have go to lay their 
 difficulty before Mr. Wilcox and Charles . 

 the sight of Margaret turn remorse into new channel . 
 he desire to confess , and though the desire be proof of a 
 weakened nature , which be about to lose the essence of human 
 intercourse , it do not take an ignoble form . he do not 
 suppose that confession would bring he happiness . it be 
 rather that he yearn to get clear of the tangle . so do 
 the suicide yearn . the impulse be akin , and the crime of 
 suicide lie rather in its disregard for the feeling of 
 those whom we leave behind . confession need harm no one - it 
 can satisfy that test - and though it be un - english , and 
 ignore by our anglican cathedral , Leonard have a right to 
 decide upon it . 

 moreover , he trust Margaret . he want her hardness 
 now . that cold , intellectual nature of hers would be just , 
 if unkind . he would do whatever she tell he , even if he 
 have to see Helen . that be the supreme punishment she would 
 exact . and perhaps she would tell he how Helen be . that 
 be the supreme reward . 

 he know nothing about Margaret , not even whether she be 
 married to Mr. Wilcox , and track she out take several 
 day . that evening he toil through the wet to Wickham 
 Place , where the new flat be now appear . be he also 
 the cause of their move ? be they expel from society on 
 his account ? thence to a public library , but could find no 
 satisfactory Schlegel in the directory . on the morrow he 
 search again . he hang about outside Mr. Wilcox 's office 
 at lunch time , and , as the clerk come out say : " excuse I , 
 sir , but be your boss marry ? " Most of they star , some 
 say , " what be that to you ? " but one , who have not yet 
 acquire reticence , tell he what he wish . Leonard could 
 not learn the private address . that necessitate more 
 trouble with directory and tube . Ducie Street be not 
 discover till the Monday , the day that Margaret and her 
 husband go down on their hunting expedition to Howards End . 

 he call at about four o'clock . the weather have 
 change , and the sun shine gaily on the ornamental 
 step - black and white marble in triangle . Leonard lower 
 his eye to they after ring the bell . he feel in curious 
 health : door seem to be open and shut inside his 
 body , and he have be oblige to steep sit up in bed , 
 with his back prop against the wall . when the 
 parlourmaid come he could not see her face ; the brown rain 
 have descend suddenly . 

 " do Mrs. Wilcox live here ? " he ask . 

 " she be out , " be the answer . 

 " when will she be back ? " 

 " I will ask , " say the parlourmaid . 

 Margaret have give instruction that no one who 
 mention her name should ever be rebuff . put the 
 door on the chain - for Leonard 's appearance demand 
 this - she go through to the smoking - room , which be 
 occupy by Tibby . Tibby be asleep . he have have a good 
 lunch . Charles Wilcox have not yet rung he up for the 
 distracting interview . he say drowsily : " I do not   know . 
 Hilton . howard end . who be it ? " 

 " I will ask , sir . " 

 " no , do not   bother . " 

 " they have take the car to howard end , " say the 
 parlourmaid to Leonard . 

 he thank she , and ask whereabouts that place be . 

 " you appear to want to know a good deal , " she remark . 
 but Margaret have forbid she to be mysterious . she tell 
 he against her well judgment that howard end be in 
 Hertfordshire . 

 " be it a village , please ? " 

 " Village ! it be Mr. Wilcox 's private house - at least , 
 it be one of they . Mrs. Wilcox keep her furniture there . 
 Hilton be the village . " 

 " yes . and when will they be back ? " 

 " Mr. Schlegel do not   know . we can not   know everything , 
 can we ? " she shut he out , and go to attend to the 
 telephone , which be ring furiously . 

 he loiter away another night of agony . Confession 
 grow more difficult . as soon as possible he go to bed . 
 he watch a patch of moonlight cross the floor of their 
 lodging , and , as sometimes happen when the mind be 
 overtax , he fall asleep for the rest of the room , but keep 
 awake for the patch of moonlight . horrible ! then begin one 
 of those disintegrate dialogue . part of he say : " why 
 horrible ? it be ordinary light from the room . " " but it 
 move . " " so do the moon . " " but it be a clench fist . " 
 " why not ? " " but it be go to touch I . " " let it . " and , 
 seem to gather motion , the patch run up his blanket . 
 presently a blue snake appear ; then another , parallel to 
 it . " be there life in the moon ? " " of course . " " but I 
 think it be uninhabited . " " not by Time , Death , Judgment , 
 and the small snake . " " small snake ! " say Leonard 
 indignantly and aloud . " what a notion ! " by a rending 
 effort of the will he wake the rest of the room up . Jacky , 
 the bed , their food , their clothe on the chair , gradually 
 enter his consciousness , and the horror vanish outward , 
 like a ring that be spread through water . 

 " I say , Jacky , I be go out for a bit . " 

 she be breathe regularly . the patch of light fall 
 clear of the striped blanket , and begin to cover the shawl 
 that lie over her foot . why have he be afraid ? he go to 
 the window , and see that the moon be descend through a 
 clear sky . he see her volcano , and the bright expanse 
 that a gracious error have name sea . they pal , for the 
 sun , who have light they up , be come to light the earth . 
 Sea of Serenity , Sea of Tranquillity , Ocean of the Lunar 
 Storms , merge into one lucent drop , itself to slip into the 
 sempiternal dawn . and he have be afraid of the moon ! 

 he dress among the contending light , and go through 
 his money . it be run low again , but enough for a 
 return ticket to Hilton . as it clink Jacky open her eye . 

 " Hullo , Len ! what ho , Len ! " 

 " what ho , Jacky ! see you again later . " 

 she turn over and sleep . 

 the house be unlocked , their landlord be a salesman 
 at Convent Garden . Leonard pass out and make his way down 
 to the station . the train , though it do not start for an 
 hour , be already draw up at the end of the platform , and 
 he lie down in it and sleep . with the first jolt he be in 
 daylight ; they have leave the gateway of King 's Cross , and 
 be under blue sky . tunnel follow , and after each the 
 sky grow bluer , and from the embankment at Finsbury Park he 
 have his first sight of the sun . it roll along behind the 
 eastern smoke - a wheel , whose fellow be the descending 
 moon - and as yet it seem the servant of the blue sky , not 
 its lord . he doze again . over Tewin Water it be day . to 
 the left fall the shadow of the embankment and its arch ; 
 to the right Leonard see up into the Tewin Woods and towards 
 the church , with its wild legend of immortality . six forest 
 tree - that be a fact - grow out of one of the graf in 
 Tewin churchyard . the grave 's occupant - that be the 
 legend - be an atheist , who declare that if God exist , six 
 forest tree would grow out of her grave . these thing in 
 Hertfordshire ; and far afield lay the house of a 
 hermit - Mrs. Wilcox have know he - who bar himself up , 
 and write prophecy , and give all he have to the poor . 
 while , powder in between , be the villa of business man , 
 who see life more steadily , though with the steadiness of 
 the half - close eye . over all the sun be stream , to all 
 the bird be sing , to all the primrose be yellow , 
 and the speedwell blue , and the country , however they 
 interpret she , be utter her cry of " now . " she do not 
 free Leonard yet , and the knife plunge deeply into his 
 heart as the train draw up at Hilton . but remorse have 
 become beautiful . 

 Hilton be asleep , or at the early , breakfast . 
 Leonard notice the contrast when he step out of it into 
 the country . here man have be up since dawn . their hour 
 be rule , not by a London office , but by the movement of 
 the crop and the sun . that they be man of the fine 
 type only the sentimentalist can declare . but they keep to 
 the life of daylight . they be England 's hope . clumsily 
 they carry forward the torch of the sun , until such time as 
 the nation see fit to take it up . half clodhopper , half 
 board - school prig , they can still throw back to a nobler 
 stock , and breed yeoman . 

 at the chalk pit a motor pass he . in it be another 
 type , whom nature favour - the Imperial . healthy , ever in 
 motion , it hop to inherit the earth . it breed as quickly 
 as the yeoman , and as soundly ; strong be the temptation to 
 acclaim it as a super - yeoman , who carry his country 's 
 virtue overseas . but the Imperialist be not what he think 
 or seem . he be a destroyer . he prepare the way for 
 cosmopolitanism , and though his ambition may be fulfil , 
 the earth that he inherit will be grey . 

 to Leonard , intent on his private sin , there come the 
 conviction of innate goodness elsewhere . it be not the 
 optimism which he have be teach at school . again and 
 again must the drum tap , and the goblin stalk over the 
 universe before joy can be purge of the superficial . it 
 be rather paradoxical , and arise from his sorrow . death 
 destroy a man , but the idea of death save he - that be the 
 good account of it that have yet be give . Squalor and 
 tragedy can beckon to all that be great in we , and 
 strengthen the wing of love . they can beckon ; it be not 
 certain that they will , for they be not love 's servant . 
 but they can beckon , and the knowledge of this incredible 
 truth comfort he . 

 as he approach the house all thought stop . 
 contradictory notion stand side by side in his mind . he 
 be terrified but happy , ashamed , but have do no sin . he 
 know the confession : " Mrs. Wilcox , I have do wrong , " but 
 sunrise have rob its meaning , and he feel rather on a 
 supreme adventure . 

 he enter a garden , steady himself against a 
 motor - car that he find in it , find a door open and enter 
 a house . yes , it would be very easy . from a room to the 
 leave he hear voice , Margaret 's amongst they . his own name 
 be call aloud , and a man whom he have never see say , 
 " oh , be he there ? I be not surprised . I now thrash he 
 within an inch of his life . " 

 " Mrs. Wilcox , " say Leonard , " I have do wrong . " 

 the man take he by the collar and cry , " bring I a 
 stick . " woman be scream . a stick , very bright , 
 descend . it hurt he , not where it descend , but in the 
 heart . book fall over he in a shower . nothing have sense . 

 " get some water , " command Charles , who have all through 
 keep very calm . " he be sham . of course I only use the 
 blade . here , carry he out into the air . " 

 think that he understand these thing , Margaret 
 obey he . they lay Leonard , who be dead , on the gravel ; 
 Helen pour water over he . 

 " that be enough , " say Charles . 

 " yes , murder 's enough , " say Miss Avery , come out of 
 the house with the sword . 


 chapter 42 

 when Charles leave Ducie Street he have catch the first train 
 home , but have no inkling of the new development until 
 late at night . then his father , who have din alone , send 
 for he , and in very grave tone inquire for Margaret . 

 " I do not   know where she be , pater , " say Charles . 
 " dolly keep back dinner nearly an hour for she . " 

 " tell I when she come in - . " 

 another hour pass . the servant go to bed , and 
 Charles visit his father again , to receive further 
 instruction . Mrs. Wilcox have still not return . 

 " I will sit up for she as late as you like , but she can 
 hardly be come . be not   she stop with her sister at the 
 hotel ? " 

 " perhaps , " say Mr. Wilcox thoughtfully - " perhaps . " 

 " can I do anything for you , sir ? " 

 " not tonight , my boy . " 

 Mr. Wilcox like be call sir . he raise his eye 
 and give his son more open a look of tenderness than he 
 usually venture . he see Charles as little boy and strong 
 man in one . though his wife have prove unstable his 
 child be leave to he . 

 after midnight he tap on Charles 's door . " I can not 
 sleep , " he say . " I have well have a talk with you and get 
 it over . " 

 he complain of the heat . Charles take he out into 
 the garden , and they pace up and down in their 
 dressing - gown . Charles become very quiet as the story 
 unroll ; he have know all along that Margaret be as bad as 
 her sister . 

 " she will feel differently in the morning , " say Mr. 
 Wilcox , who have of course say nothing about Mrs. Bast . 
 " but I can not let this kind of thing continue without 
 comment . I be morally certain that she be with her sister 
 at howard End . the house be mine - and , Charles , it will be 
 yours - and when I say that no one be to live there , I mean 
 that no one be to live there . I will not   have it . " he look 
 angrily at the moon . " to my mind this question be connect 
 with something far great , the right of property itself . " 

 " undoubtedly , " say Charles . 

 Mr. Wilcox link his arm in his son 's , but somehow 
 like he less as he tell he more . " I do not   want you to 
 conclude that my wife and I have anything of the nature of a 
 quarrel . she be only over - wrought , as who would not be ? I 
 shall do what I can for Helen , but on the understanding that 
 they clear out of the house at once . do you see ? that be a 
 sine qua non . " 

 " then at eight tomorrow I may go up in the car ? " 

 " eight or early . say that you be act as my 
 representative , and , of course , use no violence , Charles . " 

 on the morrow , as Charles return , leave Leonard dead 
 upon the gravel , it do not seem to he that he have use 
 violence . death be due to heart disease . his stepmother 
 herself have say so , and even Miss Avery have acknowledge 
 that he only use the flat of the sword . on his way through 
 the village he inform the police , who thank he , and 
 say there must be an inquest . he find his father in the 
 garden shade his eye from the sun . 

 " it have be pretty horrible , " say Charles gravely . 
 " they be there , and they have the man up there with they too . " 

 " what - what man ? " 

 " I tell you last night . his name be Bast . " 

 " my God , be it possible ? " say Mr. Wilcox . " in your 
 mother 's house ! Charles , in your mother 's house ! " 

 " I know , pater . that be what I feel . as a matter of 
 fact , there be no need to trouble about the man . he be in 
 the last stage of heart disease , and just before I could 
 show he what I think of he he go off . the police be 
 see about it at this moment . " 

 Mr. Wilcox listen attentively . 

 " I get up there - oh , it could not   have be more than 
 half - past seven . the Avery woman be light a fire for 
 they . they be still upstairs . I wait in the 
 drawing - room . we be all moderately civil and collect , 
 though I have my suspicion . I give they your message , and 
 Mrs. Wilcox say , ' oh yes , I see ; yes , ' in that way of her . " 

 " nothing else ? " 

 " I promise to tell you , ' with her love , ' that she be 
 go to Germany with her sister this evening . that be all 
 we have time for . " 

 Mr. Wilcox seem relieve . 

 " because by then I suppose the man get tired of hiding , 
 for suddenly Mrs. Wilcox scream out his name . I 
 recognize it , and I go for he in the hall . be I right , 
 pater ? I think thing be go a little too far . " 

 " right , my dear boy ? I do not   know . but you would have 
 be no son of mine if you have not . then do he 
 just - just - crumple up as you say ? " he shrink from the 
 simple word . 

 " he catch hold of the bookcase , which come down over 
 he . so I merely put the sword down and carry he into 
 the garden . we all think he be sham . however , he be 
 dead right enough . awful business ! " 

 " Sword ? " cry his father , with anxiety in his voice . 
 " what sword ? whose sword ? " 

 " a sword of theirs . " 

 " what be you do with it ? " 

 " well , do not   you see , pater , I have to snatch up the 
 first thing handy I have not   a rid - whip or stick . I catch 
 he once or twice over the shoulder with the flat of their 
 old german sword . " 

 " then what ? " 

 " he pull over the bookcase , as I say , and fall , " say 
 Charles , with a sigh . it be no fun do errand for his 
 father , who be never quite satisfied . 

 " but the real cause be heart disease ? of that you be sure ? " 

 " that or a fit . however , we shall hear more than enough 
 at the inquest on such unsavoury topic . " 

 they go into breakfast . Charles have a rack 
 headache , consequent on motor before food . he be also 
 anxious about the future , reflect that the police must 
 detain Helen and Margaret for the inquest and ferret the 
 whole thing out . he see himself oblige to leave Hilton . 
 one could not afford to live near the scene of a scandal - it 
 be not fair on one 's wife . his comfort be that the 
 pater 's eye be open at last . there would be a horrible 
 smash up , and probably a separation from Margaret ; then they 
 would all start again , more as they have be in his mother 's 
 time . 

 " I think I will go round to the police - station , " say his 
 father when breakfast be over . 

 " what for ? " cry dolly , who have still not be " tell . " 

 " very well , sir . which car will you have ? " 

 " I think I will walk . " 

 " it be a good half - mile , " say Charles , step into the 
 garden . " the sun 's very hot for April . shall not   I take you 
 up , and then , perhaps , a little spin round by Tewin ? " 

 " you go on as if I do not   know my own mind , " say Mr. 
 Wilcox fretfully . Charles harden his mouth . " you young 
 fellow ' one idea be to get into a motor . I tell you , I 
 want to walk : I be very fond of walk . " 

 " oh , all right ; I be about the house if you want I for 
 anything . I think of not go up to the office today , if 
 that be your wish . " 

 " it be , indeed , my boy , " say Mr. Wilcox , and lay a 
 hand on his sleeve . 

 Charles do not like it ; he be uneasy about his father , 
 who do not seem himself this morning . there be a petulant 
 touch about he - more like a woman . could it be that he be 
 grow old ? the Wilcoxes be not lack in affection ; 
 they have it royally , but they do not know how to use it . 
 it be the talent in the napkin , and , for a warm - hearted 
 man , Charles have convey very little joy . as he watch 
 his father shuffle up the road , he have a vague regret - a 
 wish that something have be different somewhere - a wish 
  though he do not express it thus   that he have be teach 
 to say " I " in his youth . he mean to make up for Margaret 's 
 defection , but know that his father have be very happy with 
 she until yesterday . how have she do it ? by some 
 dishonest trick , no doubt - but how ? 

 Mr. Wilcox reappear at eleven , look very tired . 
 there be to be an inquest on Leonard 's ' body tomorrow , and 
 the police require his son to attend . 

 " I expect that , " say Charles . " I shall naturally be 
 the most important witness there . " 


 chapter 43 

 out of the turmoil and horror that have begin with Aunt 
 Juley 's illness and be not even to end with Leonard 's 
 death , it seem impossible to Margaret that healthy life 
 should re - emerge . event succeed in a logical , yet 
 senseless , train . People lose their humanity , and take 
 value as arbitrary as those in a pack of playing - card . it 
 be natural that Henry should do this and cause Helen to do 
 that , and then think she wrong for do it ; natural that 
 she herself should think he wrong ; natural that Leonard 
 should want to know how Helen be , and come , and Charles be 
 angry with he for come - natural , but unreal . in this 
 jangle of cause and effect what have become of their true 
 self ? here Leonard lie dead in the garden , from natural 
 cause ; yet life be a deep , deep river , death a blue sky , 
 life be a house , death a wisp of hay , a flower , a tower , 
 life and death be anything and everything , except this 
 order insanity , where the king take the queen , and the 
 ace the king . ah , no ; there be beauty and adventure 
 behind , such as the man at her foot have yearn for ; there 
 be hope this side of the grave ; there be true 
 relationship beyond the limit that fetter we now . as a 
 prisoner look up and see star beckon , so she , from the 
 turmoil and horror of those day , catch glimpse of the 
 diviner wheel . 

 and Helen , dumb with fright , but try to keep calm for 
 the child 's sake , and Miss Avery , calm , but murmur 
 tenderly , " no one ever tell the lad he will have a 
 child " - they also remind she that horror be not the end . 
 to what ultimate harmony we tend she do not know , but there 
 seem great chance that a child would be bear into the 
 world , to take the great chance of beauty and adventure 
 that the world offer . she move through the sunlit garden , 
 gather narcissi , crimson - eyed and white . there be 
 nothing else to be do ; the time for telegram and anger 
 be over , and it seem wisest that the hand of Leonard 
 should be fold on his breast and be fill with flower . 
 here be the father ; leave it at that . let Squalor be 
 turn into Tragedy , whose eye be the star , and whose 
 hand hold the sunset and the dawn . 

 and even the influx of official , even the return of the 
 doctor , vulgar and acute , could not shake her belief in the 
 eternity of beauty . Science explain people , but could not 
 understand they . after long century among the bone and 
 muscle it might be advance to knowledge of the nerve , 
 but this would never give understanding . one could open the 
 heart to Mr. Mansbridge and his sort without discover its 
 secret to they , for they want everything down in black 
 and white , and black and white be exactly what they be 
 leave with . 

 they question she closely about Charles . she never 
 suspect why . death have come , and the doctor agree that 
 it be due to heart disease . they ask to see her father 's 
 sword . she explain that Charles 's anger be natural , but 
 mistaken . miserable question about Leonard follow , all 
 of which she answer unfalteringly . then back to Charles 
 again . " no doubt Mr. Wilcox may have induce death , " she 
 say ; " but if it be not   one thing it would have be 
 another , as you yourself know . " at last they thank she , 
 and take the sword and the body down to Hilton . she begin 
 to pick up the book from the floor . 

 Helen have go to the farm . it be the good place for 
 she , since she have to wait for the inquest . though , as if 
 thing be not hard enough , Madge and her husband have 
 raise trouble ; they do not see why they should receive the 
 offscouring of howard End . and , of course , they be 
 right . the whole world be go to be right , and amply 
 avenge any brave talk against the convention . " nothing 
 matter , " the Schlegels have say in the past , " except one 's 
 self - respect and that of one 's friend . " when the time come , 
 other thing matter terribly . however , Madge have yield , 
 and Helen be assure of peace for one day and night , and 
 tomorrow she would return to Germany . 

 as for herself , she determine to go too . no message 
 come from Henry ; perhaps he expect she to apologize . now 
 that she have time to think over her own tragedy , she be 
 unrepentant . she neither forgave he for his behaviour nor 
 wish to forgive he . her speech to he seem perfect . 
 she would not have alter a word . it have to be utter 
 once in a life , to adjust the lopsidedness of the world . it 
 be speak not only to her husband , but to thousand of man 
 like he - a protest against the inner darkness in high 
 place that come with a commercial age . though he would 
 build up his life without her , she could not apologize . he 
 have refuse to connect , on the clear issue that can be 
 lay before a man , and their love must take the consequence . 

 no , there be nothing more to be do . they have try 
 not to go over the precipice but perhaps the fall be 
 inevitable . and it comfort she to think that the future 
 be certainly inevitable : cause and effect would go jangle 
 forward to some goal doubtless , but to none that she could 
 imagine . at such moment the soul retire within , to float 
 upon the bosom of a deep stream , and have communion with 
 the dead , and see the world 's glory not diminish , but 
 different in kind to what she have suppose . she alter she 
 focus until trivial thing be blur . Margaret have be 
 tend this way all the winter . Leonard 's death bring 
 she to the goal . alas ! that Henry should fade , away as 
 reality emerge , and only her love for he should remain 
 clear , stamp with his image like the cameo we rescue out 
 of dream . 

 with unfaltere eye she trace his future . he would 
 soon present a healthy mind to the world again , and what do 
 he or the world care if he be rotten at the core ? he would 
 grow into a rich , jolly old man , at time a little 
 sentimental about woman , but empty his glass with 
 anyone . tenacious of power , he would keep Charles and the 
 rest dependent , and retire from business reluctantly and at 
 an advanced age . he would settle down - though she could not 
 realize this . in her eye Henry be always move and 
 cause other to move , until the end of the earth meet . 
 but in time he must get too tired to move , and settle down . 
 what next ? the inevitable word . the release of the soul to 
 its appropriate Heaven . 

 would they meet in it ? Margaret believe in immortality 
 for herself . an eternal future have always seem natural to 
 she . and Henry believe in it for himself . yet , would they 
 meet again ? be there not rather endless level beyond the 
 grave , as the theory that he have censure teach ? and his 
 level , whether high or low , could it possibly be the 
 same as her ? 

 thus gravely meditate , she be summon by he . he 
 send up Crane in the motor . other servant pass like 
 water , but the chauffeur remain , though impertinent and 
 disloyal . Margaret dislike Crane , and he know it . 

 " be it the key that Mr. Wilcox want ? " she ask . 

 " he do not   say , madam . " 

 " you have not   any note for I ? " 

 " he do not   say , madam . " 

 after a moment 's thought she lock up howard End . it 
 be pitiable to see in it the stirring of warmth that would 
 be quench for ever . she rake out the fire that be 
 blaze in the kitchen , and spread the coal in the 
 gravelled yard . she close the window and draw the 
 curtain . Henry would probably sell the place now . 

 she be determined not to spare he , for nothing new have 
 happen as far as they be concern . her mood might 
 never have alter from yesterday evening . he be stand 
 a little outside Charles 's gate , and motion the car to 
 stop . when his wife get out he say hoarsely : " I prefer to 
 discuss thing with you outside . " 

 " it will be more appropriate in the road , I be afraid , " 
 say Margaret . " do you get my message ? " 

 " what about ? " 

 " I be go to Germany with my sister . I must tell you 
 now that I shall make it my permanent home . our talk last 
 night be more important than you have realize . I be 
 unable to forgive you and be leave you . " 

 " I be extremely tired , " say Henry , in injure tone . 
 " I have be walk about all the morning , and wish to sit down . " 

 " certainly , if you will consent to sit on the grass . " 

 the Great North Road should have be border all its 
 length with glebe . Henry 's kind have filch most of it . 
 she move to the scrap opposite , wherein be the Six 
 Hills . they sit down on the farth side , so that they 
 could not be see by Charles or dolly . 

 " here be your key , " say Margaret . she toss they 
 towards he . they fall on the sunlit slope of grass , and he 
 do not pick they up . 

 " I have something to tell you , " he say gently . 

 she know this superficial gentleness , this confession of 
 hastiness , that be only intend to enhance her admiration 
 of the male . 

 " I do not   want to hear it , " she reply . " my sister be 
 go to be ill . my life be go to be with she now . we 
 must manage to build up something , she and I and her child . " 

 " where be you go ? " 

 " Munich . we start after the inquest , if she be not too ill . " 

 " after the inquest ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " have you realize what the verdict at the inquest will be ? " 

 " yes , heart disease . " 

 " no , my dear ; manslaughter . " 

 Margaret drive her finger through the grass . the hill 
 beneath she move as if it be alive . 

 " Manslaughter , " repeat Mr. Wilcox . " Charles may go to 
 prison . I dare not tell he . I do not   know what to do - what 
 to do . I be break - I be end . " 

 no sudden warmth arise in she . she do not see that to 
 break he be her only hope . she do not enfold the 
 sufferer in her arm . but all through that day and the next 
 a new life begin to move . the verdict be bring in . 
 Charles be commit for trial . it be against all reason 
 that he should be punish , but the law , be make in his 
 image , sentence he to three year ' imprisonment . then 
 Henry 's fortress give way . he could bear no one but his 
 wife , he shamble up to Margaret afterwards and ask she to 
 do what she could with he . she do what seem 
 easiest - she take he down to recruit at howard End . 


 chapter 44 

 Tom 's father be cut the big meadow . he pass again 
 and again amid whirring blade and sweet odour of grass , 
 encompass with narrow circle the sacred centre of the 
 field . Tom be negotiate with Helen . 

 " I have not   any idea , " she reply . " do you suppose baby 
 may , Meg ? " 

 Margaret put down her work and regard they absently . 
 " what be that ? " she ask . 

 " Tom want to know whether baby be old enough to play 
 with hay ? " 

 " I have not   the least notion , " answer Margaret , and 
 take up her work again . 

 " now , Tom , baby be not to stand ; he be not to lie on his 
 face ; he be not to lie so that his head wag ; he be not to 
 be tease or tickle ; and he be not to be cut into two or 
 more piece by the cutter . will you be as careful as all that ? " 

 Tom hold out his arm . 

 " that child be a wonderful nursemaid , " remark Margaret . 

 " he be fond of baby . that be why he do it ! " be 
 Helen 's answer . they be go to be lifelong friend . " 

 " start at the age of six and one ? " 

 " of course . it will be a great thing for Tom . " 

 " it may be a great thing for baby . " 

 fourteen month have pass , but Margaret still stop 
 at howard End . no well plan have occur to she . the 
 meadow be be recut , the great red poppy be reopen 
 in the garden . July would follow with the little red 
 poppy among the wheat , August with the cutting of the 
 wheat . these little event would become part of her year 
 after year . every summer she would fear lest the well 
 should give out , every winter lest the pipe should freeze ; 
 every westerly gale might blow the wych - elm down and bring 
 the end of all thing , and so she could not read or talk 
 during a westerly gale . the air be tranquil now . she and 
 her sister be sit on the remain of Evie 's mockery , 
 where the lawn merge into the field . 

 " what a time they all be ! " say Helen . " what can they 
 be do inside ? " Margaret , who be grow less talkative , 
 make no answer . the noise of the cutter come 
 intermittently , like the breaking of wave . close by they a 
 man be prepare to scythe out one of the dell - hole . 

 " I wish Henry be out to enjoy this , " say Helen . " this 
 lovely weather and to be shut up in the house ! it be very hard . " 

 " it have to be , " say Margaret . " the hay - fever be his 
 chief objection against live here , but he think it worth while . " 

 " Meg , be or be not   he ill ? I can not   make out . " 

 " not ill . eternally tired . he have work very hard all 
 his life , and notice nothing . those be the people who 
 collapse when they do notice a thing . " 

 " I suppose he worry dreadfully about his part of the tangle . " 

 " dreadfully . that be why I wish dolly have not come , 
 too , today . still , he want they all to come . it have to be . " 

 " why do he want they ? " 

 Margaret do not answer . 

 " Meg , may I tell you something ? I like Henry . " 

 " you would be odd if you do not , " say Margaret . 

 " I usen't   to . " 

 " usen't ! " she lower her eye a moment to the black 
 abyss of the past . they have cross it , always except 
 Leonard and Charles . they be build up a new life , 
 obscure , yet gild with tranquillity . Leonard be dead ; 
 Charles have two year more in prison . one usen't   always to 
 see clearly before that time . it be different now . 

 " I like Henry because he do worry . " 

 " and he like you because you do not . " 

 Helen sigh . she seem humiliate , and bury she 
 face in her hand . after a time she say : " above love , " a 
 transition less abrupt than it appear . 

 Margaret never stop work . 

 " I mean a woman 's love for a man . I suppose I should 
 hang my life on to that once , and be drive up and down and 
 about as if something be worry through I . but 
 everything be peaceful now ; I seem cure . that Herr 
 Forstmeister , whom Frieda keep write about , must be a 
 noble character , but he do not   see that I shall never marry 
 he or anyone . it be not   shame or mistrust of myself . I 
 simply could not . I be end . I use to be so dreamy about a 
 man 's love as a girl , and think that for good or evil love 
 must be the great thing . but it have not   be ; it have be 
 itself a dream . do you agree ? " 

 " I do not agree . I do not . " 

 " I ought to remember Leonard as my lover , " say Helen , 
 step down into the field . " I tempt he , and kill 
 he and it be surely the least I can do . I would like to 
 throw out all my heart to Leonard on such an afternoon as 
 this . but I can not . it be no good pretending . I be 
 forget he . " her eye fill with tear . " how nothing 
 seem to match - how , my darling , my precious - " she break 
 off . " Tommy ! " 

 " yes , please ? " 

 " Baby be not to try and stand . - there be something want 
 in I . I see you love Henry , and understand he well 
 daily , and I know that death would not   part you in the 
 least . but I - be it some awful appalling , criminal defect ? " 

 Margaret silence she . she say : " it be only that 
 people be far more different than be pretend . all over 
 the world man and woman be worry because they can not 
 develop as they be suppose to develop . here and there 
 they have the matter out , and it comfort they . do not   fret 
 yourself , Helen . develop what you have ; love your child . I 
 do not love child . I be thankful to have none . I can 
 play with their beauty and charm , but that be all - nothing 
 real , not one scrap of what there ought to be . and 
 other - other go far still , and move outside humanity 
 altogether . a place , as well as a person , may catch the 
 glow . do not   you see that all this lead to comfort in the 
 end ? it be part of the battle against sameness . 
 difference - eternal difference , plant by God in a single 
 family , so that there may always be colour ; sorrow perhaps , 
 but colour in the daily grey . then I can not   have you 
 worry about Leonard . do not   drag in the personal when it 
 will not come . forget he . " 

 " yes , yes , but what have Leonard get out of life ? " 

 " perhaps an adventure . " 

 " be that enough ? " 

 " not for we . but for he . " 

 Helen take up a bunch of grass . she look at the 
 sorrel , and the red and white and yellow clover , and the 
 quaker grass , and the daisy , and the bent that compose 
 it . she raise it to her face . 

 " be it sweeten yet ? " ask Margaret . 

 " no , only wither . " 

 " it will sweeten tomorrow . " 

 Helen smile . " oh , Meg , you be a person , " she say . 
 " think of the racket and torture this time last year . but 
 now I could not   stop unhappy if I try . what a change - and 
 all through you ! " 

 " oh , we merely settle down . you and Henry learn to 
 understand one another and to forgive , all through the 
 autumn and the winter . " 

 " yes , but who settle we down ? " 

 Margaret do not reply . the scything have begin , and she 
 take off her pince - nez to watch it . 

 " you ! " cry Helen . " you do it all , sweetest , though 
 you be too stupid to see . live here be your plan - I 
 want you ; he want you ; and every one say it be 
 impossible , but you know . just think of our life without 
 you , Meg - I and baby with Monica , revolt by theory , he 
 hand about from dolly to Evie . but you pick up the 
 piece , and make we a home . can not   it strike you - even for a 
 moment - that your life have be heroic ? can not   you remember 
 the two month after Charles 's arrest , when you begin to 
 act , and do all ? " 

 " you be both ill at the time , " say Margaret . " I do 
 the obvious thing . I have two invalid to nurse . here be 
 a house , ready furnished and empty . it be obvious . I 
 do not   know myself it would turn into a permanent home . no 
 doubt I have do a little towards straighten the tangle , 
 but thing that I can not   phrase have help I . " 

 " I hope it will be permanent , " say Helen , drift away 
 to other thought . 

 " I think so . there be moment when I feel howard end 
 peculiarly our own . " 

 " all the same , London 's creeping . " 

 she point over the meadow - over eight or nine meadow , 
 but at the end of they be a red rust . 

 " you see that in Surrey and even Hampshire now , " she 
 continue . " I can see it from the Purbeck Downs . and 
 London be only part of something else , I be afraid . Life be 
 go to be melt down , all over the world . " 

 Margaret know that her sister speak truly . howard end , 
 Oniton , the Purbeck Downs , the Oderberge , be all 
 survival , and the melting - pot be be prepare for they . 
 logically , they have no right to be alive . one 's hope be in 
 the weakness of logic . be they possibly the earth beat 
 time ? 

 " because a thing be go strong now , it need not go 
 strong for ever , " she say . " this craze for motion have only 
 set in during the last hundred year . it may be follow by 
 a civilization that will not   be a movement , because it will 
 rest on the earth . all the sign be against it now , but I 
 can not   help hop , and very early in the morning in the 
 garden I feel that our house be the future as well as the past . " 

 they turn and look at it . their own memory 
 colour it now , for Helen 's child have be bear in the 
 central room of the nine . then Margaret say , " oh , take 
 care - ! " for something move behind the window of the hall , 
 and the door open . 

 " the conclave 's break at last . I will go . " 

 it be Paul . 

 Helen retreat with the child far into the field . 
 friendly voice greet she . Margaret rise , to encounter a 
 man with a heavy black moustache . 

 " my father have ask for you , " he say with hostility . 
 she take her work and follow he . 

 " we have be talk business , " he continue , " but I 
 dare say you know all about it beforehand . " 

 " yes , I do . " 

 Clumsy of movement - for he have spend all his life in the 
 saddle - Paul drive his foot against the paint of the front 
 door . Mrs. Wilcox give a little cry of annoyance . she do 
 not like anything scratch ; she stop in the hall to take 
 Dolly 's boa and glove out of a vase . 

 her husband be lie in a great leather chair in the 
 dining - room , and by his side , hold his hand rather 
 ostentatiously , be Evie . dolly , dress in purple , sit 
 near the window . the room be a little dark and airless ; 
 they be oblige to keep it like this until the carting of 
 the hay . Margaret join the family without speak ; the 
 five of they have meet already at tea , and she know quite well 
 what be go to be say . averse to waste her time , she 
 go on sewing . the clock strike six . 

 " be this go to suit every one ? " say Henry in a weary 
 voice . he use the old phrase , but their effect be 
 unexpected and shadowy . " because I do not   want you all 
 come here later on and complain that I have be unfair . " 

 " it be apparently get to suit we , " say Paul . 

 " I beg your pardon , my boy . you have only to speak , and 
 I will leave the house to you instead . " 

 Paul frown ill - temperedly , and begin scratch at his 
 arm . " as I have   give up the outdoor life that suit I , and 
 I have come home to look after the business , it be no good my 
 settle down here , " he say at last . " it be not really the 
 country , and it be not the town . " 

 " very well . do my arrangement suit you , Evie ? " 

 " of course , Father . " 

 " and you , dolly ? " 

 dolly raise she fade little face , which sorrow could 
 wither but not steady . " perfectly splendidly , " she say . 
 " I think Charles want it for the boy , but last time I 
 see he he say no , because we can not possibly live in this 
 part of England again . Charles say we ought to change our 
 name , but I can not think what to , for Wilcox just suit 
 Charles and I , and I can not   think of any other name . " 

 there be a general silence . dolly look nervously 
 round , fear that she have be inappropriate . Paul 
 continue to scratch his arm . 

 " then I leave howard end to my wife absolutely , " say 
 Henry . " and let every one understand that ; and after I be 
 dead let there be no jealousy and no surprise . " 

 Margaret do not answer . there be something uncanny in 
 her triumph . she , who have never expect to conquer anyone , 
 have charge straight through these Wilcoxes and break up 
 their life . 

 " in consequence , I leave my wife no money , " say Henry . 
 " that be her own wish . all that she would have have will be 
 divide among you . I be also give you a great deal in my 
 lifetime , so that you may be independent of I . that be her 
 wish , too . she also be give away a great deal of money . 
 she intend to diminish her income by half during the next 
 ten year ; she intend when she die to leave the house to 
 she - to her nephew , down in the field . be all that clear ? 
 do every one understand ? " 

 Paul rise to his foot . he be accustom to native , 
 and a very little shake he out of the Englishman . feel 
 manly and cynical , he say : " down in the field ? oh , come ! 
 I think we might have have the whole establishment , 
 piccaninny include . " 

 Mrs. Cahill whisper : " do not , Paul . you promise you would 
 take care . " feel a woman of the world , she rise and 
 prepare to take she leave . 

 her father kiss she . " good - bye , old girl , " he say ; 
 " do not   you worry about I . " 

 " good - bye , Dad . " 

 then it be Dolly 's turn . anxious to contribute , she 
 laugh nervously , and say : " good - bye , Mr. Wilcox . it do 
 seem curious that Mrs. Wilcox should have leave Margaret 
 howard end , and yet she get it , after all . " 

 from Evie come a sharply - draw breath . " good - bye , " she 
 say to Margaret , and kiss she . 

 and again and again fall the word , like the ebb of a 
 die sea . 

 " good - bye . " 

 " good - bye , dolly . " 

 " so long , Father . " 

 " good - bye , my boy ; always take care of yourself . " 

 " good - bye , Mrs. Wilcox . " 

 " good - bye . 

 Margaret see their visitor to the gate . then she 
 return to her husband and lay her head in his hand . he 
 be pitiably tired . but Dolly 's remark have interest she . 
 at last she say : " could you tell I , Henry , what be that 
 about Mrs. Wilcox have leave I howard End ? " 

 tranquilly he reply : " yes , she do . but that be a 
 very old story . when she be ill and you be so kind to 
 she she want to make you some return , and , not be 
 herself at the time , scribble ' howard End ' on a piece of 
 paper . I go into it thoroughly , and , as it be clearly 
 fanciful , I set it aside , little know what my Margaret 
 would be to I in the future . " 

 Margaret be silent . something shake her life in its 
 inmost recess , and she shiver . 

 " I do not   do wrong , do I ? " he ask , bend down . 

 " you do not , darling . nothing have be do wrong . " 

 from the garden come laughter . " here they be at last ! " 
 exclaim Henry , disengage himself with a smile . Helen 
 rush into the gloom , hold Tom by one hand and carry 
 her baby on the other . there be shout of infectious joy . 

 " the field 's cut ! " Helen cry excitedly - " the big 
 meadow ! we have   see to the very end , and it will be such a 
 crop of hay as never ! " 


  Weybridge , 1908 - 1910 . 

