where angel fear to TREAD 

 E. M. Forster 




 Chapter 1 

 they be all at Charing Cross to see Lilia off - Philip , Harriet , Irma , 
 Mrs. Herriton herself . even Mrs. Theobald , squire by Mr. Kingcroft , 
 have brave the journey from Yorkshire to bid her only daughter good - bye . 
 Miss Abbott be likewise attend by numerous relative , and the sight 
 of so many people talk at once and say such different thing 
 cause Lilia to break into ungovernable peal of laughter . 

 " quite an ovation , " she cry , sprawl out of her first - class 
 carriage . " they will take we for royalty . oh , Mr. Kingcroft , get we 
 foot - warmer . " 

 the good - natured young man hurry away , and Philip , take his place , 
 flood she with a final stream of advice and injunction - where to 
 stop , how to learn Italian , when to use mosquito - net , what picture 
 to look at . " remember , " he conclude , " that it be only by go off the 
 track that you get to know the country . see the little town - Gubbio , 
 Pienza , Cortona , San Gemignano , Monteriano . and do not , let I beg 
 you , go with that awful tourist idea that Italy 's only a museum of 
 antiquity and art . love and understand the Italians , for the people 
 be more marvellous than the land . " 

 " how I wish you be come , Philip , " she say , flatter at the 
 unwonted notice her brother - in - law be give she . 

 " I wish I be . " he could have manage it without great difficulty , 
 for his career at the Bar be not so intense as to prevent occasional 
 holiday . but his family dislike his continual visit to the continent , 
 and he himself often find pleasure in the idea that he be too busy to 
 leave town . 

 " good - bye , dear every one . what a whirl ! " she catch sight of her little 
 daughter Irma , and feel that a touch of maternal solemnity be require . 
 " good - bye , darling . mind you be always good , and do what Granny tell 
 you . " 

 she refer not to her own mother , but to her mother - in - law , Mrs. 
 Herriton , who hat the title of Granny . 

 Irma lift a serious face to be kiss , and say cautiously , " I will do 
 my good . " 

 " she be sure to be good , " say Mrs. Herriton , who be stand pensively 
 a little out of the hubbub . but Lilia be already call to Miss 
 Abbott , a tall , grave , rather nice - looking young lady who be conduct 
 her adieus in a more decorous manner on the platform . 

 " Caroline , my Caroline ! jump in , or your chaperon will go off without 
 you . " 

 and Philip , whom the idea of Italy always intoxicate , have start 
 again , tell she of the supreme moment of her come journey - the 
 Campanile of Airolo , which would burst on she when she emerge from the 
 St. Gothard tunnel , presage the future ; the view of the Ticino and 
 Lago Maggiore as the train climb the slope of Monte Cenere ; the view 
 of Lugano , the view of Como - Italy gathering thick around her now - the 
 arrival at her first resting - place , when , after long drive through 
 dark and dirty street , she should at last behold , amid the roar of 
 tram and the glare of arc lamp , the buttress of the cathedral of 
 Milan . 

 " Handkerchiefs and collar , " scream Harriet , " in my inlaid box ! I have 
 lend you my inlaid box . " 

 " good old Harry ! " she kiss every one again , and there be a moment 's 
 silence . they all smile steadily , except Philip , who be choke in 
 the fog , and old Mrs. Theobald , who have begin to cry . Miss Abbott get 
 into the carriage . the guard himself shut the door , and tell Lilia that 
 she would be all right . then the train move , and they all move with it 
 a couple of step , and wave their handkerchief , and utter cheerful 
 little cry . at that moment Mr. Kingcroft reappear , carry a 
 footwarmer by both end , as if it be a tea - tray . he be sorry that 
 he be too late , and call out in a quivering voice , " good - bye , Mrs. 
 Charles . may you enjoy yourself , and may God bless you . " 

 Lilia smile and nod , and then the absurd position of the foot - warmer 
 overcome she , and she begin to laugh again . 

 " oh , I be so sorry , " she cry back , " but you do look so funny . oh , you 
 all look so funny wave ! oh , pray ! " and laugh helplessly , she be 
 carry out into the fog . 

 " high spirit to begin so long a journey , " say Mrs. Theobald , dab 
 her eye . 

 Mr. Kingcroft solemnly move his head in token of agreement . " I wish , " 
 say he , " that Mrs. Charles have get the footwarmer . these London 
 porter will not   take heed to a country chap . " 

 " but you do your good , " say Mrs. Herriton . " and I think it simply 
 noble of you to have bring Mrs. Theobald all the way here on such a 
 day as this . " then , rather hastily , she shake hand , and leave he to 
 take Mrs. Theobald all the way back . 

 Sawston , her own home , be within easy reach of London , and they be 
 not late for tea . Tea be in the dining - room , with an egg for irma , to 
 keep up the child 's spirit . the house seem strangely quiet after a 
 fortnight 's bustle , and their conversation be spasmodic and subdue . 
 they wonder whether the traveller have get to Folkestone , whether it 
 would be at all rough , and if so what would happen to poor Miss Abbott . 

 " and , Granny , when will the old ship get to Italy ? " ask Irma . 

 " ' Grandmother , ' dear ; not ' granny , ' " say Mrs. Herriton , give she 
 a kiss . " and we say ' a boat ' or ' a steamer , ' not ' a ship . ' ship have 
 sail . and mother will not   go all the way by sea . you look at the map of 
 Europe , and you will see why . Harriet , take she . go with Aunt Harriet , and 
 she will show you the map . " 

 " Righto ! " say the little girl , and drag the reluctant Harriet 
 into the library . Mrs. Herriton and her son be leave alone . there be 
 immediately confidence between they . 

 " here beginneth the New Life , " say Philip . 

 " poor child , how vulgar ! " murmur Mrs. Herriton . " it be surprising that 
 she be not   bad . but she have get a look of poor Charles about she . " 

 " and - alas , alas ! - a look of old Mrs. Theobald . what appalling 
 apparition be that ! I do think the lady be bedridden as well as 
 imbecile . why ever do she come ? " 

 " Mr. Kingcroft make she . I be certain of it . he want to see Lilia 
 again , and this be the only way . " 

 " I hope he be satisfied . I do not think my sister - in - law distinguish 
 herself in her farewell . " 

 Mrs. Herriton shudder . " I mind nothing , so long as she have go - and 
 go with Miss Abbott . it be mortify to think that a widow of 
 thirty - three require a girl ten year young to look after she . " 

 " I pity Miss Abbott . fortunately one admirer be chain to England . Mr. 
 Kingcroft can not leave the crop or the climate or something . I do not 
 think , either , he improve his chance today . he , as well as Lilia , have 
 the knack of be absurd in public . " 

 Mrs. Herriton reply , " when a man be neither well breed , nor well 
 connect , nor handsome , nor clever , nor rich , even Lilia may discard 
 he in time . " 

 " no . I believe she would take any one . right up to the last , when her 
 box be pack , she be ' play ' the chinless curate . both the 
 curate be chinless , but hers have the damp hand . I come on they in 
 the Park . they be speak of the Pentateuch . " 

 " my dear boy ! if possible , she have get bad and bad . it be your idea 
 of italian travel that save we ! " 

 Philip brighten at the little compliment . " the odd part be that she 
 be quite eager - always ask I for information ; and of course I be 
 very glad to give it . I admit she be a philistine , appallingly ignorant , 
 and her taste in art be false . still , to have any taste at all be 
 something . and I do believe that Italy really purify and ennoble all 
 who visit she . she be the school as well as the playground of the world . 
 it be really to Lilia 's credit that she want to go there . " 

 " she would go anywhere , " say his mother , who have hear enough of the 
 praise of Italy . " I and Caroline Abbott have the great difficulty in 
 dissuade she from the Riviera . " 

 " no , Mother ; no . she be really keen on Italy . this travel be quite a 
 crisis for she . " he find the situation full of whimsical romance : there 
 be something half attractive , half repellent in the thought of this 
 vulgar woman journey to place he love and revere . why should she 
 not be transfigure ? the same have happen to the Goths . 

 Mrs. Herriton do not believe in romance nor in transfiguration , nor in 
 parallel from history , nor in anything else that may disturb domestic 
 life . she adroitly change the subject before Philip get excite . soon 
 Harriet return , have give her lesson in geography . irma go to bed 
 early , and be tuck up by her grandmother . then the two lady work 
 and play card . Philip read a book . and so they all settle down to 
 their quiet , profitable existence , and continue it without interruption 
 through the winter . 

 it be now nearly ten year since Charles have fall in love with Lilia 
 Theobald because she be pretty , and during that time Mrs. Herriton have 
 hardly know a moment 's rest . for six month she scheme to prevent 
 the match , and when it have take place she turn to another task - the 
 supervision of her daughter - in - law . Lilia must be push through life 
 without bring discredit on the family into which she have marry . she 
 be aid by Charles , by her daughter Harriet , and , as soon as he be 
 old enough , by the clever one of the family , Philip . the birth of Irma 
 make thing still more difficult . but fortunately old Mrs. Theobald , who 
 have attempt interference , begin to break up . it be an effort to she 
 to leave Whitby , and Mrs. Herriton discourage the effort as far as 
 possible . that curious duel which be fight over every baby be fight 
 and decide early . Irma belong to her father 's family , not to her 
 mother 's . 

 Charles die , and the struggle recommence . Lilia try to assert 
 herself , and say that she should go to take care of Mrs. Theobald . 
 it require all Mrs. Herriton 's kindness to prevent she . a house be 
 finally take for she at Sawston , and there for three year she live 
 with irma , continually subject to the refining influence of her late 
 husband 's family . 

 during one of her rare Yorkshire visit trouble begin again . Lilia 
 confide to a friend that she like a Mr. Kingcroft extremely , but 
 that she be not exactly engaged to he . the news come round to Mrs. 
 Herriton , who at once write , beg for information , and point out 
 that Lilia must either be engage or not , since no intermediate state 
 exist . it be a good letter , and flurry Lilia extremely . she leave 
 Mr. Kingcroft without even the pressure of a rescue - party . she cry a 
 great deal on her return to Sawston , and say she be very sorry . Mrs. 
 Herriton take the opportunity of speak more seriously about the 
 duty of widowhood and motherhood than she have ever do before . but 
 somehow thing never go easily after . Lilia would not settle down in 
 her place among Sawston matron . she be a bad housekeeper , always in 
 the throe of some domestic crisis , which Mrs. Herriton , who keep she 
 servant for year , have to step across and adjust . she let irma stop 
 away from school for insufficient reason , and she allow she to wear 
 ring . she learn to bicycle , for the purpose of wake the place up , 
 and coast down the High Street one Sunday evening , fall off at the 
 turn by the church . if she have not be a relative , it would have be 
 entertaining . but even Philip , who in theory love outrage English 
 convention , rise to the occasion , and give she a talking which she 
 remember to her die day . it be just then , too , that they discover 
 that she still allow Mr. Kingcroft to write to she " as a gentleman 
 friend , " and to send present to Irma . 

 Philip think of Italy , and the situation be save . caroline , 
 charming , sober , Caroline Abbott , who live two turning away , be 
 seek a companion for a year 's travel . Lilia give up her house , sell 
 half her furniture , leave the other half and Irma with Mrs. Herriton , and 
 have now depart , amid universal approval , for a change of scene . 

 she write to they frequently during the winter - more frequently than she 
 write to her mother . her letter be always prosperous . florence she 
 find perfectly sweet , Naples a dream , but very whiffy . in Rome one have 
 simply to sit still and feel . Philip , however , declare that she be 
 improve . he be particularly gratify when in the early spring she 
 begin to visit the small town that he have recommend . " in a place 
 like this , " she write , " one really do feel in the heart of thing , and 
 off the beat track . look out of a gothic window every morning , it 
 seem impossible that the middle age have pass away . " the letter be 
 from Monteriano , and conclude with a not unsuccessful description of 
 the wonderful little town . 

 " it be something that she be content , " say Mrs. Herriton . " but no one 
 could live three month with Caroline Abbott and not be the well for 
 it . " 

 just then Irma come in from school , and she read her mother 's letter to 
 she , carefully correct any grammatical error , for she be a loyal 
 supporter of parental authority - Irma listen politely , but soon 
 change the subject to hockey , in which her whole being be absorb . 
 they be to vote for colour that afternoon - yellow and white or yellow 
 and green . what do her grandmother think ? 

 of course Mrs. Herriton have an opinion , which she sedately expound , in 
 spite of Harriet , who say that colour be unnecessary for child , 
 and of Philip , who say that they be ugly . she be get proud of 
 Irma , who have certainly greatly improve , and could no long be call 
 that most appalling of thing - a vulgar child . she be anxious to form 
 she before her mother return . so she have no objection to the leisurely 
 movement of the traveller , and even suggest that they should 
 overstay their year if it suit they . 

 Lilia 's next letter be also from Monteriano , and Philip grow quite 
 enthusiastic . 

 " they have   stop there over a week ! " he cry . " why ! I should not   have 
 do as much myself . they must be really keen , for the hotel 's none too 
 comfortable . " 

 " I can not understand people , " say Harriet . " what can they be do all 
 day ? and there be no church there , I suppose . " 

 " there be Santa Deodata , one of the most beautiful church in Italy . " 

 " of course I mean an english church , " say Harriet stiffly . " Lilia 
 promise I that she would always be in a large town on Sundays . " 

 " if she go to a service at Santa Deodata 's , she will find more beauty 
 and sincerity than there be in all the back Kitchens of Europe . " 

 the Back Kitchen be his nickname for St. James 's , a small depress 
 edifice much patronize by his sister . she always resent any slight on 
 it , and Mrs. Herriton have to intervene . 

 " now , dear , do not . listen to Lilia 's letter . ' we love this place , and 
 I do not know how I shall ever thank Philip for tell I it . it be 
 not only so quaint , but one see the Italians unspoile in all their 
 simplicity and charm here . the fresco be wonderful . Caroline , who 
 grow sweet every day , be very busy sketch . ' " 

 " every one to his taste ! " say Harriet , who always deliver a platitude 
 as if it be an epigram . she be curiously virulent about Italy , which 
 she have never visit , her only experience of the Continent be an 
 occasional six week in the protestant part of Switzerland . 

 " oh , Harriet be a bad lot ! " say Philip as soon as she leave the room . 
 his mother laugh , and tell he not to be naughty ; and the appearance 
 of irma , just off to school , prevent further discussion . not only in 
 Tracts be a child a peacemaker . 

 " one moment , Irma , " say her uncle . " I be go to the station . I will give 
 you the pleasure of my company . " 

 they start together . Irma be gratify ; but conversation flag , 
 for Philip have not the art of talk to the young . Mrs. Herriton sit 
 a little long at the breakfast table , re - read Lilia 's letter . then 
 she help the cook to clear , order dinner , and start the housemaid 
 turn out the drawing - room , Tuesday be its day . the weather be 
 lovely , and she think she would do a little gardening , as it be quite 
 early . she call Harriet , who have recover from the insult to St. 
 James 's , and together they go to the kitchen garden and begin to sow 
 some early vegetable . 

 " we will save the pea to the last ; they be the great fun , " say 
 Mrs. Herriton , who have the gift of make work a treat . she and her 
 elderly daughter always get on very well , though they have not a great 
 deal in common . Harriet 's education have be almost too successful . as 
 Philip once say , she have " bolt all the cardinal virtue and could not 
 digest they . " though pious and patriotic , and a great moral asset for 
 the house , she lack that pliancy and tact which her mother so much 
 value , and have expect she to pick up for herself . Harriet , if she have 
 be allow , would have drive Lilia to an open rupture , and , what be 
 bad , she would have do the same to Philip two year before , when he 
 return full of passion for Italy , and ridicule Sawston and its way . 

 " it be a shame , Mother ! " she have cry . " Philip laugh at everything - the 
 Book Club , the Debating Society , the Progressive Whist , the bazaar . 
 People will not   like it . we have our reputation . a house divide against 
 itself can not stand . " 

 Mrs. Herriton reply in the memorable word , " let Philip say what he 
 like , and he will let we do what we like . " and Harriet have acquiesce . 

 they sow the duller vegetable first , and a pleasant feeling of 
 righteous fatigue steal over they as they address themselves to the 
 pea . Harriet stretch a string to guide the row straight , and Mrs. 
 Herriton scratch a furrow with a pointed stick . at the end of it she 
 look at her watch . 

 " it be twelve ! the second post be in . run and see if there be any 
 letter . " 

 Harriet do not want to go . " let us finish the pea . there will not   be any 
 letter . " 

 " no , dear ; please go . I will sow the pea , but you shall cover they 
 up - and mind the bird do not   see them ! " 

 Mrs. Herriton be very careful to let those pea trickle evenly from 
 her hand , and at the end of the row she be conscious that she have never 
 sow well . they be expensive too . 

 " actually old Mrs. Theobald ! " say Harriet , return . 

 " read I the letter . my hand be dirty . how intolerable the crested 
 paper be . " 

 Harriet open the envelope . 

 " I do not   understand , " she say ; " it do not   make sense . " 

 " her letter never do . " 

 " but it must be silly than usual , " say Harriet , and her voice begin 
 to quaver . " look here , read it , Mother ; I can not   make head or tail . " 

 Mrs. Herriton take the letter indulgently . " what be the difficulty ? " she 
 say after a long pause . " what be it that puzzle you in this letter ? " 

 " the meaning - " falter Harriet . the sparrow hop near and begin 
 to eye the pea . 

 " the meaning be quite clear - Lilia be engage to be marry . do not   cry , 
 dear ; please I by not cry - do not   talk at all . it be more than I could 
 bear . she be go to marry some one she have meet in a hotel . take the 
 letter and read for yourself . " suddenly she break down over what might 
 seem a small point . " how dare she not tell I direct ! how dare she 
 write first to Yorkshire ! pray , be I to hear through Mrs. Theobald - a 
 patronizing , insolent letter like this ? have I no claim at all ? Bear 
 witness , dear " - she choke with passion - " bear witness that for this 
 I will never forgive she ! " 

 " oh , what be to be do ? " moan Harriet . " what be to be do ? " 

 " this first ! " she tear the letter into little piece and scatter it 
 over the mould . " next , a telegram for Lilia ! no ! a telegram for Miss 
 Caroline Abbott . she , too , have something to explain . " 

 " oh , what be to be do ? " repeat Harriet , as she follow her mother 
 to the house . she be helpless before such effrontery . what awful 
 thing - what awful person have come to Lilia ? " some one in the hotel . " the 
 letter only say that . what kind of person ? a gentleman ? an Englishman ? 
 the letter do not say . 

 " wire reason of stay at Monteriano . strange rumour , " read Mrs. 
 Herriton , and address the telegram to Abbott , Stella d'Italia , 
 Monteriano , Italy . " if there be an office there , " she add , " we might 
 get an answer this evening . since Philip be back at seven , and the 
 eight - fifteen catch the midnight boat at Dover - Harriet , when you go 
 with this , get 100 pound in 5 pound note at the bank . " 

 " go , dear , at once ; do not talk . I see Irma come back ; go quickly .... 
 well , Irma dear , and whose team be you in this afternoon - Miss Edith 's 
 or Miss May 's ? " 

 but as soon as she have behave as usual to her grand - daughter , she go 
 to the library and take out the large atla , for she want to know 
 about Monteriano . the name be in the small print , in the midst of a 
 woolly - brown tangle of hill which be call the " Sub - Apennines . " it 
 be not so very far from Siena , which she have learn at school . past it 
 there wander a thin black line , notch at interval like a saw , 
 and she know that this be a railway . but the map leave a good deal to 
 imagination , and she have not get any . she look up the place in " Childe 
 Harold , " but Byron have not be there . nor do Mark Twain visit it in 
 the " Tramp abroad . " the resource of literature be exhaust : she 
 must wait till Philip come home . and the thought of Philip make her try 
 Philip 's room , and there she find " Central Italy , " by Baedeker , and 
 open it for the first time in her life and read in it as follow : - 


 MONTERIANO   pop . 4800 . hotel : Stella d'Italia , moderate only ; Globo , 
 dirty .    Caffe Garibaldi . Post and Telegraph office in Corso Vittorio 
 Emmanuele , next to theatre . photograph at Seghena 's   cheap in 
 Florence . Diligence   1 lira   meet principal train . 

 Chief attraction   2 - 3 hour : Santa Deodata , Palazzo Pubblico , Sant ' 
 Agostino , Santa Caterina , Sant ' Ambrogio , Palazzo Capocchi . guide 
  2 lira   unnecessary . a walk round the Walls should on no account be 
 omit . the view from the Rocca   small gratuity   be fine at sunset . 

 history : Monteriano , the Mons Rianus of Antiquity , whose ghibelline 
 tendency be note by Dante   Purg . xx . , definitely emancipate itself 
 from Poggibonsi in 1261 . hence the distich , " poggibonizzi , faui in LA , 
 CHE monteriano SI FA citta ! " till recently enscribe over the Siena 
 gate . it remain independent till 1530 , when it be sack by the Papal 
 troop and become part of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany . it be now of small 
 importance , and seat of the district prison . the inhabitant be still 
 note for their agreeable manner . 

      

 the traveller will proceed direct from the Siena gate to the Collegiate 
 Church of Santa Deodata , and inspect   5th chapel on right   the charming 
 Frescoes .... 


 Mrs. Herriton do not proceed . she be not one to detect the hide 
 charm of Baedeker . some of the information seem to her unnecessary , 
 all of it be dull . whereas Philip could never read " the view from the 
 Rocca   small gratuity   be fine at sunset " without a catching at the 
 heart . restore the book to its place , she go downstairs , and look 
 up and down the asphalt path for her daughter . she see she at last , 
 two turning away , vainly try to shake off Mr. Abbott , Miss Caroline 
 Abbott 's father . Harriet be always unfortunate . at last she return , 
 hot , agitated , crackle with bank - note , and Irma bounce to greet she , 
 and trod heavily on her corn . 

 " your foot grow large every day , " say the agonized Harriet , and give 
 her niece a violent push . then Irma cry , and Mrs. Herriton be annoy 
 with Harriet for betray irritation . Lunch be nasty ; and during 
 pudding news arrive that the cook , by sheer dexterity , have break 
 a very vital knob off the kitchen - range . " it be too bad , " say Mrs. 
 Herriton . Irma say it be three bad , and be tell not to be rude . after 
 lunch Harriet would get out Baedeker , and read in injure tone about 
 Monteriano , the Mons Rianus of Antiquity , till her mother stop she . 

 " it be ridiculous to read , dear . she be not try to marry any one in the 
 place . some tourist , obviously , who be stop in the hotel . the place 
 have nothing to do with it at all . " 

 " but what a place to go to ! what nice person , too , do you meet in a 
 hotel ? " 

 " nice or nasty , as I have tell you several time before , be not the 
 point . Lilia have insult our family , and she shall suffer for it . and 
 when you speak against hotel , I think you forget that I meet your father 
 at Chamounix . you can contribute nothing , dear , at present , and I think 
 you have well hold your tongue . I be go to the kitchen , to speak 
 about the range . " 

 she speak just too much , and the cook say that if she could not give 
 satisfaction - she have well leave . a small thing at hand be great 
 than a great thing remote , and Lilia , misconduct herself upon a 
 mountain in Central Italy , be immediately hide . Mrs. Herriton fly to 
 a registry office , fail ; fly to another , fail again ; come home , 
 be tell by the housemaid that thing seem so unsettled that she have 
 well leave as well ; have tea , write six letter , be interrupt by 
 cook and housemaid , both weeping , ask her pardon , and implore to 
 be take back . in the flush of victory the door - bell rang , and there be 
 the telegram : " Lilia engage to italian nobility . writing . Abbott . " 

 " no answer , " say Mrs. Herriton . " get down Mr. Philip 's Gladstone from 
 the attic . " 

 she would not allow herself to be frighten by the unknown . indeed 
 she know a little now . the man be not an italian noble , otherwise the 
 telegram would have say so . it must have be write by Lilia . none 
 but she would have be guilty of the fatuous vulgarity of " italian 
 nobility . " she recall phrase of this morning 's letter : " we love this 
 place - Caroline be sweet than ever , and busy sketching - Italians full 
 of simplicity and charm . " and the remark of Baedeker , " the inhabitant 
 be still note for their agreeable manner , " have a baleful meaning now . 
 if Mrs. Herriton have no imagination , she have intuition , a more useful 
 quality , and the picture she make to herself of Lilia 's FIANCE do not 
 prove altogether wrong . 

 so Philip be receive with the news that he must start in half an hour 
 for Monteriano . he be in a painful position . for three year he have 
 sing the praise of the Italians , but he have never contemplate have 
 one as a relative . he try to soften the thing down to his mother , but 
 in his heart of heart he agree with she when she say , " the man may 
 be a duke or he may be an organ - grinder . that be not the point . if Lilia 
 marry he she insult the memory of Charles , she insult Irma , she 
 insult we . therefore I forbid she , and if she disobey we have do 
 with she for ever . " 

 " I will do all I can , " say Philip in a low voice . it be the first time 
 he have have anything to do . he kiss his mother and sister and puzzle 
 Irma . the hall be warm and attractive as he look back into it from 
 the cold March night , and he depart for Italy reluctantly , as for 
 something commonplace and dull . 

 before Mrs. Herriton go to bed she write to Mrs. Theobald , use plain 
 language about Lilia 's conduct , and hint that it be a question on 
 which every one must definitely choose side . she add , as if it be an 
 afterthought , that Mrs. Theobald 's letter have arrive that morning . 

 just as she be go upstairs she remember that she never cover 
 up those pea . it upset she more than anything , and again and again she 
 strike the banister with vexation . late as it be , she get a lantern 
 from the tool - shed and go down the garden to rake the earth over they . 
 the sparrow have take every one . but countless fragment of the letter 
 remain , disfigure the tidy ground . 



 chapter 2 

 when the bewildered tourist alight at the station of Monteriano , he 
 find himself in the middle of the country . there be a few house round 
 the railway , and many more dotted over the plain and the slope of the 
 hill , but of a town , mediaeval or otherwise , not the slight sign . he 
 must take what be suitably term a " legno " - a piece of wood - and 
 drive up eight mile of excellent road into the middle age . for it be 
 impossible , as well as sacrilegious , to be as quick as Baedeker . 

 it be three in the afternoon when Philip leave the realm of 
 commonsense . he be so weary with travel that he have fall asleep 
 in the train . his fellow - passenger have the usual italian gift of 
 divination , and when Monteriano come they know he want to go there , 
 and drop he out . his foot sink into the hot asphalt of the platform , 
 and in a dream he watch the train depart , while the porter who ought 
 to have be carry his bag , run up the line play touch - you - last 
 with the guard . alas ! he be in no humour for Italy . bargaining for a 
 legno bore he unutterably . the man ask six lira ; and though Philip 
 know that for eight mile it should scarcely be more than four , yet he 
 be about to give what he be ask , and so make the man discontent 
 and unhappy for the rest of the day . he be save from this social 
 blunder by loud shout , and look up the road see one crack his 
 whip and wave his rein and drive two horse furiously , and behind 
 he there appear the sway figure of a woman , hold star - fish 
 fashion on to anything she could touch . it be Miss Abbott , who have just 
 receive his letter from Milan announce the time of his arrival , and 
 have hurry down to meet he . 

 he have know Miss Abbott for year , and have never have much opinion about 
 her one way or the other . she be good , quiet , dull , and amiable , 
 and young only because she be twenty - three : there be nothing in her 
 appearance or manner to suggest the fire of youth . all her life have 
 be spend at Sawston with a dull and amiable father , and her pleasant , 
 pallid face , bent on some respectable charity , be a familiar object 
 of the Sawston street . why she have ever wish to leave they be 
 surprising ; but as she truly say , " I be John Bull to the backbone , yet 
 I do want to see Italy , just once . everybody say it be marvellous , and 
 that one get no idea of it from book at all . " the curate suggest 
 that a year be a long time ; and Miss Abbott , with decorous playfulness , 
 answer he , " oh , but you must let I have my fling ! I promise to have 
 it once , and once only . it will give I thing to think about and talk 
 about for the rest of my life . " the curate have consent ; so have Mr. 
 Abbott . and here she be in a legno , solitary , dusty , frighten , with 
 as much to answer and to answer for as the most dashing adventuress 
 could desire . 

 they shake hand without speak . she make room for Philip and his 
 luggage amidst the loud indignation of the unsuccessful driver , whom it 
 require the combine eloquence of the station - master and the station 
 beggar to confute . the silence be prolong until they start . for 
 three day he have be consider what he should do , and still more 
 what he should say . he have invent a dozen imaginary conversation , in 
 all of which his logic and eloquence procure he certain victory . but 
 how to begin ? he be in the enemy 's country , and everything - the hot 
 sun , the cold air behind the heat , the endless row of olive - tree , 
 regular yet mysterious - seem hostile to the placid atmosphere of 
 Sawston in which his thought take birth . at the outset he make one 
 great concession . if the match be really suitable , and Lilia be bent 
 on it , he would give in , and trust to his influence with his mother to 
 set thing right . he would not have make the concession in England ; 
 but here in Italy , Lilia , however wilful and silly , be at all event 
 grow to be a human being . 

 " be we to talk it over now ? " he ask . 

 " certainly , please , " say Miss Abbott , in great agitation . " if you will 
 be so very kind . " 

 " then how long have she be engage ? " 

 her face be that of a perfect fool - a fool in terror . 

 " a short time - quite a short time , " she stammer , as if the shortness 
 of the time would reassure he . 

 " I should like to know how long , if you can remember . " 

 she enter into elaborate calculation on her finger . " exactly eleven 
 day , " she say at last . 

 " how long have you be here ? " 

 More calculation , while he tap irritably with his foot . " close on 
 three week . " 

 " do you know he before you come ? " 

 " no . " 

 " oh ! who be he ? " 

 " a native of the place . " 

 the second silence take place . they have leave the plain now and 
 be climb up the outpost of the hill , the olive - tree still 
 accompany . the driver , a jolly fat man , have get out to ease the 
 horse , and be walk by the side of the carriage . 

 " I understand they meet at the hotel . " 

 " it be a mistake of Mrs. Theobald 's . " 

 " I also understand that he be a member of the italian nobility . " 

 she do not reply . 

 " may I be tell his name ? " 

 Miss Abbott whisper , " Carella . " but the driver hear she , and a grin 
 split over his face . the engagement must be know already . 

 " Carella ? Conte or Marchese , or what ? " 

 " Signor , " say Miss Abbott , and look helplessly aside . 

 " perhaps I bear you with these question . if so , I will stop . " 

 " oh , no , please ; not at all . I be here - my own idea - to give all 
 information which you very naturally - and to see if somehow - please ask 
 anything you like . " 

 " then how old be he ? " 

 " oh , quite young . twenty - one , I believe . " 

 there burst from Philip the exclamation , " Good Lord ! " 

 " one would never believe it , " say Miss Abbott , flush . " he look much 
 old . " 

 " and be he good - look ? " he ask , with gather sarcasm . 

 she become decisive . " very good - look . all his feature be good , and 
 he be well build - though I dare say english standard would find he too 
 short . " 

 Philip , whose one physical advantage be his height , feel annoyed at her 
 imply indifference to it . 

 " may I conclude that you like he ? " 

 she reply decisively again , " as far as I have see he , I do . " 

 at that moment the carriage enter a little wood , which lie brown and 
 sombre across the cultivate hill . the tree of the wood be small and 
 leafless , but noticeable for this - that their stem stand in violet as 
 rock stand in the summer sea . there be such violet in England , 
 but not so many . nor be there so many in Art , for no painter have the 
 courage . the cart - rut be channel , the hollow lagoon ; even the 
 dry white margin of the road be splash , like a causeway soon to be 
 submerge under the advance tide of spring . Philip pay no attention 
 at the time : he be think what to say next . but his eye have 
 register the beauty , and next March he do not forget that the road to 
 Monteriano must traverse innumerable flower . 

 " as far as I have see he , I do like he , " repeat Miss Abbott , after 
 a pause . 

 he think she sound a little defiant , and crush she at once . 

 " what be he , please ? you have not   tell I that . what be his position ? " 

 she open her mouth to speak , and no sound come from it . Philip wait 
 patiently . she try to be audacious , and fail pitiably . 

 " no position at all . he be kick his heel , as my father would say . 
 you see , he have only just finish his military service . " 

 " as a private ? " 

 " I suppose so . there be general conscription . he be in the Bersaglieri , 
 I think . be not   that the crack regiment ? " 

 " the man in it must be short and broad . they must also be able to walk 
 six mile an hour . " 

 she look at he wildly , not understand all that he say , but 
 feeling that he be very clever . then she continue her defence of 
 Signor Carella . 

 " and now , like most young man , he be look out for something to do . " 

 " meanwhile ? " 

 " meanwhile , like most young man , he live with his people - father , 
 mother , two sister , and a tiny tot of a brother . " 

 there be a grating sprightliness about she that drive he nearly mad . 
 he determine to silence she at last . 

 " one more question , and only one more . what be his father ? " 

 " his father , " say Miss Abbott . " well , I do not   suppose you will think it 
 a good match . but that be not the point . I mean the point be not - I mean 
 that social difference - love , after all - not but what - I - " 

 Philip grind his tooth together and say nothing . 

 " gentleman sometimes judge hardly . but I feel that you , and at 
 all event your mother - so really good in every sense , so really 
 unworldly - after all , love - marriage be make in heaven . " 

 " yes , Miss Abbott , I know . but I be anxious to hear heaven 's choice . you 
 arouse my curiosity . be my sister - in - law to marry an angel ? " 

 " Mr. Herriton , do not   - please , Mr. Herriton - a dentist . his father 's a 
 dentist . " 

 Philip give a cry of personal disgust and pain . he shudder all over , 
 and edge away from his companion . a dentist ! a dentist at Monteriano . a 
 dentist in fairyland ! false tooth and laugh gas and the tilting 
 chair at a place which know the Etruscan League , and the Pax Romana , 
 and Alaric himself , and the Countess Matilda , and the Middle Ages , all 
 fighting and holiness , and the Renaissance , all fighting and beauty ! he 
 think of Lilia no long . he be anxious for himself : he fear that 
 romance might die . 

 romance only die with life . no pair of pincer will ever pull it out of 
 we . but there be a spurious sentiment which can not resist the unexpected 
 and the incongruous and the grotesque . a touch will loosen it , and the 
 soon it go from we the well . it be go from Philip now , and 
 therefore he give the cry of pain . 

 " I can not think what be in the air , " he begin . " if Lilia be determine 
 to disgrace we , she might have find a less repulsive way . a boy of 
 medium height with a pretty face , the son of a dentist at Monteriano . 
 have I put it correctly ? may I surmise that he have not get one penny ? 
 may I also surmise that his social position be nil ? furthermore - " 

 " stop ! I will tell you no more . " 

 " really , Miss Abbott , it be a little late for reticence . you have 
 equip I admirably ! " 

 " I will tell you not another word ! " she cry , with a spasm of terror . 
 then she get out her handkerchief , and seem as if she would shed 
 tear . after a silence , which he intend to symbolize to her the 
 dropping of a curtain on the scene , he begin to talk of other subject . 

 they be among olive again , and the wood with its beauty and wildness 
 have pass away . but as they climb higher the country open out , and 
 there appear , high on a hill to the right , Monteriano . the hazy green 
 of the olive rise up to its wall , and it seem to float in isolation 
 between tree and sky , like some fantastic ship city of a dream . its 
 colour be brown , and it reveal not a single house - nothing but the 
 narrow circle of the wall , and behind they seventeen tower - all that 
 be leave of the fifty - two that have fill the city in her prime . some 
 be only stump , some be incline stiffly to their fall , some be 
 still erect , pierce like mast into the blue . it be impossible to 
 praise it as beautiful , but it be also impossible to damn it as quaint . 

 meanwhile Philip talk continually , think this to be great evidence 
 of resource and tact . it show Miss Abbott that he have probe she to 
 the bottom , but be able to conquer his disgust , and by sheer force of 
 intellect continue to be as agreeable and amusing as ever . he do not 
 know that he talk a good deal of nonsense , and that the sheer force 
 of his intellect be weaken by the sight of Monteriano , and by the 
 thought of dentistry within those wall . 

 the town above they swing to the left , to the right , to the left again , 
 as the road wind upward through the tree , and the tower begin to glow 
 in the descend sun . as they draw near , Philip see the head of people 
 gather black upon the wall , and he know well what be happen - how 
 the news be spread that a stranger be in sight , and the beggar 
 be arouse from their content and bid to adjust their deformity ; how 
 the alabaster man be run for his ware , and the Authorized Guide 
 run for his peaked cap and his two card of recommendation - one from 
 Miss M'Gee , Maida Vale , the other , less valuable , from an equerry to the 
 Queen of Peru ; how some one else be run to tell the landlady of the 
 Stella d'Italia to put on her pearl necklace and brown boot and empty 
 the slop from the spare bedroom ; and how the landlady be run to 
 tell Lilia and her boy that their fate be at hand . 

 perhaps it be a pity Philip have talk so profusely . he have drive 
 Miss Abbott half demente , but he have give himself no time to concert 
 a plan . the end come so suddenly . they emerge from the tree on to the 
 terrace before the walk , with the vision of half Tuscany radiant in the 
 sun behind they , and then they turn in through the Siena gate , and 
 their journey be over . the Dogana man admit they with an air of 
 gracious welcome , and they clatter up the narrow dark street , greet 
 by that mixture of curiosity and kindness which make each italian 
 arrival so wonderful . 

 he be stunned and know not what to do . at the hotel he receive no 
 ordinary reception . the landlady wring he by the hand ; one person 
 snatch his umbrella , another his bag ; people push each other out of 
 his way . the entrance seem block with a crowd . Dogs be bark , 
 bladder whistle be blow , woman wave their handkerchief , excited 
 child scream on the stair , and at the top of the stair be Lilia 
 herself , very radiant , with her good blouse on . 

 " welcome ! " she cry . " welcome to Monteriano ! " he greet she , for he 
 do not know what else to do , and a sympathetic murmur rise from the 
 crowd below . 

 " you tell I to come here , " she continue , " and I do not   forget it . let 
 I introduce Signor Carella ! " 

 Philip discern in the corner behind she a young man who might 
 eventually prove handsome and well - make , but certainly do not seem so 
 then . he be half envelop in the drapery of a cold dirty curtain , and 
 nervously stick out a hand , which Philip take and find thick and damp . 
 there be more murmur of approval from the stair . 

 " well , din - din be nearly ready , " say Lilia . " your room be down the 
 passage , Philip . you need not   go change . " 

 he stumble away to wash his hand , utterly crush by her effrontery . 

 " Dear Caroline ! " whisper Lilia as soon as he have go . " what an angel 
 you have   be to tell he ! he take it so well . but you must have have a 
 MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE . " 

 Miss Abbott 's long terror suddenly turn into acidity . " I have   tell 
 nothing , " she snap . " it be all for you - and if it only take a quarter 
 of an hour you will be lucky ! " 

 Dinner be a nightmare . they have the smelly dining - room to themselves . 
 Lilia , very smart and vociferous , be at the head of the table ; Miss 
 Abbott , also in her good , sit by Philip , look , to his irritated 
 nerve , more like the tragedy confidante every moment . that scion of the 
 italian nobility , Signor Carella , sit opposite . behind he loom a bowl 
 of goldfish , who swam round and round , gap at the guest . 

 the face of Signor Carella be twitch too much for Philip to study 
 it . but he could see the hand , which be not particularly clean , and 
 do not get clean by fidget amongst the shin slab of hair . 
 his starched cuff be not clean either , and as for his suit , it have 
 obviously be buy for the occasion as something really English - a 
 gigantic check , which do not even fit . his handkerchief he have 
 forget , but never miss it . altogether , he be quite unpresentable , 
 and very lucky to have a father who be a dentist in Monteriano . and 
 why , even Lilia - but as soon as the meal begin it furnish Philip with 
 an explanation . 

 for the youth be hungry , and his lady fill his plate with spaghetti , 
 and when those delicious slippery worm be fly down his throat , his 
 face relax and become for a moment unconscious and calm . and Philip 
 have see that face before in Italy a hundred time - see it and love 
 it , for it be not merely beautiful , but have the charm which be the 
 rightful heritage of all who be bear on that soil . but he do not want 
 to see it opposite he at dinner . it be not the face of a gentleman . 

 Conversation , to give it that name , be carry on in a mixture of 
 English and italian . Lilia have pick up hardly any of the latter 
 language , and Signor Carella have not yet learn any of the former . 
 occasionally Miss Abbott have to act as interpreter between the lover , 
 and the situation become uncouth and revolt in the extreme . yet 
 Philip be too cowardly to break forth and denounce the engagement . he 
 think he should be more effective with Lilia if he have she alone , 
 and pretend to himself that he must hear her defence before give 
 judgment . 

 Signor Carella , hearten by the spaghetti and the throat - rasp wine , 
 attempt to talk , and , look politely towards Philip , say , " England 
 be a great country . the Italians love England and the English . " 

 Philip , in no mood for international amenity , merely bow . 

 " Italy too , " the other continue a little resentfully , " be a great 
 country . she have produce many famous man - for example Garibaldi and 
 Dante . the latter write the ' Inferno , ' the ' Purgatorio , ' the ' Paradiso . ' 
 the ' Inferno ' be the most beautiful . " and with the complacent tone of 
 one who have receive a solid education , he quote the opening line - 

  Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita 
  Mi ritrovai per una selva oscura 
  Che la diritta via era smarrita - 

 a quotation which be more apt than he suppose . 

 Lilia glance at Philip to see whether he notice that she be 
 marry no ignoramus . anxious to exhibit all the good quality of she 
 betroth , she abruptly introduce the subject of pallone , in which , 
 it appear , he be a proficient player . he suddenly become shy and 
 develop a conceited grin - the grin of the village yokel whose cricket 
 score be mention before a stranger . Philip himself have love to watch 
 pallone , that entrance combination of lawn - tennis and five . but he 
 do not expect to love it quite so much again . 

 " oh , look ! " exclaim Lilia , " the poor wee fish ! " 

 a starve cat have be worry they all for piece of the purple 
 quivering beef they be try to swallow . Signor Carella , with the 
 brutality so common in Italians , have catch she by the paw and fling she 
 away from he . now she have climb up to the bowl and be try to 
 hook out the fish . he get up , drive she off , and find a large glass 
 stopper by the bowl , entirely plug up the aperture with it . 

 " but may not the fish die ? " say Miss Abbott . " they have no air . " 

 " fish live on water , not on air , " he reply in a knowing voice , and sit 
 down . apparently he be at his ease again , for he take to spit on 
 the floor . Philip glance at Lilia but do not detect her wincing . she 
 talk bravely till the end of the disgusting meal , and then get up 
 say , " well , Philip , I be sure you be ready for by - bye . we shall meet 
 at twelve o'clock lunch tomorrow , if we do not   meet before . they give we 
 caffe later in our room . " 

 it be a little too impudent . Philip reply , " I should like to see you 
 now , please , in my room , as I have come all the way on business . " he 
 hear Miss Abbott gasp . Signor Carella , who be light a rank cigar , 
 have not understand . 

 it be as he expect . when he be alone with Lilia he lose all 
 nervousness . the remembrance of his long intellectual supremacy 
 strengthen he , and he begin volubly - 

 " my dear Lilia , do not   let us have a scene . before I arrive I think I 
 might have to question you . it be unnecessary . I know everything . Miss 
 Abbott have tell I a certain amount , and the rest I see for myself . " 

 " see for yourself ? " she exclaim , and he remember afterwards that she 
 have flush crimson . 

 " that he be probably a ruffian and certainly a cad . " 

 " there be no cad in Italy , " she say quickly . 

 he be take aback . it be one of his own remark . and she far upset 
 he by add , " he be the son of a dentist . why not ? " 

 " thank you for the information . I know everything , as I tell you before . 
 I be also aware of the social position of an Italian who pull tooth in 
 a minute provincial town . " 

 he be not aware of it , but he venture to conclude that it be pretty , 
 low . nor do Lilia contradict he . but she be sharp enough to say , 
 " indeed , Philip , you surprise I . I understand you go in for equality 
 and so on . " 

 " and I understand that Signor Carella be a member of the italian 
 nobility . " 

 " well , we put it like that in the telegram so as not to shock dear Mrs. 
 Herriton . but it be true . he be a young branch . of course family 
 ramify - just as in yours there be your cousin Joseph . " she adroitly 
 pick out the only undesirable member of the Herriton clan . " Gino 's 
 father be courtesy itself , and rise rapidly in his profession . this 
 very month he leave Monteriano , and set up at Poggibonsi . and for 
 my own poor part , I think what people be be what matter , but I do not 
 suppose you will agree . and I should like you to know that Gino 's uncle be 
 a priest - the same as a clergyman at home . " 

 Philip be aware of the social position of an italian priest , and say 
 so much about it that Lilia interrupt he with , " well , his cousin 's a 
 lawyer at Rome . " 

 " what kind of ' lawyer ' ? " 

 " why , a lawyer just like you be - except that he have lot to do and can 
 never get away . " 

 the remark hurt more than he care to show . he change his method , and 
 in a gentle , conciliate tone deliver the follow speech : - 

 " the whole thing be like a bad dream - so bad that it can not go on . if 
 there be one redeem feature about the man I might be uneasy . as it 
 be I can trust to time . for the moment , Lilia , he have take you in , 
 but you will find he out soon . it be not possible that you , a lady , 
 accustom to lady and gentleman , will tolerate a man whose position 
 be - well , not equal to the son of the servant ' dentist in Coronation 
 Place . I be not blame you now . but I blame the glamour of Italy - I 
 have feel it myself , you know - and I greatly blame Miss Abbott . " 

 " Caroline ! why blame she ? what be all this to do with Caroline ? " 

 " because we expect she to - " he see that the answer would involve he 
 in difficulty , and , wave his hand , continue , " so I be confident , 
 and you in your heart agree , that this engagement will not last . think 
 of your life at home - think of Irma ! and I will also say think of we ; for 
 you know , Lilia , that we count you more than a relation . I should feel 
 I be lose my own sister if you do this , and my mother would lose a 
 daughter . " 

 she seem touch at last , for she turn away her face and say , " I 
 can not   break it off now ! " 

 " Poor Lilia , " say he , genuinely move . " I know it may be painful . but 
 I have come to rescue you , and , book - worm though I may be , I be not 
 frightened to stand up to a bully . he be merely an insolent boy . he 
 think he can keep you to your word by threat . he will be different 
 when he see he have a man to deal with . " 

 what follow should be preface with some simile - the simile of a 
 powder - mine , a thunderbolt , an earthquake - for it blow Philip up in the 
 air and flatten he on the ground and swallow he up in the depth . 
 Lilia turn on her gallant defender and say - 

 " for once in my life I will thank you to leave I alone . I will thank your 
 mother too . for twelve year you have   train I and torture I , and I will 
 stand it no more . do you think I be a fool ? do you think I never feel ? 
 ah ! when I come to your house a poor young bride , how you all look I 
 over - never a kind word - and discuss I , and think I might just do ; 
 and your mother correct I , and your sister snub I , and you say 
 funny thing about I to show how clever you be ! and when Charles die 
 I be still to run in string for the honour of your beastly family , 
 and I be to be coope up at Sawston and learn to keep house , and all my 
 chance spoilt of marry again . no , thank you ! no , thank you ! ' Bully ? ' 
 ' insolent boy ? ' who be that , pray , but you ? but , thank goodness , I can 
 stand up against the world now , for I have   find Gino , and this time I 
 marry for love ! " 

 the coarseness and truth of her attack alike overwhelm he . but her 
 supreme insolence find he word , and he too burst forth . 

 " yes ! and I forbid you to do it ! you despise I , perhaps , and think 
 I be feeble . but you be mistaken . you be ungrateful and impertinent and 
 contemptible , but I will save you in order to save Irma and our name . 
 there be go to be such a row in this town that you and he will be sorry 
 you come to it . I shall shrink from nothing , for my blood be up . it be 
 unwise of you to laugh . I forbid you to marry Carella , and I shall tell 
 he so now . " 

 " do , " she cry . " tell he so now . have it out with he . Gino ! Gino ! 
 come in ! Avanti ! Fra Filippo forbid the bann ! " 

 Gino appear so quickly that he must have be listen outside the 
 door . 

 " Fra Filippo 's blood 's up . he shrink from nothing . oh , take care he 
 do not   hurt you ! " she sway about in vulgar imitation of Philip 's 
 walk , and then , with a proud glance at the square shoulder of she 
 betroth , flounce out of the room . 

 do she intend they to fight ? Philip have no intention of do so ; and 
 no more , it seem , have Gino , who stand nervously in the middle of the 
 room with twitching lip and eye . 

 " please sit down , Signor Carella , " say Philip in Italian . " Mrs. 
 Herriton be rather agitated , but there be no reason we should not be 
 calm . might I offer you a cigarette ? please sit down . " 

 he refuse the cigarette and the chair , and remain stand in the 
 full glare of the lamp . Philip , not averse to such assistance , get his 
 own face into shadow . 

 for a long time he be silent . it might impress Gino , and it also give 
 he time to collect himself . he would not this time fall into the error 
 of blustering , which he have catch so unaccountably from Lilia . he would 
 make his power feel by restraint . 

 why , when he look up to begin , be Gino convulse with silent 
 laughter ? it vanish immediately ; but he become nervous , and be even 
 more pompous than he intend . 

 " Signor Carella , I will be frank with you . I have come to prevent you 
 marry Mrs. Herriton , because I see you will both be unhappy together . 
 she be English , you be italian ; she be accustom to one thing , you to 
 another . and - pardon I if I say it - she be rich and you be poor . " 

 " I be not marry she because she be rich , " be the sulky reply . 

 " I never suggest that for a moment , " say Philip courteously . " you be 
 honourable , I be sure ; but be you wise ? and let I remind you that we 
 want she with we at home . her little daughter will be motherless , 
 our home will be break up . if you grant my request you will earn our 
 thank - and you will not be without a reward for your disappointment . " 

 " reward - what reward ? " he bend over the back of a chair and look 
 earnestly at Philip . they be come to term pretty quickly . poor 
 Lilia ! 

 Philip say slowly , " what about a thousand lira ? " 

 his soul go forth into one exclamation , and then he be silent , with 
 gap lip . Philip would have give double : he have expect a bargain . 

 " you can have they tonight . " 

 he find word , and say , " it be too late . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " because - " his voice break . Philip watch his face , - a face without 
 refinement perhaps , but not without expression , - watch it quiver and 
 re - form and dissolve from emotion into emotion . there be avarice at one 
 moment , and insolence , and politeness , and stupidity , and cunning - and 
 let we hope that sometimes there be love . but gradually one emotion 
 dominate , the most unexpected of all ; for his chest begin to heave and 
 his eye to wink and his mouth to twitch , and suddenly he stand erect 
 and roar forth his whole be in one tremendous laugh . 

 Philip spring up , and Gino , who have fling wide his arm to let the 
 glorious creature go , take he by the shoulder and shake he , and say , 
 " because we be married - marry - married as soon as I know you be , 
 come . there be no time to tell you . oh . oh ! you have come all the way 
 for nothing . oh ! and oh , your generosity ! " suddenly he become grave , and 
 say , " please pardon I ; I be rude . I be no well than a peasant , and 
 I - " here he see Philip 's face , and it be too much for he . he gasp 
 and explode and cram his hand into his mouth and spit they out in 
 another explosion , and give Philip an aimless push , which topple he on 
 to the bed . he utter a horrified oh ! and then give up , and bolt away 
 down the passage , shriek like a child , to tell the joke to his wife . 

 for a time Philip lie on the bed , pretend to himself that he be hurt 
 grievously . he could scarcely see for temper , and in the passage he run 
 against Miss Abbott , who promptly burst into tear . 

 " I sleep at the Globo , " he tell she , " and start for Sawston tomorrow 
 morning early . he have assault I . I could prosecute he . but shall 
 not . " 

 " I can not   stop here , " she sob . " I dare not   stop here . you will have to 
 take I with you ! " 



 chapter 3 

 Opposite the Volterra gate of Monteriano , outside the city , be a very 
 respectable white - wash mud wall , with a coping of red crinkle tile 
 to keep it from dissolution . it would suggest a gentleman 's garden if 
 there be not in its middle a large hole , which grow large with every 
 rain - storm . through the hole be visible , firstly , the iron gate that be 
 intend to close it ; secondly , a square piece of ground which , though 
 not quite , mud , be at the same time not exactly grass ; and finally , 
 another wall , stone this time , which have a wooden door in the middle and 
 two wooden - shuttered window each side , and apparently form the facade 
 of a one - storey house . 

 this house be big than it look , for it slide for two storey down 
 the hill behind , and the wooden door , which be always lock , really 
 lead into the attic . the know person prefer to follow the 
 precipitous mule - track round the turn of the mud wall till he can take 
 the edifice in the rear . then - be now on a level with the cellar - he 
 lift up his head and shout . if his voice sound like something 
 light - a letter , for example , or some vegetable , or a bunch of 
 flower - a basket be let out of the first - floor window by a string , 
 into which he put his burden and depart . but if he sound like 
 something heavy , such as a log of wood , or a piece of meat , or a 
 visitor , he be interrogate , and then bid or forbid to ascend . 
 the ground floor and the upper floor of that battered house be alike 
 desert , and the inmate keep the central portion , just as in a die 
 body all life retire to the heart . there be a door at the top of the 
 first flight of stair , and if the visitor be admit he will find a 
 welcome which be not necessarily cold . there be several room , some 
 dark and mostly stuffy - a reception - room adorn with horsehair chair , 
 wool - work stool , and a stove that be never light - german bad taste 
 without german domesticity brood over that room ; also a living - room , 
 which insensibly glide into a bedroom when the refining influence of 
 hospitality be absent , and real bedroom ; and last , but not least , the 
 loggia , where you can live day and night if you feel inclined , drink 
 vermouth and smoke cigarette , with league of olive - tree and 
 vineyard and blue - green hill to watch you . 

 it be in this house that the brief and inevitable tragedy of Lilia 's 
 married life take place . she make Gino buy it for she , because it be 
 there she have first see he sit on the mud wall that face the 
 Volterra gate . she remember how the evening sun have strike his hair , 
 and how he have smile down at she , and be both sentimental and 
 unrefine , be determined to have the man and the place together . thing 
 in Italy be cheap for an italian , and , though he would have prefer 
 a house in the piazza , or well still a house at Siena , or , bliss above 
 bliss , a house at Leghorn , he do as she ask , think that perhaps 
 she show her good taste in prefer so retire an abode . 

 the house be far too big for they , and there be a general concourse of 
 his relative to fill it up . his father wish to make it a patriarchal 
 concern , where all the family should have their room and meet together 
 for meal , and be perfectly willing to give up the new practice at 
 Poggibonsi and preside . Gino be quite willing too , for he be an 
 affectionate youth who like a large home - circle , and he tell it as 
 a pleasant bit of news to Lilia , who do not attempt to conceal her 
 horror . 

 at once he be horrify too ; see that the idea be monstrous ; abuse 
 himself to she for have suggest it ; rush off to tell his father 
 that it be impossible . his father complain that prosperity be 
 already corrupt he and make he unsympathetic and hard ; his mother 
 cry ; his sister accuse he of block their social advance . he 
 be apologetic , and even cringe , until they turn on Lilia . then 
 he turn on they , say that they could not understand , much less 
 associate with , the english lady who be his wife ; that there should be 
 one master in that house - himself . 

 Lilia praise and pet he on his return , call he brave and a hero 
 and other endearing epithet . but he be rather blue when his clan leave 
 Monteriano in much dignity - a dignity which be not at all impair 
 by the acceptance of a cheque . they take the cheque not to Poggibonsi , 
 after all , but to Empoli - a lively , dusty town some twenty mile off . 
 there they settle down in comfort , and the sister say they have be 
 drive to it by Gino . 

 the cheque be , of course , Lilia 's , who be extremely generous , and be 
 quite willing to know anybody so long as she have not to live with they , 
 relation - in - law be on her nerve . she like nothing well than 
 find out some obscure and distant connection - there be several of 
 they - and act the lady bountiful , leave behind her bewilderment , 
 and too often discontent . Gino wonder how it be that all his people , 
 who have formerly seem so pleasant , have suddenly become plaintive 
 and disagreeable . he put it down to his lady wife 's magnificence , in 
 comparison with which all seem common . her money fly apace , in 
 spite of the cheap living . she be even rich than he expect ; and he 
 remember with shame how he have once regret his inability to accept 
 the thousand lira that Philip Herriton offer he in exchange for she . 
 it would have be a shortsighted bargain . 

 Lilia enjoy settle into the house , with nothing to do except give 
 order to smile workpeople , and a devoted husband as interpreter . she 
 write a jaunty account of her happiness to Mrs. Herriton , and Harriet 
 answer the letter , say   1   that all future communication should be 
 address to the solicitor ;   2   would Lilia return an inlay box which 
 Harriet have lend she - but not give - to keep handkerchief and collar 
 in ? 

 " look what I be give up to live with you ! " she say to Gino , never 
 omit to lay stress on her condescension . he take she to mean the 
 inlay box , and say that she need not give it up at all . 

 " silly fellow , no ! I mean the life . those Herritons be very well 
 connect . they lead Sawston society . but what do I care , so long as I 
 have my silly fellow ! " she always treat he as a boy , which he be , 
 and as a fool , which he be not , think herself so immeasurably 
 superior to he that she neglect opportunity after opportunity of 
 establish her rule . he be good - looking and indolent ; therefore he 
 must be stupid . he be poor ; therefore he would never dare to criticize 
 his benefactress . he be passionately in love with she ; therefore she 
 could do exactly as she like . 

 " it may not   be heaven below , " she think , " but it be well than 
 Charles . " 

 and all the time the boy be watch she , and grow up . 

 she be remind of Charles by a disagreeable letter from the 
 solicitor , bid her disgorge a large sum of money for Irma , in 
 accordance with her late husband 's will . it be just like Charles 's 
 suspicious nature to have provide against a second marriage . Gino be 
 equally indignant , and between they they compose a stinging reply , 
 which have no effect . he then say that Irma have well come out and live 
 with they . " the air be good , so be the food ; she will be happy here , and 
 we shall not have to part with the money . " but Lilia have not the courage 
 even to suggest this to the Herritons , and an unexpected terror seize 
 she at the thought of Irma or any english child be educate at 
 Monteriano . 

 Gino become terribly depressed over the solicitor ' letter , more 
 depressed than she think necessary . there be no more to do in the 
 house , and he spend whole day in the loggia lean over the parapet or 
 sit astride it disconsolately . 

 " oh , you idle boy ! " she cry , pinch his muscle . " go and play 
 pallone . " 

 " I be a married man , " he answer , without raise his head . " I do not 
 play game any more . " 

 " go and see your friend then . " 

 " I have no friend now . " 

 " silly , silly , silly ! you can not   stop indoor all day ! " 

 " I want to see no one but you . " he spit on to an olive - tree . 

 " now , Gino , do not   be silly . go and see your friend , and bring they to 
 see I . we both of we like society . " 

 he look puzzle , but allow himself to be persuade , go out , find 
 that he be not as friendless as he suppose , and return after several 
 hour in altered spirit . Lilia congratulate herself on her good 
 management . 

 " I be ready , too , for people now , " she say . " I mean to wake you all up , 
 just as I wake up Sawston . let us have plenty of man - and make they bring 
 their womenkind . I mean to have real english tea - party . " 

 " there be my aunt and her husband ; but I think you do not want to 
 receive my relative . " 

 " I never say such a - " 

 " but you would be right , " he say earnestly . " they be not for you . 
 many of they be in trade , and even we be little more ; you should have 
 gentlefolk and nobility for your friend . " 

 " poor fellow , " think Lilia . " it be sad for he to discover that his 
 people be vulgar . " she begin to tell he that she love he just for 
 his silly self , and he flush and begin tug at his moustache . 

 " but besides your relative I must have other people here . your friend 
 have wife and sister , have not   they ? " 

 " oh , yes ; but of course I scarcely know they . " 

 " not know your friend ' people ? " 

 " why , no . if they be poor and have to work for their living I may see 
 they - but not otherwise . except - " he stop . the chief exception be 
 a young lady , to whom he have once be introduce for matrimonial 
 purpose . but the dowry have prove inadequate , and the acquaintance 
 terminate . 

 " how funny ! but I mean to change all that . bring your friend to see I , 
 and I will make they bring their people . " 

 he look at she rather hopelessly . 

 " well , who be the principal people here ? who lead society ? " 

 the governor of the prison , he suppose , and the officer who assist 
 he . 

 " well , be they marry ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " there we be . do you know they ? " 

 " yes - in a way . " 

 " I see , " she exclaim angrily . " they look down on you , do they , poor 
 boy ? wait ! " he assent . " wait ! I will soon stop that . now , who else be 
 there ? " 

 " the marchese , sometimes , and the canon of the Collegiate Church . " 

 " married ? " 

 " the canon - " he begin with twinkle eye . 

 " oh , I forget your horrid celibacy . in England they would be the centre 
 of everything . but why should not   I know they ? would it make it easy if 
 I call all round ? be not   that your foreign way ? " 

 he do not think it would make it easy . 

 " but I must know some one ! who be the man you be talk to this 
 afternoon ? " 

 low - class man . he could scarcely recollect their name . 

 " but , Gino dear , if they be low class , why do you talk to they ? do not 
 you care about your position ? " 

 all Gino care about at present be idleness and pocket - money , and his 
 way of express it be to exclaim , " ouf - pouf ! how hot it be in here . 
 no air ; I sweat all over . I expire . I must cool myself , or I shall never 
 get to sleep . " in his funny abrupt way he run out on to the loggia , 
 where he lie full length on the parapet , and begin to smoke and spit 
 under the silence of the star . 

 Lilia gather somehow from this conversation that continental society 
 be not the go - as - you - please thing she have expect . indeed she could 
 not see where continental society be . Italy be such a delightful place 
 to live in if you happen to be a man . there one may enjoy that exquisite 
 luxury of Socialism - that true socialism which be base not on equality 
 of income or character , but on the equality of manner . in the democracy 
 of the caffe or the street the great question of our life have be 
 solve , and the brotherhood of man be a reality . but be accomplish at 
 the expense of the sisterhood of woman . why should you not make friend 
 with your neighbour at the theatre or in the train , when you know and 
 he know that feminine criticism and feminine insight and feminine 
 prejudice will never come between you ? though you become as David and 
 Jonathan , you need never enter his home , nor he your . all your life 
 you will meet under the open air , the only roof - tree of the South , under 
 which he will spit and swear , and you will drop your h 's , and nobody 
 will think the bad of either . 

 meanwhile the woman - they have , of course , their house and their church , 
 with its admirable and frequent service , to which they be escort by 
 the maid . otherwise they do not go out much , for it be not genteel to 
 walk , and you be too poor to keep a carriage . occasionally you will 
 take they to the caffe or theatre , and immediately all your wonte 
 acquaintance there desert you , except those few who be expect 
 and expect to marry into your family . it be all very sad . but one 
 consolation emerge - life be very pleasant in Italy if you be a man . 

 Hitherto Gino have not interfere with Lilia . she be so much old than 
 he be , and so much rich , that he regard she as a superior being who 
 answer to other law . he be not wholly surprised , for strange rumour 
 be always blow over the Alps of land where man and woman have the 
 same amusement and interest , and he have often meet that privileged 
 maniac , the lady tourist , on her solitary walk . Lilia take solitary 
 walk too , and only that week a tramp have grab at her watch - an 
 episode which be suppose to be indigenous in Italy , though really less 
 frequent there than in Bond Street . now that he know she well , he 
 be inevitably lose his awe : no one could live with she and keep it , 
 especially when she have be so silly as to lose a gold watch and chain . 
 as he lie thoughtful along the parapet , he realize for the first time 
 the responsibility of monied life . he must save she from danger , 
 physical and social , for after all she be a woman . " and I , " he 
 reflect , " though I be young , be at all event a man , and know what be 
 right . " 

 he find she still in the living - room , comb her hair , for she have 
 something of the slattern in her nature , and there be no need to keep 
 up appearance . 

 " you must not go out alone , " he say gently . " it be not safe . if you 
 want to walk , Perfetta shall accompany you . " Perfetta be a widow 
 cousin , too humble for social aspiration , who be live with they as 
 factotum . 

 " very well , " smile Lilia , " very well " - as if she be address a 
 solicitous kitten . but for all that she never take a solitary walk 
 again , with one exception , till the day of her death . 

 day pass , and no one call except poor relative . she begin to feel 
 dull . do not   he know the Sindaco or the bank manager ? even the landlady 
 of the Stella d'Italia would be well than no one . she , when she go 
 into the town , be pleasantly receive ; but people naturally find a 
 difficulty in get on with a lady who could not learn their language . 
 and the tea - party , under Gino 's adroit management , recede ever and ever 
 before she . 

 he have a good deal of anxiety over her welfare , for she do not 
 settle down in the house at all . but he be comfort by a welcome and 
 unexpected visitor . as he be go one afternoon for the letter - they 
 be deliver at the door , but it take long to get they at the 
 office - some one humorously throw a cloak over his head , and when he 
 disengage himself he see his very dear friend Spiridione Tesi of the 
 custom - house at Chiasso , whom he have not meet for two year . what joy ! 
 what salutation ! so that all the passersby smile with approval on the 
 amiable scene . Spiridione 's brother be now station - master at Bologna , 
 and thus he himself could spend his holiday travel over Italy at the 
 public expense . hearing of Gino 's marriage , he have come to see he on 
 his way to Siena , where live his own uncle , lately monie too . 

 " they all do it , " he exclaim , " myself except . " he be not quite 
 twenty - three . " but tell I more . she be English . that be good , very 
 good . an english wife be very good indeed . and she be rich ? " 

 " immensely rich . " 

 " blonde or dark ? " 

 " blonde . " 

 " be it possible ! " 

 " it please I very much , " say Gino simply . " if you remember , I always 
 desire a blonde . " three or four man have collect , and be listen . 

 " we all desire one , " say Spiridione . " but you , Gino , deserve your good 
 fortune , for you be a good son , a brave man , and a true friend , and 
 from the very first moment I see you I wish you well . " 

 " no compliment , I beg , " say Gino , stand with his hand cross on 
 his chest and a smile of pleasure on his face . 

 Spiridione address the other man , none of whom he have ever see 
 before . " be it not true ? do not he deserve this wealthy blonde ? " 

 " he do deserve she , " say all the man . 

 it be a marvellous land , where you love it or hate it . 

 there be no letter , and of course they sit down at the Caffe 
 Garibaldi , by the Collegiate Church - quite a good caffe that for so 
 small a city . there be marble - top table , and pillar terra - cotta 
 below and gold above , and on the ceiling be a fresco of the battle of 
 Solferino . one could not have desire a pretty room . they have vermouth 
 and little cake with sugar on the top , which they choose gravely at 
 the counter , pinch they first to be sure they be fresh . and though 
 vermouth be barely alcoholic , Spiridione drench his with soda - water to 
 be sure that it should not get into his head . 

 they be in high spirit , and elaborate compliment alternate 
 curiously with gentle horseplay . but soon they put up their leg on a 
 pair of chair and begin to smoke . 

 " tell I , " say Spiridione - " I forgot to ask - be she young ? " 

 " thirty - three . " 

 " ah , well , we can not have everything . " 

 " but you would be surprised . have she tell I twenty - eight , I should not 
 have disbelieve she . " 

 " be she SIMPATICA ? "   nothing will translate that word . 

 Gino dab at the sugar and say after a silence , " sufficiently so . " 

 " it be a most important thing . " 

 " she be rich , she be generous , she be affable , she address she 
 inferior without haughtiness . " 

 there be another silence . " it be not sufficient , " say the other . " one 
 do not define it thus . " he lower his voice to a whisper . " last month 
 a German be smuggle cigar . the custom - house be dark . yet I 
 refuse because I do not like he . the gift of such man do not bring 
 happiness . NON ERA SIMPATICO . he pay for every one , and the fine for 
 deception besides . " 

 " do you gain much beyond your pay ? " ask Gino , divert for an instant . 

 " I do not accept small sum now . it be not worth the risk . but the 
 German be another matter . but listen , my Gino , for I be old than 
 you and more full of experience . the person who understand we at first 
 sight , who never irritate we , who never bore , to whom we can pour 
 forth every thought and wish , not only in speech but in silence - that be 
 what I mean by SIMPATICO . " 

 " there be such man , I know , " say Gino . " and I have hear it say of 
 child . but where will you find such a woman ? " 

 " that be true . here you be wise than i. sono poco SIMPATICHE LE DONNE . 
 and the time we waste over they be much . " he sigh dolefully , as if he 
 find the nobility of his sex a burden . 

 " one I have see who may be so . she speak very little , but she be a 
 young lady - different to most . she , too , be English , the companion of 
 my wife here . but Fra Filippo , the brother - in - law , take she back with 
 he . I see they start . he be very angry . " 

 then he speak of his exciting and secret marriage , and they make fun of 
 the unfortunate Philip , who have travel over Europe to stop it . 

 " I regret though , " say Gino , when they have finish laugh , " that I 
 topple he on to the bed . a great tall man ! and when I be really amused 
 I be often impolite . " 

 " you will never see he again , " say Spiridione , who carry plenty of 
 philosophy about he . " and by now the scene will have pass from his 
 mind . " 

 " it sometimes happen that such thing be recollect long . I shall 
 never see he again , of course ; but it be no benefit to I that he 
 should wish I ill . and even if he have forget , I be still sorry that 
 I topple he on to the bed . " 

 so their talk continue , at one moment full of childishness and 
 tender wisdom , the next moment scandalously gross . the shadow of the 
 terra - cotta pillar lengthen , and tourist , fly through the Palazzo 
 Pubblico opposite , could observe how the Italians waste time . 

 the sight of tourist remind Gino of something he might say . " I 
 want to consult you since you be so kind as to take an interest in my 
 affair . my wife wish to take solitary walk . " 

 Spiridione be shock . 

 " but I have forbid she . " 

 " naturally . " 

 " she do not yet understand . she ask I to accompany she 
 sometimes - to walk without object ! you know , she would like I to be 
 with she all day . " 

 " I see . I see . " he knit his brow and try to think how he could 
 help his friend . " she need employment . be she a Catholic ? " 

 " no . " 

 " that be a pity . she must be persuade . it will be a great solace to she 
 when she be alone . " 

 " I be a Catholic , but of course I never go to church . " 

 " of course not . still , you might take she at first . that be what my 
 brother have do with his wife at Bologna and he have join the free 
 Thinkers . he take she once or twice himself , and now she have acquire 
 the habit and continue to go without he . " 

 " most excellent advice , and I thank you for it . but she wish to give 
 tea - party - man and woman together whom she have never see . " 

 " oh , the English ! they be always think of tea . they carry it by the 
 kilogramme in their trunk , and they be so clumsy that they always pack 
 it at the top . but it be absurd ! " 

 " what be I to do about it ? " 

 " do nothing . or ask I ! " 

 " come ! " cry Gino , spring up . " she will be quite pleased . " 

 the dash young fellow coloured crimson . " of course I be only 
 joke . " 

 " I know . but she want I to take my friend . come now ! waiter ! " 

 " if I do come , " cry the other , " and take tea with you , this bill must 
 be my affair . " 

 " certainly not ; you be in my country ! " 

 a long argument ensue , in which the waiter take part , suggest 
 various solution . at last Gino triumph . the bill come to 
 eightpence - halfpenny , and a halfpenny for the waiter bring it up 
 to ninepence . then there be a shower of gratitude on one side and of 
 deprecation on the other , and when courtesy be at their height they 
 suddenly link arm and swing down the street , tickle each other with 
 lemonade straw as they go . 

 Lilia be delighted to see they , and become more animate than Gino have 
 know she for a long time . the tea taste of chop hay , and they ask 
 to be allow to drink it out of a wine - glass , and refuse milk ; but , as 
 she repeatedly observe , this be something like . Spiridione 's manner 
 be very agreeable . he kiss her hand on introduction , and as his 
 profession have teach he a little English , conversation do not flag . 

 " do you like music ? " she ask . 

 " passionately , " he reply . " I have not study scientific music , but 
 the music of the heart , yes . " 

 so she play on the hum piano very badly , and he sing , not so 
 badly . Gino get out a guitar and sing too , sit out on the loggia . it 
 be a most agreeable visit . 

 Gino say he would just walk his friend back to his lodging . as they 
 go he say , without the least trace of malice or satire in his voice , 
 " I think you be quite right . I shall not bring people to the house any 
 more . I do not see why an english wife should be treat differently . 
 this be Italy . " 

 " you be very wise , " exclaim the other ; " very wise indeed . the more 
 precious a possession the more carefully it should be guard . " 

 they have reach the lodging , but go on as far as the Caffe Garibaldi , 
 where they spend a long and most delightful evening . 



 chapter 4 

 the advance of regret can be so gradual that it be impossible to say 
 " yesterday I be happy , today I be not . " at no one moment do Lilia 
 realize that her marriage be a failure ; yet during the summer and 
 autumn she become as unhappy as it be possible for her nature to be . 
 she have no unkind treatment , and few unkind word , from her husband . 
 he simply leave she alone . in the morning he go out to do " business , " 
 which , as far as she could discover , mean sit in the Farmacia . he 
 usually return to lunch , after which he retire to another room and 
 sleep . in the evening he grow vigorous again , and take the air on 
 the rampart , often have his dinner out , and seldom return till 
 midnight or later . there be , of course , the time when he be away 
 altogether - at Empoli , Siena , Florence , Bologna - for he delight in 
 travel , and seem to pick up friend all over the country . Lilia often 
 hear what a favorite he be . 

 she begin to see that she must assert herself , but she could not see 
 how . her self - confidence , which have overthrow Philip , have gradually 
 ooze away . if she leave the strange house there be the strange little 
 town . if she be to disobey her husband and walk in the country , that 
 would be strange still - vast slope of olive and vineyard , with 
 chalk - white farm , and in the distance other slope , with more olive 
 and more farm , and more little town outline against the cloudless 
 sky . " I do not   call this country , " she would say . " why , it be not as wild 
 as Sawston Park ! " and , indeed , there be scarcely a touch of wildness 
 in it - some of those slope have be under cultivation for two thousand 
 year . but it be terrible and mysterious all the same , and its 
 continue presence make Lilia so uncomfortable that she forget her 
 nature and begin to reflect . 

 she reflect chiefly about her marriage . the ceremony have be hasty 
 and expensive , and the rite , whatever they be , be not those of the 
 Church of England . Lilia have no religion in she ; but for hour at a 
 time she would be seize with a vulgar fear that she be not " marry 
 properly , " and that her social position in the next world might be as 
 obscure as it be in this . it might be safe to do the thing thoroughly , 
 and one day she take the advice of Spiridione and join the roman 
 Catholic Church , or as she call it , " Santa Deodata 's . " Gino approve ; 
 he , too , think it safe , and it be fun confessing , though the priest 
 be a stupid old man , and the whole thing be a good slap in the face 
 for the people at home . 

 the people at home take the slap very soberly ; indeed , there be few 
 leave for she to give it to . the Herritons be out of the question ; 
 they would not even let she write to irma , though Irma be occasionally 
 allow to write to she . Mrs. Theobald be rapidly subside into 
 dotage , and , as far as she could be definite about anything , have 
 definitely side with the Herritons . and Miss Abbott do likewise . night 
 after night do Lilia curse this false friend , who have agree with she 
 that the marriage would " do , " and that the Herritons would come round to 
 it , and then , at the first hint of opposition , have flee back to England 
 shrieking and distraught . Miss Abbott head the long list of those who 
 should never be write to , and who should never be forgive . almost 
 the only person who be not on that list be Mr. Kingcroft , who have 
 unexpectedly send an affectionate and inquire letter . he be quite 
 sure never to cross the Channel , and Lilia draw freely on her fancy in 
 the reply . 

 at first she have see a few english people , for Monteriano be not the 
 end of the earth . one or two inquisitive lady , who have hear at home 
 of her quarrel with the Herritons , come to call . she be very sprightly , 
 and they think she quite unconventional , and Gino a charming boy , so 
 all that be to the good . but by May the season , such as it be , have 
 finish , and there would be no one till next spring . as Mrs. Herriton 
 have often observe , Lilia have no resource . she do not like music , or 
 reading , or work . her one qualification for life be rather blowsy 
 high spirit , which turn querulous or boisterous accord to 
 circumstance . she be not obedient , but she be cowardly , and in the 
 most gentle way , which Mrs. Herriton might have envy , Gino make she do 
 what he want . at first it have be rather fun to let he get the upper 
 hand . but it be gall to discover that he could not do otherwise . he 
 have a good strong will when he choose to use it , and would not have have 
 the least scruple in use bolt and lock to put it into effect . there 
 be plenty of brutality deep down in he , and one day Lilia nearly 
 touch it . 

 it be the old question of go out alone . 

 " I always do it in England . " 

 " this be Italy . " 

 " yes , but I be old than you , and I will settle . " 

 " I be your husband , " he say , smile . they have finish their mid - day 
 meal , and he want to go and sleep . nothing would rouse he up , until 
 at last Lilia , get more and more angry , say , " and I have   get the 
 money . " 

 he look horrified . 

 now be the moment to assert herself . she make the statement again . he 
 get up from his chair . 

 " and you would well mend your manner , " she continue , " for you would find it 
 awkward if I stop draw cheque . " 

 she be no reader of character , but she quickly become alarmed . as she 
 say to Perfetta afterwards , " none of his clothe seem to fit - too 
 big in one place , too small in another . " his figure rather than his face 
 alter , the shoulder fall forward till his coat wrinkle across the 
 back and pull away from his wrist . he seem all arm . he edge round 
 the table to where she be sit , and she spring away and hold the 
 chair between they , too frightened to speak or to move . he look at she 
 with round , expressionless eye , and slowly stretch out his left hand . 

 Perfetta be hear come up from the kitchen . it seem to wake he up , 
 and he turn away and go to his room without a word . 

 " what have happen ? " cry Lilia , nearly faint . " he be ill - ill . " 

 Perfetta look suspicious when she hear the account . " what do you say 
 to he ? " she cross herself . 

 " hardly anything , " say Lilia and cross herself also . thus do the two 
 woman pay homage to their outraged male . 

 it be clear to Lilia at last that Gino have marry she for money . but 
 he have frighten she too much to leave any place for contempt . his 
 return be terrifying , for he be frighten too , implore her pardon , 
 lie at her foot , embrace she , murmur " it be not I , " strive to 
 define thing which he do not understand . he stop in the house 
 for three day , positively ill with physical collapse . but for all his 
 suffering he have tame she , and she never threaten to cut off supply 
 again . 

 perhaps he keep she even close than convention demand . but he be 
 very young , and he could not bear it to be say of he that he do 
 not know how to treat a lady - or to manage a wife . and his own social 
 position be uncertain . even in England a dentist be a troublesome 
 creature , whom careful people find difficult to class . he hover between 
 the profession and the trade ; he may be only a little low than the 
 doctor , or he may be down among the chemist , or even beneath they . the 
 son of the italian dentist feel this too . for himself nothing matter ; 
 he make friend with the people he like , for he be that glorious 
 invariable creature , a man . but his wife should visit nowhere rather 
 than visit wrongly : seclusion be both decent and safe . the social 
 ideal of North and South have have their brief contention , and this time 
 the South have win . 

 it would have be well if he have be as strict over his own behaviour 
 as he be over her . but the incongruity never occur to he for 
 a moment . his morality be that of the average Latin , and as he be 
 suddenly place in the position of a gentleman , he do not see why he 
 should not behave as such . of course , have Lilia be different - have 
 she assert herself and get a grip on his character - he might 
 possibly - though not probably - have be make a well husband as well 
 as a well man , and at all event he could have adopt the attitude of 
 the Englishman , whose standard be high even when his practice be the 
 same . but have Lilia be different she might not have marry he . 

 the discovery of his infidelity - which she make by accident - destroy 
 such remnant of self - satisfaction as her life might yet possess . she 
 break down utterly and sob and cry in Perfetta 's arm . Perfetta be 
 kind and even sympathetic , but caution she on no account to speak to 
 Gino , who would be furious if he be suspect . and Lilia agree , partly 
 because she be afraid of he , partly because it be , after all , the 
 good and most dignified thing to do . she have give up everything for 
 he - her daughter , her relative , her friend , all the little comfort 
 and luxury of a civilized life - and even if she have the courage to 
 break away , there be no one who would receive she now . the Herritons 
 have be almost malignant in their effort against she , and all her 
 friend have one by one fall off . so it be well to live on humbly , 
 try not to feel , endeavour by a cheerful demeanour to put thing 
 right . " perhaps , " she think , " if I have a child he will be different . 
 I know he want a son . " 

 Lilia have achieve pathos despite herself , for there be some situation 
 in which vulgarity count no long . not Cordelia nor Imogen more 
 deserve our tear . 

 she herself cry frequently , make herself look plain and old , which 
 distress her husband . he be particularly kind to she when he hardly 
 ever see she , and she accept his kindness without resentment , even 
 with gratitude , so docile have she become . she do not hate he , even as 
 she have never love he ; with she it be only when she be excited that 
 the semblance of either passion arise . People say she be headstrong , 
 but really her weak brain leave she cold . 

 suffering , however , be more independent of temperament , and the wise 
 of woman could hardly have suffer more . 

 as for Gino , he be quite as boyish as ever , and carry his iniquity 
 like a feather . a favourite speech of his be , " ah , one ought to marry ! 
 Spiridione be wrong ; I must persuade he . not till marriage do one 
 realize the pleasure and the possibility of life . " so say , he 
 would take down his feel hat , strike it in the right place as infallibly 
 as a german strike his in the wrong place , and leave she . 

 one evening , when he have go out thus , Lilia could stand it no long . 
 it be September . Sawston would be just fill up after the summer 
 holiday . People would be run in and out of each other 's house 
 all along the road . there be bicycle gymkhana , and on the 30th Mrs. 
 Herriton would be hold the annual bazaar in her garden for the C.M.S. 
 it seem impossible that such a free , happy life could exist . she 
 walk out on to the loggia . moonlight and star in a soft purple sky . 
 the wall of Monteriano should be glorious on such a night as this . but 
 the house face away from they . 

 Perfetta be bang in the kitchen , and the stair down lead past the 
 kitchen door . but the stair up to the attic - the stair no one ever 
 use - open out of the living - room , and by unlock the door at the 
 top one might slip out to the square terrace above the house , and thus 
 for ten minute walk in freedom and peace . 

 the key be in the pocket of Gino 's good suit - the English check - which 
 he never wear . the stair creak and the key - hole scream ; but 
 Perfetta be grow deaf . the wall be beautiful , but as they face 
 west they be in shadow . to see the light upon they she must walk round 
 the town a little , till they be catch by the beam of the rise 
 moon . she look anxiously at the house , and start . 

 it be easy walking , for a little path run all outside the rampart . 
 the few people she meet wish she a civil good - night , take she , in her 
 hatless condition , for a peasant . the wall trend round towards the 
 moon ; and presently she come into its light , and see all the rough 
 tower turn into pillar of silver and black , and the rampart 
 into cliff of pearl . she have no great sense of beauty , but she be 
 sentimental , and she begin to cry ; for here , where a great cypress 
 interrupt the monotony of the girdle of olive , she have sit with Gino 
 one afternoon in March , her head upon his shoulder , while Caroline be 
 look at the view and sketching . round the corner be the Siena gate , 
 from which the road to England start , and she could hear the rumble of 
 the diligence which be go down to catch the night train to Empoli . 
 the next moment it be upon she , for the highroad come towards her a 
 little before it begin its long zigzag down the hill . 

 the driver slacken , and call to she to get in . he do not know who 
 she be . he hop she might be come to the station . 

 " Non vengo ! " she cry . 

 he wish her good - night , and turn his horse down the corner . as the 
 diligence come round she see that it be empty . 

 " Vengo ... " 

 her voice be tremulous , and do not carry . the horse swing off . 

 " Vengo ! Vengo ! " 

 he have begin to sing , and hear nothing . she run down the road scream 
 to he to stop - that she be come ; while the distance grow great 
 and the noise of the diligence increase . the man 's back be black and 
 square against the moon , and if he would but turn for an instant she 
 would be save . she try to cut off the corner of the zigzag , stumble 
 over the great clod of earth , large and hard as rock , which lay 
 between the eternal olive . she be too late ; for , just before she 
 regain the road , the thing sweep past she , thunderous , plough up 
 choke cloud of moonlit dust . 

 she do not call any more , for she feel very ill , and faint ; and when 
 she revive she be lie in the road , with dust in her eye , and dust 
 in her mouth , and dust down her ear . there be something very terrible 
 in dust at night - time . 

 " what shall I do ? " she moan . " he will be so angry . " 

 and without further effort she slowly climb back to captivity , shake 
 her garment as she go . 

 Ill luck pursue she to the end . it be one of the night when Gino 
 happen to come in . he be in the kitchen , swear and smash 
 plate , while Perfetta , her apron over her head , be weep violently . 
 at the sight of Lilia he turn upon she and pour forth a flood of 
 miscellaneous abuse . he be far more angry but much less alarming than 
 he have be that day when he edge after her round the table . and Lilia 
 gain more courage from her bad conscience than she ever have from her 
 good one , for as he speak she be seize with indignation and fear he 
 no long , and see he for a cruel , worthless , hypocritical , dissolute 
 upstart , and speak in return . 

 Perfetta scream for she tell he everything - all she know and all 
 she think . he stand with open mouth , all the anger go out of 
 he , feel ashamed , and an utter fool . he be fairly and rightfully 
 cornered . when have a husband so give himself away before ? she finish ; 
 and he be dumb , for she have speak truly . then , alas ! the absurdity of 
 his own position grow upon he , and he laugh - as he would have laugh 
 at the same situation on the stage . 

 " you laugh ? " stammer Lilia . 

 " ah ! " he cry , " who could help it ? I , who think you know and see 
 nothing - I be trick - I be conquer . I give in . let we talk of it no 
 more . " 

 he touch she on the shoulder like a good comrade , half amuse and half 
 penitent , and then , murmur and smile to himself , run quietly out of 
 the room . 

 Perfetta burst into congratulation . " what courage you have ! " she cry ; 
 " and what good fortune ! he be angry no long ! he have forgive you ! " 

 neither Perfetta , nor Gino , nor Lilia herself know the true reason of 
 all the misery that follow . to the end he think that kindness and a 
 little attention would be enough to set thing straight . his wife be 
 a very ordinary woman , and why should her idea differ from his own ? 
 no one realize that more than personality be engage ; that the 
 struggle be national ; that generation of ancestor , good , bad , or 
 indifferent , forbad the Latin man to be chivalrous to the northern 
 woman , the northern woman to forgive the latin man . all this might have 
 be foresee : Mrs. Herriton foresee it from the first . 

 meanwhile Lilia pride herself on her high personal standard , and Gino 
 simply wonder why she do not come round . he hat discomfort and 
 yearn for sympathy , but shrank from mention his difficulty in the 
 town in case they be put down to his own incompetence . spiridione be 
 tell , and reply in a philosophical but not very helpful letter . his 
 other great friend , whom he trust more , be still serve in Eritrea 
 or some other desolate outpost . and , besides , what be the good of 
 letter ? friend can not travel through the post . 

 Lilia , so similar to her husband in many way , yearn for comfort and 
 sympathy too . the night he laugh at she she wildly take up paper and 
 pen and write page after page , analyse his character , enumerate his 
 iniquity , report whole conversation , trace all the cause and 
 the growth of her misery . she be beside herself with passion , 
 and though she could hardly think or see , she suddenly attain to 
 magnificence and pathos which a practised stylist might have envy . it 
 be write like a diary , and not till its conclusion do she realize 
 for whom it be mean . 

 " Irma , darling Irma , this letter be for you . I almost forget I have a 
 daughter . it will make you unhappy , but I want you to know everything , 
 and you can not learn thing too soon . God bless you , my dearest , and 
 save you . God bless your miserable mother . " 

 fortunately Mrs. Herriton be in when the letter arrive . she seize 
 it and open it in her bedroom . another moment , and Irma 's placid 
 childhood would have be destroy for ever . 

 Lilia receive a brief note from Harriet , again forbid direct 
 communication between mother and daughter , and conclude with formal 
 condolence . it nearly drive her mad . 

 " gently ! gently ! " say her husband . they be sit together on the 
 loggia when the letter arrive . he often sit with she now , watch she 
 for hour , puzzle and anxious , but not contrite . 

 " it be nothing . " she go in and tear it up , and then begin to write - a 
 very short letter , whose gist be " come and save I . " 

 it be not good to see your wife cry when she write - especially if 
 you be conscious that , on the whole , your treatment of she have be 
 reasonable and kind . it be not good , when you accidentally look over her 
 shoulder , to see that she be write to a man . nor should she shake she 
 fist at you when she leave the room , under the impression that you be 
 engage in light a cigar and can not see she . 

 Lilia go to the post herself . but in Italy so many thing can be 
 arrange . the postman be a friend of Gino 's , and Mr. Kingcroft never 
 get his letter . 

 so she give up hope , become ill , and all through the autumn lie in bed . 
 Gino be distract . she know why ; he want a son . he could talk and 
 think of nothing else . his one desire be to become the father of a man 
 like himself , and it hold he with a grip he only partially understand , 
 for it be the first great desire , the first great passion of his life . 
 fall in love be a mere physical triviality , like warm sun or cool 
 water , beside this divine hope of immortality : " I continue . " he give 
 candle to Santa Deodata , for he be always religious at a crisis , and 
 sometimes he go to she himself and pray the crude uncouth demand of 
 the simple . impetuously he summon all his relative back to bear he 
 company in his time of need , and Lilia see strange face flit past 
 she in the darken room . 

 " my love ! " he would say , " my dear Lilia ! be calm . I have never love 
 any one but you . " 

 she , know everything , would only smile gently , too break by 
 suffering to make sarcastic repartee . 

 before the child be bear he give she a kiss , and say , " I have pray 
 all night for a boy . " 

 some strangely tender impulse move she , and she say faintly , " you be 
 a boy yourself , Gino . " 

 he answer , " then we shall be brother . " 

 he lie outside the room with his head against the door like a dog . when 
 they come to tell he the glad news they find he half unconscious , and 
 his face be wet with tear . 

 as for Lilia , some one say to she , " it be a beautiful boy ! " but she have 
 die in give birth to he . 



 chapter 5 

 at the time of Lilia 's death Philip Herriton be just twenty - four year 
 of age - indeed the news reach Sawston on his birthday . he be a tall , 
 weakly - build young man , whose clothe have to be judiciously pad 
 on the shoulder in order to make he pass muster . his face be plain 
 rather than not , and there be a curious mixture in it of good and bad . 
 he have a fine forehead and a good large nose , and both observation 
 and sympathy be in his eye . but below the nose and eye all be 
 confusion , and those people who believe that destiny reside in the 
 mouth and chin shake their head when they look at he . 

 Philip himself , as a boy , have be keenly conscious of these defect . 
 sometimes when he have be bully or hustle about at school he would 
 retire to his cubicle and examine his feature in a look - glass , and 
 he would sigh and say , " it be a weak face . I shall never carve a place 
 for myself in the world . " but as year go on he become either less 
 self - conscious or more self - satisfied . the world , he find , make a 
 niche for he as it do for every one . decision of character might come 
 later - or he might have it without know . at all event he have get 
 a sense of beauty and a sense of humour , two most desirable gift . the 
 sense of beauty develop first . it cause he at the age of twenty to 
 wear parti - colour tie and a squashy hat , to be late for dinner on 
 account of the sunset , and to catch art from Burne - Jones to Praxiteles . 
 at twenty - two he go to Italy with some cousin , and there he absorb 
 into one aesthetic whole olive - tree , blue sky , fresco , country inn , 
 saint , peasant , mosaic , statue , beggar . he come back with the air 
 of a prophet who would either remodel Sawston or reject it . all the 
 energy and enthusiasm of a rather friendless life have pass into the 
 championship of beauty . 

 in a short time it be over . nothing have happen either in Sawston or 
 within himself . he have shock half - a - dozen people , squabble with his 
 sister , and bicker with his mother . he conclude that nothing could 
 happen , not know that human love and love of truth sometimes conquer 
 where love of beauty fail . 

 a little disenchanted , a little tired , but aesthetically intact , he 
 resume his placid life , rely more and more on his second gift , the 
 gift of humour . if he could not reform the world , he could at all 
 event laugh at it , thus attain at least an intellectual superiority . 
 Laughter , he read and believe , be a sign of good moral health , and he 
 laugh on contentedly , till Lilia 's marriage topple contentment down 
 for ever . Italy , the land of beauty , be ruin for he . she have no 
 power to change man and thing who dwelt in she . she , too , could produce 
 avarice , brutality , stupidity - and , what be bad , vulgarity . it be on 
 her soil and through her influence that a silly woman have marry a cad . 
 he hat Gino , the betrayer of his life 's ideal , and now that the sordid 
 tragedy have come , it fill he with pang , not of sympathy , but of 
 final disillusion . 

 the disillusion be convenient for Mrs. Herriton , who see a try 
 little period ahead of she , and be glad to have her family united . 

 " be we to go into mourning , do you think ? " she always ask she 
 child 's advice where possible . 

 Harriet think that they should . she have be detestable to Lilia 
 while she live , but she always feel that the dead deserve attention 
 and sympathy . " after all she have suffer . that letter keep I awake for 
 night . the whole thing be like one of those horrible modern play where 
 no one be in ' the right . ' but if we have mourning , it will mean tell 
 Irma . " 

 " of course we must tell Irma ! " say Philip . 

 " of course , " say his mother . " but I think we can still not tell she 
 about Lilia 's marriage . " 

 " I do not   think that . and she must have suspect something by now . " 

 " so one would have suppose . but she never care for her mother , and 
 little girl of nine do not   reason clearly . she look on it as a long 
 visit . and it be important , most important , that she should not receive 
 a shock . all a child 's life depend on the ideal it have of its parent . 
 destroy that and everything go - moral , behaviour , everything . 
 Absolute trust in some one else be the essence of education . that be why 
 I have be so careful about talk of poor Lilia before she . " 

 " but you forget this wretched baby . water and Adamson write that there 
 be a baby . " 

 " Mrs. Theobald must be tell . but she do not   count . she be break 
 up very quickly . she do not   even see Mr. Kingcroft now . he , thank 
 goodness , I hear , have at last console himself with someone else . " 

 " the child must know some time , " persist Philip , who feel a little 
 displeased , though he could not tell with what . 

 " the later the well . every moment she be develop . " 

 " I must say it seem rather hard luck , do not   it ? " 

 " on irma ? why ? " 

 " on we , perhaps . we have moral and behaviour also , and I do not   think 
 this continual secrecy improve they . " 

 " there be no need to twist the thing round to that , " say Harriet , rather 
 disturb . 

 " of course there be not , " say her mother . " let us keep to the main issue . 
 this baby be quite beside the point . Mrs. Theobald will do nothing , and 
 it be no concern of ours . " 

 " it will make a difference in the money , surely , " say he . 

 " no , dear ; very little . Poor Charles provide for every kind of 
 contingency in his will . the money will come to you and Harriet , as 
 Irma 's guardian . " 

 " good . do the Italian get anything ? " 

 " he will get all her . but you know what that be . " 

 " good . so those be our tactic - to tell no one about the baby , not even 
 Miss Abbott . " 

 " most certainly this be the proper course , " say Mrs. Herriton , 
 prefer " course " to " tactic " for Harriet 's sake . " and why ever 
 should we tell Caroline ? " 

 " she be so mixed up in the affair . " 

 " poor silly creature . the less she hear about it the well she will be 
 pleased . I have come to be very sorry for Caroline . she , if any one , 
 have suffer and be penitent . she burst into tear when I tell she a 
 little , only a little , of that terrible letter . I never see such genuine 
 remorse . we must forgive she and forget . let the dead bury their dead . 
 we will not trouble she with they . " 

 Philip see that his mother be scarcely logical . but there be no 
 advantage in say so . " here beginneth the New Life , then . do you 
 remember , mother , that be what we say when we see Lilia off ? " 

 " yes , dear ; but now it be really a New Life , because we be all at 
 accord . then you be still infatuate with Italy . it may be full 
 of beautiful picture and church , but we can not judge a country by 
 anything but its man . " 

 " that be quite true , " he say sadly . and as the tactic be now 
 settle , he go out and take an aimless and solitary walk . 

 by the time he come back two important thing have happen . Irma have 
 be tell of her mother 's death , and Miss Abbott , who have call for a 
 subscription , have be tell also . 

 Irma have weep loudly , have ask a few sensible question and a good many 
 silly one , and have be content with evasive answer . fortunately the 
 school prize - giving be at hand , and that , together with the prospect of 
 new black clothe , keep she from meditate on the fact that Lilia , who 
 have be absent so long , would now be absent for ever . 

 " as for Caroline , " say Mrs. Herriton , " I be almost frightened . she 
 break down utterly . she cry even when she leave the house . I comfort 
 she as well I could , and I kiss she . it be something that the breach 
 between she and ourselves be now entirely heal . " 

 " do she ask no question - as to the nature of Lilia 's death , I mean ? " 

 " she do . but she have a mind of extraordinary delicacy . she see that I 
 be reticent , and she do not press I . you see , Philip , I can say to 
 you what I could not say before Harriet . her idea be so crude . really 
 we do not want it know in Sawston that there be a baby . all peace and 
 comfort would be lose if people come inquire after it . " 

 his mother know how to manage he . he agree enthusiastically . and a few 
 day later , when he chance to travel up to London with Miss Abbott , 
 he have all the time the pleasant thrill of one who be well inform . 
 their last journey together have be from Monteriano back across 
 Europe . it have be a ghastly journey , and Philip , from the force of 
 association , rather expect something ghastly now . 

 he be surprised . Miss Abbott , between Sawston and Charing Cross , 
 reveal quality which he have never guess she to possess . without 
 be exactly original , she do show a commendable intelligence , and 
 though at time she be gauche and even uncourtly , he feel that here be 
 a person whom it might be well to cultivate . 

 at first she annoy he . they be talk , of course , about Lilia , 
 when she break the thread of vague commiseration and say abruptly , " it 
 be all so strange as well as so tragic . and what I do be as strange as 
 anything . " 

 it be the first reference she have ever make to her contemptible 
 behaviour . " never mind , " he say . " it be all over now . let the dead bury 
 their dead . it be fall out of our life . " 

 " but that be why I can talk about it and tell you everything I have 
 always want to . you think I stupid and sentimental and wicked and 
 mad , but you never really know how much I be to blame . " 

 " indeed I never think about it now , " say Philip gently . he know that 
 her nature be in the main generous and upright : it be unnecessary for 
 she to reveal her thought . 

 " the first evening we get to Monteriano , " she persist , " Lilia go out 
 for a walk alone , see that italian in a picturesque position on a wall , 
 and fall in love . he be shabbily dress , and she do not even know 
 he be the son of a dentist . I must tell you I be use to this sort 
 of thing . once or twice before I have have to send people about their 
 business . " 

 " yes ; we count on you , " say Philip , with sudden sharpness . after all , 
 if she would reveal her thought , she must take the consequence . 

 " I know you do , " she retort with equal sharpness . " Lilia see he 
 several time again , and I know I ought to interfere . I call she to 
 my bedroom one night . she be very frightened , for she know what it be 
 about and how severe I could be . ' do you love this man ? ' I ask . ' yes 
 or no ? ' she say ' yes . ' and I say , ' why do not   you marry he if you 
 think you will be happy ? ' " 

 " really - really , " explode Philip , as exasperate as if the thing have 
 happen yesterday . " you know Lilia all your life . apart from everything 
 else - as if she could choose what could make she happy ! " 

 " have you ever let she choose ? " she flash out . " I be afraid that be 
 rude , " she add , try to calm herself . 

 " let we rather say unhappily express , " say Philip , who always adopt 
 a dry satirical manner when he be puzzle . 

 " I want to finish . next morning I find Signor Carella and say the same 
 to he . he - well , he be willing . that be all . " 

 " and the telegram ? " he look scornfully out of the window . 

 Hitherto her voice have be hard , possibly in self - accusation , possibly 
 in defiance . now it become unmistakably sad . " ah , the telegram ! that be 
 wrong . Lilia there be more cowardly than I be . we should have tell the 
 truth . it lose I my nerve , at all event . I come to the station mean 
 to tell you everything then . but we have start with a lie , and I get 
 frightened . and at the end , when you leave , I get frighten again and 
 come with you . " 

 " do you really mean to stop ? " 

 " for a time , at all event . " 

 " would that have suit a newly marry pair ? " 

 " it would have suit they . Lilia need I . and as for he - I can not 
 help feel I might have get influence over he . " 

 " I be ignorant of these matter , " say Philip ; " but I should have 
 think that would have increase the difficulty of the situation . " 

 the crisp remark be waste on she . she look hopelessly at the raw 
 over - build country , and say , " well , I have explain . " 

 " but pardon I , Miss Abbott ; of most of your conduct you have give a 
 description rather than an explanation . " 

 he have fairly catch she , and expect that she would gape and collapse . 
 to his surprise she answer with some spirit , " an explanation may bore 
 you , Mr. Herriton : it drag in other topic . " 

 " oh , never mind . " 

 " I hat Sawston , you see . " 

 he be delighted . " so did and do I. that be splendid . go on . " 

 " I hat the idleness , the stupidity , the respectability , the petty 
 unselfishness . " 

 " petty selfishness , " he correct . Sawston psychology have long be his 
 specialty . 

 " petty unselfishness , " she repeat . " I have get an idea that every one 
 here spend their life in make little sacrifice for object they 
 do not   care for , to please people they do not   love ; that they never 
 learn to be sincere - and , what be as bad , never learn how to enjoy 
 themselves . that be what I think - what I think at Monteriano . " 

 " why , Miss Abbott , " he cry , " you should have tell I this before ! 
 think it still ! I agree with lot of it . magnificent ! " 

 " now Lilia , " she go on , " though there be thing about she I do not 
 like , have somehow keep the power of enjoy herself with sincerity . and 
 Gino , I think , be splendid , and young , and strong not only in body , 
 and sincere as the day . if they want to marry , why should not   they do 
 so ? why should not   she break with the deaden life where she have get 
 into a groove , and would go on in it , get more and more - bad 
 than unhappy - apathetic till she die ? of course I be wrong . she only 
 change one groove for another - a bad groove . and as for he - well , 
 you know more about he than I do . I can never trust myself to judge 
 character again . but I still feel he can not have be quite bad when 
 we first meet he . Lilia - that I should dare to say it ! - must have be 
 cowardly . he be only a boy - just go to turn into something fine , 
 I think - and she must have mismanage he . so that be the one time I 
 have go against what be proper , and there be the result . you have an 
 explanation now . " 

 " and much of it have be most interesting , though I do not   understand 
 everything . do you never think of the disparity of their social 
 position ? " 

 " we be mad - drunk with rebellion . we have no common - sense . as soon as 
 you come , you see and foresaw everything . " 

 " oh , I do not   think that . " he be vaguely displeased at be credit 
 with common - sense . for a moment Miss Abbott have seem to he more 
 unconventional than himself . 

 " I hope you see , " she conclude , " why I have trouble you with this long 
 story . woman - I hear you say the other day - be never at ease till they 
 tell their fault out loud . Lilia be dead and her husband go to 
 the bad - all through I . you see , Mr. Herriton , it make I specially 
 unhappy ; it be the only time I have   ever go into what my father call 
 ' real life ' - and look what I have   make of it ! all that winter I seem to 
 be wake up to beauty and splendour and I do not   know what ; and when the 
 spring come , I want to fight against the thing I hat - mediocrity 
 and dulness and spitefulness and society . I actually hat society for 
 a day or two at Monteriano . I do not   see that all these thing be 
 invincible , and that if we go against they they will break we to piece . 
 thank you for listen to so much nonsense . " 

 " oh , I quite sympathize with what you say , " say Philip encouragingly ; 
 " it be not   nonsense , and a year or two ago I should have be say it 
 too . but I feel differently now , and I hope that you also will change . 
 Society be invincible - to a certain degree . but your real life be your 
 own , and nothing can touch it . there be no power on earth that can 
 prevent your criticizing and despise mediocrity - nothing that can stop 
 you retreat into splendour and beauty - into the thought and belief 
 that make the real life - the real you . " 

 " I have never have that experience yet . surely I and my life must be 
 where I live . " 

 evidently she have the usual feminine incapacity for grasp philosophy . 
 but she have develop quite a personality , and he must see more of she . 
 " there be another great consolation against invincible mediocrity , " he 
 say - " the meeting a fellow - victim . I hope that this be only the first 
 of many discussion that we shall have together . " 

 she make a suitable reply . the train reach Charing Cross , and they 
 part , - he to go to a matinee , she to buy petticoat for the corpulent 
 poor . her thought wander as she buy they : the gulf between herself 
 and Mr. Herriton , which she have always know to be great , now seem to 
 her immeasurable . 

 these event and conversation take place at Christmas - time . the 
 New Life initiate by they last some seven month . then a little 
 incident - a mere little vexatious incident - bring it to its close . 

 Irma collect picture post - card , and Mrs. Herriton or Harriet always 
 glance first at all that come , lest the child should get hold of 
 something vulgar . on this occasion the subject seem perfectly 
 inoffensive - a lot of ruin factory chimney - and Harriet be about to 
 hand it to her niece when her eye be catch by the word on the margin . 
 she give a shriek and fling the card into the grate . of course no fire 
 be alight in July , and Irma only have to run and pick it out again . 

 " how dare you ! " scream her aunt . " you wicked girl ! give it here ! " 

 unfortunately Mrs. Herriton be out of the room . irma , who be not in 
 awe of Harriet , dance round the table , read as she do so , " view of 
 the superb city of Monteriano - from your lital brother . " 

 Stupid Harriet catch she , box her ear , and tear the post - card into 
 fragment . irma howl with pain , and begin shout indignantly , " who 
 be my little brother ? why have I never hear of he before ? Grandmamma ! 
 Grandmamma ! who be my little brother ? who be my - " 

 Mrs. Herriton sweep into the room , say , " come with I , dear , and I 
 will tell you . now it be time for you to know . " 

 Irma return from the interview sobbing , though , as a matter of 
 fact , she have learn very little . but that little take hold of her 
 imagination . she have promise secrecy - she know not why . but what harm 
 in talk of the little brother to those who have hear of he already ? 

 " Aunt Harriet ! " she would say . " Uncle Phil ! Grandmamma ! what do you 
 suppose my little brother be do now ? have he begin to play ? do italian 
 baby talk soon than we , or would he be an english baby bear 
 abroad ? oh , I do long to see he , and be the first to teach he the Ten 
 Commandments and the Catechism . " 

 the last remark always make Harriet look grave . 

 " really , " exclaim Mrs. Herriton , " Irma be get too tiresome . she 
 forget poor Lilia soon enough . " 

 " a live brother be more to she than a dead mother , " say Philip 
 dreamily . " she can knit he sock . " 

 " I stop that . she be bring he in everywhere . it be most 
 vexatious . the other night she ask if she might include he in the 
 people she mention specially in her prayer . " 

 " what do you say ? " 

 " of course I allow she , " she reply coldly . " she have a right to 
 mention any one she choose . but I be annoy with she this morning , 
 and I fear that I show it . " 

 " and what happen this morning ? " 

 " she ask if she could pray for her ' new father ' - for the italian ! " 

 " do you let she ? " 

 " I get up without say anything . " 

 " you must have feel just as you do when I want to pray for the 
 devil . " 

 " he be the devil , " cry Harriet . 

 " no , Harriet ; he be too vulgar . " 

 " I will thank you not to scoff against religion ! " be Harriet 's retort . 
 " think of that poor baby . irma be right to pray for he . what an 
 entrance into life for an english child ! " 

 " my dear sister , I can reassure you . firstly , the beastly baby be 
 italian . secondly , it be promptly christen at Santa Deodata 's , and a 
 powerful combination of saint watch over - " 

 " do not , dear . and , Harriet , do not   be so serious - I mean not so serious 
 when you be with Irma . she will be bad than ever if she think we 
 have something to hide . " 

 Harriet 's conscience could be quite as tiresome as Philip 's 
 unconventionality . Mrs. Herriton soon make it easy for her daughter to 
 go for six week to the Tirol . then she and Philip begin to grapple with 
 Irma alone . 

 just as they have get thing a little quiet the beastly baby send another 
 picture post - card - a comic one , not particularly proper . Irma receive 
 it while they be out , and all the trouble begin again . 

 " I can not think , " say Mrs. Herriton , " what his motive be in send 
 they . " 

 two year before , Philip would have say that the motive be to give 
 pleasure . now he , like his mother , try to think of something sinister 
 and subtle . 

 " do you suppose that he guess the situation - how anxious we be to 
 hush the scandal up ? " 

 " that be quite possible . he know that Irma will worry we about the 
 baby . perhaps he hop that we shall adopt it to quiet she . " 

 " Hopeful indeed . " 

 " at the same time he have the chance of corrupt the child 's moral . " 
 she unlock a drawer , take out the post - card , and regard it gravely . 
 " he entreat she to send the baby one , " be her next remark . 

 " she might do it too ! " 

 " I tell she not to ; but we must watch she carefully , without , of course , 
 appear to be suspicious . " 

 Philip be get to enjoy his mother 's diplomacy . he do not think of 
 his own moral and behaviour any more . 

 " who be to watch she at school , though ? she may bubble out any moment . " 

 " we can but trust to our influence , " say Mrs. Herriton . 

 Irma do bubble out , that very day . she be proof against a single 
 post - card , not against two . a new little brother be a valuable 
 sentimental asset to a school - girl , and her school be then pass 
 through an acute phase of baby - worship . happy the girl who have she 
 quiver full of they , who kiss they when she leave home in the morning , 
 who have the right to extricate they from mail - cart in the interval , who 
 dangle they at tea ere they retire to rest ! that one might sing 
 the unwritten song of Miriam , bless above all school - girl , who be 
 allow to hide her baby brother in a squashy place , where none but 
 herself could find he ! 

 how could irma keep silent when pretentious girl speak of baby cousin 
 and baby visitor - she who have a baby brother , who write her post - card 
 through his dear papa ? she have promise not to tell about he - she know 
 not why - and she tell . and one girl tell another , and one girl tell she 
 mother , and the thing be out . 

 " yes , it be all very sad , " Mrs. Herriton keep say . " my 
 daughter - in - law make a very unhappy marriage , as I dare say you know . 
 I suppose that the child will be educate in Italy . possibly his 
 grandmother may be do something , but I have not hear of it . I do not 
 expect that she will have he over . she disapprove of the father . it be 
 altogether a painful business for she . " 

 she be careful only to scold Irma for disobedience - that eighth deadly 
 sin , so convenient to parent and guardian . Harriet would have plunge 
 into needless explanation and abuse . the child be ashamed , and talk 
 about the baby less . the end of the school year be at hand , and she 
 hop to get another prize . but she also have put her hand to the wheel . 

 it be several day before they see Miss Abbott . Mrs. Herriton have not 
 come across her much since the kiss of reconciliation , nor Philip since 
 the journey to London . she have , indeed , be rather a disappointment to 
 he . her creditable display of originality have never be repeat : 
 he fear she be slip back . now she come about the Cottage 
 Hospital - her life be devoted to dull act of charity - and though she 
 get money out of he and out of his mother , she still sit tight in her 
 chair , look graver and more wooden than ever . 

 " I dare say you have hear , " say Mrs. Herriton , well know what the 
 matter be . 

 " yes , I have . I come to ask you ; have any step be take ? " 

 Philip be astonish . the question be impertinent in the extreme . he 
 have a regard for Miss Abbott , and regret that she have be guilty of 
 it . 

 " about the baby ? " ask Mrs. Herriton pleasantly . 

 " yes . " 

 " as far as I know , no step . Mrs. Theobald may have decide on 
 something , but I have not hear of it . " 

 " I be mean , have you decide on anything ? " 

 " the child be no relation of our , " say Philip . " it be therefore 
 scarcely for we to interfere . " 

 his mother glance at he nervously . " Poor Lilia be almost a daughter 
 to I once . I know what Miss Abbott mean . but now thing have alter . 
 any initiative would naturally come from Mrs. Theobald . " 

 " but do not Mrs. Theobald always take any initiative from you ? " ask 
 Miss Abbott . 

 Mrs. Herriton could not help colour . " I sometimes have give she 
 advice in the past . I should not presume to do so now . " 

 " then be nothing to be do for the child at all ? " 

 " it be extraordinarily good of you to take this unexpected interest , " 
 say Philip . 

 " the child come into the world through my negligence , " reply Miss 
 Abbott . " it be natural I should take an interest in it . " 

 " my dear caroline , " say Mrs. Herriton , " you must not brood over the 
 thing . let bygone be bygone . the child should worry you even less than 
 it worry we . we never even mention it . it belong to another world . " 

 Miss Abbott get up without reply and turn to go . her extreme 
 gravity make Mrs. Herriton uneasy . " of course , " she add , " if Mrs. 
 Theobald decide on any plan that seem at all practicable - I must say 
 I do not   see any such - I shall ask if I may join she in it , for Irma 's 
 sake , and share in any possible expense . " 

 " please would you let I know if she decide on anything . I should like 
 to join as well . " 

 " my dear , how you throw about your money ! we would never allow it . " 

 " and if she decide on nothing , please also let I know . let I know in 
 any case . " 

 Mrs. Herriton make a point of kiss she . 

 " be the young person mad ? " burst out Philip as soon as she have depart . 
 " never in my life have I see such colossal impertinence . she ought to 
 be well smack , and send back to Sunday - school . " 

 his mother say nothing . 

 " but do not   you see - she be practically threaten we ? you can not   put 
 she off with Mrs. Theobald ; she know as well as we do that she be a 
 nonentity . if we do not   do anything she be go to raise a scandal - that 
 we neglect our relative ,   c. , which be , of course , a lie . still she will 
 say it . oh , dear , sweet , sober Caroline Abbott have a screw loose ! we 
 know it at Monteriano . I have my suspicion last year one day in the 
 train ; and here it be again . the young person be mad . " 

 she still say nothing . 

 " shall I go round at once and give it she well ? I would really enjoy it . " 

 in a low , serious voice - such a voice as she have not use to he for 
 month - Mrs. Herriton say , " Caroline have be extremely impertinent . 
 yet there may be something in what she say after all . ought the child 
 to grow up in that place - and with that father ? " 

 Philip start and shudder . he see that his mother be not sincere . 
 her insincerity to other have amuse he , but it be dishearten when 
 use against himself . 

 " let we admit frankly , " she continue , " that after all we may have 
 responsibility . " 

 " I do not   understand you , Mother . you be turn absolutely round . what 
 be you up to ? " 

 in one moment an impenetrable barrier have be erect between they . 
 they be no long in smile confidence . Mrs. Herriton be off on 
 tactic of her own - tactic which might be beyond or beneath he . 

 his remark offend she . " up to ? I be wonder whether I ought not to 
 adopt the child . be that sufficiently plain ? " 

 " and this be the result of half - a - dozen idiocy of Miss Abbott ? " 

 " it be . I repeat , she have be extremely impertinent . none the less 
 she be show I my duty . if I can rescue poor Lilia 's baby from that 
 horrible man , who will bring it up either as Papist or infidel - who will 
 certainly bring it up to be vicious - I shall do it . " 

 " you talk like Harriet . " 

 " and why not ? " say she , flush at what she know to be an insult . 
 " say , if you choose , that I talk like Irma . that child have see the 
 thing more clearly than any of we . she long for her little brother . she 
 shall have he . I do not   care if I be impulsive . " 

 he be sure that she be not impulsive , but do not dare to say so . her 
 ability frighten he . all his life he have be her puppet . she let he 
 worship Italy , and reform Sawston - just as she have let Harriet be Low 
 Church . she have let he talk as much as he like . but when she want a 
 thing she always get it . 

 and though she be frightening he , she do not inspire he with 
 reverence . her life , he see , be without meaning . to what purpose be 
 her diplomacy , her insincerity , her continued repression of vigour ? do 
 they make any one well or happy ? do they even bring happiness to 
 herself ? harriet with her gloomy peevish creed , Lilia with her clutch 
 after pleasure , be after all more divine than this well - order , 
 active , useless machine . 

 now that his mother have wound his vanity he could criticize she thus . 
 but he could not rebel . to the end of his day he could probably go on 
 do what she want . he watch with a cold interest the duel between 
 she and Miss Abbott . Mrs. Herriton 's policy only appear gradually . it 
 be to prevent Miss Abbott interfere with the child at all cost , and 
 if possible to prevent she at a small cost . Pride be the only solid 
 element in her disposition . she could not bear to seem less charitable 
 than other . 

 " I be plan what can be do , " she would tell people , " and that kind 
 Caroline Abbott be help I . it be no business of either of we , but 
 we be get to feel that the baby must not be leave entirely to that 
 horrible man . it would be unfair to little Irma ; after all , he be her 
 half - brother . no , we have come to nothing definite . " 

 Miss Abbott be equally civil , but not to be appease by good 
 intention . the child 's welfare be a sacred duty to she , not a matter 
 of pride or even of sentiment . by it alone , she feel , could she undo a 
 little of the evil that she have permit to come into the world . to her 
 imagination Monteriano have become a magic city of vice , beneath 
 whose tower no person could grow up happy or pure . Sawston , with its 
 semi - detached house and snobby school , its book tea and bazaar , be 
 certainly petty and dull ; at time she find it even contemptible . but 
 it be not a place of sin , and at Sawston , either with the Herritons or 
 with herself , the baby should grow up . 

 as soon as it be inevitable , Mrs. Herriton write a letter for water 
 and Adamson to send to Gino - the odd letter ; Philip see a copy of 
 it afterwards . its ostensible purpose be to complain of the picture 
 postcard . right at the end , in a few nonchalant sentence , she offer 
 to adopt the child , provide that Gino would undertake never to come 
 near it , and would surrender some of Lilia 's money for its education . 

 " what do you think of it ? " she ask her son . " it would not do to let 
 he know that we be anxious for it . " 

 " certainly he will never suppose that . " 

 " but what effect will the letter have on he ? " 

 " when he get it he will do a sum . if it be less expensive in the long 
 run to part with a little money and to be clear of the baby , he will 
 part with it . if he would lose , he will adopt the tone of the love 
 father . " 

 " dear , you be shockingly cynical . " after a pause she add , " how would 
 the sum work out ? " 

 " I do not   know , I be sure . but if you want to ensure the baby be 
 post by return , you should have send a little sum to HIM . oh , I be not 
 cynical - at least I only go by what I know of he . but I be weary of 
 the whole show . Weary of Italy . Weary , weary , weary . Sawston 's a kind , 
 pitiful place , be not   it ? I will go walk in it and seek comfort . " 

 he smile as he speak , for the sake of not appear serious . when he 
 have leave she she begin to smile also . 

 it be to the Abbotts ' that he walk . Mr. Abbott offer he tea , and 
 Caroline , who be keep up her italian in the next room , come in to 
 pour it out . he tell they that his mother have write to Signor Carella , 
 and they both utter fervent wish for her success . 

 " very fine of Mrs. Herriton , very fine indeed , " say Mr. Abbott , 
 who , like every one else , know nothing of his daughter 's exasperating 
 behaviour . " I be afraid it will mean a lot of expense . she will get 
 nothing out of Italy without pay . " 

 " there be sure to be incidental expense , " say Philip cautiously . 
 then he turn to Miss Abbott and say , " do you suppose we shall have 
 difficulty with the man ? " 

 " it depend , " she reply , with equal caution . 

 " from what you see of he , should you conclude that he would make an 
 affectionate parent ? " 

 " I do not   go by what I see of he , but by what I know of he . " 

 " well , what do you conclude from that ? " 

 " that he be a thoroughly wicked man . " 

 " yet thoroughly wicked man have love their child . look at Rodrigo 
 Borgia , for example . " 

 " I have also see example of that in my district . " 

 with this remark the admirable young woman rise , and return to keep 
 up her italian . she puzzle Philip extremely . he could understand 
 enthusiasm , but she do not seem the least enthusiastic . he could 
 understand pure cussedness , but it do not seem to be that either . 
 apparently she be derive neither amusement nor profit from the 
 struggle . why , then , have she undertake it ? perhaps she be not sincere . 
 perhaps , on the whole , that be most likely . she must be profess one 
 thing and aim at another . what the other thing could be he do not 
 stop to consider . Insincerity be become his stock explanation for 
 anything unfamiliar , whether that thing be a kindly action or a high 
 ideal . 

 " she fence well , " he say to his mother afterwards . 

 " what have you to fence about ? " she say suavely . her son might know she 
 tactic , but she refuse to admit that he know . she still pretend to 
 he that the baby be the one thing she want , and have always want , 
 and that Miss Abbott be her value ally . 

 and when , next week , the reply come from Italy , she show he no face 
 of triumph . " read the letter , " she say . " we have fail . " 

 Gino write in his own language , but the solicitor have send a laborious 
 english translation , where " Preghiatissima Signora " be render 
 as " Most Praiseworthy Madam , " and every delicate compliment and 
 superlative - superlative be delicate in Italian - would have fell an 
 ox . for a moment Philip forget the matter in the manner ; this grotesque 
 memorial of the land he have love move he almost to tear . he know 
 the original of these lumber phrase ; he also have send ' sincere 
 augury " ; he also have address letter - who write at home ? - from the 
 Caffe Garibaldi . " I do not   know I be still such an ass , " he think . 
 " why can not   I realize that it be merely trick of expression ? a bounder 's 
 a bounder , whether he live in Sawston or Monteriano . " 

 " be not   it dishearten ? " say his mother . 

 he then read that Gino could not accept the generous offer . his paternal 
 heart would not permit he to abandon this symbol of his deplore 
 spouse . as for the picture post - card , it displease he greatly that 
 they have be obnoxious . he would send no more . would Mrs. Herriton , 
 with her notorious kindness , explain this to Irma , and thank she for 
 those which irma   courteous Miss !   have send to he ? 

 " the sum work out against we , " say Philip . " or perhaps he be put 
 up the price . " 

 " no , " say Mrs. Herriton decidedly . " it be not that . for some perverse 
 reason he will not part with the child . I must go and tell poor 
 Caroline . she will be equally distressed . " 

 she return from the visit in the most extraordinary condition . she 
 face be red , she pant for breath , there be dark circle round her 
 eye . 

 " the impudence ! " she shout . " the cursed impudence ! oh , I be swear . 
 I do not   care . that beastly woman - how dare she interfere - I will - Philip , 
 dear , I be sorry . it be no good . you must go . " 

 " go where ? do sit down . what be happen ? " this outburst of violence from 
 his elegant ladylike mother pain he dreadfully . he have not know that 
 it be in she . 

 " she will not   accept - will not   accept the letter as final . you must go to 
 Monteriano ! " 

 " I will not ! " he shout back . " I have   be and I have   fail . I will never see 
 the place again . I hate Italy . " 

 " if you do not   go , she will . " 

 " Abbott ? " 

 " yes . go alone ; would start this evening . I offer to write ; she 
 say it be ' too late ! ' too late ! the child , if you please - Irma 's 
 brother - to live with she , to be bring up by she and her father at our 
 very gate , to go to school like a gentleman , she pay . oh , you be a 
 man ! it do not   matter for you . you can laugh . but I know what people 
 say ; and that woman go to Italy this evening . " 

 he seem to be inspire . " then let she go ! let her mess with Italy by 
 herself . she will come to grief somehow . Italy 's too dangerous , too - " 

 " stop that nonsense , Philip . I will not be disgrace by she . I will have 
 the child . pay all we have   get for it . I will have it . " 

 " let she go to Italy ! " he cry . " let her meddle with what she do not 
 understand ! look at this letter ! the man who write it will marry she , 
 or murder she , or do for she somehow . he be a bounder , but he be not an 
 english bounder . he be mysterious and terrible . he be get a country behind 
 he that be upset people from the beginning of the world . " 

 " Harriet ! " exclaim his mother . " Harriet shall go too . Harriet , now , 
 will be invaluable ! " and before Philip have stop talk nonsense , she 
 have plan the whole thing and be look out the train . 



 chapter 6 

 Italy , Philip have always maintain , be only her true self in the height 
 of the summer , when the tourist have leave she , and her soul awake 
 under the beam of a vertical sun . he now have every opportunity of 
 see she at her good , for it be nearly the middle of August before he 
 go out to meet Harriet in the Tirol . 

 he find his sister in a dense cloud five thousand foot above the sea , 
 chill to the bone , overfed , bored , and not at all unwilling to be 
 fetch away . 

 " it upset one 's plan terribly , " she remark , as she squeeze out her 
 sponge , " but obviously it be my duty . " 

 " do mother explain it all to you ? " ask Philip . 

 " yes , indeed ! Mother have write I a really beautiful letter . she 
 describe how it be that she gradually get to feel that we must rescue 
 the poor baby from its terrible surrounding , how she have try by 
 letter , and it be no good - nothing but insincere compliment and 
 hypocrisy come back . then she say , ' there be nothing like personal 
 influence ; you and Philip will succeed where I have fail . ' she say , 
 too , that Caroline Abbott have be wonderful . " 

 Philip assent . 

 " Caroline feel it as keenly almost as we . that be because she know the 
 man . oh , he must be loathsome ! goodness I ! I have   forget to pack the 
 ammonia ! ... it have be a terrible lesson for Caroline , but I fancy it 
 be her turning - point . I can not   help like to think that out of all this 
 evil good will come . " 

 Philip see no prospect of good , nor of beauty either . but the expedition 
 promise to be highly comic . he be not averse to it any long ; he 
 be simply indifferent to all in it except the humour . these would be 
 wonderful . Harriet , work by her mother ; Mrs. Herriton , work by Miss 
 Abbott ; Gino , work by a cheque - what well entertainment could he 
 desire ? there be nothing to distract he this time ; his sentimentality 
 have die , so have his anxiety for the family honour . he might be a 
 puppet 's puppet , but he know exactly the disposition of the string . 

 they travel for thirteen hour down - hill , whilst the stream 
 broaden and the mountain shrank , and the vegetation change , and the 
 people cease be ugly and drink beer , and begin instead to drink 
 wine and to be beautiful . and the train which have pick they at sunrise 
 out of a waste of glacier and hotel be waltz at sunset round the 
 wall of Verona . 

 " absurd nonsense they talk about the heat , " say Philip , as they drive 
 from the station . " supposing we be here for pleasure , what could be 
 more pleasurable than this ? " 

 " do you hear , though , they be remark on the cold ? " say Harriet 
 nervously . " I should never have think it cold . " 

 and on the second day the heat strike they , like a hand lay over the 
 mouth , just as they be walk to see the tomb of Juliet . from 
 that moment everything go wrong . they flee from Verona . Harriet 's 
 sketch - book be steal , and the bottle of ammonia in her trunk burst 
 over her prayer - book , so that purple patch appear on all her 
 clothe . then , as she be go through Mantua at four in the morning , 
 Philip make she look out of the window because it be Virgil 's 
 birthplace , and a smut fly in her eye , and Harriet with a smut in her 
 eye be notorious . at Bologna they stop twenty - four hour to rest . it 
 be a FESTA , and child blow bladder whistle night and day . " what a 
 religion ! " say Harriet . the hotel smell , two puppy be asleep on 
 her bed , and her bedroom window look into a belfry , which salute she 
 slumbering form every quarter of an hour . Philip leave his walking - stick , 
 his sock , and the Baedeker at Bologna ; she only leave her sponge - bag . 
 next day they cross the Apennines with a train - sick child and a 
 hot lady , who tell they that never , never before have she sweat so 
 profusely . " foreigner be a filthy nation , " say Harriet . " I do not   care 
 if there be tunnel ; open the window . " he obey , and she get another 
 smut in her eye . nor do Florence improve matter . eat , walk , even 
 a cross word would bathe they both in boiling water . Philip , who be 
 slighter of build , and less conscientious , suffer less . but Harriet 
 have never be to Florence , and between the hour of eight and eleven 
 she crawl like a wound creature through the street , and swoon 
 before various masterpiece of art . it be an irritable couple who take 
 ticket to Monteriano . 

 " single or return ? " say he . 

 " a single for I , " say Harriet peevishly ; " I shall never get back 
 alive . " 

 " sweet creature ! " say her brother , suddenly break down . " how helpful 
 you will be when we come to Signor Carella ! " 

 " do you suppose , " say Harriet , stand still among a whirl of 
 porter - " do you suppose I be go to enter that man 's house ? " 

 " then what have you come for , pray ? for ornament ? " 

 " to see that you do your duty . " 

 " oh , thank ! " 

 " so mother tell I . for goodness sake get the ticket ; here come that 
 hot woman again ! she have the impudence to bow . " 

 " Mother tell you , do she ? " say Philip wrathfully , as he go to 
 struggle for ticket at a slit so narrow that they be hand to he 
 edgeway . Italy be beastly , and florence station be the centre of 
 beastly Italy . but he have a strange feeling that he be to blame for it 
 all ; that a little influx into he of virtue would make the whole land 
 not beastly but amusing . for there be enchantment , he be sure of that ; 
 solid enchantment , which lie behind the porter and the screaming and 
 the dust . he could see it in the terrific blue sky beneath which they 
 travel , in the whitened plain which grip life tight than a 
 frost , in the exhausted reach of the Arno , in the ruin of brown 
 castle which stand quiver upon the hill . he could see it , though 
 his head ache and his skin be twitch , though he be here as a 
 puppet , and though his sister know how he be here . there be nothing 
 pleasant in that journey to Monteriano station . but nothing - not even 
 the discomfort - be commonplace . 

 " but do people live inside ? " ask Harriet . they have exchange 
 railway - carriage for the legno , and the legno have emerge from the 
 wither tree , and have reveal to they their destination . Philip , to 
 be annoying , answer " no . " 

 " what do they do there ? " continue Harriet , with a frown . 

 " there be a caffe . a prison . a theatre . a church . wall . a view . " 

 " not for I , thank you , " say Harriet , after a weighty pause . 

 " nobody ask you , Miss , you see . now Lilia be ask by such a nice 
 young gentleman , with curl all over his forehead , and tooth just as 
 white as father make they . " then his manner change . " but , Harriet , do 
 you see nothing wonderful or attractive in that place - nothing at all ? " 

 " nothing at all . it be frightful . " 

 " I know it be . but it be old - awfully old . " 

 " beauty be the only test , " say Harriet . " at least so you tell I when 
 I sketch old building - for the sake , I suppose , of make yourself 
 unpleasant . " 

 " oh , I be perfectly right . but at the same time - I do not   know - so 
 many thing have happen here - people have live so hard and so 
 splendidly - I can not   explain . " 

 " I should not   think you could . it do not   seem the good moment to begin 
 your Italy mania . I think you be cure of it by now . instead , will 
 you kindly tell I what you be go to do when you arrive . I do beg 
 you will not be take unawares this time . " 

 " first , Harriet , I shall settle you at the Stella d'Italia , in the 
 comfort that befit your sex and disposition . then I shall make myself 
 some tea . after tea I shall take a book into Santa Deodata 's , and read 
 there . it be always fresh and cool . " 

 the martyr Harriet exclaim , " I be not clever , Philip . I do not   go in 
 for it , as you know . but I know what be rude . and I know what be wrong . " 

 " Meaning - ? " 

 " you ! " she shout , bounce on the cushion of the legno and startle 
 all the flea . " what be the good of cleverness if a man 's murder a 
 woman ? " 

 " Harriet , I be hot . to whom do you refer ? " 

 " he . she . if you do not   look out he will murder you . I wish he would . " 

 " tut tut , tutlet ! you would find a corpse extraordinarily inconvenient . " 
 then he try to be less aggravating . " I heartily dislike the fellow , 
 but we know he do not   murder she . in that letter , though she say a lot , 
 she never say he be physically cruel . " 

 " he have murder she . the thing he do - thing one can not   even 
 mention - " 

 " thing which one must mention if one be to talk at all . and thing which 
 one must keep in their proper place . because he be unfaithful to his 
 wife , it do not   follow that in every way he be absolutely vile . " he 
 look at the city . it seem to approve his remark . 

 " it be the supreme test . the man who be unchivalrous to a woman - " 

 " oh , stow it ! take it to the Back Kitchen . it be no more a supreme test 
 than anything else . the Italians never be chivalrous from the first . 
 if you condemn he for that , you will condemn the whole lot . " 

 " I condemn the whole lot . " 

 " and the French as well ? " 

 " and the French as well . " 

 " thing be not   so jolly easy , " say Philip , more to himself than to she . 

 but for harriet thing be easy , though not jolly , and she turn upon 
 her brother yet again . " what about the baby , pray ? you have   say a lot of 
 smart thing and whittle away morality and religion and I do not   know 
 what ; but what about the baby ? you think I a fool , but I have   be 
 notice you all today , and you have not   mention the baby once . you 
 have not   think about it , even . you do not   care . Philip ! I shall not 
 speak to you . you be intolerable . " 

 she keep her promise , and never open her lip all the rest of the way . 
 but her eye glow with anger and resolution . for she be a straight , 
 brave woman , as well as a peevish one . 

 Philip acknowledge her reproof to be true . he do not care about the 
 baby one straw . nevertheless , he mean to do his duty , and he be fairly 
 confident of success . if Gino would have sell his wife for a thousand 
 lira , for how much less would he not sell his child ? it be just a 
 commercial transaction . why should it interfere with other thing ? his 
 eye be fix on the tower again , just as they have be fix when he 
 drive with Miss Abbott . but this time his thought be pleasanter , for 
 he have no such grave business on his mind . it be in the spirit of the 
 cultivate tourist that he approach his destination . 

 one of the tower , rough as any other , be top by a cross - the tower 
 of the Collegiate Church of Santa Deodata . she be a holy maiden of the 
 Dark Ages , the city 's patron saint , and sweetness and barbarity mingle 
 strangely in her story . so holy be she that all her life she lie upon 
 she back in the house of her mother , refuse to eat , refuse to play , 
 refuse to work . the devil , envious of such sanctity , tempt she in 
 various way . he dangle grape above she , he show her fascinating 
 toy , he push soft pillow beneath her aching head . when all prove 
 vain he trip up the mother and fling she downstair before her very 
 eye . but so holy be the saint that she never pick her mother up , but 
 lie upon she back through all , and thus assure her throne in Paradise . 
 she be only fifteen when she die , which show how much be within the 
 reach of any school - girl . those who think her life be unpractical need 
 only think of the victory upon Poggibonsi , San Gemignano , Volterra , 
 Siena itself - all gain through the invocation of her name ; they need 
 only look at the church which rise over her grave . the grand scheme for 
 a marble facade be never carry out , and it be brown unfinished stone 
 until this day . but for the inside Giotto be summon to decorate the 
 wall of the nave . Giotto come - that be to say , he do not come , german 
 research have decisively prove - but at all event the nave be cover 
 with fresco , and so be two chapel in the left transept , and the 
 arch into the choir , and there be scrap in the choir itself . there the 
 decoration stop , till in the full spring of the Renaissance a 
 great painter come to pay a few week ' visit to his friend the Lord of 
 Monteriano . in the interval between the banquet and the discussion on 
 latin etymology and the dancing , he would stroll over to the church , and 
 there in the fifth chapel to the right he have paint two fresco of 
 the death and burial of Santa Deodata . that be why Baedeker give the 
 place a star . 

 Santa Deodata be well company than Harriet , and she keep Philip in a 
 pleasant dream until the legno draw up at the hotel . every one there be 
 asleep , for it be still the hour when only idiot be move . there 
 be not even any beggar about . the cabman put their bag down in the 
 passage - they have leave heavy luggage at the station - and stroll about 
 till he come on the landlady 's room and wake she , and send she to they . 

 then Harriet pronounce the monosyllable " go ! " 

 " go where ? " ask Philip , bow to the landlady , who be swim down 
 the stair . 

 " to the italian . go . " 

 " Buona sera , signora padrona . Si ritorna volontieri a Monteriano ! " 
  do not   be a goose . I be not go now . you be in the way , too .   " vorrei 
 due camere - " 

 " go . this instant . now . I will stand it no long . go ! " 

 " I be damned if I will go . I want my tea . " 

 " swear if you like ! " she cry . " Blaspheme ! abuse I ! but understand , 
 I be in earnest . " 

 " Harriet , do not   act . or act well . " 

 " we have   come here to get the baby back , and for nothing else . I will not 
 have this levity and slackness , and talk about picture and church . 
 think of mother ; do she send you out for they ? " 

 " think of mother and do not   straddle across the stair . let the cabman 
 and the landlady come down , and let I go up and choose room . " 

 " I shall not . " 

 " Harriet , be you mad ? " 

 " if you like . but you will not come up till you have see the italian . " 

 " La signorina si sente male , " say Philip , " C ' e il sole . " 

 " Poveretta ! " cry the landlady and the cabman . 

 " leave I alone ! " say Harriet , snarl round at they . " I do not   care 
 for the lot of you . I be english , and neither you will come down nor he up 
 till he go for the baby . " 

 " La prego - piano - piano - c e un ' altra signorina che dorme - " 

 " we shall probably be arrest for brawling , Harriet . have you the very 
 slight sense of the ludicrous ? " 

 Harriet have not ; that be why she could be so powerful . she have 
 concoct this scene in the carriage , and nothing should baulk she 
 of it . to the abuse in front and the coaxing behind she be equally 
 indifferent . how long she would have stand like a glorify Horatius , 
 keep the staircase at both end , be never to be know . for the young 
 lady , whose sleep they be disturbing , awake and open her bedroom 
 door , and come out on to the landing . she be Miss Abbott . 

 Philip 's first coherent feeling be one of indignation . to be run by 
 his mother and hector by his sister be as much as he could stand . the 
 intervention of a third female drive he suddenly beyond politeness . he 
 be about to say exactly what he think about the thing from begin 
 to end . but before he could do so Harriet also have see Miss Abbott . she 
 utter a shrill cry of joy . 

 " you , Caroline , here of all people ! " and in spite of the heat she dart 
 up the stair and imprint an affectionate kiss upon her friend . 

 Philip have an inspiration . " you will have a lot to tell Miss Abbott , 
 Harriet , and she may have as much to tell you . so I will pay my call on 
 Signor Carella , as you suggest , and see how thing stand . " 

 Miss Abbott utter some noise of greeting or alarm . he do not reply to 
 it or approach near to she . without even pay the cabman , he escape 
 into the street . 

 " tear each other 's eye out ! " he cry , gesticulate at the facade of 
 the hotel . " give it to she , Harriet ! teach she to leave we alone . give 
 it to she , Caroline ! teach she to be grateful to you . go it , lady ; go 
 it ! " 

 such people as observe he be interested , but do not conclude that 
 he be mad . this aftermath of conversation be not unknown in Italy . 

 he try to think how amusing it be ; but it would not do - Miss Abbott 's 
 presence affect he too personally . either she suspect he of 
 dishonesty , or else she be be dishonest herself . he prefer to 
 suppose the latter . perhaps she have see Gino , and they have prepare 
 some elaborate mortification for the Herritons . perhaps Gino have sell 
 the baby cheap to she for a joke : it be just the kind of joke that 
 would appeal to he . Philip still remember the laughter that have 
 greet his fruitless journey , and the uncouth push that have topple he 
 on to the bed . and whatever it might mean , Miss Abbott 's presence spoil 
 the comedy : she would do nothing funny . 

 during this short meditation he have walk through the city , and be out 
 on the other side . " where do Signor Carella live ? " he ask the man at 
 the Dogana . 

 " I will show you , " say a little girl , spring out of the ground as 
 italian child will . 

 " she will show you , " say the Dogana man , nod reassuringly . " follow 
 she always , always , and you will come to no harm . she be a trustworthy 
 guide . she be my 

  daughter . " 
  cousin . " 
  sister . " 

 Philip know these relative well : they ramify , if need be , all over the 
 peninsula . 

 " do you chance to know whether Signor Carella be in ? " he ask she . 

 she have just see he go in . Philip nod . he be look forward to 
 the interview this time : it would be an intellectual duet with a man 
 of no great intellect . what be Miss Abbott up to ? that be one of the 
 thing he be go to discover . while she have it out with Harriet , he 
 would have it out with Gino . he follow the Dogana 's relative softly , 
 like a diplomatist . 

 he do not follow she long , for this be the Volterra gate , and the 
 house be exactly opposite to it . in half a minute they have scramble 
 down the mule - track and reach the only practicable entrance . Philip 
 laugh , partly at the thought of Lilia in such a building , partly in 
 the confidence of victory . meanwhile the Dogana 's relative lift up her 
 voice and give a shout . 

 for an impressive interval there be no reply . then the figure of a 
 woman appear high up on the loggia . 

 " that be Perfetta , " say the girl . 

 " I want to see Signor Carella , " cry Philip . 

 " Out ! " 

 " out , " echo the girl complacently . 

 " why on earth do you say he be in ? " he could have strangle she 
 for temper . he have be just ripe for an interview - just the right 
 combination of indignation and acuteness : blood hot , brain cool . but 
 nothing ever do go right in Monteriano . " when will he be back ? " he 
 call to Perfetta . it really be too bad . 

 she do not know . he be away on business . he might be back this 
 evening , he might not . he have go to Poggibonsi . 

 at the sound of this word the little girl put her finger to her 
 nose and sweep they at the plain . she sing as she do so , even as she 
 foremother have sing seven hundred year back - 

  Poggibonizzi , fatti in la , 
  Che Monteriano si fa citta ! 

 then she ask Philip for a halfpenny . a german lady , friendly to the 
 Past , have give she one that very spring . 

 " I shall have to leave a message , " he call . 

 " now Perfetta have go for her basket , " say the little girl . " when she 
 return she will lower it - so . then you will put your card into it . then 
 she will raise it - thus . by this means - " 

 when Perfetta return , Philip remember to ask after the baby . it take 
 long to find than the basket , and he stand perspire in the evening 
 sun , try to avoid the smell of the drain and to prevent the little 
 girl from sing against Poggibonsi . the olive - tree beside he be 
 drape with the weekly - or more probably the monthly - wash . what a 
 frightful spotty blouse ! he could not think where he have see it . then 
 he remember that it be Lilia 's . she have bring it " to hack about in " 
 at Sawston , and have take it to Italy because " in Italy anything do . " 
 he have rebuke she for the sentiment . 

 " beautiful as an angel ! " bellow Perfetta , hold out something which 
 must be Lilia 's baby . " but who be I address ? " 

 " thank you - here be my card . " he have write on it a civil request 
 to Gino for an interview next morning . but before he place it in the 
 basket and reveal his identity , he wish to find something out . " have 
 a young lady happen to call here lately - a young english lady ? " 

 Perfetta beg his pardon : she be a little deaf . 

 " a young lady - pale , large , tall . " 

 she do not quite catch . 

 " a young lady ! " 

 " Perfetta be deaf when she choose , " say the Dogana 's relative . at 
 last Philip admit the peculiarity and strode away . he pay off the 
 detestable child at the Volterra gate . she get two nickel piece and be 
 not pleased , partly because it be too much , partly because he do not 
 look pleased when he give it to she . he catch her father and cousin 
 wink at each other as he walk past they . Monteriano seem in 
 one conspiracy to make he look a fool . he feel tired and anxious and 
 muddle , and not sure of anything except that his temper be lose . 
 in this mood he return to the Stella d'Italia , and there , as he be 
 ascend the stair , Miss Abbott pop out of the dining - room on the 
 first floor and beckon to he mysteriously . 

 " I be go to make myself some tea , " he say , with his hand still on 
 the banister . 

 " I should be grateful - " 

 so he follow she into the dining - room and shut the door . 

 " you see , " she begin , " Harriet know nothing . " 

 " no more do I. he be out . " 

 " but what be that to do with it ? " 

 he present she with an unpleasant smile . she fence well , as he have 
 notice before . " he be out . you find I as ignorant as you have leave 
 Harriet . " 

 " what do you mean ? please , please Mr. Herriton , do not   be mysterious : 
 there be not   the time . any moment Harriet may be down , and we shall not   have 
 decide how to behave to she . Sawston be different : we have to keep up 
 appearance . but here we must speak out , and I think I can trust you to 
 do it . otherwise we will never start clear . " 

 " pray let we start clear , " say Philip , pace up and down the room . 
 " permit I to begin by ask you a question . in which capacity have you 
 come to Monteriano - spy or traitor ? " 

 " Spy ! " she answer , without a moment 's hesitation . she be stand 
 by the little gothic window as she speak - the hotel have be a palace 
 once - and with her finger she be follow the curve of the moulding 
 as if they might feel beautiful and strange . " Spy , " she repeat , for 
 Philip be bewilder at learn her guilt so easily , and could not 
 answer a word . " your mother have behave dishonourably all through . she 
 never want the child ; no harm in that ; but she be too proud to let it 
 come to I . she have do all she could to wreck thing ; she do not tell 
 you everything ; she have tell Harriet nothing at all ; she have lie or 
 act lie everywhere . I can not trust your mother . so I have come here 
 alone - all across Europe ; no one know it ; my father think I be in 
 Normandy - to spy on Mrs. Herriton . do not   let us argue ! " for he have begin , 
 almost mechanically , to rebuke she for impertinence . " if you be here to 
 get the child , I will help you ; if you be here to fail , I shall get it 
 instead of you . " 

 " it be hopeless to expect you to believe I , " he stammer . " but I can 
 assert that we be here to get the child , even if it cost we all we have 
 get . my mother have fix no money limit whatever . I be here to carry 
 out her instruction . I think that you will approve of they , as you have 
 practically dictate they . I do not approve of they . they be absurd . " 

 she nod carelessly . she do not mind what he say . all she want be 
 to get the baby out of Monteriano . 

 " Harriet also carry out your instruction , " he continue . " she , 
 however , approve of they , and do not know that they proceed from you . 
 I think , Miss Abbott , you have well take entire charge of the rescue 
 party . I have ask for an interview with Signor Carella tomorrow 
 morning . do you acquiesce ? " 

 she nod again . 

 " might I ask for detail of your interview with he ? they might be 
 helpful to I . " 

 he have speak at random . to his delight she suddenly collapse . her hand 
 fall from the window . her face be red with more than the reflection of 
 evening . 

 " my interview - how do you know of it ? " 

 " from Perfetta , if it interest you . " 

 " who ever be Perfetta ? " 

 " the woman who must have let you in . " 

 " in where ? " 

 " into Signor Carella 's house . " 

 " Mr. Herriton ! " she exclaim . " how could you believe she ? do you 
 suppose that I would have enter that man 's house , know about he 
 all that I do ? I think you have very odd idea of what be possible for 
 a lady . I hear you want Harriet to go . very properly she refuse . 
 eighteen month ago I might have do such a thing . but I trust I have 
 learn how to behave by now . " 

 Philip begin to see that there be two Miss Abbotts - the Miss Abbott 
 who could travel alone to Monteriano , and the Miss Abbott who could 
 not enter Gino 's house when she get there . it be an amusing discovery . 
 which of they would respond to his next move ? 

 " I suppose I misunderstood Perfetta . where do you have your interview , 
 then ? " 

 " not an interview - an accident - I be very sorry - I mean you to have the 
 chance of see he first . though it be your fault . you be a day late . 
 you be due here yesterday . so I come yesterday , and , not find you , 
 go up to the Rocca - you know that kitchen - garden where they let you 
 in , and there be a ladder up to a broken tower , where you can stand 
 and see all the other tower below you and the plain and all the other 
 hill ? " 

 " yes , yes . I know the Rocca ; I tell you of it . " 

 " so I go up in the evening for the sunset : I have nothing to do . he be 
 in the garden : it belong to a friend of his . " 

 " and you talk . " 

 " it be very awkward for I . but I have to talk : he seem to make I . 
 you see he think I be here as a tourist ; he think so still . he 
 intend to be civil , and I judge it well to be civil also . " 

 " and of what do you talk ? " 

 " the weather - there will be rain , he say , by tomorrow evening - the 
 other town , England , myself , about you a little , and he actually 
 mention Lilia . he be perfectly disgusting ; he pretend he love 
 she ; he offer to show I her grave - the grave of the woman he have 
 murder ! " 

 " my dear Miss Abbott , he be not a murderer . I have just be drive 
 that into Harriet . and when you know the Italians as well as I do , you 
 will realize that in all that he say to you he be perfectly sincere . 
 the Italians be essentially dramatic ; they look on death and love as 
 spectacle . I do not   doubt that he persuade himself , for the moment , 
 that he have behave admirably , both as husband and widower . " 

 " you may be right , " say Miss Abbott , impress for the first time . 
 " when I try to pave the way , so to speak - to hint that he have not 
 behave as he ought - well , it be no good at all . he could not   or 
 would not   understand . " 

 there be something very humorous in the idea of Miss Abbott approach 
 Gino , on the Rocca , in the spirit of a district visitor . Philip , whose 
 temper be return , laugh . 

 " Harriet would say he have no sense of sin . " 

 " Harriet may be right , I be afraid . " 

 " if so , perhaps he be not   sinful ! " 

 Miss Abbott be not one to encourage levity . " I know what he have 
 do , " she say . " what he say and what he think be of very little 
 importance . " 

 Philip smile at her crudity . " I should like to hear , though , what he 
 say about I . be he prepare a warm reception ? " 

 " oh , no , not that . I never tell he that you and Harriet be come . 
 you could have take he by surprise if you like . he only ask for 
 you , and wish he have not   be so rude to you eighteen month ago . " 

 " what a memory the fellow have for little thing ! " he turn away as he 
 speak , for he do not want she to see his face . it be suffuse with 
 pleasure . for an apology , which would have be intolerable eighteen 
 month ago , be gracious and agreeable now . 

 she would not let this pass . " you do not think it a little thing at the 
 time . you tell I he have assault you . " 

 " I lose my temper , " say Philip lightly . his vanity have be appease , 
 and he know it . this tiny piece of civility have change his mood . " do 
 he really - what exactly do he say ? " 

 " he say he be sorry - pleasantly , as Italians do say such thing . but 
 he never mention the baby once . " 

 what do the baby matter when the world be suddenly right way up ? 
 Philip smile , and be shock at himself for smile , and smile again . 
 for romance have come back to Italy ; there be no cad in she ; she be 
 beautiful , courteous , lovable , as of old . and Miss Abbott - she , too , be 
 beautiful in her way , for all her gaucheness and conventionality . 
 she really care about life , and try to live it properly . and 
 Harriet - even Harriet try . 

 this admirable change in Philip proceed from nothing admirable , and 
 may therefore provoke the gibe of the cynical . but angel and other 
 practical people will accept it reverently , and write it down as good . 

 " the view from the Rocca   small gratuity   be fine at sunset , " he 
 murmur , more to himself than to she . 

 " and he never mention the baby once , " Miss Abbott repeat . but she 
 have return to the window , and again her finger pursue the delicate 
 curve . he watch she in silence , and be more attracted to she than he 
 have ever be before . she really be the strange mixture . 

 " the view from the Rocca - be not   it fine ? " 

 " what be not   fine here ? " she answer gently , and then add , " I wish I 
 be Harriet , " throw an extraordinary meaning into the word . 

 " because Harriet - ? " 

 she would not go far , but he believe that she have pay homage 
 to the complexity of life . for she , at all event , the expedition be 
 neither easy nor jolly . beauty , evil , charm , vulgarity , mystery - she 
 also acknowledge this tangle , in spite of herself . and her voice 
 thrill he when she break silence with " Mr. Herriton - come here - look 
 at this ! " 

 she remove a pile of plate from the Gothic window , and they leant out 
 of it . close opposite , wedge between mean house , there rise up one of 
 the great tower . it be your tower : you stretch a barricade between it 
 and the hotel , and the traffic be block in a moment . far up , where 
 the street empty out by the church , your connection , the Merli and 
 the Capocchi , do likewise . they command the Piazza , you the Siena gate . 
 no one can move in either but he shall be instantly slay , either by 
 bow or by crossbow , or by greek fire . beware , however , of the 
 back bedroom window . for they be menace by the tower of the 
 Aldobrandeschi , and before now arrow have stick quiver over the 
 washstand . guard these window well , lest there be a repetition of the 
 event of February 1338 , when the hotel be surprised from the rear , and 
 your dear friend - you could just make out that it be he - be throw 
 at you over the stair . 

 " it reach up to heaven , " say Philip , " and down to the other place . " 
 the summit of the tower be radiant in the sun , while its base be in 
 shadow and paste over with advertisement . " be it to be a symbol of the 
 town ? " 

 she give no hint that she understand he . but they remain together at 
 the window because it be a little cool and so pleasant . Philip 
 find a certain grace and lightness in his companion which he have never 
 notice in England . she be appallingly narrow , but her consciousness of 
 wide thing give to she narrowness a pathetic charm . he do not suspect 
 that he be more graceful too . for our vanity be such that we hold our 
 own character immutable , and we be slow to acknowledge that they have 
 change , even for the well . 

 citizen come out for a little stroll before dinner . some of they stand 
 and gaze at the advertisement on the tower . 

 " surely that be not   an opera - bill ? " say Miss Abbott . 

 Philip put on his pince - nez . " ' Lucia di Lammermoor . by the Master 
 Donizetti . unique representation . this evening . ' 

 " but be there an opera ? right up here ? " 

 " why , yes . these people know how to live . they would soon have a thing 
 bad than not have it at all . that be why they have get to have so much 
 that be good . however bad the performance be tonight , it will be alive . 
 Italians do not   love music silently , like the beastly german . the 
 audience take its share - sometimes more . " 

 " can not   we go ? " 

 he turn on she , but not unkindly . " but we be here to rescue a child ! " 

 he curse himself for the remark . all the pleasure and the light go 
 out of her face , and she become again Miss Abbott of Sawston - good , oh , 
 most undoubtedly good , but most appallingly dull . dull and remorseful : 
 it be a deadly combination , and he strove against it in vain till he be 
 interrupt by the opening of the dining - room door . 

 they start as guiltily as if they have be flirt . their interview 
 have take such an unexpected course . anger , cynicism , stubborn 
 morality - all have end in a feeling of good - will towards each other 
 and towards the city which have receive they . and now Harriet 
 be here - acrid , indissoluble , large ; the same in Italy as in 
 England - change her disposition never , and her atmosphere under 
 protest . 

 yet even Harriet be human , and the well for a little tea . she do not 
 scold Philip for find Gino out , as she might reasonably have do . 
 she shower civility on Miss Abbott , exclaim again and again 
 that Caroline 's visit be one of the most fortunate coincidence in the 
 world . Caroline do not contradict she . 

 " you see he tomorrow at ten , Philip . well , do not   forget the blank 
 cheque . say an hour for the business . no , Italians be so slow ; say two . 
 twelve o'clock . lunch . well - then it be no good go till the evening 
 train . I can manage the baby as far as Florence - " 

 " my dear sister , you can not   run on like that . you do not   buy a pair of 
 glove in two hour , much less a baby . " 

 " three hour , then , or four ; or make he learn english way . at Florence 
 we get a nurse - " 

 " but , Harriet , " say Miss Abbott , " what if at first he be to refuse ? " 

 " I do not   know the meaning of the word , " say Harriet impressively . " I have 
 tell the landlady that Philip and I only want our room one night , and 
 we shall keep to it . " 

 " I dare say it will be all right . but , as I tell you , I think the man 
 I meet on the Rocca a strange , difficult man . " 

 " he be insolent to lady , we know . but my brother can be trust to 
 bring he to his sens . that woman , Philip , whom you see will carry the 
 baby to the hotel . of course you must tip she for it . and try , if you 
 can , to get poor Lilia 's silver bangle . they be nice quiet thing , 
 and will do for Irma . and there be an inlaid box I lend her - lent , not 
 give - to keep her handkerchief in . it be of no real value ; but this be 
 our only chance . do not   ask for it ; but if you see it lie about , just 
 say - " 

 " no , Harriet ; I will try for the baby , but for nothing else . I promise 
 to do that tomorrow , and to do it in the way you wish . but tonight , as 
 we be all tired , we want a change of topic . we want relaxation . we want 
 to go to the theatre . " 

 " theatre here ? and at such a moment ? " 

 " we should hardly enjoy it , with the great interview impend , " say 
 Miss Abbott , with an anxious glance at Philip . 

 he do not betray she , but say , " do not   you think it be well than 
 sit in all the evening and get nervous ? " 

 his sister shake her head . " Mother would not   like it . it would be most 
 unsuitable - almost irreverent . besides all that , foreign theatre 
 be notorious . do not   you remember those letter in the ' Church Family 
 Newspaper ' ? " 

 " but this be an opera - ' Lucia di Lammermoor ' - Sir Walter 
 Scott - classical , you know . " 

 Harriet 's face grow resign . " certainly one have so few opportunity 
 of hear music . it be sure to be very bad . but it might be well than 
 sit idle all the evening . we have no book , and I lose my crochet at 
 Florence . " 

 " good . Miss Abbott , you be come too ? " 

 " it be very kind of you , Mr. Herriton . in some way I should enjoy 
 it ; but - excuse the suggestion - I do not   think we ought to go to cheap 
 seat . " 

 " good gracious I ! " cry Harriet , " I should never have think of that . 
 as likely as not , we should have try to save money and sit among the 
 most awful people . one keep on forget this be Italy . " 

 " unfortunately I have no evening dress ; and if the seat - " 

 " oh , that will be all right , " say Philip , smile at his timorous , 
 scrupulous woman - kind . " we will go as we be , and buy the good we can get . 
 Monteriano be not formal . " 

 so this strenuous day of resolution , plan , alarm , battle , victory , 
 defeat , truce , end at the opera . Miss Abbott and Harriet be both 
 a little shame - faced . they think of their friend at Sawston , who be 
 suppose they to be now tilt against the power of evil . what would 
 Mrs. Herriton , or Irma , or the curate at the Back Kitchen say if they 
 could see the rescue party at a place of amusement on the very first day 
 of its mission ? Philip , too , marvel at his wish to go . he begin 
 to see that he be enjoy his time in Monteriano , in spite of the 
 tiresomeness of his companion and the occasional contrariness of 
 himself . 

 he have be to this theatre many year before , on the occasion of a 
 performance of " La Zia di Carlo . " since then it have be thoroughly do 
 up , in the tint of the beet - root and the tomato , and be in many other 
 way a credit to the little town . the orchestra have be enlarge , 
 some of the box have terra - cotta drapery , and over each box be now 
 suspend an enormous tablet , neatly frame , bear upon it the number 
 of that box . there be also a drop - scene , represent a pink and purple 
 landscape , wherein sport many a lady lightly clothe , and two more lady 
 lie along the top of the proscenium to steady a large and pallid clock . 
 so rich and so appalling be the effect , that Philip could scarcely 
 suppress a cry . there be something majestic in the bad taste of Italy ; 
 it be not the bad taste of a country which know no well ; it have not 
 the nervous vulgarity of England , or the blind vulgarity of Germany . 
 it observe beauty , and choose to pass it by . but it attain to 
 beauty 's confidence . this tiny theatre of Monteriano spraddle and 
 swagger with the good of they , and these lady with their clock would 
 have nod to the young man on the ceiling of the Sistine . 

 Philip have try for a box , but all the good be take : it be rather 
 a grand performance , and he have to be content with stall . Harriet be 
 fretful and insular . Miss Abbott be pleasant , and insist on praise 
 everything : her only regret be that she have no pretty clothe with she . 

 " we do all right , " say Philip , amuse at her unwonted vanity . 

 " yes , I know ; but pretty thing pack as easily as ugly one . we have no 
 need to come to Italy like guy . " 

 this time he do not reply , " but we be here to rescue a baby . " for 
 he see a charming picture , as charm a picture as he have see for 
 year - the hot red theatre ; outside the theatre , tower and dark gate 
 and mediaeval wall ; beyond the wall olive - tree in the starlight and 
 white wind road and firefly and untroubled dust ; and here in the 
 middle of it all , Miss Abbott , wish she have not come look like a 
 guy . she have make the right remark . most undoubtedly she have make the 
 right remark . this stiff suburban woman be unbend before the shrine . 

 " do not   you like it at all ? " he ask she . 

 " most awfully . " and by this bald interchange they convince each other 
 that Romance be here . 

 Harriet , meanwhile , have be cough ominously at the drop - scene , which 
 presently rise on the ground of Ravenswood , and the chorus of Scotch 
 retainer burst into cry . the audience accompany with tapping and 
 drumming , sway in the melody like corn in the wind . Harriet , though 
 she do not care for music , know how to listen to it . she utter an 
 acid " shish ! " 

 " shut it , " whisper her brother . 

 " we must make a stand from the beginning . they be talk . " 

 " it be tiresome , " murmur Miss Abbott ; " but perhaps it be not   for we to 
 interfere . " 

 Harriet shake her head and shishe again . the people be quiet , not 
 because it be wrong to talk during a chorus , but because it be natural 
 to be civil to a visitor . for a little time she keep the whole house in 
 order , and could smile at her brother complacently . 

 her success annoy he . he have grasp the principle of opera in 
 Italy - it aim not at illusion but at entertainment - and he do not want 
 this great evening - party to turn into a prayer - meeting . but soon the 
 box begin to fill , and Harriet 's power be over . family greet each 
 other across the auditorium . People in the pit hail their brother and 
 son in the chorus , and tell they how well they be sing . when Lucia 
 appear by the fountain there be loud applause , and cry of " welcome 
 to Monteriano ! " 

 " ridiculous baby ! " say Harriet , settle down in her stall . 

 " why , it be the famous hot lady of the Apennines , " cry Philip ; " the 
 one who have never , never before - " 

 " Ugh ! do not . she will be very vulgar . and I be sure it be even bad here 
 than in the tunnel . I wish we would never - " 

 Lucia begin to sing , and there be a moment 's silence . she be stout 
 and ugly ; but her voice be still beautiful , and as she sing the theatre 
 murmur like a hive of happy bee . all through the coloratura she 
 be accompany by sigh , and its top note be drown in a shout of 
 universal joy . 

 so the opera proceed . the singer draw inspiration from the audience , 
 and the two great sextette be render not unworthily . Miss Abbott 
 fall into the spirit of the thing . she , too , chat and laugh and 
 applaud and encore , and rejoice in the existence of beauty . as for 
 Philip , he forget himself as well as his mission . he be not even an 
 enthusiastic visitor . for he have be in this place always . it be his 
 home . 

 Harriet , like M. Bovary on a more famous occasion , be try to follow 
 the plot . occasionally she nudge her companion , and ask they what 
 have become of Walter Scott . she look round grimly . the audience 
 sound drunk , and even Caroline , who never take a drop , be sway 
 oddly . violent wave of excitement , all arise from very little , go 
 sweeping round the theatre . the climax be reach in the mad scene . 
 Lucia , clothe in white , as befit her malady , suddenly gather up her 
 streaming hair and bow her acknowledgment to the audience . then from 
 the back of the stage - she feign not to see it - there advance a kind 
 of bamboo clothe - horse , stick all over with bouquet . it be very ugly , 
 and most of the flower in it be false . Lucia know this , and so do 
 the audience ; and they all know that the clothe - horse be a piece of 
 stage property , bring in to make the performance go year after year . 
 none the less do it unloose the great deep . with a scream of amazement 
 and joy she embrace the animal , pull out one or two practicable 
 blossom , press they to her lip , and fling they into her admirer . 
 they fling they back , with loud melodious cry , and a little boy in one 
 of the stageboxe snatch up his sister 's carnation and offer they . 
 " che carino ! " exclaim the singer . she dart at the little boy and 
 kiss he . now the noise become tremendous . " Silence ! silence ! " shout 
 many old gentleman behind . " let the divine creature continue ! " but 
 the young man in the adjacent box be implore Lucia to extend her 
 civility to they . she refuse , with a humorous , expressive gesture . one 
 of they hurl a bouquet at she . she spurn it with her foot . then , 
 encourage by the roar of the audience , she pick it up and toss it 
 to they . Harriet be always unfortunate . the bouquet strike she full in 
 the chest , and a little billet - doux fall out of it into her lap . 

 " call this classical ! " she cry , rise from her seat . " it be not even 
 respectable ! Philip ! take I out at once . " 

 " whose be it ? " shout her brother , hold up the bouquet in one hand 
 and the billet - doux in the other . " whose be it ? " 

 the house explode , and one of the box be violently agitated , as if 
 some one be be haul to the front . Harriet move down the gangway , 
 and compel Miss Abbott to follow she . Philip , still laugh 
 and call " whose be it ? " bring up the rear . he be drunk with 
 excitement . the heat , the fatigue , and the enjoyment have mount into 
 his head . 

 " to the left ! " the people cry . " the innamorato be to the left . " 

 he desert his lady and plunge towards the box . a young man be 
 fling stomach downwards across the balustrade . Philip hand he up the 
 bouquet and the note . then his own hand be seize affectionately . it 
 all seem quite natural . 

 " why have you not write ? " cry the young man . " why do you take I by 
 surprise ? " 

 " oh , I have   write , " say Philip hilariously . " I leave a note this 
 afternoon . " 

 " Silence ! silence ! " cry the audience , who be begin to have 
 enough . " let the divine creature continue . " Miss Abbott and Harriet have 
 disappear . 

 " no ! no ! " cry the young man . " you do not   escape I now . " for Philip be 
 try feebly to disengage his hand . amiable youth bent out of the box 
 and invite he to enter it . 

 " Gino 's friend be our - " 

 " friend ? " cry Gino . " a relative ! a brother ! Fra Filippo , who have come 
 all the way from England and never write . " 

 " I leave a message . " 

 the audience begin to hiss . 

 " come in to we . " 

 " thank you - lady - there be not time - " 

 the next moment he be swing by his arm . the moment after he shoot 
 over the balustrade into the box . then the conductor , see that the 
 incident be over , raise his baton . the house be hush , and Lucia di 
 Lammermoor resume her song of madness and death . 

 Philip have whisper introduction to the pleasant people who have pull 
 he in - tradesman 's son perhaps they be , or medical student , or 
 solicitor ' clerk , or son of other dentist . there be no knowing who 
 be who in Italy . the guest of the evening be a private soldier . he 
 share the honour now with Philip . the two have to stand side by side in 
 the front , and exchange compliment , whilst Gino preside , courteous , 
 but delightfully familiar . Philip would have a spasm of horror at the 
 muddle he have make . but the spasm would pass , and again he would be 
 enchant by the kind , cheerful voice , the laughter that be never 
 vapid , and the light caress of the arm across his back . 

 he could not get away till the play be nearly finish , and Edgardo be 
 sing amongst the tomb of ancestor . his new friend hop to see he 
 at the Garibaldi tomorrow evening . he promise ; then he remember that 
 if they keep to Harriet 's plan he would have leave Monteriano . " at ten 
 o'clock , then , " he say to Gino . " I want to speak to you alone . at ten . " 

 " certainly ! " laugh the other . 

 Miss Abbott be sit up for he when he get back . Harriet , it seem , 
 have go straight to bed . 

 " that be he , be not   it ? " she ask . 

 " yes , rather . " 

 " I suppose you do not   settle anything ? " 

 " why , no ; how could I ? the fact be - well , I get take by surprise , 
 but after all , what do it matter ? there be no earthly reason why we 
 should not   do the business pleasantly . he be a perfectly charming person , 
 and so be his friend . I be his friend now - his long - lose brother . 
 what be the harm ? I tell you , Miss Abbott , it be one thing for England and 
 another for Italy . there we plan and get on high moral horse . here 
 we find what ass we be , for thing go off quite easily , all by 
 themselves . my hat , what a night ! do you ever see a really purple sky 
 and really silver star before ? well , as I be say , it be absurd to 
 worry ; he be not a porky father . he want that baby as little as I do . 
 he be be rag my dear mother - just as he rag I eighteen month 
 ago , and I have   forgive he . oh , but he have a sense of humour ! " 

 Miss Abbott , too , have a wonderful evening , nor do she ever remember 
 such star or such a sky . her head , too , be full of music , and that 
 night when she open the window her room be fill with warm , sweet 
 air . she be bath in beauty within and without ; she could not go to 
 bed for happiness . have she ever be so happy before ? yes , once before , 
 and here , a night in March , the night Gino and Lilia have tell she of 
 their love - the night whose evil she have come now to undo . 

 she give a sudden cry of shame . " this time - the same place - the same 
 thing " - and she begin to beat down her happiness , know it to be 
 sinful . she be here to fight against this place , to rescue a little 
 soul - who be innocent as yet . she be here to champion morality and 
 purity , and the holy life of an english home . in the spring she have 
 sin through ignorance ; she be not ignorant now . " help I ! " she 
 cry , and shut the window as if there be magic in the encircle air . 
 but the tune would not go out of her head , and all night long she be 
 trouble by torrent of music , and by applause and laughter , and angry 
 young man who shout the distich out of Baedeker : - 

  Poggibonizzi fatti in la , 
  Che Monteriano si fa citta ! 

 Poggibonsi be reveal to she as they sing - a joyless , straggle 
 place , full of people who pretend . when she wake up she know that it 
 have be Sawston . 



 chapter 7 

 at about nine o'clock next morning Perfetta go out on to the loggia , 
 not to look at the view , but to throw some dirty water at it . " Scusi 
 tanto ! " she wail , for the water spatter a tall young lady who have 
 for some time be tap at the low door . 

 " be Signor Carella in ? " the young lady ask . it be no business of 
 Perfetta be to be shock , and the style of the visitor seem to demand 
 the reception - room . accordingly she open its shutter , dust a round 
 patch on one of the horsehair chair , and bade the lady do herself the 
 inconvenience of sit down . then she run into Monteriano and shout 
 up and down its street until such time as her young master should hear 
 she . 

 the reception - room be sacred to the dead wife . her shiny portrait hung 
 upon the wall - similar , doubtless , in all respect to the one which 
 would be paste on her tombstone . a little piece of black drapery have 
 be tack above the frame to lend a dignity to woe . but two of the 
 tack have fall out , and the effect be now rakish , as of a drunkard 's 
 bonnet . a coon song lie open on the piano , and of the two table one 
 support Baedeker 's " Central Italy , " the other Harriet 's inlaid box . 
 and over everything there lie a deposit of heavy white dust , which 
 be only blow off one moment to thicken on another . it be well to 
 be remember with love . it be not so very dreadful to be forget 
 entirely . but if we shall resent anything on earth at all , we shall 
 resent the consecration of a deserted room . 

 Miss Abbott do not sit down , partly because the antimacassar might 
 harbour flea , partly because she have suddenly feel faint , and be glad 
 to cling on to the funnel of the stove . she struggle with herself , 
 for she have need to be very calm ; only if she be very calm might she 
 behaviour be justify . she have break faith with Philip and Harriet : 
 she be go to try for the baby before they do . if she fail she 
 could scarcely look they in the face again . 

 " Harriet and her brother , " she reason , " do not   realize what be before 
 they . she would bluster and be rude ; he would be pleasant and take it 
 as a joke . both of they - even if they offer money - would fail . but I 
 begin to understand the man 's nature ; he do not love the child , but he 
 will be touchy about it - and that be quite as bad for we . he be charming , 
 but he be no fool ; he conquer I last year ; he conquer Mr. Herriton 
 yesterday , and if I be not careful he will conquer we all today , and the 
 baby will grow up in Monteriano . he be terribly strong ; Lilia find that 
 out , but only I remember it now . " 

 this attempt , and this justification of it , be the result of the long 
 and restless night . Miss Abbott have come to believe that she alone could 
 do battle with Gino , because she alone understand he ; and she have put 
 this , as nicely as she could , in a note which she have leave for Philip . 
 it distress she to write such a note , partly because her education 
 incline she to reverence the male , partly because she have get to like 
 Philip a good deal after their last strange interview . his pettiness 
 would be disperse , and as for his " unconventionality , " which be so 
 much gossip about at Sawston , she begin to see that it do not differ 
 greatly from certain familiar notion of her own . if only he would 
 forgive she for what she be do now , there might perhaps be before 
 they a long and profitable friendship . but she must succeed . no one 
 would forgive she if she do not succeed . she prepare to do battle with 
 the power of evil . 

 the voice of her adversary be hear at last , sing fearlessly 
 from his expand lung , like a professional . Herein he differ from 
 Englishmen , who always have a little feeling against music , and sing 
 only from the throat , apologetically . he pad upstairs , and look 
 in at the open door of the reception - room without see she . her heart 
 leapt and her throat be dry when he turn away and pass , still 
 singing , into the room opposite . it be alarming not to be see . 

 he have leave the door of this room open , and she could see into it , 
 right across the landing . it be in a shocking mess . food , bedclothe , 
 patent - leather boot , dirty plate , and knife lie strew over a large 
 table and on the floor . but it be the mess that come of life , not of 
 desolation . it be preferable to the charnel - chamber in which she be 
 stand now , and the light in it be soft and large , as from some 
 gracious , noble opening . 

 he stop sing , and cry " where be Perfetta ? " 

 his back be turn , and he be light a cigar . he be not speak 
 to Miss Abbott . he could not even be expect she . the vista of the 
 landing and the two open door make he both remote and significant , 
 like an actor on the stage , intimate and unapproachable at the same 
 time . she could no more call out to he than if he be Hamlet . 

 " you know ! " he continue , " but you will not tell I . exactly like you . " 
 he recline on the table and blow a fat smoke - ring . " and why will not   you 
 tell I the number ? I have dream of a red hen - that be two hundred and 
 five , and a friend unexpected - he mean eighty - two . but I try for the 
 Terno this week . so tell I another number . " 

 Miss Abbott do not know of the Tombola . his speech terrify she . she 
 feel those subtle restriction which come upon we in fatigue . have she 
 sleep well she would have greet he as soon as she see he . now it be 
 impossible . he have get into another world . 

 she watch his smoke - ring . the air have carry it slowly away from he , 
 and bring it out intact upon the landing . 

 " two hundred and five - eighty - two . in any case I shall put they on Bari , 
 not on Florence . I can not tell you why ; I have a feeling this week for 
 Bari . " again she try to speak . but the ring mesmerize she . it have 
 become vast and elliptical , and float in at the reception - room door . 

 " ah ! you do not   care if you get the profit . you will not   even say ' thank 
 you , Gino . ' say it , or I will drop hot , red - hot ash on you . ' thank you , 
 gino - ' " 

 the ring have extend its pale blue coil towards she . she lose 
 self - control . it envelop she . as if it be a breath from the pit , she 
 scream . 

 there he be , want to know what have frighten she , how she have get 
 here , why she have never speak . he make she sit down . he bring she 
 wine , which she refuse . she have not one word to say to he . 

 " what be it ? " he repeat . " what have frighten you ? " 

 he , too , be frightened , and perspiration come start through the tan . 
 for it be a serious thing to have be watch . we all radiate something 
 curiously intimate when we believe ourselves to be alone . 

 " business - " she say at last . 

 " business with I ? " 

 " most important business . " she be lie , white and limp , in the dusty 
 chair . 

 " before business you must get well ; this be the good wine . " 

 she refuse it feebly . he pour out a glass . she drink it . as she do 
 so she become self - conscious . however important the business , it be not 
 proper of she to have call on he , or to accept his hospitality . 

 " perhaps you be engage , " she say . " and as I be not very well - " 

 " you be not well enough to go back . and I be not engage . " 

 she look nervously at the other room . 

 " ah , now I understand , " he exclaim . " now I see what frighten you . 
 but why do you never speak ? " and take she into the room where he 
 live , he point to - the baby . 

 she have think so much about this baby , of its welfare , its soul , its 
 moral , its probable defect . but , like most unmarried people , she have 
 only thought of it as a word - just as the healthy man only think of the 
 word death , not of death itself . the real thing , lie asleep on a dirty 
 rug , disconcert she . it do not stand for a principle any long . 
 it be so much flesh and blood , so many inch and ounce of life - a 
 glorious , unquestionable fact , which a man and another woman have give 
 to the world . you could talk to it ; in time it would answer you ; in time 
 it would not answer you unless it choose , but would secrete , within the 
 compass of its body , thought and wonderful passion of its own . and 
 this be the machine on which she and Mrs. Herriton and Philip and 
 Harriet have for the last month be exercise their various ideal - have 
 determine that in time it should move this way or that way , should 
 accomplish this and not that . it be to be Low Church , it be to be 
 high - principle , it be to be tactful , gentlemanly , artistic - excellent 
 thing all . yet now that she see this baby , lie asleep on a dirty rug , 
 she have a great disposition not to dictate one of they , and to exert 
 no more influence than there may be in a kiss or in the vague of the 
 heartfelt prayer . 

 but she have practise self - discipline , and her thought and action be 
 not yet to correspond . to recover her self - esteem she try to imagine 
 that she be in her district , and to behave accordingly . 

 " what a fine child , Signor Carella . and how nice of you to talk to it . 
 though I see that the ungrateful little fellow be asleep ! seven month ? 
 no , eight ; of course eight . still , he be a remarkably fine child for his 
 age . " 

 Italian be a bad medium for condescension . the patronizing word come 
 out gracious and sincere , and he smile with pleasure . 

 " you must not stand . let we sit on the loggia , where it be cool . I be 
 afraid the room be very untidy , " he add , with the air of a hostess who 
 apologize for a stray thread on the drawing - room carpet . Miss Abbott 
 pick her way to the chair . he sit near she , astride the parapet , with 
 one foot in the loggia and the other dangle into the view . his face 
 be in profile , and its beautiful contour drive artfully against 
 the misty green of the oppose hill . " Posing ! " say Miss Abbott to 
 herself . " a bear artist 's model . " 

 " Mr. Herriton call yesterday , " she begin , " but you be out . " 

 he start an elaborate and graceful explanation . he have go for the 
 day to Poggibonsi . why have the Herritons not write to he , so that he 
 could have receive they properly ? Poggibonsi would have do any day ; 
 not but what his business there be fairly important . what do she 
 suppose that it be ? 

 naturally she be not greatly interested . she have not come from Sawston 
 to guess why he have be to Poggibonsi . she answer politely that she 
 have no idea , and return to her mission . 

 " but guess ! " he persist , clap the balustrade between his hand . 

 she suggest , with gentle sarcasm , that perhaps he have go to 
 Poggibonsi to find something to do . 

 he intimate that it be not as important as all that . something to 
 do - an almost hopeless quest ! " e manca questo ! " he rub his thumb and 
 forefinger together , to indicate that he have no money . then he 
 sigh , and blow another smoke - ring . Miss Abbott take heart and turn 
 diplomatic . 

 " this house , " she say , " be a large house . " 

 " exactly , " be his gloomy reply . " and when my poor wife die - " he get 
 up , go in , and walk across the landing to the reception - room door , 
 which he close reverently . then he shut the door of the living - room 
 with his foot , return briskly to his seat , and continue his sentence . 
 " when my poor wife die I think of have my relative to live here . 
 my father wish to give up his practice at Empoli ; my mother and 
 sister and two aunt be also willing . but it be impossible . they 
 have their way of do thing , and when I be young I be content 
 with they . but now I be a man . I have my own way . do you understand ? " 

 " yes , I do , " say Miss Abbott , think of her own dear father , whose 
 trick and habit , after twenty - five year spend in their company , be 
 begin to get on her nerve . she remember , though , that she be 
 not here to sympathize with Gino - at all event , not to show that 
 she sympathize . she also remind herself that he be not worthy of 
 sympathy . " it be a large house , " she repeat . 

 " Immense ; and the taxis ! but it will be well when - ah ! but you have 
 never guess why I go to Poggibonsi - why it be that I be out when 
 he call . " 

 " I can not guess , Signor Carella . I be here on business . " 

 " but try . " 

 " I can not ; I hardly know you . " 

 " but we be old friend , " he say , " and your approval will be grateful 
 to I . you give it I once before . will you give it now ? " 

 " I have not come as a friend this time , " she answer stiffly . " I be not 
 likely , Signor Carella , to approve of anything you do . " 

 " oh , Signorina ! " he laugh , as if he find her piquant and amusing . 
 " surely you approve of marriage ? " 

 " where there be love , " say Miss Abbott , look at he hard . his face 
 have alter in the last year , but not for the bad , which be baffle . 

 " where there be love , " say he , politely echo the english view . then 
 he smile on she , expect congratulation . 

 " do I understand that you be propose to marry again ? " 

 he nod . 

 " I forbid you , then ! " 

 he look puzzle , but take it for some foreign banter , and laugh . 

 " I forbid you ! " repeat Miss Abbott , and all the indignation of her sex 
 and her nationality go thrill through the word . 

 " but why ? " he jump up , frown . his voice be squeaky and petulant , 
 like that of a child who be suddenly forbid a toy . 

 " you have ruin one woman ; I forbid you to ruin another . it be not a 
 year since Lilia die . you pretend to I the other day that you love 
 she . it be a lie . you want her money . have this woman money too ? " 

 " why , yes ! " he say irritably . " a little . " 

 " and I suppose you will say that you love she . " 

 " I shall not say it . it will be untrue . now my poor wife - " he stop , 
 see that the comparison would involve he in difficulty . and indeed 
 he have often find Lilia as agreeable as any one else . 

 Miss Abbott be furious at this final insult to her dead acquaintance . 
 she be glad that after all she could be so angry with the boy . she 
 glow and throb ; her tongue move nimbly . at the finish , if the 
 real business of the day have be complete , she could have sweep 
 majestically from the house . but the baby still remain , asleep on a 
 dirty rug . 

 Gino be thoughtful , and stand scratch his head . he respect Miss 
 Abbott . he wish that she would respect he . " so you do not advise I ? " 
 he say dolefully . " but why should it be a failure ? " 

 Miss Abbott try to remember that he be really a child still - a child 
 with the strength and the passion of a disreputable man . " how can it 
 succeed , " she say solemnly , " where there be no love ? " 

 " but she do love I ! I forget to tell you that . " 

 " indeed . " 

 " passionately . " he lay his hand upon his own heart . 

 " then God help she ! " 

 he stamp impatiently . " whatever I say displease you , Signorina . God 
 help you , for you be most unfair . you say that I ill - treat my dear 
 wife . it be not so . I have never ill - treat any one . you complain that 
 there be no love in this marriage . I prove that there be , and you become 
 still more angry . what do you want ? do you suppose she will not be 
 content ? glad enough she be to get I , and she will do her duty well . " 

 " her duty ! " cry Miss Abbott , with all the bitterness of which she be 
 capable . 

 " why , of course . she know why I be marry she . " 

 " to succeed where Lilia fail ! to be your housekeeper , your slave , 
 you - " the word she would like to have say be too violent for she . 

 " to look after the baby , certainly , " say he . 

 " the baby - ? " she have forget it . 

 " it be an english marriage , " he say proudly . " I do not care about the 
 money . I be have she for my son . do you not understand that ? " 

 " no , " say Miss Abbott , utterly bewildered . then , for a moment , she see 
 light . " it be not necessary , Signor Carella . since you be tired of the 
 baby - " 

 ever after she remember it to her credit that she see her mistake at 
 once . " I do not   mean that , " she add quickly . 

 " I know , " be his courteous response . " ah , in a foreign language   and 
 how perfectly you speak italian   one be certain to make slip . " 

 she look at his face . it be apparently innocent of satire . 

 " you mean that we could not always be together yet , he and I. you be 
 right . what be to be do ? I can not afford a nurse , and Perfetta be too 
 rough . when he be ill I dare not let she touch he . when he have to 
 be wash , which happen now and then , who do it ? I. I feed he , or 
 settle what he shall have . I sleep with he and comfort he when he be 
 unhappy in the night . no one talk , no one may sing to he but i. do not 
 be unfair this time ; I like to do these thing . but nevertheless   his 
 voice become pathetic   they take up a great deal of time , and be not 
 all suitable for a young man . " 

 " not at all suitable , " say Miss Abbott , and close her eye wearily . 
 each moment her difficulty be increase . she wish that she be 
 not so tired , so open to contradictory impression . she long for 
 Harriet 's burly obtuseness or for the soulless diplomacy of Mrs. 
 Herriton . 

 " a little more wine ? " ask Gino kindly . 

 " oh , no , thank you ! but marriage , Signor Carella , be a very serious 
 step . could you not manage more simply ? your relative , for example - " 

 " Empoli ! I would as soon have he in England ! " 

 " England , then - " 

 he laugh . 

 " he have a grandmother there , you know - Mrs. Theobald . " 

 " he have a grandmother here . no , he be troublesome , but I must have he 
 with I . I will not even have my father and mother too . for they would 
 separate we , " he add . 

 " how ? " 

 " they would separate our thought . " 

 she be silent . this cruel , vicious fellow know of strange refinement . 
 the horrible truth , that wicked people be capable of love , stand naked 
 before she , and her moral being be abash . it be her duty to rescue 
 the baby , to save it from contagion , and she still mean to do her duty . 
 but the comfortable sense of virtue leave she . she be in the presence of 
 something great than right or wrong . 

 forget that this be an interview , he have stroll back into the 
 room , drive by the instinct she have arouse in he . " wake up ! " he cry 
 to his baby , as if it be some grow - up friend . then he lift his foot 
 and trod lightly on its stomach . 

 Miss Abbott cry , " oh , take care ! " she be unaccustomed to this method 
 of awaken the young . 

 " he be not much long than my boot , be he ? can you believe that in time 
 his own boot will be as large ? and that he also - " 

 " but ought you to treat he like that ? " 

 he stand with one foot rest on the little body , suddenly musing , 
 fill with the desire that his son should be like he , and should have 
 son like he , to people the earth . it be the strong desire that can 
 come to a man - if it come to he at all - strong even than love or the 
 desire for personal immortality . all man vaunt it , and declare that it 
 be theirs ; but the heart of most be set elsewhere . it be the exception 
 who comprehend that physical and spiritual life may stream out of he 
 for ever . Miss Abbott , for all her goodness , could not comprehend it , 
 though such a thing be more within the comprehension of woman . and 
 when Gino point first to himself and then to his baby and say 
 " father - son , " she still take it as a piece of nursery prattle , and 
 smile mechanically . 

 the child , the first fruit , wake up and glare at she . Gino do not 
 greet it , but continue the exposition of his policy . 

 " this woman will do exactly what I tell she . she be fond of child . 
 she be clean ; she have a pleasant voice . she be not beautiful ; I can not 
 pretend that to you for a moment . but she be what I require . " 

 the baby give a pierce yell . 

 " oh , do take care ! " beg Miss Abbott . " you be squeeze it . " 

 " it be nothing . if he cry silently then you may be frightened . he 
 think I be go to wash he , and he be quite right . " 

 " wash he ! " she cry . " you ? here ? " the homely piece of news seem 
 to shatter all her plan . she have spend a long half - hour in elaborate 
 approach , in high moral attack ; she have neither frighten her enemy 
 nor make he angry , nor interfere with the least detail of his domestic 
 life . 

 " I have go to the Farmacia , " he continue , " and be sit there 
 comfortably , when suddenly I remember that Perfetta have heated water 
 an hour ago - over there , look , cover with a cushion . I come away at 
 once , for really he must be wash . you must excuse I . I can put it off 
 no long . " 

 " I have waste your time , " she say feebly . 

 he walk sternly to the loggia and draw from it a large earthenware 
 bowl . it be dirty inside ; he dust it with a tablecloth . then he 
 fetch the hot water , which be in a copper pot . he pour it out . he 
 add cold . he feel in his pocket and bring out a piece of soap . then 
 he take up the baby , and , hold his cigar between his tooth , begin to 
 unwrap it . Miss Abbott turn to go . 

 " but why be you go ? excuse I if I wash he while we talk . " 

 " I have nothing more to say , " say Miss Abbott . all she could do now 
 be to find Philip , confess her miserable defeat , and bid he go in 
 her stead and prosper well . she curse her feebleness ; she long to 
 expose it , without apology or tear . 

 " oh , but stop a moment ! " he cry . " you have not see he yet . " 

 " I have see as much as I want , thank you . " 

 the last wrapping slide off . he hold out to she in his two hand a little 
 kicking image of bronze . 

 " take he ! " 

 she would not touch the child . 

 " I must go at once , " she cry ; for the tear - the wrong tear - be 
 hurry to her eye . 

 " who would have believe his mother be blonde ? for he be brown all 
 over - brown every inch of he . ah , but how beautiful he be ! and he be 
 mine ; mine for ever . even if he hat I he will be mine . he can not help 
 it ; he be make out of I ; I be his father . " 

 it be too late to go . she could not tell why , but it be too late . 
 she turn away her head when Gino lift his son to his lip . this be 
 something too remote from the prettiness of the nursery . the man be 
 majestic ; he be a part of Nature ; in no ordinary love scene could he 
 ever be so great . for a wonderful physical tie bind the parent to the 
 child ; and - by some sad , strange irony - it do not bind we child 
 to our parent . for if it do , if we could answer their love not with 
 gratitude but with equal love , life would lose much of its pathos 
 and much of its squalor , and we might be wonderfully happy . gino 
 passionately embrace , Miss Abbott reverently avert her eye - both 
 of they have parent whom they do not love so very much . 

 " may I help you to wash he ? " she ask humbly . 

 he give she his son without speak , and they kneel side by side , 
 tuck up their sleeve . the child have stop cry , and his arm and 
 leg be agitate by some overpowering joy . Miss Abbott have a woman 's 
 pleasure in clean anything - more especially when the thing be human . 
 she understand little baby from long experience in a district , and 
 Gino soon cease to give her direction , and only give she thank . 

 " it be very kind of you , " he murmur , " especially in your beautiful 
 dress . he be nearly clean already . why , I take the whole morning ! there 
 be so much more of a baby than one expect . and Perfetta wash he just 
 as she wash clothe . then he scream for hour . my wife be to have a 
 light hand . ah , how he kick ! have he splash you ? I be very sorry . " 

 " I be ready for a soft towel now , " say Miss Abbott , who be strangely 
 exalt by the service . 

 " certainly ! certainly ! " he stride in a knowing way to a cupboard . but 
 he have no idea where the soft towel be . generally he dab the baby on 
 the first dry thing he find . 

 " and if you have any powder . " 

 he strike his forehead despairingly . apparently the stock of powder be 
 just exhausted . 

 she sacrifice her own clean handkerchief . he put a chair for she on the 
 loggia , which face westward , and be still pleasant and cool . there she 
 sit , with twenty mile of view behind she , and he place the dripping 
 baby on her knee . it shine now with health and beauty : it seem to 
 reflect light , like a copper vessel . just such a baby Bellini set 
 languid on his mother 's lap , or Signorelli fling wriggle on pavement 
 of marble , or Lorenzo di Credi , more reverent but less divine , lay 
 carefully among flower , with his head upon a wisp of golden straw . for 
 a time Gino contemplate they stand . then , to get a well view , he 
 kneel by the side of the chair , with his hand clasp before he . 

 so they be when Philip enter , and see , to all intent and purpose , 
 the Virgin and Child , with Donor . 

 " Hullo ! " he exclaim ; for he be glad to find thing in such cheerful 
 trim . 

 she do not greet he , but rise up unsteadily and hand the baby to his 
 father . 

 " no , do stop ! " whisper Philip . " I get your note . I be not offend ; 
 you be quite right . I really want you ; I could never have do it 
 alone . " 

 no word come from she , but she raise her hand to her mouth , like one 
 who be in sudden agony . 

 " Signorina , do stop a little - after all your kindness . " 

 she burst into tear . 

 " what be it ? " say Philip kindly . 

 she try to speak , and then go away weep bitterly . 

 the two man star at each other . by a common impulse they run on to the 
 loggia . they be just in time to see Miss Abbott disappear among the 
 tree . 

 " what be it ? " ask Philip again . there be no answer , and somehow he 
 do not want an answer . some strange thing have happen which he could 
 not presume to understand . he would find out from Miss Abbott , if ever 
 he find out at all . 

 " well , your business , " say Gino , after a puzzled sigh . 

 " our business - Miss Abbott have tell you of that . " 

 " no . " 

 " but surely - " 

 " she come for business . but she forget about it ; so do I. " 

 Perfetta , who have a genius for miss people , now return , loudly 
 complain of the size of Monteriano and the intricacy of its 
 street . Gino tell she to watch the baby . then he offer Philip a 
 cigar , and they proceed to the business . 



 chapter 8 

 " mad ! " scream Harriet , - " absolutely stark , star , rave mad ! " 

 Philip judge it well not to contradict she . 

 " what be she here for ? answer I that . what be she do in Monteriano in 
 August ? why be not   she in Normandy ? answer that . she will not . I can : she be 
 come to thwart we ; she be betray we - get hold of mother 's plan . oh , 
 goodness , my head ! " 

 he be unwise enough to reply , " you must not   accuse she of that . though 
 she be exasperate , she have not   come here to betray we . " 

 " then why have she come here ? answer I that . " 

 he make no answer . but fortunately his sister be too much agitated 
 to wait for one . " burst in on I - cry and look a disgusting 
 sight - and say she have be to see the italian . could not   even talk 
 properly ; pretend she have change her opinion . what be her opinion 
 to we ? I be very calm . I say : ' Miss Abbott , I think there be a 
 little misapprehension in this matter . my mother , Mrs. Herriton - ' oh , 
 goodness , my head ! of course you have   fail - do not   trouble to answer - I 
 know you have   fail . where be the baby , pray ? of course you have not   get 
 it . dear sweet Caroline will not   let you . oh , yes , and we be to go away at 
 once and trouble the father no more . those be her command . command ! 
 command ! " and Harriet also burst into tear . 

 Philip govern his temper . his sister be annoying , but quite 
 reasonable in her indignation . moreover , Miss Abbott have behave even 
 bad than she suppose . 

 " I have   not get the baby , Harriet , but at the same time I have not 
 exactly fail . I and Signor Carella be to have another interview 
 this afternoon , at the Caffe Garibaldi . he be perfectly reasonable and 
 pleasant . should you be dispose to come with I , you would find he 
 quite willing to discuss thing . he be desperately in want of money , and 
 have no prospect of get any . I discover that . at the same time , he 
 have a certain affection for the child . " for Philip 's insight , or perhaps 
 his opportunity , have not be equal to Miss Abbott 's . 

 Harriet would only sob , and accuse her brother of insult she ; how 
 could a lady speak to such a horrible man ? that , and nothing else , be 
 enough to stamp Caroline . oh , poor Lilia ! 

 Philip drum on the bedroom window - sill . he see no escape from the 
 deadlock . for though he speak cheerfully about his second interview with 
 Gino , he feel at the bottom of his heart that it would fail . Gino be 
 too courteous : he would not break off negotiation by sharp denial ; he 
 love this civil , half - humorous bargaining . and he love fool his 
 opponent , and do it so nicely that his opponent do not mind be 
 fool . 

 " Miss Abbott have behave extraordinarily , " he say at last ; " but at the 
 same time - " 

 his sister would not hear he . she burst forth again on the madness , the 
 interference , the intolerable duplicity of Caroline . 

 " Harriet , you must listen . my dear , you must stop cry . I have 
 something quite important to say . " 

 " I shall not stop cry , " say she . but in time , find that he would 
 not speak to she , she do stop . 

 " remember that Miss Abbott have do we no harm . she say nothing to he 
 about the matter . he assume that she be work with we : I gather 
 that . " 

 " well , she be not . " 

 " yes ; but if you be careful she may be . I interpret her behaviour thus : 
 she go to see he , honestly intend to get the child away . in the 
 note she leave I she say so , and I do not   believe she would lie . " 

 " I do . " 

 " when she get there , there be some pretty domestic scene between he 
 and the baby , and she have get sweep off in a gush of sentimentalism . 
 before very long , if I know anything about psychology , there will be a 
 reaction . she will be sweep back . " 

 " I do not   understand your long word . say plainly - " 

 " when she be sweep back , she will be invaluable . for she have make quite an 
 impression on he . he think she so nice with the baby . you know , she 
 wash it for he . " 

 " disgusting ! " 

 Harriet 's ejaculation be more aggravating than the rest of she . but 
 Philip be averse to lose his temper . the access of joy that have come 
 to he yesterday in the theatre promise to be permanent . he be more 
 anxious than heretofore to be charitable towards the world . 

 " if you want to carry off the baby , keep your peace with Miss Abbott . 
 for if she choose , she can help you well than I can . " 

 " there can be no peace between I and she , " say Harriet gloomily . 

 " do you - " 

 " oh , not all I want . she go away before I have finish 
 speak - just like those cowardly people ! - into the church . " 

 " into Santa Deodata 's ? " 

 " yes ; I be sure she need it . anything more unchristian - " 

 in time Philip go to the church also , leave his sister a little 
 calm and a little disposed to think over his advice . what have come 
 over Miss Abbott ? he have always think she both stable and sincere . 
 that conversation he have have with her last Christmas in the train to 
 Charing Cross - that alone furnish he with a parallel . for the second 
 time , Monteriano must have turn her head . he be not angry with she , 
 for he be quite indifferent to the outcome of their expedition . he be 
 only extremely interested . 

 it be now nearly midday , and the street be clear . but the intense 
 heat have break , and there be a pleasant suggestion of rain . the 
 Piazza , with its three great attraction - the Palazzo Pubblico , the 
 Collegiate Church , and the Caffe Garibaldi : the intellect , the soul , and 
 the body - have never look more charming . for a moment Philip stand in 
 its centre , much inclined to be dreamy , and think how wonderful it 
 must feel to belong to a city , however mean . he be here , however , as 
 an emissary of civilization and as a student of character , and , after a 
 sigh , he enter Santa Deodata 's to continue his mission . 

 there have be a FESTA two day before , and the church still smell of 
 incense and of garlic . the little son of the sacristan be sweep the 
 nave , more for amusement than for cleanliness , send great cloud 
 of dust over the fresco and the scattered worshipper . the sacristan 
 himself have prop a ladder in the centre of the Deluge - which fill 
 one of the nave spandrel - and be free a column from its wealth of 
 scarlet calico . much scarlet calico also lie upon the floor - for the 
 church can look as fine as any theatre - and the sacristan 's little 
 daughter be try to fold it up . she be wear a tinsel crown . the 
 crown really belong to St. Augustine . but it have be cut too big : 
 it fall down over his cheek like a collar : you never see anything so 
 absurd . one of the canon have unhook it just before the FIESTA begin , 
 and have give it to the sacristan 's daughter . 

 " please , " cry Philip , " be there an english lady here ? " 

 the man 's mouth be full of tin - tack , but he nod cheerfully towards 
 a kneeling figure . in the midst of this confusion Miss Abbott be 
 pray . 

 he be not much surprised : a spiritual breakdown be quite to be 
 expect . for though he be grow more charitable towards mankind , 
 he be still a little jaunty , and too apt to stake out beforehand the 
 course that will be pursue by the wound soul . it do not surprise 
 he , however , that she should greet he naturally , with none of the sour 
 self - consciousness of a person who have just rise from her knee . this 
 be indeed the spirit of Santa Deodata 's , where a prayer to God be 
 think none the bad of because it come next to a pleasant word to 
 a neighbour . " I be sure that I need it , " say she ; and he , who have 
 expect she to be ashamed , become confused , and know not what to reply . 

 " I have   nothing to tell you , " she continue . " I have simply change 
 straight round . if I have plan the whole thing out , I could not have 
 treat you bad . I can talk it over now ; but please believe that I 
 have be cry . " 

 " and please believe that I have not come to scold you , " say Philip . " I 
 know what have happen . " 

 " what ? " ask Miss Abbott . instinctively she lead the way to the famous 
 chapel , the fifth chapel on the right , wherein Giovanni da Empoli have 
 paint the death and burial of the saint . here they could sit out of 
 the dust and the noise , and proceed with a discussion which promise to 
 be important . 

 " what might have happen to I - he have make you believe that he love 
 the child . " 

 " oh , yes ; he have . he will never give it up . " 

 " at present it be still unsettled . " 

 " it will never be settle . " 

 " perhaps not . well , as I say , I know what have happen , and I be not 
 here to scold you . but I must ask you to withdraw from the thing for the 
 present . Harriet be furious . but she will calm down when she realize 
 that you have do we no harm , and will do none . " 

 " I can do no more , " she say . " but I tell you plainly I have change 
 side . " 

 " if you do no more , that be all we want . you promise not to prejudice 
 our cause by speak to Signor Carella ? " 

 " oh , certainly . I do not   want to speak to he again ; I shall not   ever see 
 he again . " 

 " quite nice , be not   he ? " 

 " quite . " 

 " well , that be all I want to know . I will go and tell Harriet of your 
 promise , and I think things'll quiet down now . " 

 but he do not move , for it be an increase pleasure to he to be 
 near she , and her charm be at its strong today . he think less of 
 psychology and feminine reaction . the gush of sentimentalism which have 
 carry she away have only make she more alluring . he be content to 
 observe her beauty and to profit by the tenderness and the wisdom that 
 dwelt within she . 

 " why be not   you angry with I ? " she ask , after a pause . 

 " because I understand you - all side , I think , - Harriet , Signor Carella , 
 even my mother . " 

 " you do understand wonderfully . you be the only one of we who have a 
 general view of the muddle . " 

 he smile with pleasure . it be the first time she have ever praise 
 he . his eye rest agreeably on Santa Deodata , who be die in full 
 sanctity , upon her back . there be a window open behind she , reveal 
 just such a view as he have see that morning , and on her widow 
 mother 's dresser there stand just such another copper pot . the saint 
 look neither at the view nor at the pot , and at her widow mother 
 still less . for lo ! she have a vision : the head and shoulder of St. 
 Augustine be slide like some miraculous enamel along the rough - cast 
 wall . it be a gentle saint who be content with half another saint to see 
 her die . in her death , as in her life , Santa Deodata do not accomplish 
 much . 

 " so what be you go to do ? " say Miss Abbott . 

 Philip start , not so much at the word as at the sudden change in the 
 voice . " do ? " he echo , rather dismayed . " this afternoon I have another 
 interview . " 

 " it will come to nothing . well ? " 

 " then another . if that fail I shall wire home for instruction . I dare 
 say we may fail altogether , but we shall fail honourably . " 

 she have often be decide . but now behind her decision there be a note 
 of passion . she strike he not as different , but as more important , and 
 he mind it very much when she say - 

 " that be not do anything ! you would be do something if you 
 kidnap the baby , or if you go straight away . but that ! to fail 
 honourably ! to come out of the thing as well as you can ! be that all you 
 be after ? " 

 " why , yes , " he stammer . " since we talk openly , that be all I be after 
 just now . what else be there ? if I can persuade Signor Carella to give 
 in , so much the well . if he will not , I must report the failure to my 
 mother and then go home . why , Miss Abbott , you can not   expect I to follow 
 you through all these turn - " 

 " I do not ! but I do expect you to settle what be right and to follow 
 that . do you want the child to stop with his father , who love he and 
 will bring he up badly , or do you want he to come to Sawston , where 
 no one love he , but where he will be bring up well ? there be the 
 question put dispassionately enough even for you . settle it . settle 
 which side you will fight on . but do not   go talk about an ' honourable 
 failure , ' which mean simply not think and not act at all . " 

 " because I understand the position of Signor Carella and of you , it be no 
 reason that - " 

 " none at all . fight as if you think we wrong . oh , what be the use of your 
 fair - mindedness if you never decide for yourself ? any one get hold of 
 you and make you do what they want . and you see through they and laugh 
 at they - and do it . it be not enough to see clearly ; I be muddle - head 
 and stupid , and not worth a quarter of you , but I have try to do 
 what seem right at the time . and you - your brain and your insight be 
 splendid . but when you see what be right you be too idle to do it . you 
 tell I once that we shall be judge by our intention , not by our 
 accomplishment . I think it a grand remark . but we must intend to 
 accomplish - not sit intend on a chair . " 

 " you be wonderful ! " he say gravely . 

 " oh , you appreciate I ! " she burst out again . " I wish you do not . you 
 appreciate we all - see good in all of we . and all the time you be 
 dead - dead - dead . look , why be not   you angry ? " she come up to he , and 
 then her mood suddenly change , and she take hold of both his hand . 
 " you be so splendid , Mr. Herriton , that I can not   bear to see you waste . 
 I can not   bear - she have not be good to you - your mother . " 

 " Miss Abbott , do not   worry over I . some people be bear not to do 
 thing . I be one of they ; I never do anything at school or at the Bar . 
 I come out to stop Lilia 's marriage , and it be too late . I come out 
 intend to get the baby , and I shall return an ' honourable failure . ' I 
 never expect anything to happen now , and so I be never disappointed . 
 you would be surprised to know what my great event be . go to the 
 theatre yesterday , talk to you now - I do not   suppose I shall ever 
 meet anything great . I seem fat to pass through the world without 
 collide with it or move it - and I be sure I can not   tell you whether 
 the fate 's good or evil . I do not   die - I do not   fall in love . and if other 
 people die or fall in love they always do it when I be just not there . 
 you be quite right ; life to I be just a spectacle , which - thank God , 
 and thank Italy , and thank you - be now more beautiful and heartening 
 than it have ever be before . " 

 she say solemnly , " I wish something would happen to you , my dear 
 friend ; I wish something would happen to you . " 

 " but why ? " he ask , smile . " prove to I why I do not   do as I be . " 

 she also smile , very gravely . she could not prove it . no argument 
 exist . their discourse , splendid as it have be , result in nothing , 
 and their respective opinion and policy be exactly the same when 
 they leave the church as when they have enter it . 

 Harriet be rude at lunch . she call Miss Abbott a turncoat and a 
 coward to her face . Miss Abbott resent neither epithet , feel that 
 one be justify and the other not unreasonable . she try to avoid 
 even the suspicion of satire in her reply . but Harriet be sure 
 that she be satirical because she be so calm . she get more and more 
 violent , and Philip at one time fear that she would come to blow . 

 " look here ! " he cry , with something of the old manner , " it be too 
 hot for this . we have   be talk and interview each other all the 
 morning , and I have another interview this afternoon . I do stipulate for 
 silence . let each lady retire to her bedroom with a book . " 

 " I retire to pack , " say Harriet . " please remind Signor Carella , Philip , 
 that the baby be to be here by half - past eight this evening . " 

 " oh , certainly , Harriet . I shall make a point of remind he . " 

 " and order a carriage to take we to the evening train . " 

 " and please , " say Miss Abbott , " would you order a carriage for I too ? " 

 " you go ? " he exclaim . 

 " of course , " she reply , suddenly flush . " why not ? " 

 " why , of course you would be go . two carriage , then . two carriage 
 for the evening train . " he look at his sister hopelessly . " Harriet , 
 whatever be you up to ? we shall never be ready . " 

 " order my carriage for the evening train , " say Harriet , and depart . 

 " well , I suppose I shall . and I shall also have my interview with Signor 
 Carella . " 

 Miss Abbott give a little sigh . 

 " but why should you mind ? do you suppose that I shall have the slight 
 influence over he ? " 

 " no . but - I can not   repeat all that I say in the church . you ought never 
 to see he again . you ought to bundle Harriet into a carriage , not this 
 evening , but now , and drive she straight away . " 

 " perhaps I ought . but it be not   a very big ' ought . ' whatever Harriet and 
 I do the issue be the same . why , I can see the splendour of it - even the 
 humour . Gino sit up here on the mountain - top with his cub . we come 
 and ask for it . he welcome we . we ask for it again . he be equally 
 pleasant . I be agreeable to spend the whole week bargaining with he . but 
 I know that at the end of it I shall descend empty - handed to the 
 plain . it might be fine of I to make up my mind . but I be not a fine 
 character . and nothing hang on it . " 

 " perhaps I be extreme , " she say humbly . " I have   be try to run you , 
 just like your mother . I feel you ought to fight it out with Harriet . 
 every little trifle , for some reason , do seem incalculably important 
 today , and when you say of a thing that ' nothing hang on it , ' it sound 
 like blasphemy . there be never any know -   how be I to put it ?   - which 
 of our action , which of our idleness will not   have thing hang on it 
 for ever . " 

 he assent , but her remark have only an aesthetic value . he be not 
 prepared to take it to his heart . all the afternoon he rest - worry , 
 but not exactly despondent . the thing would jog out somehow . probably 
 Miss Abbott be right . the baby have well stop where it be love . and 
 that , probably , be what the fate have decree . he feel little interest 
 in the matter , and he be sure that he have no influence . 

 it be not surprising , therefore , that the interview at the Caffe 
 Garibaldi come to nothing . neither of they take it very seriously . and 
 before long Gino have discover how thing lay , and be rag his 
 companion hopelessly . Philip try to look offended , but in the end 
 he have to laugh . " well , you be right , " he say . " this affair be be 
 manage by the lady . " 

 " ah , the lady - the lady ! " cry the other , and then he roar like 
 a millionaire for two cup of black coffee , and insist on treat his 
 friend , as a sign that their strife be over . 

 " well , I have do my good , " say Philip , dip a long slice of sugar 
 into his cup , and watch the brown liquid ascend into it . " I shall 
 face my mother with a good conscience . will you bear I witness that 
 I have   do my good ? " 

 " my poor fellow , I will ! " he lay a sympathetic hand on Philip 's knee . 

 " and that I have - " the sugar be now impregnate with coffee , and he 
 bent forward to swallow it . as he do so his eye sweep the opposite of 
 the Piazza , and he see there , watch they , Harriet . " Mia sorella ! " he 
 exclaim . Gino , much amused , lay his hand upon the little table , and 
 beat the marble humorously with his fist . Harriet turn away and begin 
 gloomily to inspect the Palazzo Pubblico . 

 " Poor Harriet ! " say Philip , swallow the sugar . " one more wrench and 
 it will all be over for she ; we be leave this evening . " 

 Gino be sorry for this . " then you will not be here this evening as you 
 promise we . all three leave ? " 

 " all three , " say Philip , who have not reveal the secession of Miss 
 Abbott ; " by the night train ; at least , that be my sister 's plan . so I be 
 afraid I shall not   be here . " 

 they watch the depart figure of Harriet , and then enter upon the 
 final civility . they shake each other warmly by both hand . Philip 
 be to come again next year , and to write beforehand . he be to be 
 introduce to Gino 's wife , for he be tell of the marriage now . he be 
 to be godfather to his next baby . as for Gino , he would remember some 
 time that Philip like vermouth . he beg he to give his love to irma . 
 Mrs. Herriton - should he send she his sympathetic regard ? no ; perhaps 
 that would hardly do . 

 so the two young man part with a good deal of genuine affection . for 
 the barrier of language be sometimes a blessed barrier , which only let 
 pass what be good . or - to put the thing less cynically - we may be well 
 in new clean word , which have never be taint by our pettiness or 
 vice . Philip , at all event , live more graciously in Italian , the very 
 phrase of which entice one to be happy and kind . it be horrible to 
 think of the English of Harriet , whose every word would be as hard , as 
 distinct , and as unfinished as a lump of coal . 

 Harriet , however , talk little . she have see enough to know that her 
 brother have fail again , and with unwonted dignity she accept the 
 situation . she do her packing , she write up her diary , she make a brown 
 paper cover for the new Baedeker . Philip , find she so amenable , try 
 to discuss their future plan . but she only say that they would sleep 
 in Florence , and tell he to telegraph for room . they have supper 
 alone . Miss Abbott do not come down . the landlady tell they that Signor 
 Carella have call on Miss Abbott to say good - bye , but she , though in , 
 have not be able to see he . she also tell they that it have begin 
 to rain . Harriet sigh , but indicate to her brother that he be not 
 responsible . 

 the carriage come round at a quarter past eight . it be not rain 
 much , but the night be extraordinarily dark , and one of the driver 
 want to go slowly to the station . Miss Abbott come down and say that 
 she be ready , and would start at once . 

 " yes , do , " say Philip , who be stand in the hall . " now that we have 
 quarrel we scarcely want to travel in procession all the way down the 
 hill . well , good - bye ; it be all over at last ; another scene in my pageant 
 have shift . " 

 " good - bye ; it be be a great pleasure to see you . I hope that will not 
 shift , at all event . " she grip his hand . 

 " you sound despondent , " he say , laugh . " do not   forget that you return 
 victorious . " 

 " I suppose I do , " she reply , more despondently than ever , and get into 
 the carriage . he conclude that she be think of her reception at 
 Sawston , whither her fame would doubtless precede she . whatever would 
 Mrs. Herriton do ? she could make thing quite unpleasant when she 
 think it right . she might think it right to be silent , but then there 
 be Harriet . who would bridle Harriet 's tongue ? between the two of 
 they Miss Abbott be bind to have a bad time . her reputation , both for 
 consistency and for moral enthusiasm , would be lose for ever . 

 " it be hard luck on she , " he think . " she be a good person . I must do 
 for her anything I can . " their intimacy have be very rapid , but he too 
 hop that it would not shift . he believe that he understand she , 
 and that she , by now , have see the bad of he . what if after a 
 long time - if after all - he flush like a boy as he look after her 
 carriage . 

 he go into the dining - room to look for Harriet . Harriet be not to 
 be find . her bedroom , too , be empty . all that be leave of she be 
 the purple prayer - book which lie open on the bed . Philip take it up 
 aimlessly , and see - " blessed be the Lord my God who teacheth my hand to 
 war and my finger to fight . " he put the book in his pocket , and begin 
 to brood over more profitable theme . 

 Santa Deodata give out half past eight . all the luggage be on , and 
 still Harriet have not appear . " depend upon it , " say the landlady , 
 ' she have go to Signor Carella 's to say good - bye to her little nephew . " 
 Philip do not think it likely . they shout all over the house and 
 still there be no Harriet . he begin to be uneasy . he be helpless 
 without Miss Abbott ; her grave , kind face have cheer he wonderfully , 
 even when it look displeased . Monteriano be sad without she ; the rain 
 be thicken ; the scrap of Donizetti float tunelessly out of the 
 wineshop , and of the great tower opposite he could only see the base , 
 fresh paper with the advertisement of quack . 

 a man come up the street with a note . Philip read , " start at once . pick 
 I up outside the gate . pay the bearer . H. H. " 

 " do the lady give you this note ? " he cry . 

 the man be unintelligible . 

 " speak up ! " exclaim Philip . " who give it you - and where ? " 

 nothing but horrible sighing and bubbling come out of the man . 

 " be patient with he , " say the driver , turn round on the box . " it be 
 the poor idiot . " and the landlady come out of the hotel and echo " the 
 poor idiot . he can not speak . he take message for we all . " 

 Philip then see that the messenger be a ghastly creature , quite bald , 
 with trickle eye and grey twitching nose . in another country he would 
 have be shut up ; here he be accept as a public institution , and 
 part of Nature 's scheme . 

 " Ugh ! " shudder the Englishman . " Signora padrona , find out from he ; 
 this note be from my sister . what do it mean ? where do he see she ? " 

 " it be no good , " say the landlady . " he understand everything but he 
 can explain nothing . " 

 " he have vision of the saint , " say the man who drive the cab . 

 " but my sister - where have she go ? how have she meet he ? " 

 " she have go for a walk , " assert the landlady . it be a nasty 
 evening , but she be begin to understand the English . " she have go 
 for a walk - perhaps to wish good - bye to her little nephew . prefer to 
 come back another way , she have send you this note by the poor idiot and 
 be wait for you outside the Siena gate . many of my guest do this . " 

 there be nothing to do but to obey the message . he shake hand with 
 the landlady , give the messenger a nickel piece , and drive away . after 
 a dozen yard the carriage stop . the poor idiot be run and 
 whimpering behind . 

 " go on , " cry Philip . " I have pay he plenty . " 

 a horrible hand push three soldi into his lap . it be part of the 
 idiot 's malady only to receive what be just for his service . this be 
 the change out of the nickel piece . 

 " go on ! " shout Philip , and fling the money into the road . he be 
 frighten at the episode ; the whole of life have become unreal . it be 
 a relief to be out of the Siena gate . they draw up for a moment on the 
 terrace . but there be no sign of Harriet . the driver call to the 
 Dogana man . but they have see no english lady pass . 

 " what be I to do ? " he cry ; " it be not like the lady to be late . we 
 shall miss the train . " 

 " let we drive slowly , " say the driver , " and you shall call she by name 
 as we go . " 

 so they start down into the night , Philip call " Harriet ! Harriet ! 
 Harriet ! " and there she be , wait for they in the wet , at the first 
 turn of the zigzag . 

 " Harriet , why do not   you answer ? " 

 " I hear you come , " say she , and get quickly in . not till then do he 
 see that she carry a bundle . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " hush - " 

 " whatever be that ? " 

 " hush - sleep . " 

 Harriet have succeed where Miss Abbott and Philip have fail . it be 
 the baby . 

 she would not let he talk . the baby , she repeat , be asleep , and she 
 put up an umbrella to shield it and she from the rain . he should 
 hear all later , so he have to conjecture the course of the wonderful 
 interview - an interview between the south pole and the North . it be 
 quite easy to conjecture : gino crumple up suddenly before the intense 
 conviction of Harriet ; be tell , perhaps , to his face that he be a 
 villain ; yield his only son perhaps for money , perhaps for nothing . 
 " Poor Gino , " he think . " he be no great than I be , after all . " 

 then he think of Miss Abbott , whose carriage must be descend the 
 darkness some mile or two below they , and his easy self - accusation 
 fail . she , too , have conviction ; he have feel its force ; he would feel 
 it again when she know this day 's sombre and unexpected close . 

 " you have be pretty secret , " he say ; " you might tell I a little now . 
 what do we pay for he ? all we have   get ? " 

 " hush ! " answer Harriet , and dandle the bundle laboriously , like some 
 bony prophetess - Judith , or Deborah , or Jael . he have last see the baby 
 sprawl on the knee of Miss Abbott , shin and naked , with twenty 
 mile of view behind he , and his father kneel by his foot . and 
 that remembrance , together with Harriet , and the darkness , and the 
 poor idiot , and the silent rain , fill he with sorrow and with the 
 expectation of sorrow to come . 

 Monteriano have long disappear , and he could see nothing but the 
 occasional wet stem of an olive , which their lamp illumine as they 
 pass it . they travel quickly , for this driver do not care how fast 
 he go to the station , and would dash down each incline and scuttle 
 perilously round the curve . 

 " look here , Harriet , " he say at last , " I feel bad ; I want to see the 
 baby . " 

 " hush ! " 

 " I do not   mind if I do wake he up . I want to see he . I have   as much right 
 in he as you . " 

 Harriet give in . but it be too dark for he to see the child 's face . 
 " wait a minute , " he whisper , and before she could stop he he have 
 light a match under the shelter of her umbrella . " but he be awake ! " he 
 exclaim . the match go out . 

 " good ickle quiet boysey , then . " 

 Philip wince . " his face , do you know , strike I as all wrong . " 

 " all wrong ? " 

 " all pucker queerly . " 

 " of course - with the shadow - you could not   see he . " 

 " well , hold he up again . " she do so . he light another match . it go out 
 quickly , but not before he have see that the baby be cry . 

 " nonsense , " say Harriet sharply . " we should hear he if he cry . " 

 " no , he be cry hard ; I think so before , and I be certain now . " 

 Harriet touch the child 's face . it be bath in tear . " oh , the night 
 air , I suppose , " she say , " or perhaps the wet of the rain . " 

 " I say , you have not   hurt it , or hold it the wrong way , or anything ; 
 it be too uncanny - cry and no noise . why do not   you get Perfetta to 
 carry it to the hotel instead of muddle with the messenger ? it be a 
 marvel he understand about the note . " 

 " oh , he understand . " and he could feel her shudder . " he try to carry 
 the baby - " 

 " but why not Gino or Perfetta ? " 

 " Philip , do not   talk . must I say it again ? do not   talk . the baby want 
 to sleep . " she croon harshly as they descend , and now and then she 
 wipe up the tear which well inexhaustibly from the little eye . 
 Philip look away , wink at time himself . it be as if they be 
 travel with the whole world 's sorrow , as if all the mystery , all the 
 persistency of woe be gather to a single fount . the road be 
 now coat with mud , and the carriage go more quietly but not less 
 swiftly , slide by long zigzag into the night . he know the landmark 
 pretty well : here be the crossroad to Poggibonsi ; and the last view of 
 Monteriano , if they have light , would be from here . soon they ought to 
 come to that little wood where violet be so plentiful in spring . he 
 wish the weather have not change ; it be not cold , but the air be 
 extraordinarily damp . it could not be good for the child . 

 " I suppose he breathe , and all that sort of thing ? " he say . 

 " of course , " say Harriet , in an angry whisper . " you have   start he 
 again . I be certain he be asleep . I do wish you would not   talk ; it make 
 I so nervous . " 

 " I be nervous too . I wish he would scream . it be too uncanny . poor Gino ! I be 
 terribly sorry for Gino . " 

 " be you ? " 

 " because he be weak - like most of we . he do not   know what he want . he 
 do not   grip on to life . but I like that man , and I be sorry for he . " 

 naturally enough she make no answer . 

 " you despise he , Harriet , and you despise I . but you do we no good 
 by it . we fool want some one to set we on our foot . suppose a really 
 decent woman have set up Gino - I believe Caroline Abbott might have do 
 it - might not   he have be another man ? " 

 " Philip , " she interrupt , with an attempt at nonchalance , " do you 
 happen to have those match handy ? we might as well look at the baby 
 again if you have . " 

 the first match blow out immediately . so do the second . he suggest 
 that they should stop the carriage and borrow the lamp from the driver . 

 " oh , I do not   want all that bother . try again . " 

 they enter the little wood as he try to strike the third match . 
 at last it catch . Harriet poise the umbrella rightly , and for a full 
 quarter minute they contemplate the face that tremble in the light of 
 the trembling flame . then there be a shout and a crash . they be lie 
 in the mud in darkness . the carriage have overturn . 

 Philip be a good deal hurt . he sit up and rock himself to and fro , 
 hold his arm . he could just make out the outline of the carriage 
 above he , and the outline of the carriage cushion and of their 
 luggage upon the grey road . the accident have take place in the wood , 
 where it be even dark than in the open . 

 " be you all right ? " he manage to say . Harriet be scream , the horse 
 be kick , the driver be curse some other man . 

 Harriet 's scream become coherent . " the baby - the baby - it slip - it be 
 go from my arm - I steal it ! " 

 " God help I ! " say Philip . a cold circle come round his mouth , and , he 
 faint . 

 when he recover it be still the same confusion . the horse be 
 kicking , the baby have not be find , and Harriet still scream like a 
 maniac , " I steal it ! I steal it ! I steal it ! it slip out of my arm ! " 

 " keep still ! " he command the driver . " let no one move . we may tread on 
 it . keep still . " 

 for a moment they all obey he . he begin to crawl through the mud , 
 touch first this , then that , grasp the cushion by mistake , 
 listen for the faint whisper that might guide he . he try to 
 light a match , hold the box in his tooth and strike at it with the 
 uninjured hand . at last he succeed , and the light fall upon the bundle 
 which he be seek . 

 it have roll off the road into the wood a little way , and have fall 
 across a great rut . so tiny it be that have it fall lengthway it 
 would have disappear , and he might never have find it . 

 " I steal it ! I and the idiot - no one be there . " she burst out laugh . 

 he sit down and lay it on his knee . then he try to cleanse the face 
 from the mud and the rain and the tear . his arm , he suppose , be 
 break , but he could still move it a little , and for the moment he 
 forget all pain . he be listen - not for a cry , but for the tick of a 
 heart or the slight tremor of breath . 

 " where be you ? " call a voice . it be Miss Abbott , against whose 
 carriage they have collide . she have relit one of the lamp , and be 
 pick her way towards he . 

 " Silence ! " he call again , and again they obey . he shake the bundle ; 
 he breathe into it ; he open his coat and press it against he . then 
 he listen , and hear nothing but the rain and the pant horse , and 
 Harriet , who be somewhere chuckle to herself in the dark . 

 Miss Abbott approach , and take it gently from he . the face be 
 already chilly , but thank to Philip it be no long wet . nor would it 
 again be wet by any tear . 



 chapter 9 

 the detail of Harriet 's crime be never know . in her illness 
 she speak more of the inlaid box that she lend to Lilia - lent , not 
 give - than of recent trouble . it be clear that she have go prepare 
 for an interview with Gino , and find he out , she have yield to a 
 grotesque temptation . but how far this be the result of ill - temper , to 
 what extent she have be fortify by her religion , when and how she have 
 meet the poor idiot - these question be never answer , nor do they 
 interest Philip greatly . detection be certain : they would have be 
 arrest by the police of Florence or Milan , or at the frontier . as it 
 be , they have be stop in a simple manner a few mile out of the 
 town . 

 as yet he could scarcely survey the thing . it be too great . round the 
 italian baby who have die in the mud there centre deep passion and 
 high hope . People have be wicked or wrong in the matter ; no one save 
 himself have be trivial . now the baby have go , but there remain this 
 vast apparatus of pride and pity and love . for the dead , who seem 
 to take away so much , really take with they nothing that be ours . the 
 passion they have arouse life after they , easy to transmute or to 
 transfer , but well - nigh impossible to destroy . and Philip know that he 
 be still voyage on the same magnificent , perilous sea , with the sun 
 or the cloud above he , and the tide below . 

 the course of the moment - that , at all event , be certain . he and no 
 one else must take the news to Gino . it be easy to talk of Harriet 's 
 crime - easy also to blame the negligent Perfetta or Mrs. Herriton at 
 home . every one have contribute - even Miss Abbott and Irma . if one 
 choose , one might consider the catastrophe composite or the work of fate . 
 but Philip do not so choose . it be his own fault , due to acknowledge 
 weakness in his own character . therefore he , and no one else , must take 
 the news of it to Gino . 

 nothing prevent he . Miss Abbott be engage with Harriet , and people 
 have spring out of the darkness and be conduct they towards some 
 cottage . Philip have only to get into the uninjured carriage and order 
 the driver to return . he be back at Monteriano after a two hour ' 
 absence . Perfetta be in the house now , and greet he cheerfully . 
 Pain , physical and mental , have make he stupid . it be some time before 
 he realize that she have never miss the child . 

 Gino be still out . the woman take he to the reception - room , just as 
 she have take Miss Abbott in the morning , and dust a circle for he on 
 one of the horsehair chair . but it be dark now , so she leave the guest 
 a little lamp . 

 " I will be as quick as I can , " she tell he . " but there be many street 
 in Monteriano ; he be sometimes difficult to find . I could not find he 
 this morning . " 

 " go first to the Caffe Garibaldi , " say Philip , remember that this 
 be the hour appoint by his friend of yesterday . 

 he occupy the time he be leave alone not in thinking - there be 
 nothing to think about ; he simply have to tell a few fact - but in try 
 to make a sling for his broken arm . the trouble be in the elbow - joint , 
 and as long as he keep this motionless he could go on as usual . but 
 inflammation be begin , and the slight jar give he agony . the 
 sling be not fit before Gino leap up the stair , cry - 

 " so you be back ! how glad I be ! we be all wait - " 

 Philip have see too much to be nervous . in low , even tone he tell what 
 have happen ; and the other , also perfectly calm , hear he to the end . 
 in the silence Perfetta call up that she have forget the baby 's 
 evening milk ; she must fetch it . when she have go Gino take up the lamp 
 without a word , and they go into the other room . 

 " my sister be ill , " say Philip , " and Miss Abbott be guiltless . I should 
 be glad if you do not have to trouble they . " 

 Gino have stoop down by the way , and be feel the place where his 
 son have lie . now and then he frown a little and glance at Philip . 

 " it be through I , " he continue . " it happen because I be cowardly 
 and idle . I have come to know what you will do . " 

 Gino have leave the rug , and begin to pat the table from the end , as if 
 he be blind . the action be so uncanny that Philip be drive to 
 intervene . 

 " gently , man , gently ; he be not here . " 

 he go up and touch he on the shoulder . 

 he twitch away , and begin to pass his hand over thing more 
 rapidly - over the table , the chair , the entire floor , the wall as high 
 as he could reach they . Philip have not presume to comfort he . but now 
 the tension be too great - he try . 

 " break down , Gino ; you must break down . scream and curse and give in for 
 a little ; you must break down . " 

 there be no reply , and no cessation of the sweep hand . 

 " it be time to be unhappy . break down or you will be ill like my sister . 
 you will go - " 

 the tour of the room be over . he have touch everything in it except 
 Philip . now he approach he . he face be that of a man who have lose 
 his old reason for life and seek a new one . 

 " Gino ! " 

 he stop for a moment ; then he come nearer . Philip stand his ground . 

 " you be to do what you like with I , Gino . your son be dead , Gino . he 
 die in my arm , remember . it do not excuse I ; but he do die in my 
 arm . " 

 the left hand come forward , slowly this time . it hover before Philip 
 like an insect . then it descend and grip he by his broken elbow . 

 Philip strike out with all the strength of his other arm . Gino fall to 
 the blow without a cry or a word . 

 " you brute ! " exclaim the Englishman . " kill I if you like ! but just 
 you leave my broken arm alone . " 

 then he be seize with remorse , and kneel beside his adversary and 
 try to revive he . he manage to raise he up , and prop his body 
 against his own . he pass his arm round he . again he be fill with 
 pity and tenderness . he await the revival without fear , sure that both 
 of they be safe at last . 

 Gino recover suddenly . his lip move . for one blessed moment it 
 seem that he be go to speak . but he scramble up in silence , 
 remember everything , and he make not towards Philip , but towards the 
 lamp . 

 " do what you like ; but think first - " 

 the lamp be toss across the room , out through the loggia . it break 
 against one of the tree below . Philip begin to cry out in the dark . 

 Gino approach from behind and give he a sharp pinch . Philip spin 
 round with a yell . he have only be pinch on the back , but he know 
 what be in store for he . he strike out , exhort the devil to fight 
 he , to kill he , to do anything but this . then he stumble to the door . 
 it be open . he lose his head , and , instead of turn down the stair , 
 he run across the landing into the room opposite . there he lie down on 
 the floor between the stove and the skirting - board . 

 his sens grow sharp . he could hear Gino come in on tiptoe . he even 
 know what be pass in his mind , how now he be at fault , now he 
 be hopeful , now he be wonder whether after all the victim have not 
 escape down the stair . there be a quick swoop above he , and then 
 a low growl like a dog 's . Gino have break his finger - nail against the 
 stove . 

 physical pain be almost too terrible to bear . we can just bear it when 
 it come by accident or for our good - as it generally do in modern 
 life - except at school . but when it be cause by the malignity of a 
 man , full grown , fashion like ourselves , all our control disappear . 
 Philip 's one thought be to get away from that room at whatever 
 sacrifice of nobility or pride . 

 Gino be now at the further end of the room , grope by the little 
 table . suddenly the instinct come to he . he crawl quickly to where 
 Philip lie and have he clean by the elbow . 

 the whole arm seem red - hot , and the broken bone grate in the joint , 
 send out shoot of the essence of pain . his other arm be pinion 
 against the wall , and Gino have trample in behind the stove and be 
 kneel on his leg . for the space of a minute he yell and yell 
 with all the force of his lung . then this solace be deny he . the 
 other hand , moist and strong , begin to close round his throat . 

 at first he be glad , for here , he think , be death at last . but 
 it be only a new torture ; perhaps Gino inherit the skill of his 
 ancestor - and childlike ruffian who fling each other from the tower . 
 just as the windpipe close , the hand fall off , and Philip be revive 
 by the motion of his arm . and just as he be about to faint and gain at 
 last one moment of oblivion , the motion stop , and he would struggle 
 instead against the pressure on his throat . 

 vivid picture be dance through the pain - Lilia die some month 
 back in this very house , Miss Abbott bend over the baby , his mother 
 at home , now read evening prayer to the servant . he feel that he 
 be grow weak ; his brain wander ; the agony do not seem so great . 
 not all Gino 's care could indefinitely postpone the end . his yell and 
 gurgle become mechanical - function of the tortured flesh rather than 
 true note of indignation and despair . he be conscious of a horrid 
 tumbling . then his arm be pull a little too roughly , and everything 
 be quiet at last . 

 " but your son be dead , Gino . your son be dead , dear Gino . your son be 
 dead . " 

 the room be full of light , and Miss Abbott have Gino by the shoulder , 
 hold he down in a chair . she be exhaust with the struggle , and 
 her arm be tremble . 

 " what be the good of another death ? what be the good of more pain ? " 

 he too begin to tremble . then he turn and look curiously at Philip , 
 whose face , cover with dust and foam , be visible by the stove . Miss 
 Abbott allow he to get up , though she still hold he firmly . he give 
 a loud and curious cry - a cry of interrogation it might be call . below 
 there be the noise of Perfetta return with the baby 's milk . 

 " go to he , " say Miss Abbott , indicate Philip . " pick he up . treat 
 he kindly . " 

 she release he , and he approach Philip slowly . his eye be fill 
 with trouble . he bend down , as if he would gently raise he up . 

 " help ! help ! " moan Philip . his body have suffer too much from Gino . 
 it could not bear to be touch by he . 

 Gino seem to understand . he stop , crouch above he . Miss Abbott 
 herself come forward and lift her friend in her arm . 

 " oh , the foul devil ! " he murmur . " kill he ! kill he for I . " 

 Miss Abbott lay he tenderly on the couch and wipe his face . then she 
 say gravely to they both , " this thing stop here . " 

 " Latte ! latte ! " cry Perfetta , hilariously ascend the stair . 

 " remember , " she continue , " there be to be no revenge . I will have no 
 more intentional evil . we be not to fight with each other any more . " 

 " I shall never forgive he , " sigh Philip . 

 " Latte ! latte freschissima ! bianca come neve ! " Perfetta come in with 
 another lamp and a little jug . 

 Gino speak for the first time . " put the milk on the table , " he say . 
 " it will not be want in the other room . " the peril be over at last . 
 a great sob shake the whole body , another follow , and then he give a 
 pierce cry of woe , and stumble towards Miss Abbott like a child and 
 clung to she . 

 all through the day Miss Abbott have seem to Philip like a goddess , and 
 more than ever do she seem so now . many people look young and more 
 intimate during great emotion . but some there be who look old , and 
 remote , and he could not think that there be little difference in 
 year , and none in composition , between she and the man whose head be 
 lay upon her breast . her eye be open , full of infinite pity and 
 full of majesty , as if they discern the boundary of sorrow , and see 
 unimaginable tract beyond . such eye he have see in great picture but 
 never in a mortal . her hand be fold round the sufferer , stroke 
 he lightly , for even a goddess can do no more than that . and it seem 
 fitting , too , that she should bend her head and touch his forehead with 
 her lip . 

 Philip look away , as he sometimes look away from the great picture 
 where visible form suddenly become inadequate for the thing they have 
 show to we . he be happy ; he be assure that there be greatness in 
 the world . there come to he an earnest desire to be good through the 
 example of this good woman . he would try henceforward to be worthy of 
 the thing she have reveal . quietly , without hysterical prayer or 
 banging of drum , he undergo conversion . he be save . 

 " that milk , " say she , " need not be waste . take it , Signor Carella , and 
 persuade Mr. Herriton to drink . " 

 Gino obey she , and carry the child 's milk to Philip . and Philip 
 obey also and drank . 

 " be there any left ? " 

 " a little , " answer Gino . 

 " then finish it . " for she be determined to use such remnant as lie 
 about the world . 

 " will you not have some ? " 

 " I do not care for milk ; finish it all . " 

 " Philip , have you have enough milk ? " 

 " yes , thank you , Gino ; finish it all . " 

 he drink the milk , and then , either by accident or in some spasm of 
 pain , break the jug to piece . Perfetta exclaim in bewilderment . " it 
 do not matter , " he tell she . " it do not matter . it will never be 
 want any more . " 



 chapter 10 

 " he will have to marry she , " say Philip . " I hear from he this 
 morning , just as we leave Milan . he find he have go too far to back 
 out . it would be expensive . I do not   know how much he mind - not as much 
 as we suppose , I think . at all event there be not a word of blame in the 
 letter . I do not   believe he even feel angry . I never be so completely 
 forgive . ever since you stop he kill I , it have be a vision of 
 perfect friendship . he nurse I , he lie for I at the inqu , and at 
 the funeral , though he be cry , you would have think it be my son 
 who have die . certainly I be the only person he have to be kind to ; 
 he be so distressed not to make Harriet 's acquaintance , and that he 
 scarcely see anything of you . in his letter he say so again . " 

 " thank he , please , when you write , " say Miss Abbott , " and give he my 
 kind regard . " 

 " indeed I will . " he be surprised that she could slide away from the 
 man so easily . for his own part , he be bind by tie of almost alarming 
 intimacy . Gino have the southern knack of friendship . in the interval 
 of business he would pull out Philip 's life , turn it inside out , 
 remodel it , and advise he how to use it for the good . the sensation be 
 pleasant , for he be a kind as well as a skilful operator . but Philip 
 come away feeling that he have not a secret corner leave . in that 
 very letter Gino have again implore he , as a refuge from domestic 
 difficulty , " to marry Miss Abbott , even if her dowry be small . " and 
 how Miss Abbott herself , after such tragic intercourse , could resume 
 the convention and send calm message of esteem , be more than he could 
 understand . 

 " when will you see he again ? " she ask . they be stand together in 
 the corridor of the train , slowly ascend out of Italy towards the San 
 Gothard tunnel . 

 " I hope next spring . perhaps we shall paint Siena red for a day or 
 two with some of the new wife 's money . it be one of the argument for 
 marry she . " 

 " he have no heart , " she say severely . " he do not really mind about the 
 child at all . " 

 " no ; you be wrong . he do . he be unhappy , like the rest of we . but he 
 do not   try to keep up appearance as we do . he know that the thing 
 that have make he happy once will probably make he happy again - " 

 " he say he would never be happy again . " 

 " in his passion . not when he be calm . we English say it when we be 
 calm - when we do not really believe it any long . Gino be not ashamed 
 of inconsistency . it be one of the many thing I like he for . " 

 " yes ; I be wrong . that be so . " 

 " he be much more honest with himself than I be , " continue Philip , " and 
 he be honest without an effort and without pride . but you , Miss Abbott , 
 what about you ? will you be in Italy next spring ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I be sorry . when will you come back , do you think ? " 

 " I think never . " 

 " for whatever reason ? " he star at she as if she be some monstrosity . 

 " because I understand the place . there be no need . " 

 " Understand Italy ! " he exclaim . 

 " perfectly . " 

 " well , I do not . and I do not   understand you , " he murmur to himself , as 
 he pace away from she up the corridor . by this time he love her very 
 much , and he could not bear to be puzzle . he have reach love by the 
 spiritual path : her thought and her goodness and her nobility have 
 move he first , and now her whole body and all its gesture have become 
 transfigure by they . the beauty that be call obvious - the beauty 
 of her hair and her voice and her limb - he have notice these 
 last ; Gino , who never traverse any path at all , have commend they 
 dispassionately to his friend . 

 why be he so puzzle ? he have know so much about she once - what she 
 think , how she feel , the reason for her action . and now he only know 
 that he love she , and all the other knowledge seem pass from he 
 just as he need it most . why would she never come to Italy again ? why 
 have she avoid himself and Gino ever since the evening that she have 
 save their life ? the train be nearly empty . Harriet slumber in 
 a compartment by herself . he must ask she these question now , and he 
 return quickly to she down the corridor . 

 she greet he with a question of her own . " be your plan decide ? " 

 " yes . I can not   live at Sawston . " 

 " have you tell Mrs. Herriton ? " 

 " I write from Monteriano . I try to explain thing ; but she will 
 never understand I . her view will be that the affair be settle - sadly 
 settle since the baby be dead . still it be over ; our family circle need 
 be vex no more . she will not   even be angry with you . you see , you have 
 do we no harm in the long run . unless , of course , you talk about 
 Harriet and make a scandal . so that be my plan - London and work . what be 
 your ? " 

 " Poor Harriet ! " say Miss Abbott . " as if I dare judge Harriet ! or 
 anybody . " and without reply to Philip 's question she leave he to 
 visit the other invalid . 

 Philip gaze after she mournfully , and then he look mournfully out of 
 the window at the decrease stream . all the excitement be over - the 
 inquest , Harriet 's short illness , his own visit to the surgeon . he be 
 convalescent , both in body and spirit , but convalescence bring no joy . 
 in the look - glass at the end of the corridor he see his face haggard , 
 and his shoulder pull forward by the weight of the sling . life be 
 great than he have suppose , but it be even less complete . he have see 
 the need for strenuous work and for righteousness . and now he see what a 
 very little way those thing would go . 

 " be Harriet go to be all right ? " he ask . Miss Abbott have come back 
 to he . 

 " she will soon be her old self , " be the reply . for Harriet , after a 
 short paroxysm of illness and remorse , be quickly return to her 
 normal state . she have be " thoroughly upset " as she phrase it , but 
 she soon cease to realize that anything be wrong beyond the death of 
 a poor little child . already she speak of " this unlucky accident , " and 
 " the mysterious frustration of one 's attempt to make thing well . " 
 Miss Abbott have see that she be comfortable , and have give she a kind 
 kiss . but she return feel that Harriet , like her mother , consider 
 the affair as settle . 

 " I be clear enough about Harriet 's future , and about part of my own . but 
 I ask again , what about your ? " 

 " Sawston and work , " say Miss Abbott . 

 " no . " 

 " why not ? " she ask , smile . 

 " you have   see too much . you have   see as much and do more than I have . " 

 " but it be so different . of course I shall go to Sawston . you forget 
 my father ; and even if he be not   there , I have   a hundred tie : my 
 district - I be neglect it shamefully - my evening class , the St. 
 James ' - " 

 " silly nonsense ! " he explode , suddenly move to have the whole thing 
 out with she . " you be too good - about a thousand time well than I be . 
 you can not   live in that hole ; you must go among people who can hope to 
 understand you . I mind for myself . I want to see you often - again and 
 again . " 

 " of course we shall meet whenever you come down ; and I hope that it will 
 mean often . " 

 " it be not enough ; it will only be in the old horrible way , each with a 
 dozen relative round we . no , Miss Abbott ; it be not good enough . " 

 " we can write at all event . " 

 " you will write ? " he cry , with a flush of pleasure . at time his hope 
 seem so solid . 

 " I will indeed . " 

 " but I say it be not enough - you can not   go back to the old life if you 
 want to . too much have happen . " 

 " I know that , " she say sadly . 

 " not only pain and sorrow , but wonderful thing : that tower in the 
 sunlight - do you remember it , and all you say to I ? the theatre , even . 
 and the next day - in the church ; and our time with Gino . " 

 " all the wonderful thing be over , " she say . " that be just where it 
 be . " 

 " I do not   believe it . at all event not for I . the most wonderful thing 
 may be to come - " 

 " the wonderful thing be over , " she repeat , and look at he so 
 mournfully that he dare not contradict she . the train be crawl up 
 the last ascent towards the Campanile of Airolo and the entrance of the 
 tunnel . 

 " Miss Abbott , " he murmur , speak quickly , as if their free 
 intercourse might soon be end , " what be the matter with you ? I 
 think I understand you , and I do not . all those two great first day at 
 Monteriano I read you as clearly as you read I still . I see why you 
 have come , and why you change side , and afterwards I see your wonderful 
 courage and pity . and now you be frank with I one moment , as you use 
 to be , and the next moment you shut I up . you see I owe too much to 
 you - my life , and I do not   know what besides . I will not   stand it . you have 
 go too far to turn mysterious . I will quote what you say to I : ' do not 
 be mysterious ; there be not   the time . ' I will quote something else : ' I and 
 my life must be where I live . ' you can not   live at Sawston . " 

 he have move she at last . she whisper to herself hurriedly . " it be 
 tempt - " and those three word throw he into a tumult of joy . what 
 be tempting to she ? after all be the great of thing possible ? 
 perhaps , after long estrangement , after much tragedy , the South have 
 bring they together in the end . that laughter in the theatre , those 
 silver star in the purple sky , even the violet of a depart spring , 
 all have help , and sorrow have help also , and so have tenderness to 
 other . 

 " it be tempting , " she repeat , " not to be mysterious . I have   want often 
 to tell you , and then be afraid . I could never tell any one else , 
 certainly no woman , and I think you be the one man who might understand 
 and not be disgust . " 

 " be you lonely ? " he whisper . " be it anything like that ? " 

 " yes . " the train seem to shake he towards she . he be resolve that 
 though a dozen people be look , he would yet take she in his 
 arm . " I be terribly lonely , or I would not   speak . I think you must know 
 already . " their face be crimson , as if the same thought be surge 
 through they both . 

 " perhaps I do . " he come close to she . " perhaps I could speak instead . 
 but if you will say the word plainly you will never be sorry ; I will thank 
 you for it all my life . " 

 she say plainly , " that I love he . " then she break down . her body be 
 shake with sob , and lest there should be any doubt she cry between 
 the sob for Gino ! Gino ! Gino ! 

 he hear himself remark " rather ! I love he too ! when I can forget how 
 he hurt I that evening . though whenever we shake hand - " one of they 
 must have move a step or two , for when she speak again she be already 
 a little way apart . 

 " you have   upset I . " she stifle something that be perilously near 
 hysteric . " I think I be past all this . you be take it wrongly . I be 
 in love with Gino - do not   pass it off - I mean it crudely - you know what I 
 mean . so laugh at I . " 

 " Laugh at love ? " ask Philip . 

 " yes . pull it to piece . tell I I be a fool or bad - that he be a cad . 
 say all you say when Lilia fall in love with he . that be the help 
 I want . I dare tell you this because I like you - and because you be 
 without passion ; you look on life as a spectacle ; you do not   enter it ; 
 you only find it funny or beautiful . so I can trust you to cure I . 
 Mr. Herriton , be not   it funny ? " she try to laugh herself , but become 
 frightened and have to stop . " he be not a gentleman , nor a Christian , nor 
 good in any way . he be never flatter I nor honour I . but because 
 he be handsome , that be be enough . the son of an italian dentist , with 
 a pretty face . " she repeat the phrase as if it be a charm against 
 passion . " oh , Mr. Herriton , be not   it funny ! " then , to his relief , she 
 begin to cry . " I love he , and I be not ashamed of it . I love he , and 
 I be go to Sawston , and if I may not   speak about he to you sometimes , 
 I shall die . " 

 in that terrible discovery Philip manage to think not of himself but of 
 she . he do not lament . he do not even speak to she kindly , for he see 
 that she could not stand it . a flippant reply be what she ask and 
 need - something flippant and a little cynical . and indeed it be the 
 only reply he could trust himself to make . 

 " perhaps it be what the book call ' a pass fancy ' ? " 

 she shake her head . even this question be too pathetic . for as far 
 as she know anything about herself , she know that her passion , once 
 arouse , be sure . " if I see he often , " she say , " I might remember 
 what he be like . or he might grow old . but I dare not risk it , so 
 nothing can alter I now . " 

 " well , if the fancy do pass , let I know . " after all , he could say 
 what he want . 

 " oh , you shall know quick enough - " 

 " but before you retire to Sawston - be you so mighty sure ? " 

 " what of ? " she have stop cry . he be treat she exactly as she 
 have hop . 

 " that you and he - " he smile bitterly at the thought of they together . 
 here be the cruel antique malice of the god , such as they once send 
 forth against Pasiphae . century of aspiration and culture - and the 
 world could not escape it . " I be go to say - whatever have you get in 
 common ? " 

 " nothing except the time we have see each other . " again her face be 
 crimson . he turn his own face away . 

 " which - which time ? " 

 " the time I think you weak and heedless , and go instead of you to 
 get the baby . that begin it , as far as I know the beginning . or it may 
 have begin when you take we to the theatre , and I see he mix up with 
 music and light . but do not   understand till the morning . then you open 
 the door - and I know why I have be so happy . afterwards , in the church , 
 I pray for we all ; not for anything new , but that we might just be as 
 we be - he with the child he love , you and I and Harriet safe out of 
 the place - and that I might never see he or speak to he again . I could 
 have pull through then - the thing be only come near , like a wreath 
 of smoke ; it have not   wrap I round . " 

 " but through my fault , " say Philip solemnly , " he be part from the 
 child he love . and because my life be in danger you come and see 
 he and speak to he again . " for the thing be even great than she 
 imagine . nobody but himself would ever see round it now . and to see 
 round it he be stand at an immense distance . he could even be glad 
 that she have once hold the beloved in her arm . 

 " do not   talk of ' fault . ' you be my friend for ever , Mr. Herriton , I 
 think . only do not   be charitable and shift or take the blame . get over 
 supposing I be refine . that be what puzzle you . get over that . " 

 as he speak she seem to be transfigure , and to have indeed no part 
 with refinement or unrefinement any long . out of this wreck there be 
 reveal to he something indestructible - something which she , who have 
 give it , could never take away . 

 " I say again , do not   be charitable . if he have ask I , I might have 
 give myself body and soul . that would have be the end of my rescue 
 party . but all through he take I for a superior being - a goddess . I 
 who be worship every inch of he , and every word he speak . and that 
 save I . " 

 Philip 's eye be fix on the Campanile of Airolo . but he see instead 
 the fair myth of endymion . this woman be a goddess to the end . for 
 her no love could be degrade : she stand outside all degradation . this 
 episode , which she think so sordid , and which be so tragic for he , 
 remain supremely beautiful . to such a height be he lift , that 
 without regret he could now have tell she that he be her worshipper 
 too . but what be the use of tell she ? for all the wonderful thing 
 have happen . 

 " thank you , " be all that he permit himself . " thank you for 
 everything . " 

 she look at he with great friendliness , for he have make her life 
 endurable . at that moment the train enter the San Gothard tunnel . they 
 hurry back to the carriage to close the window lest the smut should 
 get into Harriet 's eye . 


