a room with a view 

 E. M. Forster 
 PART one 



 chapter I : the Bertolini 

 " the Signora have no business to do it , " say Miss Bartlett , " no business 
 at all . she promise we south room with a view close together , instead 
 of which here be north room , look into a courtyard , and a long way 
 apart . oh , Lucy ! " 

 " and a Cockney , besides ! " say Lucy , who have be far sadden by 
 the Signora 's unexpected accent . " it might be London . " she look at the 
 two row of english people who be sit at the table ; at the row 
 of white bottle of water and red bottle of wine that run between the 
 english people ; at the portrait of the late queen and the late Poet 
 Laureate that hang behind the english people , heavily frame ; at the 
 notice of the english church   Rev. Cuthbert Eager , M. A. Oxon . , that 
 be the only other decoration of the wall . " Charlotte , do not   you feel , 
 too , that we might be in London ? I can hardly believe that all kind of 
 other thing be just outside . I suppose it be one 's be so tired . " 

 " this meat have surely be use for soup , " say Miss Bartlett , lay 
 down her fork . 

 " I want so to see the Arno . the room the Signora promise we in her 
 letter would have look over the Arno . the Signora have no business to 
 do it at all . oh , it be a shame ! " 

 " any nook do for I , " Miss Bartlett continue ; " but it do seem hard 
 that you should not   have a view . " 

 Lucy feel that she have be selfish . " Charlotte , you must not   spoil I : 
 of course , you must look over the Arno , too . I mean that . the first 
 vacant room in the front - " " you must have it , " say Miss Bartlett , part 
 of whose travelling expense be pay by Lucy 's mother - a piece of 
 generosity to which she make many a tactful allusion . 

 " no , no . you must have it . " 

 " I insist on it . your mother would never forgive I , Lucy . " 

 " she would never forgive I . " 

 the lady ' voice grow animate , and - if the sad truth be own - a 
 little peevish . they be tired , and under the guise of unselfishness 
 they wrangle . some of their neighbour interchanged glance , and one 
 of they - one of the ill - breed people whom one do meet abroad - leant 
 forward over the table and actually intrude into their argument . he 
 say : 

 " I have a view , I have a view . " 

 Miss Bartlett be startle . generally at a pension people look they 
 over for a day or two before speak , and often do not find out that 
 they would " do " till they have go . she know that the intruder be 
 ill - breed , even before she glance at he . he be an old man , of heavy 
 build , with a fair , shaven face and large eye . there be something 
 childish in those eye , though it be not the childishness of senility . 
 what exactly it be Miss Bartlett do not stop to consider , for she 
 glance pass on to his clothe . these do not attract she . he be 
 probably try to become acquainted with they before they get into the 
 swim . so she assume a daze expression when he speak to she , and then 
 say : " a view ? oh , a view ! how delightful a view be ! " 

 " this be my son , " say the old man ; " his name 's George . he have a view 
 too . " 

 " ah , " say Miss Bartlett , repress Lucy , who be about to speak . 

 " what I mean , " he continue , " be that you can have our room , and we will 
 have your . we will change . " 

 the well class of tourist be shock at this , and sympathize with 
 the new - comer . Miss Bartlett , in reply , open her mouth as little 
 as possible , and say " thank you very much indeed ; that be out of the 
 question . " 

 " why ? " say the old man , with both fist on the table . 

 " because it be quite out of the question , thank you . " 

 " you see , we do not   like to take - " begin Lucy . her cousin again 
 repress she . 

 " but why ? " he persist . " woman like look at a view ; man do not . " and 
 he thump with his fist like a naughty child , and turn to his son , 
 say , " George , persuade they ! " 

 " it be so obvious they should have the room , " say the son . " there be 
 nothing else to say . " 

 he do not look at the lady as he speak , but his voice be perplexed 
 and sorrowful . Lucy , too , be perplexed ; but she see that they be in 
 for what be know as " quite a scene , " and she have an odd feeling that 
 whenever these ill - breed tourist speak the contest widen and deepen 
 till it deal , not with room and view , but with - well , with something 
 quite different , whose existence she have not realize before . now the 
 old man attack Miss Bartlett almost violently : why should she not 
 change ? what possible objection have she ? they would clear out in half an 
 hour . 

 Miss Bartlett , though skilled in the delicacy of conversation , be 
 powerless in the presence of brutality . it be impossible to snub any 
 one so gross . her face redden with displeasure . she look around as 
 much as to say , " be you all like this ? " and two little old lady , who 
 be sit far up the table , with shawl hang over the back 
 of the chair , look back , clearly indicate " we be not ; we be 
 genteel . " 

 " eat your dinner , dear , " she say to Lucy , and begin to toy again with 
 the meat that she have once censure . 

 Lucy mumble that those seem very odd people opposite . 

 " eat your dinner , dear . this pension be a failure . to - morrow we will 
 make a change . " 

 hardly have she announce this fell decision when she reverse it . the 
 curtain at the end of the room part , and reveal a clergyman , stout 
 but attractive , who hurry forward to take his place at the table , 
 cheerfully apologize for his lateness . Lucy , who have not yet acquire 
 decency , at once rise to her foot , exclaim : " oh , oh ! why , it be 
 Mr. Beebe ! oh , how perfectly lovely ! oh , Charlotte , we must stop now , 
 however bad the room be . oh ! " 

 Miss Bartlett say , with more restraint : 

 " how do you do , Mr. Beebe ? I expect that you have forget we : Miss 
 Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch , who be at Tunbridge Wells when you 
 help the Vicar of St. Peter 's that very cold Easter . " 

 the clergyman , who have the air of one on a holiday , do not remember 
 the lady quite as clearly as they remember he . but he come forward 
 pleasantly enough and accept the chair into which he be beckon by 
 Lucy . 

 " I be so glad to see you , " say the girl , who be in a state of 
 spiritual starvation , and would have be glad to see the waiter if 
 her cousin have permit it . " just fancy how small the world be . summer 
 Street , too , make it so specially funny . " 

 " Miss Honeychurch live in the parish of Summer Street , " say Miss 
 Bartlett , fill up the gap , " and she happen to tell I in the course 
 of conversation that you have just accept the living - " 

 " yes , I hear from mother so last week . she do not   know that I know you 
 at Tunbridge Wells ; but I write back at once , and I say : ' Mr. Beebe 
 be - ' " 

 " quite right , " say the clergyman . " I move into the Rectory at Summer 
 Street next June . I be lucky to be appoint to such a charming 
 neighbourhood . " 

 " oh , how glad I be ! the name of our house be Windy Corner . " Mr. Beebe 
 bow . 

 " there be mother and I generally , and my brother , though it be not often 
 we get he to ch - - the church be rather far off , I mean . " 

 " Lucy , dearest , let Mr. Beebe eat his dinner . " 

 " I be eat it , thank you , and enjoy it . " 

 he prefer to talk to Lucy , whose play he remember , rather than 
 to Miss Bartlett , who probably remember his sermon . he ask the girl 
 whether she know Florence well , and be inform at some length that she 
 have never be there before . it be delightful to advise a newcomer , and 
 he be first in the field . " do not   neglect the country round , " his advice 
 conclude . " the first fine afternoon drive up to Fiesole , and round by 
 Settignano , or something of that sort . " 

 " no ! " cry a voice from the top of the table . " Mr. Beebe , you be 
 wrong . the first fine afternoon your lady must go to Prato . " 

 " that lady look so clever , " whisper Miss Bartlett to her cousin . " we 
 be in luck . " 

 and , indeed , a perfect torrent of information burst on they . People tell 
 they what to see , when to see it , how to stop the electric tram , how to 
 get rid of the beggar , how much to give for a vellum blotter , how 
 much the place would grow upon they . the Pension Bertolini have decide , 
 almost enthusiastically , that they would do . whichever way they look , 
 kind lady smile and shout at they . and above all rise the voice of 
 the clever lady , cry : " Prato ! they must go to Prato . that place be 
 too sweetly squalid for word . I love it ; I revel in shake off the 
 trammel of respectability , as you know . " 

 the young man name George glance at the clever lady , and then return 
 moodily to his plate . obviously he and his father do not do . Lucy , in 
 the midst of her success , find time to wish they do . it give she no 
 extra pleasure that any one should be leave in the cold ; and when she 
 rise to go , she turn back and give the two outsider a nervous little 
 bow . 

 the father do not see it ; the son acknowledge it , not by another bow , 
 but by raise his eyebrow and smile ; he seem to be smile across 
 something . 

 she hasten after her cousin , who have already disappear through the 
 curtain - curtain which smite one in the face , and seem heavy with 
 more than cloth . beyond they stand the unreliable Signora , bow 
 good - evening to her guest , and support by ' Enery , her little boy , and 
 Victorier , her daughter . it make a curious little scene , this attempt 
 of the Cockney to convey the grace and geniality of the South . and even 
 more curious be the drawing - room , which attempt to rival the solid 
 comfort of a Bloomsbury boarding - house . be this really Italy ? 

 Miss Bartlett be already seat on a tightly stuff arm - chair , which 
 have the colour and the contours of a tomato . she be talk to Mr. 
 Beebe , and as she speak , her long narrow head drive backwards and 
 forwards , slowly , regularly , as though she be demolish some 
 invisible obstacle . " we be most grateful to you , " she be say . 
 " the first evening mean so much . when you arrive we be in for a 
 peculiarly mauvais quart d'heure . " 

 he express his regret . 

 " do you , by any chance , know the name of an old man who sit opposite we 
 at dinner ? " 

 " Emerson . " 

 " be he a friend of your ? " 

 " we be friendly - as one be in pension . " 

 " then I will say no more . " 

 he press she very slightly , and she say more . 

 " I be , as it be , " she conclude , " the chaperon of my young cousin , 
 Lucy , and it would be a serious thing if I put she under an obligation 
 to people of whom we know nothing . his manner be somewhat unfortunate . 
 I hope I act for the good . " 

 " you act very naturally , " say he . he seem thoughtful , and after 
 a few moment add : " all the same , I do not   think much harm would have 
 come of accept . " 

 " no harm , of course . but we could not be under an obligation . " 

 " he be rather a peculiar man . " again he hesitate , and then say gently : 
 " I think he would not take advantage of your acceptance , nor expect you 
 to show gratitude . he have the merit - if it be one - of say exactly 
 what he mean . he have room he do not value , and he think you would 
 value they . he no more thought of put you under an obligation than 
 he think of be polite . it be so difficult - at least , I find it 
 difficult - to understand people who speak the truth . " 

 Lucy be pleased , and say : " I be hop that he be nice ; I do so 
 always hope that people will be nice . " 

 " I think he be ; nice and tiresome . I differ from he on almost every 
 point of any importance , and so , I expect - I may say I hope - you will 
 differ . but his be a type one disagree with rather than deplore . when 
 he first come here he not unnaturally put people 's back up . he have no 
 tact and no manner - I do not   mean by that that he have bad manner - and 
 he will not keep his opinion to himself . we nearly complain about 
 he to our depress Signora , but I be glad to say we think well of 
 it . " 

 " be I to conclude , " say Miss Bartlett , " that he be a Socialist ? " 

 Mr. Beebe accept the convenient word , not without a slight twitching 
 of the lip . 

 " and presumably he have bring up his son to be a Socialist , too ? " 

 " I hardly know George , for he have not   learn to talk yet . he seem a nice 
 creature , and I think he have brain . of course , he have all his father 's 
 mannerism , and it be quite possible that he , too , may be a Socialist . " 

 " oh , you relieve I , " say Miss Bartlett . " so you think I ought to 
 have accept their offer ? you feel I have be narrow - minded and 
 suspicious ? " 

 " not at all , " he answer ; " I never suggest that . " 

 " but ought I not to apologize , at all event , for my apparent rudeness ? " 

 he reply , with some irritation , that it would be quite unnecessary , 
 and get up from his seat to go to the smoking - room . 

 " be I a bore ? " say Miss Bartlett , as soon as he have disappear . " why 
 do not   you talk , Lucy ? he prefer young people , I be sure . I do hope I 
 have not   monopolize he . I hop you would have he all the evening , as 
 well as all dinner - time . " 

 " he be nice , " exclaim Lucy . " just what I remember . he seem to see 
 good in every one . no one would take he for a clergyman . " 

 " my dear Lucia - " 

 " well , you know what I mean . and you know how clergyman generally laugh ; 
 Mr. Beebe laugh just like an ordinary man . " 

 " funny girl ! how you do remind I of your mother . I wonder if she will 
 approve of Mr. Beebe . " 

 " I be sure she will ; and so will Freddy . " 

 " I think every one at Windy Corner will approve ; it be the fashionable 
 world . I be use to Tunbridge Wells , where we be all hopelessly behind 
 the time . " 

 " yes , " say Lucy despondently . 

 there be a haze of disapproval in the air , but whether the disapproval 
 be of herself , or of Mr. Beebe , or of the fashionable world at Windy 
 Corner , or of the narrow world at Tunbridge Wells , she could not 
 determine . she try to locate it , but as usual she blunder . Miss 
 Bartlett sedulously deny disapprove of any one , and add " I be 
 afraid you be find I a very depressing companion . " 

 and the girl again think : " I must have be selfish or unkind ; I must 
 be more careful . it be so dreadful for Charlotte , be poor . " 

 fortunately one of the little old lady , who for some time have be 
 smile very benignly , now approach and ask if she might be allow 
 to sit where Mr. Beebe have sit . permission grant , she begin to chatter 
 gently about Italy , the plunge it have be to come there , the gratifying 
 success of the plunge , the improvement in her sister 's health , the 
 necessity of close the bed - room window at night , and of thoroughly 
 empty the water - bottle in the morning . she handle her subject 
 agreeably , and they be , perhaps , more worthy of attention than 
 the high discourse upon Guelfs and Ghibellines which be proceed 
 tempestuously at the other end of the room . it be a real catastrophe , 
 not a mere episode , that evening of her at Venice , when she have find 
 in her bedroom something that be one bad than a flea , though one 
 well than something else . 

 " but here you be as safe as in England . Signora Bertolini be so 
 English . " 

 " yet our room smell , " say poor Lucy . " we dread go to bed . " 

 " ah , then you look into the court . " she sigh . " if only Mr. Emerson be 
 more tactful ! we be so sorry for you at dinner . " 

 " I think he be mean to be kind . " 

 " undoubtedly he be , " say Miss Bartlett . 

 " Mr. Beebe have just be scold I for my suspicious nature . of 
 course , I be hold back on my cousin 's account . " 

 " of course , " say the little old lady ; and they murmur that one could 
 not be too careful with a young girl . 

 Lucy try to look demure , but could not help feel a great fool . no 
 one be careful with she at home ; or , at all event , she have not notice 
 it . 

 " about old Mr. Emerson - I hardly know . no , he be not tactful ; yet , have 
 you ever notice that there be people who do thing which be most 
 indelicate , and yet at the same time - beautiful ? " 

 " beautiful ? " say Miss Bartlett , puzzle at the word . " be not beauty 
 and delicacy the same ? " 

 " so one would have think , " say the other helplessly . " but thing be 
 so difficult , I sometimes think . " 

 she proceed no far into thing , for Mr. Beebe reappear , look 
 extremely pleasant . 

 " Miss Bartlett , " he cry , " it be all right about the room . I be so glad . 
 Mr. Emerson be talk about it in the smoking - room , and know what 
 I do , I encourage he to make the offer again . he have let I come and 
 ask you . he would be so pleased . " 

 " oh , Charlotte , " cry Lucy to her cousin , " we must have the room now . 
 the old man be just as nice and kind as he can be . " 

 Miss Bartlett be silent . 

 " I fear , " say Mr. Beebe , after a pause , " that I have be officious . I 
 must apologize for my interference . " 

 gravely displease , he turn to go . not till then do Miss Bartlett 
 reply : " my own wish , dear Lucy , be unimportant in comparison with 
 your . it would be hard indeed if I stop you do as you like at 
 Florence , when I be only here through your kindness . if you wish I to 
 turn these gentleman out of their room , I will do it . would you then , 
 Mr. Beebe , kindly tell Mr. Emerson that I accept his kind offer , and 
 then conduct he to I , in order that I may thank he personally ? " 

 she raise her voice as she speak ; it be hear all over the 
 drawing - room , and silence the Guelfs and the Ghibellines . the 
 clergyman , inwardly curse the female sex , bow , and depart with her 
 message . 

 " remember , Lucy , I alone be implicate in this . I do not wish the 
 acceptance to come from you . grant I that , at all event . " 

 Mr. Beebe be back , say rather nervously : 

 " Mr. Emerson be engage , but here be his son instead . " 

 the young man gaze down on the three lady , who feel seat on the 
 floor , so low be their chair . 

 " my father , " he say , " be in his bath , so you can not thank he 
 personally . but any message give by you to I will be give by I to 
 he as soon as he come out . " 

 Miss Bartlett be unequal to the bath . all her barbed civility come 
 forth wrong end first . young Mr. Emerson score a notable triumph to the 
 delight of Mr. Beebe and to the secret delight of Lucy . 

 " poor young man ! " say Miss Bartlett , as soon as he have go . 

 " how angry he be with his father about the room ! it be all he can do to 
 keep polite . " 

 " in half an hour or so your room will be ready , " say Mr. Beebe . then 
 look rather thoughtfully at the two cousin , he retire to his own 
 room , to write up his philosophic diary . 

 " oh , dear ! " breathe the little old lady , and shudder as if all the 
 wind of heaven have enter the apartment . " gentleman sometimes do not 
 realize - " her voice fade away , but Miss Bartlett seem to understand 
 and a conversation develop , in which gentleman who do not thoroughly 
 realize play a principal part . Lucy , not realize either , be reduce 
 to literature . take up Baedeker 's Handbook to Northern Italy , she 
 commit to memory the most important date of Florentine history . for 
 she be determined to enjoy herself on the morrow . thus the half - hour 
 creep profitably away , and at last Miss Bartlett rise with a sigh , and 
 say : 

 " I think one might venture now . no , Lucy , do not stir . I will 
 superintend the move . " 

 " how you do do everything , " say Lucy . 

 " naturally , dear . it be my affair . " 

 " but I would like to help you . " 

 " no , dear . " 

 Charlotte 's energy ! and her unselfishness ! she have be thus all her 
 life , but really , on this italian tour , she be surpass herself . so 
 Lucy feel , or strove to feel . and yet - there be a rebellious spirit 
 in she which wonder whether the acceptance might not have be less 
 delicate and more beautiful . at all event , she enter her own room 
 without any feeling of joy . 

 " I want to explain , " say Miss Bartlett , " why it be that I have take 
 the large room . naturally , of course , I should have give it to you ; 
 but I happen to know that it belong to the young man , and I be sure 
 your mother would not like it . " 

 Lucy be bewilder . 

 " if you be to accept a favour it be more suitable you should be under 
 an obligation to his father than to he . I be a woman of the world , in 
 my small way , and I know where thing lead to . however , Mr. Beebe be a 
 guarantee of a sort that they will not presume on this . " 

 " Mother would not   mind I be sure , " say Lucy , but again have the sense of 
 large and unsuspected issue . 

 Miss Bartlett only sigh , and envelop she in a protect embrace as 
 she wish her good - night . it give Lucy the sensation of a fog , and when 
 she reach her own room she open the window and breathe the clean 
 night air , think of the kind old man who have enable she to see the 
 light dance in the Arno and the cypress of San Miniato , and the 
 foot - hill of the Apennines , black against the rise moon . 

 Miss Bartlett , in her room , fasten the window - shutter and lock the 
 door , and then make a tour of the apartment to see where the cupboard 
 lead , and whether there be any oubliette or secret entrance . it be 
 then that she see , pin up over the washstand , a sheet of paper on 
 which be scrawl an enormous note of interrogation . nothing more . 

 " what do it mean ? " she think , and she examine it carefully by the 
 light of a candle . meaningless at first , it gradually become menacing , 
 obnoxious , portentous with evil . she be seize with an impulse to 
 destroy it , but fortunately remember that she have no right to do so , 
 since it must be the property of young Mr. Emerson . so she unpin it 
 carefully , and put it between two piece of blot - paper to keep it 
 clean for he . then she complete her inspection of the room , sigh 
 heavily accord to her habit , and go to bed . 



 Chapter II : in Santa Croce with no Baedeker 

 it be pleasant to wake up in Florence , to open the eye upon a bright 
 bare room , with a floor of red tile which look clean though they be 
 not ; with a paint ceiling whereon pink griffin and blue amorini sport 
 in a forest of yellow violin and bassoon . it be pleasant , too , to 
 fle wide the window , pinch the finger in unfamiliar fastening , 
 to lean out into sunshine with beautiful hill and tree and marble 
 church opposite , and close below , the Arno , gurgle against the 
 embankment of the road . 

 over the river man be at work with spade and sieve on the sandy 
 foreshore , and on the river be a boat , also diligently employ for 
 some mysterious end . an electric tram come rush underneath the 
 window . no one be inside it , except one tourist ; but its platform be 
 overflow with Italians , who prefer to stand . child try to 
 hang on behind , and the conductor , with no malice , spat in their face 
 to make they let go . then soldier appear - good - look , undersized 
 man - wear each a knapsack cover with mangy fur , and a great - coat 
 which have be cut for some large soldier . beside they walk officer , 
 look foolish and fierce , and before they go little boy , turn 
 somersault in time with the band . the tramcar become entangle in their 
 rank , and move on painfully , like a caterpillar in a swarm of ant . 
 one of the little boy fall down , and some white bullock come out of 
 an archway . indeed , if it have not be for the good advice of an old man 
 who be sell button - hook , the road might never have get clear . 

 over such triviality as these many a valuable hour may slip away , 
 and the traveller who have go to Italy to study the tactile value of 
 Giotto , or the corruption of the Papacy , may return remember nothing 
 but the blue sky and the man and woman who live under it . so it be as 
 well that Miss Bartlett should tap and come in , and have comment on 
 Lucy 's leave the door unlocked , and on she lean out of the window 
 before she be fully dress , should urge she to hasten herself , or the 
 good of the day would be go . by the time Lucy be ready her cousin 
 have do her breakfast , and be listen to the clever lady among the 
 crumb . 

 a conversation then ensue , on not unfamiliar line . Miss Bartlett 
 be , after all , a wee bit tired , and think they have well spend the 
 morning settle in ; unless Lucy would at all like to go out ? Lucy would 
 rather like to go out , as it be her first day in Florence , but , of 
 course , she could go alone . Miss Bartlett could not allow this . of 
 course she would accompany Lucy everywhere . oh , certainly not ; Lucy 
 would stop with her cousin . oh , no ! that would never do . oh , yes ! 

 at this point the clever lady break in . 

 " if it be Mrs. Grundy who be trouble you , I do assure you that you 
 can neglect the good person . be English , Miss Honeychurch will be 
 perfectly safe . italian understand . a dear friend of mine , Contessa 
 Baroncelli , have two daughter , and when she can not send a maid to school 
 with they , she let they go in sailor - hat instead . every one take 
 they for English , you see , especially if their hair be strain tightly 
 behind . " 

 Miss Bartlett be unconvince by the safety of Contessa Baroncelli 's 
 daughter . she be determined to take Lucy herself , her head not be 
 so very bad . the clever lady then say that she be go to spend a 
 long morning in Santa Croce , and if Lucy would come too , she would be 
 delighted . 

 " I will take you by a dear dirty back way , Miss Honeychurch , and if you 
 bring I luck , we shall have an adventure . " 

 Lucy say that this be most kind , and at once open the Baedeker , to 
 see where Santa Croce be . 

 " Tut , tut ! Miss Lucy ! I hope we shall soon emancipate you from Baedeker . 
 he do but touch the surface of thing . as to the true Italy - he do 
 not even dream of it . the true Italy be only to be find by patient 
 observation . " 

 this sound very interesting , and Lucy hurry over her breakfast , and 
 start with her new friend in high spirit . Italy be come at last . 
 the Cockney Signora and her work have vanish like a bad dream . 

 Miss Lavish - for that be the clever lady 's name - turn to the right 
 along the sunny Lung ' arno . how delightfully warm ! but a wind down 
 the side street cut like a knife , do not   it ? Ponte alle 
 Grazie - particularly interesting , mention by Dante . San 
 Miniato - beautiful as well as interesting ; the crucifix that kiss 
 a murderer - Miss Honeychurch would remember the story . the man on the 
 river be fish .   untrue ; but then , so be most information .   then 
 Miss Lavish dart under the archway of the white bullock , and she 
 stop , and she cry : 

 " a smell ! a true florentine smell ! every city , let I teach you , have its 
 own smell . " 

 " be it a very nice smell ? " say Lucy , who have inherit from her mother 
 a distaste to dirt . 

 " one do not   come to Italy for niceness , " be the retort ; " one come for 
 life . Buon giorno ! Buon giorno ! " bow right and left . " look at that 
 adorable wine - cart ! how the driver stare at we , dear , simple soul ! " 

 so Miss Lavish proceed through the street of the city of Florence , 
 short , fidgety , and playful as a kitten , though without a kitten 's 
 grace . it be a treat for the girl to be with any one so clever and so 
 cheerful ; and a blue military cloak , such as an italian officer wear , 
 only increase the sense of festivity . 

 " Buon giorno ! take the word of an old woman , Miss Lucy : you will 
 never repent of a little civility to your inferior . that be the 
 true democracy . though I be a real radical as well . there , now you be 
 shocked . " 

 " indeed , I be not ! " exclaim Lucy . " we be Radicals , too , out and out . 
 my father always vote for Mr. Gladstone , until he be so dreadful about 
 Ireland . " 

 " I see , I see . and now you have go over to the enemy . " 

 " oh , please - ! if my father be alive , I be sure he would vote Radical 
 again now that Ireland be all right . and as it be , the glass over our 
 front door be break last election , and Freddy be sure it be the 
 Tories ; but mother say nonsense , a tramp . " 

 " shameful ! a manufacture district , I suppose ? " 

 " no - in the Surrey hill . about five mile from Dorking , look over 
 the Weald . " 

 Miss Lavish seem interested , and slacken her trot . 

 " what a delightful part ; I know it so well . it be full of the very 
 nice people . do you know Sir Harry Otway - a Radical if ever there 
 be ? " 

 " very well indeed . " 

 " and old Mrs. Butterworth the philanthropist ? " " why , she rent a field 
 of we ! how funny ! " 

 Miss Lavish look at the narrow ribbon of sky , and murmur : " oh , you 
 have property in Surrey ? " 

 " hardly any , " say Lucy , fearful of be think a snob . " only thirty 
 acre - just the garden , all downhill , and some field . " 

 Miss Lavish be not disgusted , and say it be just the size of her 
 aunt 's Suffolk estate . Italy recede . they try to remember the last 
 name of Lady Louisa some one , who have take a house near Summer Street 
 the other year , but she have not like it , which be odd of she . and just 
 as Miss Lavish have get the name , she break off and exclaim : 

 " bless we ! bless we and save we ! we have   lose the way . " 

 certainly they have seem a long time in reach Santa Croce , the tower 
 of which have be plainly visible from the landing window . but Miss 
 Lavish have say so much about know her florence by heart , that Lucy 
 have follow she with no misgiving . 

 " Lost ! lose ! my dear Miss Lucy , during our political diatribe we have 
 take a wrong turning . how those horrid Conservatives would jeer at we ! 
 what be we to do ? two lone female in an unknown town . now , this be 
 what I call an adventure . " 

 Lucy , who want to see Santa Croce , suggest , as a possible solution , 
 that they should ask the way there . 

 " oh , but that be the word of a craven ! and no , you be not , not , not to 
 look at your Baedeker . give it to I ; I shall not   let you carry it . we will 
 simply drift . " 

 accordingly they drift through a series of those grey - brown street , 
 neither commodious nor picturesque , in which the eastern quarter of the 
 city abound . Lucy soon lose interest in the discontent of Lady 
 Louisa , and become discontent herself . for one ravishing moment Italy 
 appear . she stand in the Square of the Annunziata and see in the 
 live terra - cotta those divine baby whom no cheap reproduction can 
 ever stale . there they stand , with their shin limb burst from 
 the garment of charity , and their strong white arm extend against 
 circlet of heaven . Lucy think she have never see anything more 
 beautiful ; but Miss Lavish , with a shriek of dismay , drag she 
 forward , declare that they be out of their path now by at least a 
 mile . 

 the hour be approach at which the continental breakfast begin , or 
 rather cease , to tell , and the lady buy some hot chestnut paste 
 out of a little shop , because it look so typical . it taste partly 
 of the paper in which it be wrap , partly of hair oil , partly of the 
 great unknown . but it give they strength to drift into another Piazza , 
 large and dusty , on the farth side of which rise a black - and - white 
 facade of surpass ugliness . Miss Lavish speak to it dramatically . it 
 be Santa Croce . the adventure be over . 

 " stop a minute ; let those two people go on , or I shall have to speak to 
 they . I do det conventional intercourse . Nasty ! they be go into 
 the church , too . oh , the Britisher abroad ! " 

 " we sit opposite they at dinner last night . they have give we their 
 room . they be so very kind . " 

 " look at their figure ! " laugh Miss Lavish . " they walk through my 
 Italy like a pair of cow . it be very naughty of I , but I would like 
 to set an examination paper at Dover , and turn back every tourist who 
 could not   pass it . " 

 " what would you ask we ? " 

 Miss Lavish lay her hand pleasantly on Lucy 's arm , as if to suggest 
 that she , at all event , would get full mark . in this exalted mood they 
 reach the step of the great church , and be about to enter it when 
 Miss Lavish stop , squeak , fling up her arm , and cry : 

 " there go my local - colour box ! I must have a word with he ! " 

 and in a moment she be away over the Piazza , her military cloak 
 flap in the wind ; nor do she slacken speed till she catch up an 
 old man with white whisker , and nip he playfully upon the arm . 

 Lucy wait for nearly ten minute . then she begin to get tired . the 
 beggar worry she , the dust blow in her eye , and she remember that 
 a young girl ought not to loiter in public place . she descend slowly 
 into the Piazza with the intention of rejoin Miss Lavish , who be 
 really almost too original . but at that moment Miss Lavish and her 
 local - colour box move also , and disappear down a side street , both 
 gesticulate largely . tear of indignation come to Lucy 's eye partly 
 because Miss Lavish have jilt she , partly because she have take she 
 Baedeker . how could she find her way home ? how could she find her way 
 about in Santa Croce ? her first morning be ruin , and she might never 
 be in Florence again . a few minute ago she have be all high spirit , 
 talk as a woman of culture , and half persuade herself that she 
 be full of originality . now she enter the church depressed and 
 humiliate , not even able to remember whether it be build by the 
 Franciscans or the Dominicans . of course , it must be a wonderful 
 building . but how like a barn ! and how very cold ! of course , it 
 contain fresco by Giotto , in the presence of whose tactile value 
 she be capable of feel what be proper . but who be to tell 
 she which they be ? she walk about disdainfully , unwilling to be 
 enthusiastic over monument of uncertain authorship or date . there be 
 no one even to tell she which , of all the sepulchral slab that pave 
 the nave and transept , be the one that be really beautiful , the one 
 that have be most praise by Mr. Ruskin . 

 then the pernicious charm of Italy work on she , and , instead of 
 acquire information , she begin to be happy . she puzzle out the 
 italian notice - the notice that forbid people to introduce dog into 
 the church - the notice that pray people , in the interest of health and 
 out of respect to the sacred edifice in which they find themselves , 
 not to spit . she watch the tourist ; their nose be as red as their 
 Baedekers , so cold be Santa Croce . she behold the horrible fate that 
 overtake three Papists - two he - baby and a she - baby - who begin their 
 career by souse each other with the Holy Water , and then proceed to 
 the Machiavelli memorial , dripping but hallow . advance towards it 
 very slowly and from immense distance , they touch the stone with 
 their finger , with their handkerchief , with their head , and then 
 retreat . what could this mean ? they do it again and again . then Lucy 
 realize that they have mistake Machiavelli for some saint , hop 
 to acquire virtue . punishment follow quickly . the small he - baby 
 stumble over one of the sepulchral slab so much admire by Mr. Ruskin , 
 and entangle his foot in the feature of a recumbent bishop . protestant 
 as she be , Lucy dart forward . she be too late . he fall heavily upon 
 the prelate 's upturned toe . 

 " Hateful bishop ! " exclaim the voice of old Mr. Emerson , who have dart 
 forward also . " hard in life , hard in death . go out into the sunshine , 
 little boy , and kiss your hand to the sun , for that be where you ought 
 to be . intolerable bishop ! " 

 the child scream frantically at these word , and at these dreadful 
 people who pick he up , dust he , rub his bruise , and tell he 
 not to be superstitious . 

 " look at he ! " say Mr. Emerson to Lucy . " here be a mess : a baby hurt , 
 cold , and frighten ! but what else can you expect from a church ? " 

 the child 's leg have become as melt wax . each time that old Mr. 
 Emerson and Lucy set it erect it collapse with a roar . fortunately an 
 italian lady , who ought to have be say her prayer , come to the 
 rescue . by some mysterious virtue , which mother alone possess , she 
 stiffen the little boy 's back - bone and imparted strength to his knee . 
 he stand . still gibber with agitation , he walk away . 

 " you be a clever woman , " say Mr. Emerson . " you have do more than 
 all the relic in the world . I be not of your creed , but I do believe in 
 those who make their fellow - creature happy . there be no scheme of the 
 universe - " 

 he pause for a phrase . 

 " Niente , " say the italian lady , and return to her prayer . 

 " I be not sure she understand English , " suggest Lucy . 

 in her chastened mood she no long despise the Emersons . she be 
 determined to be gracious to they , beautiful rather than delicate , 
 and , if possible , to erase Miss Bartlett 's civility by some gracious 
 reference to the pleasant room . 

 " that woman understand everything , " be Mr. Emerson 's reply . " but what 
 be you do here ? be you do the church ? be you through with the 
 church ? " 

 " no , " cry Lucy , remember her grievance . " I come here with Miss 
 Lavish , who be to explain everything ; and just by the door - it be too 
 bad ! - she simply run away , and after wait quite a time , I have to come 
 in by myself . " 

 " why should not   you ? " say Mr. Emerson . 

 " yes , why should not   you come by yourself ? " say the son , address the 
 young lady for the first time . 

 " but Miss Lavish have even take away Baedeker . " 

 " Baedeker ? " say Mr. Emerson . " I be glad it be that you minded . it be worth 
 minding , the loss of a Baedeker . that be worth mind . " 

 Lucy be puzzle . she be again conscious of some new idea , and be not 
 sure whither it would lead she . 

 " if you have   no Baedeker , " say the son , " you would well join we . " be this 
 where the idea would lead ? she take refuge in her dignity . 

 " thank you very much , but I could not think of that . I hope you do not 
 suppose that I come to join on to you . I really come to help with the 
 child , and to thank you for so kindly give we your room last night . I 
 hope that you have not be put to any great inconvenience . " 

 " my dear , " say the old man gently , " I think that you be repeat what 
 you have hear old people say . you be pretend to be touchy ; but 
 you be not really . stop be so tiresome , and tell I instead what 
 part of the church you want to see . to take you to it will be a real 
 pleasure . " 

 now , this be abominably impertinent , and she ought to have be 
 furious . but it be sometimes as difficult to lose one 's temper as it 
 be difficult at other time to keep it . Lucy could not get cross . Mr. 
 Emerson be an old man , and surely a girl might humour he . on the other 
 hand , his son be a young man , and she feel that a girl ought to be 
 offend with he , or at all event be offend before he . it be at 
 he that she gaze before reply . 

 " I be not touchy , I hope . it be the Giottos that I want to see , if you 
 will kindly tell I which they be . " 

 the son nod . with a look of sombre satisfaction , he lead the way to 
 the Peruzzi Chapel . there be a hint of the teacher about he . she feel 
 like a child in school who have answer a question rightly . 

 the chapel be already fill with an earnest congregation , and out of 
 they rise the voice of a lecturer , direct they how to worship Giotto , 
 not by tactful valuation , but by the standard of the spirit . 

 " remember , " he be say , " the fact about this church of Santa Croce ; 
 how it be build by faith in the full fervour of medievalism , before 
 any taint of the Renaissance have appear . observe how Giotto in these 
 fresco - now , unhappily , ruin by restoration - be untrouble by the 
 snare of anatomy and perspective . could anything be more majestic , more 
 pathetic , beautiful , true ? how little , we feel , avail knowledge and 
 technical cleverness against a man who truly feel ! " 

 " no ! " exclaim Mr. Emerson , in much too loud a voice for church . 
 " remember nothing of the sort ! build by faith indeed ! that simply mean 
 the workman be not   pay properly . and as for the fresco , I see no 
 truth in they . look at that fat man in blue ! he must weigh as much as I 
 do , and he be shoot into the sky like an air balloon . " 

 he be refer to the fresco of the " Ascension of St. John . " inside , 
 the lecturer 's voice falter , as well it might . the audience shift 
 uneasily , and so do Lucy . she be sure that she ought not to be with 
 these man ; but they have cast a spell over she . they be so serious and 
 so strange that she could not remember how to behave . 

 " now , do this happen , or do not   it ? yes or no ? " 

 George reply : 

 " it happen like this , if it happen at all . I would rather go up to 
 heaven by myself than be push by cherub ; and if I get there I should 
 like my friend to lean out of it , just as they do here . " 

 " you will never go up , " say his father . " you and I , dear boy , will 
 lie at peace in the earth that bear we , and our name will disappear as 
 surely as our work survive . " 

 " some of the people can only see the empty grave , not the saint , whoever 
 he be , go up . it do happen like that , if it happen at all . " 

 " Pardon I , " say a frigid voice . " the chapel be somewhat small for two 
 party . we will incommode you no long . " 

 the lecturer be a clergyman , and his audience must be also his flock , 
 for they hold prayer - book as well as guide - book in their hand . they 
 file out of the chapel in silence . amongst they be the two little old 
 lady of the Pension Bertolini - Miss Teresa and Miss Catherine Alan . 

 " stop ! " cry Mr. Emerson . " there be plenty of room for we all . stop ! " 

 the procession disappear without a word . 

 soon the lecturer could be hear in the next chapel , describe the life 
 of St. Francis . 

 " George , I do believe that clergyman be the Brixton curate . " 

 George go into the next chapel and return , say " perhaps he be . I 
 do not   remember . " 

 " then I have well speak to he and remind he who I be . it be that Mr. 
 Eager . why do he go ? do we talk too loud ? how vexatious . I shall go 
 and say we be sorry . had not   I well ? then perhaps he will come back . " 

 " he will not come back , " say George . 

 but Mr. Emerson , contrite and unhappy , hurry away to apologize to the 
 Rev. Cuthbert Eager . Lucy , apparently absorb in a lunette , could hear 
 the lecture again interrupt , the anxious , aggressive voice of the old 
 man , the curt , injure reply of his opponent . the son , who take every 
 little contretemp as if it be a tragedy , be listen also . 

 " my father have that effect on nearly every one , " he inform she . " he 
 will try to be kind . " 

 " I hope we all try , " say she , smile nervously . 

 " because we think it improve our character . but he be kind to people 
 because he love they ; and they find he out , and be offend , or 
 frightened . " 

 " how silly of they ! " say Lucy , though in her heart she sympathize ; " I 
 think that a kind action do tactfully - " 

 " Tact ! " 

 he throw up his head in disdain . apparently she have give the wrong 
 answer . she watch the singular creature pace up and down the chapel . 
 for a young man his face be rugge , and - until the shadow fall upon 
 it - hard . enshadowe , it spring into tenderness . she see he once again 
 at Rome , on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel , carry a burden of 
 acorn . healthy and muscular , he yet give she the feeling of greyness , 
 of tragedy that might only find solution in the night . the feeling soon 
 pass ; it be unlike she to have entertain anything so subtle . bear 
 of silence and of unknown emotion , it pass when Mr. Emerson return , 
 and she could re - enter the world of rapid talk , which be alone familiar 
 to she . 

 " be you snub ? " ask his son tranquilly . 

 " but we have spoil the pleasure of I do not   know how many people . they 
 will not   come back . " 

 " ... full of innate sympathy ... quickness to perceive good in 
 other ... vision of the brotherhood of man ... " scrap of the lecture on 
 St. Francis come float round the partition wall . 

 " do not   let we spoil your , " he continue to Lucy . " have you look at 
 those saint ? " 

 " yes , " say Lucy . " they be lovely . do you know which be the tombstone 
 that be praise in Ruskin ? " 

 he do not know , and suggest that they should try to guess it . George , 
 rather to her relief , refuse to move , and she and the old man wander 
 not unpleasantly about Santa Croce , which , though it be like a barn , 
 have harvest many beautiful thing inside its wall . there be also 
 beggar to avoid and guide to dodge round the pillar , and an old lady 
 with her dog , and here and there a priest modestly edge to his 
 Mass through the group of tourist . but Mr. Emerson be only half 
 interested . he watch the lecturer , whose success he believe he have 
 impair , and then he anxiously watch his son . 

 " why will he look at that fresco ? " he say uneasily . " I see nothing in 
 it . " 

 " I like Giotto , " she reply . " it be so wonderful what they say about 
 his tactile value . though I like thing like the Della Robbia baby 
 well . " 

 " so you ought . a baby be worth a dozen saint . and my baby 's worth the 
 whole of Paradise , and as far as I can see he live in Hell . " 

 Lucy again feel that this do not do . 

 " in Hell , " he repeat . " he be unhappy . " 

 " oh , dear ! " say Lucy . 

 " how can he be unhappy when he be strong and alive ? what more be one 
 to give he ? and think how he have be bring up - free from all the 
 superstition and ignorance that lead man to hate one another in the name 
 of God . with such an education as that , I think he be bind to grow 
 up happy . " 

 she be no theologian , but she feel that here be a very foolish old 
 man , as well as a very irreligious one . she also feel that her mother 
 might not like she talk to that kind of person , and that Charlotte 
 would object most strongly . 

 " what be we to do with he ? " he ask . " he come out for his holiday to 
 Italy , and behave - like that ; like the little child who ought to have 
 be play , and who hurt himself upon the tombstone . eh ? what do you 
 say ? " 

 Lucy have make no suggestion . suddenly he say : 

 " now do not   be stupid over this . I do not   require you to fall in love with 
 my boy , but I do think you might try and understand he . you be near 
 his age , and if you let yourself go I be sure you be sensible . you 
 might help I . he have know so few woman , and you have the time . 
 you stop here several week , I suppose ? but let yourself go . you be 
 inclined to get muddle , if I may judge from last night . let yourself 
 go . pull out from the depth those thought that you do not understand , 
 and spread they out in the sunlight and know the meaning of they . by 
 understand George you may learn to understand yourself . it will be 
 good for both of you . " 

 to this extraordinary speech Lucy find no answer . 

 " I only know what it be that be wrong with he ; not why it be . " 

 " and what be it ? " ask Lucy fearfully , expect some harrowing tale . 

 " the old trouble ; thing will not   fit . " 

 " what thing ? " 

 " the thing of the universe . it be quite true . they do not . " 

 " oh , Mr. Emerson , whatever do you mean ? " 

 in his ordinary voice , so that she scarcely realize he be quote 
 poetry , he say : 

  " ' from far , from eve and morning , 
  and yon twelve - wind sky , 
  the stuff of life to knit I 
  Blew hither : here be I ' 

 George and I both know this , but why do it distress he ? we know that 
 we come from the wind , and that we shall return to they ; that all life 
 be perhaps a knot , a tangle , a blemish in the eternal smoothness . but 
 why should this make we unhappy ? let we rather love one another , and 
 work and rejoice . I do not   believe in this world sorrow . " 

 Miss Honeychurch assent . 

 " then make my boy think like we . make he realize that by the side of 
 the everlasting why there be a yes - a transitory yes if you like , but a 
 yes . " 

 suddenly she laugh ; surely one ought to laugh . a young man melancholy 
 because the universe would not   fit , because life be a tangle or a wind , 
 or a Yes , or something ! 

 " I be very sorry , " she cry . " you will think I unfeele , but - but - " 
 then she become matronly . " oh , but your son want employment . have he no 
 particular hobby ? why , I myself have worry , but I can generally forget 
 they at the piano ; and collect stamp do no end of good for my 
 brother . perhaps Italy bore he ; you ought to try the alp or the 
 Lakes . " 

 the old man 's face sadden , and he touch she gently with his hand . 
 this do not alarm she ; she think that her advice have impress he 
 and that he be thank she for it . indeed , he no long alarm she 
 at all ; she regard he as a kind thing , but quite silly . her feeling 
 be as inflate spiritually as they have be an hour ago esthetically , 
 before she lose Baedeker . the dear George , now stride towards they 
 over the tombstone , seem both pitiable and absurd . he approach , his 
 face in the shadow . he say : 

 " Miss Bartlett . " 

 " oh , good gracious I ! " say Lucy , suddenly collapse and again see 
 the whole of life in a new perspective . " where ? where ? " 

 " in the nave . " 

 " I see . those gossip little Miss Alans must have - " she check 
 herself . 

 " poor girl ! " explode Mr. Emerson . " poor girl ! " 

 she could not let this pass , for it be just what she be feel 
 herself . 

 " poor girl ? I fail to understand the point of that remark . I think 
 myself a very fortunate girl , I assure you . I be thoroughly happy , and 
 have a splendid time . pray do not   waste time mourn over I . there be 
 enough sorrow in the world , be not   there , without try to invent it . 
 good - bye . thank you both so much for all your kindness . ah , yes ! there 
 do come my cousin . a delightful morning ! Santa Croce be a wonderful 
 church . " 

 she join her cousin . 



 Chapter III : Music , Violets , and the Letter " S " 

 it so happen that Lucy , who find daily life rather chaotic , enter 
 a more solid world when she open the piano . she be then no long 
 either deferential or patronizing ; no long either a rebel or a slave . 
 the kingdom of music be not the kingdom of this world ; it will accept 
 those whom breeding and intellect and culture have alike reject . the 
 commonplace person begin to play , and shoot into the empyrean without 
 effort , whilst we look up , marvel how he have escape we , and 
 think how we could worship he and love he , would he but translate 
 his vision into human word , and his experience into human action . 
 perhaps he can not ; certainly he do not , or do so very seldom . Lucy 
 have do so never . 

 she be no dazzle executante ; her run be not at all like string of 
 pearl , and she strike no more right note than be suitable for one 
 of her age and situation . nor be she the passionate young lady , who 
 perform so tragically on a summer 's evening with the window open . 
 passion be there , but it could not be easily label ; it slip 
 between love and hatred and jealousy , and all the furniture of the 
 pictorial style . and she be tragical only in the sense that she be 
 great , for she love to play on the side of victory . victory of what and 
 over what - that be more than the word of daily life can tell we . but 
 that some sonata of Beethoven be write tragic no one can gainsay ; 
 yet they can triumph or despair as the player decide , and Lucy have 
 decide that they should triumph . 

 a very wet afternoon at the Bertolini permit she to do the thing she 
 really like , and after lunch she open the little drape piano . a few 
 people linger round and praise her playing , but find that she 
 make no reply , disperse to their room to write up their diary or 
 to sleep . she take no notice of Mr. Emerson look for his son , nor of 
 Miss Bartlett look for Miss Lavish , nor of Miss Lavish look for 
 her cigarette - case . like every true performer , she be intoxicate by 
 the mere feel of the note : they be finger caress her own ; and by 
 touch , not by sound alone , do she come to her desire . 

 Mr. Beebe , sit unnoticed in the window , ponder this illogical 
 element in Miss Honeychurch , and recall the occasion at Tunbridge 
 Wells when he have discover it . it be at one of those entertainment 
 where the upper class entertain the low . the seat be fill with 
 a respectful audience , and the lady and gentleman of the parish , under 
 the auspex of their vicar , sang , or recite , or imitate the drawing 
 of a champagne cork . among the promise item be " Miss Honeychurch . 
 Piano . beethoven , " and Mr. Beebe be wonder whether it would be 
 Adelaida , or the march of the Ruins of Athens , when his composure 
 be disturb by the open bar of Opus III . he be in suspense all 
 through the introduction , for not until the pace quicken do one know 
 what the performer intend . with the roar of the opening theme he know 
 that thing be go extraordinarily ; in the chord that herald the 
 conclusion he hear the hammer stroke of victory . he be glad that she 
 only play the first movement , for he could have pay no attention to 
 the wind intricacy of the measure of nine - sixteen . the audience 
 clap , no less respectful . it be Mr. Beebe who start the stamping ; 
 it be all that one could do . 

 " who be she ? " he ask the vicar afterwards . 

 " Cousin of one of my parishioner . I do not consider her choice of a 
 piece happy . beethoven be so usually simple and direct in his appeal 
 that it be sheer perversity to choose a thing like that , which , if 
 anything , disturb . " 

 " introduce I . " 

 " she will be delighted . she and Miss Bartlett be full of the praise of 
 your sermon . " 

 " my sermon ? " cry Mr. Beebe . " why ever do she listen to it ? " 

 when he be introduce he understand why , for Miss Honeychurch , 
 disjoin from her music stool , be only a young lady with a quantity of 
 dark hair and a very pretty , pale , undeveloped face . she love go to 
 concert , she love stop with her cousin , she love iced coffee and 
 meringue . he do not doubt that she love his sermon also . but before 
 he leave Tunbridge Wells he make a remark to the vicar , which he now 
 make to Lucy herself when she close the little piano and move dreamily 
 towards he : 

 " if Miss Honeychurch ever take to live as she play , it will be very 
 exciting both for we and for she . " 

 Lucy at once re - enter daily life . 

 " oh , what a funny thing ! some one say just the same to mother , and she 
 say she trust I should never live a duet . " 

 " do not   Mrs. Honeychurch like music ? " 

 " she do not   mind it . but she do not   like one to get excited over 
 anything ; she think I be silly about it . she think - I can not   make 
 out . once , you know , I say that I like my own playing well than any 
 one 's . she have never get over it . of course , I do not   mean that I play 
 well ; I only mean - " 

 " of course , " say he , wonder why she bother to explain . 

 " music - " say Lucy , as if attempt some generality . she could not 
 complete it , and look out absently upon Italy in the wet . the whole 
 life of the South be disorganize , and the most graceful nation in 
 Europe have turn into formless lump of clothe . 

 the street and the river be dirty yellow , the bridge be dirty grey , 
 and the hill be dirty purple . somewhere in their fold be conceal 
 Miss Lavish and Miss Bartlett , who have choose this afternoon to visit 
 the Torre del Gallo . 

 " what about music ? " say Mr. Beebe . 

 " Poor Charlotte will be sop , " be Lucy 's reply . 

 the expedition be typical of Miss Bartlett , who would return cold , 
 tired , hungry , and angelic , with a ruin skirt , a pulpy Baedeker , and 
 a tickling cough in her throat . on another day , when the whole world be 
 singing and the air run into the mouth , like wine , she would refuse to 
 stir from the drawing - room , say that she be an old thing , and no fit 
 companion for a hearty girl . 

 " Miss Lavish have lead your cousin astray . she hop to find the true 
 Italy in the wet I believe . " 

 " Miss Lavish be so original , " murmur Lucy . this be a stock remark , 
 the supreme achievement of the Pension Bertolini in the way of 
 definition . Miss Lavish be so original . Mr. Beebe have his doubt , but 
 they would have be put down to clerical narrowness . for that , and for 
 other reason , he hold his peace . 

 " be it true , " continue Lucy in awe - strike tone , " that Miss Lavish be 
 write a book ? " 

 " they do say so . " 

 " what be it about ? " 

 " it will be a novel , " reply Mr. Beebe , " deal with modern Italy . 
 let I refer you for an account to Miss Catharine Alan , who use word 
 herself more admirably than any one I know . " 

 " I wish Miss Lavish would tell I herself . we start such friend . but 
 I do not   think she ought to have run away with Baedeker that morning in 
 Santa Croce . Charlotte be most annoyed at find I practically alone , 
 and so I could not   help be a little annoyed with Miss Lavish . " 

 " the two lady , at all event , have make it up . " 

 he be interested in the sudden friendship between woman so apparently 
 dissimilar as Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish . they be always in each 
 other 's company , with Lucy a slight third . Miss Lavish he believe 
 he understand , but Miss Bartlett might reveal unknown depth of 
 strangeness , though not perhaps , of meaning . be Italy deflect 
 she from the path of prim chaperon , which he have assign to she at 
 Tunbridge Wells ? all his life he have love to study maiden lady ; 
 they be his specialty , and his profession have provide he with ample 
 opportunity for the work . girl like Lucy be charming to look at , 
 but Mr. Beebe be , from rather profound reason , somewhat chilly in his 
 attitude towards the other sex , and prefer to be interested rather 
 than enthral . 

 Lucy , for the third time , say that poor Charlotte would be sop . the 
 Arno be rise in flood , wash away the trace of the little cart 
 upon the foreshore . but in the south - west there have appear a dull haze 
 of yellow , which might mean well weather if it do not mean bad . she 
 open the window to inspect , and a cold blast enter the room , draw 
 a plaintive cry from Miss Catharine Alan , who enter at the same moment 
 by the door . 

 " oh , dear Miss Honeychurch , you will catch a chill ! and Mr. Beebe here 
 besides . who would suppose this be Italy ? there be my sister actually 
 nurse the hot - water can ; no comfort or proper provision . " 

 she sidle towards they and sit down , self - conscious as she always be 
 on enter a room which contain one man , or a man and one woman . 

 " I could hear your beautiful playing , Miss Honeychurch , though I be in 
 my room with the door shut . door shut ; indeed , most necessary . no one 
 have the least idea of privacy in this country . and one person catch it 
 from another . " 

 Lucy answer suitably . Mr. Beebe be not able to tell the lady of 
 his adventure at Modena , where the chambermaid burst in upon he in his 
 bath , exclaim cheerfully , " Fa niente , sono vecchia . " he content 
 himself with say : " I quite agree with you , Miss Alan . the Italians 
 be a most unpleasant people . they pry everywhere , they see everything , 
 and they know what we want before we know it ourselves . we be at their 
 mercy . they read our thought , they foretell our desire . from the 
 cab - driver down to - to Giotto , they turn we inside out , and I resent 
 it . yet in their heart of heart they be - how superficial ! they have no 
 conception of the intellectual life . how right be Signora Bertolini , who 
 exclaim to I the other day : ' Ho , Mr. Beebe , if you know what I suffer 
 over the child 's edjucaishion . HI will not   ' ave my little Victorier 
 teach by a hignorant Italian what can not   explain nothink ! ' " 

 Miss Alan do not follow , but gather that she be be mock in an 
 agreeable way . her sister be a little disappointed in Mr. Beebe , have 
 expect well thing from a clergyman whose head be bald and who 
 wear a pair of russet whisker . indeed , who would have suppose that 
 tolerance , sympathy , and a sense of humour would inhabit that militant 
 form ? 

 in the midst of her satisfaction she continue to sidle , and at last 
 the cause be disclose . from the chair beneath she she extract 
 a gun - metal cigarette - case , on which be powder in turquoise the 
 initial " E. L. " 

 " that belong to Lavish . " say the clergyman . " a good fellow , lavish , 
 but I wish she would start a pipe . " 

 " oh , Mr. Beebe , " say Miss Alan , divide between awe and mirth . " indeed , 
 though it be dreadful for she to smoke , it be not quite as dreadful as 
 you suppose . she take to it , practically in despair , after her 
 life 's work be carry away in a landslip . surely that make it more 
 excusable . " 

 " what be that ? " ask Lucy . 

 Mr. Beebe sit back complacently , and Miss Alan begin as follow : " it be 
 a novel - and I be afraid , from what I can gather , not a very nice novel . 
 it be so sad when people who have ability misuse they , and I must say 
 they nearly always do . anyhow , she leave it almost finish in the Grotto 
 of the Calvary at the Capuccini Hotel at Amalfi while she go for a 
 little ink . she say : ' can I have a little ink , please ? ' but you know 
 what Italians be , and meanwhile the Grotto fall roar on to the 
 beach , and the sad thing of all be that she can not remember what she 
 have write . the poor thing be very ill after it , and so get tempt 
 into cigarette . it be a great secret , but I be glad to say that she be 
 write another novel . she tell Teresa and Miss Pole the other day that 
 she have get up all the local colour - this novel be to be about modern 
 Italy ; the other be historical - but that she could not start till she 
 have an idea . first she try Perugia for an inspiration , then she come 
 here - this must on no account get round . and so cheerful through it all ! 
 I can not help think that there be something to admire in every one , 
 even if you do not approve of they . " 

 Miss Alan be always thus be charitable against her well judgment . 
 a delicate pathos perfume her disconnected remark , give they 
 unexpected beauty , just as in the decay autumn wood there sometimes 
 rise odour reminiscent of spring . she feel she have make almost too many 
 allowance , and apologize hurriedly for her toleration . 

 " all the same , she be a little too - I hardly like to say unwomanly , but 
 she behave most strangely when the Emersons arrive . " 

 Mr. Beebe smile as Miss Alan plunge into an anecdote which he know she 
 would be unable to finish in the presence of a gentleman . 

 " I do not   know , Miss Honeychurch , if you have notice that Miss Pole , the 
 lady who have so much yellow hair , take lemonade . that old Mr. Emerson , 
 who put thing very strangely - " 

 her jaw drop . she be silent . Mr. Beebe , whose social resource be 
 endless , go out to order some tea , and she continue to Lucy in a 
 hasty whisper : 

 " Stomach . he warn Miss Pole of her stomach - acidity , he call it - and 
 he may have mean to be kind . I must say I forget myself and laugh ; it 
 be so sudden . as Teresa truly say , it be no laugh matter . but the 
 point be that Miss Lavish be positively attract by his mentioning 
 S. , and say she like plain speak , and meet different grade of 
 thought . she think they be commercial traveller - ' drummer ' be the 
 word she use - and all through dinner she try to prove that England , 
 our great and beloved country , rest on nothing but commerce . Teresa be 
 very much annoyed , and leave the table before the cheese , say as she 
 do so : ' there , Miss Lavish , be one who can confute you well than I , ' 
 and point to that beautiful picture of Lord Tennyson . then Miss 
 Lavish say : ' tut ! the early Victorians . ' just imagine ! ' tut ! the early 
 Victorians . ' my sister have go , and I feel bind to speak . I say : 
 ' Miss Lavish , I be an early victorian ; at least , that be to say , I 
 will hear no breath of censure against our dear Queen . ' it be horrible 
 speaking . I remind she how the Queen have be to Ireland when she do 
 not want to go , and I must say she be dumbfound , and make no reply . 
 but , unluckily , Mr. Emerson overhear this part , and call in his deep 
 voice : ' quite so , quite so ! I honour the woman for her irish visit . ' the 
 woman ! I tell thing so badly ; but you see what a tangle we be in 
 by this time , all on account of S. have be mention in the first 
 place . but that be not all . after dinner Miss Lavish actually come up 
 and say : ' Miss Alan , I be go into the smoking - room to talk to those 
 two nice man . come , too . ' needless to say , I refuse such an unsuitable 
 invitation , and she have the impertinence to tell I that it would 
 broaden my idea , and say that she have four brother , all University 
 man , except one who be in the army , who always make a point of talk 
 to commercial traveller . " 

 " let I finish the story , " say Mr. Beebe , who have return . 

 " Miss Lavish try Miss Pole , myself , every one , and finally say : 
 ' I shall go alone . ' she go . at the end of five minute she return 
 unobtrusively with a green baize board , and begin play patience . " 

 " whatever happen ? " cry Lucy . 

 " no one know . no one will ever know . Miss Lavish will never dare to 
 tell , and Mr. Emerson do not think it worth tell . " 

 " Mr. Beebe - old Mr. Emerson , be he nice or not nice ? I do so want to 
 know . " 

 Mr. Beebe laugh and suggest that she should settle the question for 
 herself . 

 " no ; but it be so difficult . sometimes he be so silly , and then I do not 
 mind he . Miss Alan , what do you think ? be he nice ? " 

 the little old lady shake her head , and sigh disapprovingly . Mr. 
 Beebe , whom the conversation amuse , stir she up by say : 

 " I consider that you be bind to class he as nice , Miss Alan , after 
 that business of the violet . " 

 " violet ? oh , dear ! who tell you about the violet ? how do thing get 
 round ? a pension be a bad place for gossip . no , I can not forget how 
 they behave at Mr. Eager 's lecture at Santa Croce . oh , poor Miss 
 Honeychurch ! it really be too bad . no , I have quite change . I do not 
 like the Emersons . they be not nice . " 

 Mr. Beebe smile nonchalantly . he have make a gentle effort to introduce 
 the Emersons into Bertolini society , and the effort have fail . he be 
 almost the only person who remain friendly to they . Miss Lavish , who 
 represent intellect , be avowedly hostile , and now the Miss Alans , 
 who stand for good breeding , be follow she . Miss Bartlett , smart 
 under an obligation , would scarcely be civil . the case of Lucy be 
 different . she have give he a hazy account of her adventure in Santa 
 Croce , and he gather that the two man have make a curious and possibly 
 concert attempt to annex she , to show she the world from their own 
 strange standpoint , to interest she in their private sorrow and joy . 
 this be impertinent ; he do not wish their cause to be champion by a 
 young girl : he would rather it should fail . after all , he know nothing 
 about they , and pension joy , pension sorrow , be flimsy thing ; 
 whereas Lucy would be his parishioner . 

 Lucy , with one eye upon the weather , finally say that she think the 
 Emersons be nice ; not that she see anything of they now . even their 
 seat at dinner have be move . 

 " but be not   they always waylay you to go out with they , dear ? " say 
 the little lady inquisitively . 

 " only once . Charlotte do not   like it , and say something - quite 
 politely , of course . " 

 " most right of she . they do not   understand our way . they must find their 
 level . " 

 Mr. Beebe rather feel that they have go under . they have give up their 
 attempt - if it be one - to conquer society , and now the father be 
 almost as silent as the son . he wonder whether he would not plan a 
 pleasant day for these folk before they leave - some expedition , perhaps , 
 with Lucy well chaperon to be nice to they . it be one of Mr. Beebe 's 
 chief pleasure to provide people with happy memory . 

 evening approach while they chat ; the air become bright ; the 
 colour on the tree and hill be purify , and the Arno lose its 
 muddy solidity and begin to twinkle . there be a few streak of 
 bluish - green among the cloud , a few patch of watery light upon the 
 earth , and then the dripping facade of San Miniato shine brilliantly in 
 the decline sun . 

 " too late to go out , " say Miss Alan in a voice of relief . " all the 
 gallery be shut . " 

 " I think I shall go out , " say Lucy . " I want to go round the town in the 
 circular tram - on the platform by the driver . " 

 her two companion look grave . Mr. Beebe , who feel responsible for she 
 in the absence of Miss Bartlett , venture to say : 

 " I wish we could . unluckily I have letter . if you do want to go out 
 alone , will not   you be well on your foot ? " 

 " Italians , dear , you know , " say Miss Alan . 

 " perhaps I shall meet some one who read I through and through ! " 

 but they still look disapproval , and she so far concede to Mr. Beebe 
 as to say that she would only go for a little walk , and keep to the 
 street frequent by tourist . 

 " she ought not   really to go at all , " say Mr. Beebe , as they watch 
 she from the window , " and she know it . I put it down to too much 
 Beethoven . " 



 Chapter IV : Fourth chapter 

 Mr. Beebe be right . Lucy never know her desire so clearly as after 
 music . she have not really appreciate the clergyman 's wit , nor the 
 suggestive twittering of Miss Alan . Conversation be tedious ; she 
 want something big , and she believe that it would have come to she on 
 the wind - sweep platform of an electric tram . this she might not attempt . 
 it be unladylike . why ? why be most big thing unladylike ? Charlotte 
 have once explain to she why . it be not that lady be inferior 
 to man ; it be that they be different . their mission be to inspire 
 other to achievement rather than to achieve themselves . indirectly , by 
 mean of tact and a spotless name , a lady could accomplish much . but 
 if she rush into the fray herself she would be first censure , then 
 despise , and finally ignore . poem have be write to illustrate this 
 point . 

 there be much that be immortal in this medieval lady . the dragon have 
 go , and so have the knight , but still she linger in our midst . she 
 reign in many an early victorian castle , and be queen of much early 
 victorian song . it be sweet to protect she in the interval of business , 
 sweet to pay her honour when she have cook our dinner well . but alas ! 
 the creature grow degenerate . in her heart also there be spring 
 up strange desire . she too be enamour of heavy wind , and vast 
 panorama , and green expanse of the sea . she have mark the kingdom 
 of this world , how full it be of wealth , and beauty , and war - a radiant 
 crust , build around the central fire , spin towards the recede 
 heaven . man , declare that she inspire they to it , move joyfully over 
 the surface , have the most delightful meeting with other man , happy , 
 not because they be masculine , but because they be alive . before the 
 show break up she would like to drop the august title of the Eternal 
 Woman , and go there as her transitory self . 

 Lucy do not stand for the medieval lady , who be rather an ideal to 
 which she be bid to lift her eye when feel serious . nor have 
 she any system of revolt . here and there a restriction annoy she 
 particularly , and she would transgress it , and perhaps be sorry that she 
 have do so . this afternoon she be peculiarly restive . she would really 
 like to do something of which her well - wisher disapprove . as she might 
 not go on the electric tram , she go to Alinari 's shop . 

 there she buy a photograph of Botticelli 's " Birth of Venus . " Venus , 
 be a pity , spoil the picture , otherwise so charming , and Miss 
 Bartlett have persuade she to do without it .   a pity in art of course 
 signify the nude .   Giorgione 's " Tempesta , " the " Idolino , " some of 
 the Sistine fresco and the Apoxyomenos , be add to it . she feel 
 a little calm then , and buy Fra Angelico 's " Coronation , " Giotto 's 
 " ascension of St. John , " some Della Robbia baby , and some Guido 
 Reni Madonnas . for her taste be catholic , and she extend uncritical 
 approval to every well - know name . 

 but though she spend nearly seven lira , the gate of liberty seem 
 still unopened . she be conscious of her discontent ; it be new to she 
 to be conscious of it . " the world , " she think , " be certainly full 
 of beautiful thing , if only I could come across they . " it be not 
 surprising that Mrs. Honeychurch disapprove of music , declare that it 
 always leave her daughter peevish , unpractical , and touchy . 

 " nothing ever happen to I , " she reflect , as she enter the Piazza 
 Signoria and look nonchalantly at its marvel , now fairly familiar to 
 she . the great square be in shadow ; the sunshine have come too late to 
 strike it . Neptune be already unsubstantial in the twilight , half god , 
 half ghost , and his fountain plash dreamily to the man and satyr who 
 idle together on its marge . the Loggia show as the triple entrance of 
 a cave , wherein many a deity , shadowy , but immortal , look forth 
 upon the arrival and departure of mankind . it be the hour of 
 unreality - the hour , that is , when unfamiliar thing be real . an old 
 person at such an hour and in such a place might think that sufficient 
 be happen to he , and rest content . Lucy desire more . 

 she fix her eye wistfully on the tower of the palace , which rise 
 out of the low darkness like a pillar of roughen gold . it seem 
 no long a tower , no long support by earth , but some unattainable 
 treasure throbbing in the tranquil sky . its brightness mesmerize she , 
 still dance before her eye when she bent they to the ground and 
 start towards home . 

 then something do happen . 

 two Italians by the Loggia have be bicker about a debt . " cinque 
 lire , " they have cry , " cinque lira ! " they spar at each other , and 
 one of they be hit lightly upon the chest . he frown ; he bent towards 
 Lucy with a look of interest , as if he have an important message for she . 
 he open his lip to deliver it , and a stream of red come out between 
 they and trickle down his unshaven chin . 

 that be all . a crowd rise out of the dusk . it hide this extraordinary 
 man from she , and bear he away to the fountain . Mr. George Emerson 
 happen to be a few pace away , look at she across the spot where 
 the man have be . how very odd ! across something . even as she catch 
 sight of he he grow dim ; the palace itself grow dim , sway above she , 
 fall on to she softly , slowly , noiselessly , and the sky fall with it . 

 she think : " oh , what have I do ? " 

 " oh , what have I do ? " she murmur , and open her eye . 

 George Emerson still look at she , but not across anything . she have 
 complain of dullness , and lo ! one man be stab , and another hold 
 she in his arm . 

 they be sit on some step in the Uffizi Arcade . he must have 
 carry she . he rise when she speak , and begin to dust his knee . she 
 repeat : 

 " oh , what have I do ? " 

 " you faint . " 

 " I - I be very sorry . " 

 " how be you now ? " 

 " perfectly well - absolutely well . " and she begin to nod and smile . 

 " then let we come home . there be no point in our stopping . " 

 he hold out his hand to pull she up . she pretend not to see it . the 
 cry from the fountain - they have never cease - rang emptily . the whole 
 world seem pale and void of its original meaning . 

 " how very kind you have be ! I might have hurt myself fall . but now 
 I be well . I can go alone , thank you . " 

 his hand be still extend . 

 " oh , my photograph ! " she exclaim suddenly . 

 " what photograph ? " 

 " I buy some photograph at Alinari 's . I must have drop they out 
 there in the square . " she look at he cautiously . " would you add to 
 your kindness by fetch they ? " 

 he add to his kindness . as soon as he have turn his back , Lucy arise 
 with the running of a maniac and steal down the arcade towards the Arno . 

 " Miss Honeychurch ! " 

 she stop with her hand on her heart . 

 " you sit still ; you be not   fit to go home alone . " 

 " yes , I be , thank you so very much . " 

 " no , you be not . you would go openly if you be . " 

 " but I have rather - " 

 " then I do not   fetch your photograph . " 

 " I have rather be alone . " 

 he say imperiously : " the man be dead - the man be probably dead ; sit 
 down till you be rest . " she be bewilder , and obey he . " and 
 do not   move till I come back . " 

 in the distance she see creature with black hood , such as appear in 
 dream . the palace tower have lose the reflection of the decline day , 
 and join itself to earth . how should she talk to Mr. Emerson when he 
 return from the shadowy square ? again the thought occur to she , 
 " oh , what have I do ? " - the thought that she , as well as the die man , 
 have cross some spiritual boundary . 

 he return , and she talk of the murder . oddly enough , it be an easy 
 topic . she speak of the italian character ; she become almost garrulous 
 over the incident that have make her faint five minute before . be 
 strong physically , she soon overcome the horror of blood . she rise 
 without his assistance , and though wing seem to flutter inside she , 
 she walk firmly enough towards the Arno . there a cabman signal to 
 they ; they refuse he . 

 " and the murderer try to kiss he , you say - how very odd Italians 
 be ! - and give himself up to the police ! Mr. Beebe be say that 
 italian know everything , but I think they be rather childish . when my 
 cousin and I be at the Pitti yesterday - what be that ? " 

 he have throw something into the stream . 

 " what do you throw in ? " 

 " thing I do not   want , " he say crossly . 

 " Mr. Emerson ! " 

 " well ? " 

 " where be the photograph ? " 

 he be silent . 

 " I believe it be my photograph that you throw away . " 

 " I do not   know what to do with they , " he cry , and his voice be that 
 of an anxious boy . her heart warm towards he for the first time . 
 " they be cover with blood . there ! I be glad I have   tell you ; and all 
 the time we be make conversation I be wonder what to do with 
 they . " he point down - stream . " they have   go . " the river swirl under 
 the bridge , " I do mind they so , and one be so foolish , it seem well 
 that they should go out to the sea - I do not   know ; I may just mean that 
 they frighten I . " then the boy verge into a man . " for something 
 tremendous have happen ; I must face it without get muddle . it 
 be not   exactly that a man have die . " 

 something warn Lucy that she must stop he . 

 " it have happen , " he repeat , " and I mean to find out what it be . " 

 " Mr. Emerson - " 

 he turn towards her frowning , as if she have disturb he in some 
 abstract quest . 

 " I want to ask you something before we go in . " 

 they be close to their pension . she stop and leant her elbow 
 against the parapet of the embankment . he do likewise . there be at 
 time a magic in identity of position ; it be one of the thing that have 
 suggest to we eternal comradeship . she move her elbow before say : 

 " I have behave ridiculously . " 

 he be follow his own thought . 

 " I be never so much ashamed of myself in my life ; I can not think what 
 come over I . " 

 " I nearly faint myself , " he say ; but she feel that her attitude 
 repel he . 

 " well , I owe you a thousand apology . " 

 " oh , all right . " 

 " and - this be the real point - you know how silly people be 
 gossip - lady especially , I be afraid - you understand what I mean ? " 

 " I be afraid I do not . " 

 " I mean , would you not mention it to any one , my foolish behaviour ? " 

 " your behaviour ? oh , yes , all right - all right . " 

 " thank you so much . and would you - " 

 she could not carry her request any far . the river be rush below 
 they , almost black in the advance night . he have throw her photograph 
 into it , and then he have tell she the reason . it strike she that it be 
 hopeless to look for chivalry in such a man . he would do she no harm by 
 idle gossip ; he be trustworthy , intelligent , and even kind ; he might 
 even have a high opinion of she . but he lack chivalry ; his thought , 
 like his behaviour , would not be modify by awe . it be useless to say 
 to he , " and would you - " and hope that he would complete the sentence 
 for himself , avert his eye from her nakedness like the knight in 
 that beautiful picture . she have be in his arm , and he remember it , 
 just as he remember the blood on the photograph that she have buy 
 in Alinari 's shop . it be not exactly that a man have die ; something 
 have happen to the living : they have come to a situation where character 
 tell , and where childhood enter upon the branching path of Youth . 

 " well , thank you so much , " she repeat , " how quickly these accident do 
 happen , and then one return to the old life ! " 

 " I do not . " 

 Anxiety move she to question he . 

 his answer be puzzle : " I shall probably want to live . " 

 " but why , Mr. Emerson ? what do you mean ? " 

 " I shall want to live , I say . " 

 lean her elbow on the parapet , she contemplate the River Arno , 
 whose roar be suggest some unexpected melody to her ear . 



 chapter v : possibility of a Pleasant Outing 

 it be a family say that " you never know which way Charlotte Bartlett 
 would turn . " she be perfectly pleasant and sensible over Lucy 's 
 adventure , find the abridge account of it quite adequate , and pay 
 suitable tribute to the courtesy of Mr. George Emerson . she and Miss 
 Lavish have have an adventure also . they have be stop at the Dazio 
 come back , and the young official there , who seem impudent and 
 desoeuvre , have try to search their reticule for provision . it might 
 have be most unpleasant . fortunately Miss Lavish be a match for any 
 one . 

 for good or for evil , Lucy be leave to face her problem alone . none 
 of her friend have see she , either in the Piazza or , later on , by 
 the embankment . Mr. Beebe , indeed , notice her startled eye at 
 dinner - time , have again pass to himself the remark of " too much 
 Beethoven . " but he only suppose that she be ready for an adventure , 
 not that she have encounter it . this solitude oppress she ; she be 
 accustomed to have her thought confirm by other or , at all event , 
 contradict ; it be too dreadful not to know whether she be think 
 right or wrong . 

 at breakfast next morning she take decisive action . there be two plan 
 between which she have to choose . Mr. Beebe be walk up to the 
 Torre del Gallo with the Emersons and some american lady . would miss 
 Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch join the party ? Charlotte decline for 
 herself ; she have be there in the rain the previous afternoon . but 
 she think it an admirable idea for Lucy , who hat shopping , change 
 money , fetch letter , and other irksome duty - all of which Miss 
 Bartlett must accomplish this morning and could easily accomplish alone . 

 " no , Charlotte ! " cry the girl , with real warmth . " it be very kind of 
 Mr. Beebe , but I be certainly come with you . I have much rather . " 

 " very well , dear , " say Miss Bartlett , with a faint flush of pleasure 
 that call forth a deep flush of shame on the cheek of Lucy . how 
 abominably she behave to Charlotte , now as always ! but now she should 
 alter . all morning she would be really nice to she . 

 she slip her arm into her cousin 's , and they start off along the 
 Lung ' arno . the river be a lion that morning in strength , voice , and 
 colour . Miss Bartlett insist on lean over the parapet to look at 
 it . she then make her usual remark , which be " how I do wish Freddy and 
 your mother could see this , too ! " 

 Lucy fidget ; it be tiresome of Charlotte to have stop exactly 
 where she do . 

 " look , Lucia ! oh , you be watch for the Torre del Gallo party . I 
 fear you would repent you of your choice . " 

 serious as the choice have be , Lucy do not repent . yesterday have be 
 a muddle - queer and odd , the kind of thing one could not write down 
 easily on paper - but she have a feeling that Charlotte and her shopping 
 be preferable to George Emerson and the summit of the Torre del 
 Gallo . since she could not unravel the tangle , she must take care not 
 to re - enter it . she could protest sincerely against Miss Bartlett 's 
 insinuation . 

 but though she have avoid the chief actor , the scenery unfortunately 
 remain . Charlotte , with the complacency of fate , lead she from the 
 river to the Piazza Signoria . she could not have believe that stone , a 
 Loggia , a fountain , a palace tower , would have such significance . for a 
 moment she understand the nature of ghost . 

 the exact site of the murder be occupy , not by a ghost , but by Miss 
 Lavish , who have the morning newspaper in her hand . she hail they 
 briskly . the dreadful catastrophe of the previous day have give she an 
 idea which she think would work up into a book . 

 " oh , let I congratulate you ! " say Miss Bartlett . " after your despair 
 of yesterday ! what a fortunate thing ! " 

 " aha ! Miss Honeychurch , come you here I be in luck . now , you be to tell 
 I absolutely everything that you see from the beginning . " Lucy poke at 
 the ground with her parasol . 

 " but perhaps you would rather not ? " 

 " I be sorry - if you could manage without it , I think I would rather not . " 

 the elder lady exchange glance , not of disapproval ; it be suitable 
 that a girl should feel deeply . 

 " it be I who be sorry , " say Miss Lavish " literary hack be shameless 
 creature . I believe there be no secret of the human heart into which we 
 would not   pry . " 

 she march cheerfully to the fountain and back , and do a few 
 calculation in realism . then she say that she have be in the 
 Piazza since eight o'clock collect material . a good deal of it be 
 unsuitable , but of course one always have to adapt . the two man have 
 quarrel over a five - franc note . for the five - franc note she should 
 substitute a young lady , which would raise the tone of the tragedy , and 
 at the same time furnish an excellent plot . 

 " what be the heroine 's name ? " ask Miss Bartlett . 

 " Leonora , " say Miss Lavish ; her own name be Eleanor . 

 " I do hope she be nice . " 

 that desideratum would not be omit . 

 " and what be the plot ? " 

 love , murder , abduction , revenge , be the plot . but it all come while 
 the fountain plash to the satyr in the morning sun . 

 " I hope you will excuse I for bore on like this , " Miss Lavish 
 conclude . " it be so tempting to talk to really sympathetic people . 
 of course , this be the bare outline . there will be a deal of local 
 colouring , description of Florence and the neighbourhood , and I shall 
 also introduce some humorous character . and let I give you all fair 
 warning : I intend to be unmerciful to the british tourist . " 

 " oh , you wicked woman , " cry Miss Bartlett . " I be sure you be think 
 of the Emersons . " 

 Miss Lavish give a machiavellian smile . 

 " I confess that in Italy my sympathy be not with my own countryman . 
 it be the neglect Italians who attract I , and whose life I be go 
 to paint so far as I can . for I repeat and I insist , and I have always 
 hold most strongly , that a tragedy such as yesterday 's be not the less 
 tragic because it happen in humble life . " 

 there be a fitting silence when Miss Lavish have conclude . then the 
 cousin wish success to her labour , and walk slowly away across the 
 square . 

 " she be my idea of a really clever woman , " say Miss Bartlett . " that 
 last remark strike I as so particularly true . it should be a most 
 pathetic novel . " 

 Lucy assent . at present her great aim be not to get put into it . her 
 perception this morning be curiously keen , and she believe that Miss 
 Lavish have she on trial for an ingenue . 

 " she be emancipate , but only in the very good sense of the word , " 
 continue Miss Bartlett slowly . " none but the superficial would be 
 shock at she . we have a long talk yesterday . she believe in justice 
 and truth and human interest . she tell I also that she have a high 
 opinion of the destiny of woman - Mr. Eager ! why , how nice ! what a 
 pleasant surprise ! " 

 " ah , not for I , " say the chaplain blandly , " for I have be watch 
 you and Miss Honeychurch for quite a little time . " 

 " we be chat to Miss Lavish . " 

 his brow contract . 

 " so I see . be you indeed ? andate via ! sono occupato ! " the last remark 
 be make to a vender of panoramic photograph who be approach with a 
 courteous smile . " I be about to venture a suggestion . would you and 
 Miss Honeychurch be disposed to join I in a drive some day this week - a 
 drive in the hill ? we might go up by Fiesole and back by Settignano . 
 there be a point on that road where we could get down and have an 
 hour 's ramble on the hillside . the view thence of Florence be most 
 beautiful - far well than the hackneyed view of Fiesole . it be the view 
 that Alessio Baldovinetti be fond of introduce into his picture . that 
 man have a decide feeling for landscape . decidedly . but who look at it 
 to - day ? ah , the world be too much for we . " 

 Miss Bartlett have not hear of Alessio Baldovinetti , but she know 
 that Mr. Eager be no commonplace chaplain . he be a member of the 
 residential colony who have make Florence their home . he know the people 
 who never walk about with Baedekers , who have learn to take a siesta 
 after lunch , who take drive the pension tourist have never hear of , 
 and see by private influence gallery which be close to they . live 
 in delicate seclusion , some in furnished flat , other in Renaissance 
 villa on Fiesole 's slope , they read , write , study , and exchange 
 idea , thus attain to that intimate knowledge , or rather perception , 
 of Florence which be deny to all who carry in their pocket the 
 coupon of Cook . 

 therefore an invitation from the chaplain be something to be proud of . 
 between the two section of his flock he be often the only link , and it 
 be his avow custom to select those of his migratory sheep who seem 
 worthy , and give they a few hour in the pasture of the permanent . tea 
 at a Renaissance villa ? nothing have be say about it yet . but if it 
 do come to that - how Lucy would enjoy it ! 

 a few day ago and Lucy would have feel the same . but the joy of life 
 be group themselves anew . a drive in the hill with Mr. Eager and 
 Miss Bartlett - even if culminate in a residential tea - party - be 
 no long the great of they . she echo the rapture of Charlotte 
 somewhat faintly . only when she hear that Mr. Beebe be also come do 
 her thank become more sincere . 

 " so we shall be a partie carree , " say the chaplain . " in these day of 
 toil and tumult one have great need of the country and its message of 
 purity . andate via ! andate presto , presto ! ah , the town ! beautiful as it 
 be , it be the town . " 

 they assent . 

 " this very square - so I be tell - witness yesterday the most sordid of 
 tragedy . to one who love the Florence of Dante and Savonarola 
 there be something portentous in such desecration - portentous and 
 humiliating . " 

 " humiliate indeed , " say Miss Bartlett . " Miss Honeychurch happen to 
 be pass through as it happen . she can hardly bear to speak of it . " 
 she glance at Lucy proudly . 

 " and how come we to have you here ? " ask the chaplain paternally . 

 Miss Bartlett 's recent liberalism ooze away at the question . " do 
 not blame she , please , Mr. Eager . the fault be mine : I leave she 
 unchaperoned . " 

 " so you be here alone , Miss Honeychurch ? " his voice suggest 
 sympathetic reproof but at the same time indicate that a few harrowing 
 detail would not be unacceptable . his dark , handsome face droop 
 mournfully towards she to catch her reply . 

 " practically . " 

 " one of our pension acquaintance kindly bring her home , " say Miss 
 Bartlett , adroitly conceal the sex of the preserver . 

 " for she also it must have be a terrible experience . I trust that 
 neither of you be at all - that it be not in your immediate proximity ? " 

 of the many thing Lucy be notice to - day , not the least remarkable 
 be this : the ghoulish fashion in which respectable people will nibble 
 after blood . George Emerson have keep the subject strangely pure . 

 " he die by the fountain , I believe , " be her reply . 

 " and you and your friend - " 

 " be over at the Loggia . " 

 " that must have save you much . you have not , of course , see the 
 disgraceful illustration which the gutter Press - this man be a public 
 nuisance ; he know that I be a resident perfectly well , and yet he go 
 on worry I to buy his vulgar view . " 

 surely the vendor of photograph be in league with Lucy - in the eternal 
 league of Italy with youth . he have suddenly extend his book before 
 Miss Bartlett and Mr. Eager , bind their hand together by a long 
 glossy ribbon of church , picture , and view . 

 " this be too much ! " cry the chaplain , strike petulantly at one of 
 Fra Angelico 's angel . she tore . a shrill cry rise from the vendor . the 
 book it seem , be more valuable than one would have suppose . 

 " willingly would I purchase - " begin Miss Bartlett . 

 " ignore he , " say Mr. Eager sharply , and they all walk rapidly away 
 from the square . 

 but an italian can never be ignore , least of all when he have a 
 grievance . his mysterious persecution of Mr. Eager become relentless ; 
 the air ring with his threat and lamentation . he appeal to Lucy ; 
 would not she intercede ? he be poor - he shelter a family - the tax on 
 bread . he wait , he gibber , he be recompensed , he be dissatisfied , 
 he do not leave they until he have sweep their mind clean of all 
 thought whether pleasant or unpleasant . 

 shopping be the topic that now ensue . under the chaplain 's guidance 
 they select many hideous present and mementoes - florid little 
 picture - frame that seem fashion in gild pastry ; other little 
 frame , more severe , that stand on little easel , and be carven out 
 of oak ; a blot book of vellum ; a Dante of the same material ; cheap 
 mosaic brooch , which the maid , next Christmas , would never tell from 
 real ; pin , pot , heraldic saucer , brown art - photograph ; Eros and 
 psyche in alabaster ; St. Peter to match - all of which would have cost 
 less in London . 

 this successful morning leave no pleasant impression on Lucy . she have 
 be a little frightened , both by Miss Lavish and by Mr. Eager , she know 
 not why . and as they frighten she , she have , strangely enough , cease 
 to respect they . she doubt that Miss Lavish be a great artist . she 
 doubt that Mr. Eager be as full of spirituality and culture as she 
 have be lead to suppose . they be try by some new test , and they be 
 find want . as for Charlotte - as for Charlotte she be exactly the 
 same . it might be possible to be nice to she ; it be impossible to love 
 she . 

 " the son of a labourer ; I happen to know it for a fact . a mechanic of 
 some sort himself when he be young ; then he take to write for the 
 Socialistic Press . I come across he at Brixton . " 

 they be talk about the Emersons . 

 " how wonderfully people rise in these day ! " sigh Miss Bartlett , 
 finger a model of the lean Tower of Pisa . 

 " generally , " reply Mr. Eager , " one have only sympathy for their 
 success . the desire for education and for social advance - in these 
 thing there be something not wholly vile . there be some work man 
 whom one would be very willing to see out here in Florence - little as 
 they would make of it . " 

 " be he a journalist now ? " Miss Bartlett ask , " he be not ; he make an 
 advantageous marriage . " 

 he utter this remark with a voice full of meaning , and end with a 
 sigh . 

 " oh , so he have a wife . " 

 " dead , Miss Bartlett , dead . I wonder - yes I wonder how he have the 
 effrontery to look I in the face , to dare to claim acquaintance with 
 I . he be in my London parish long ago . the other day in Santa Croce , 
 when he be with Miss Honeychurch , I snub he . let he beware that he 
 do not get more than a snub . " 

 " what ? " cry Lucy , flush . 

 " exposure ! " hiss Mr. Eager . 

 he try to change the subject ; but in score a dramatic point he have 
 interest his audience more than he have intend . Miss Bartlett be 
 full of very natural curiosity . Lucy , though she wish never to see the 
 Emersons again , be not disposed to condemn they on a single word . 

 " do you mean , " she ask , " that he be an irreligious man ? we know that 
 already . " 

 " Lucy , dear - " say Miss Bartlett , gently reprove her cousin 's 
 penetration . 

 " I should be astonish if you know all . the boy - an innocent child at 
 the time - I will exclude . God know what his education and his inherit 
 quality may have make he . " 

 " perhaps , " say Miss Bartlett , " it be something that we have well not 
 hear . " 

 " to speak plainly , " say Mr. Eager , " it be . I will say no more . " for the 
 first time Lucy 's rebellious thought sweep out in word - for the first 
 time in her life . 

 " you have say very little . " 

 " it be my intention to say very little , " be his frigid reply . 

 he gaze indignantly at the girl , who meet he with equal indignation . 
 she turn towards he from the shop counter ; her breast heave quickly . 
 he observe her brow , and the sudden strength of her lip . it be 
 intolerable that she should disbelieve he . 

 " Murder , if you want to know , " he cry angrily . " that man murder his 
 wife ! " 

 " how ? " she retort . 

 " to all intent and purpose he murder she . that day in Santa 
 Croce - do they say anything against I ? " 

 " not a word , Mr. Eager - not a single word . " 

 " oh , I think they have be libel I to you . but I suppose it be 
 only their personal charm that make you defend they . " 

 " I be not defend they , " say Lucy , lose her courage , and relapse 
 into the old chaotic method . " they be nothing to I . " 

 " how could you think she be defend they ? " say Miss Bartlett , much 
 discomfit by the unpleasant scene . the shopman be possibly listen . 

 " she will find it difficult . for that man have murder his wife in the 
 sight of God . " 

 the addition of God be strike . but the chaplain be really try 
 to qualify a rash remark . a silence follow which might have be 
 impressive , but be merely awkward . then Miss Bartlett hastily purchase 
 the Leaning Tower , and lead the way into the street . 

 " I must be go , " say he , shut his eye and take out his watch . 

 Miss Bartlett thank he for his kindness , and speak with enthusiasm of 
 the approach drive . 

 " Drive ? oh , be our drive to come off ? " 

 Lucy be recall to her manner , and after a little exertion the 
 complacency of Mr. Eager be restore . 

 " bother the drive ! " exclaim the girl , as soon as he have depart . " it 
 be just the drive we have arrange with Mr. Beebe without any fuss at 
 all . why should he invite we in that absurd manner ? we might as well 
 invite he . we be each pay for ourselves . " 

 Miss Bartlett , who have intend to lament over the Emersons , be 
 launch by this remark into unexpected thought . 

 " if that be so , dear - if the drive we and Mr. Beebe be go with Mr. 
 Eager be really the same as the one we be go with Mr. Beebe , then I 
 foresee a sad kettle of fish . " 

 " how ? " 

 " because Mr. Beebe have ask Eleanor Lavish to come , too . " 

 " that will mean another carriage . " 

 " far bad . Mr. Eager do not like Eleanor . she know it herself . the 
 truth must be tell ; she be too unconventional for he . " 

 they be now in the newspaper - room at the English bank . Lucy stand by 
 the central table , heedless of Punch and the Graphic , try to answer , 
 or at all event to formulate the question riot in her brain . the 
 well - know world have break up , and there emerge Florence , a magic 
 city where people think and do the most extraordinary thing . murder , 
 accusation of murder , a lady cling to one man and be rude to 
 another - be these the daily incident of her street ? be there more 
 in her frank beauty than meet the eye - the power , perhaps , to evoke 
 passion , good and bad , and to bring they speedily to a fulfillment ? 

 Happy Charlotte , who , though greatly trouble over thing that do not 
 matter , seem oblivious to thing that do ; who could conjecture with 
 admirable delicacy " where thing might lead to , " but apparently lose 
 sight of the goal as she approach it . now she be crouch in the 
 corner try to extract a circular note from a kind of linen nose - bag 
 which hang in chaste concealment round her neck . she have be tell that 
 this be the only safe way to carry money in Italy ; it must only 
 be broach within the wall of the english bank . as she grope she 
 murmur : " whether it be Mr. Beebe who forget to tell Mr. Eager , or Mr. 
 Eager who forget when he tell we , or whether they have decide to leave 
 Eleanor out altogether - which they could scarcely do - but in any case 
 we must be prepare . it be you they really want ; I be only ask for 
 appearance . you shall go with the two gentleman , and I and Eleanor will 
 follow behind . a one - horse carriage would do for we . yet how difficult 
 it be ! " 

 " it be indeed , " reply the girl , with a gravity that sound 
 sympathetic . 

 " what do you think about it ? " ask Miss Bartlett , flush from the 
 struggle , and button up her dress . 

 " I do not   know what I think , nor what I want . " 

 " oh , dear , Lucy ! I do hope Florence be not   bore you . speak the word , 
 and , as you know , I would take you to the end of the earth to - morrow . " 

 " thank you , Charlotte , " say Lucy , and ponder over the offer . 

 there be letter for she at the bureau - one from her brother , full 
 of athletic and biology ; one from her mother , delightful as only her 
 mother 's letter could be . she have read in it of the crocus which have 
 be buy for yellow and be come up puce , of the new parlour - maid , 
 who have water the fern with essence of lemonade , of the semi - detach 
 cottage which be ruin Summer Street , and break the heart of Sir 
 Harry Otway . she recall the free , pleasant life of her home , where she 
 be allow to do everything , and where nothing ever happen to she . 
 the road up through the pine - wood , the clean drawing - room , the view 
 over the Sussex Weald - all hang before her bright and distinct , but 
 pathetic as the picture in a gallery to which , after much experience , a 
 traveller return . 

 " and the news ? " ask Miss Bartlett . 

 " Mrs. Vyse and her son have go to Rome , " say Lucy , give the news 
 that interest she least . " do you know the Vyses ? " 

 " oh , not that way back . we can never have too much of the dear Piazza 
 Signoria . " 

 " they be nice people , the Vyses . so clever - my idea of what be really 
 clever . do not   you long to be in Rome ? " 

 " I die for it ! " 

 the Piazza Signoria be too stony to be brilliant . it have no grass , 
 no flower , no fresco , no glitter wall of marble or comfort 
 patch of ruddy brick . by an odd chance - unless we believe in a 
 preside genius of place - the statue that relieve its severity 
 suggest , not the innocence of childhood , nor the glorious bewilderment 
 of youth , but the conscious achievement of maturity . Perseus and 
 Judith , Hercules and Thusnelda , they have do or suffer something , 
 and though they be immortal , immortality have come to they after 
 experience , not before . here , not only in the solitude of Nature , might 
 a hero meet a goddess , or a heroine a god . 

 " Charlotte ! " cry the girl suddenly . " here be an idea . what if we pop 
 off to Rome to - morrow - straight to the Vyses ' hotel ? for I do know what 
 I want . I be sick of Florence . no , you say you would go to the end of the 
 earth ! do ! do ! " 

 Miss Bartlett , with equal vivacity , reply : 

 " oh , you droll person ! pray , what would become of your drive in the 
 hill ? " 

 they pass together through the gaunt beauty of the square , laugh 
 over the unpractical suggestion . 



 Chapter VI : the Reverend Arthur Beebe , the Reverend Cuthbert Eager , 
 Mr. Emerson , Mr. George Emerson , Miss Eleanor Lavish , Miss Charlotte 
 Bartlett , and Miss Lucy Honeychurch Drive out in Carriages to see a 
 view ; Italians drive they . 

 it be Phaethon who drive they to Fiesole that memorable day , a youth 
 all irresponsibility and fire , recklessly urge his master 's horse up 
 the stony hill . Mr. Beebe recognize he at once . neither the Ages of 
 Faith nor the Age of Doubt have touch he ; he be Phaethon in Tuscany 
 drive a cab . and it be Persephone whom he ask leave to pick up on 
 the way , say that she be his sister - Persephone , tall and slender 
 and pale , return with the Spring to her mother 's cottage , and still 
 shade her eye from the unaccustomed light . to her Mr. Eager object , 
 say that here be the thin edge of the wedge , and one must guard 
 against imposition . but the lady intercede , and when it have be make 
 clear that it be a very great favour , the goddess be allow to mount 
 beside the god . 

 Phaethon at once slip the left rein over her head , thus enable 
 himself to drive with his arm round her waist . she do not mind . 
 Mr. Eager , who sit with his back to the horse , see nothing of the 
 indecorous proceeding , and continue his conversation with Lucy . the 
 other two occupant of the carriage be old Mr. Emerson and Miss 
 Lavish . for a dreadful thing have happen : Mr. Beebe , without consult 
 Mr. Eager , have double the size of the party . and though Miss Bartlett 
 and Miss Lavish have plan all the morning how the people be to sit , 
 at the critical moment when the carriage come round they lose their 
 head , and Miss Lavish get in with Lucy , while Miss Bartlett , with 
 George Emerson and Mr. Beebe , follow on behind . 

 it be hard on the poor chaplain to have his partie carree thus 
 transform . tea at a Renaissance villa , if he have ever meditate it , 
 be now impossible . Lucy and Miss Bartlett have a certain style about 
 they , and Mr. Beebe , though unreliable , be a man of part . but a shoddy 
 lady writer and a journalist who have murder his wife in the sight of 
 God - they should enter no villa at his introduction . 

 Lucy , elegantly dress in white , sit erect and nervous amid these 
 explosive ingredient , attentive to Mr. Eager , repressive towards Miss 
 Lavish , watchful of old Mr. Emerson , hitherto fortunately asleep , thank 
 to a heavy lunch and the drowsy atmosphere of Spring . she look on the 
 expedition as the work of Fate . but for it she would have avoid George 
 Emerson successfully . in an open manner he have show that he wish to 
 continue their intimacy . she have refuse , not because she dislike he , 
 but because she do not know what have happen , and suspect that he 
 do know . and this frighten she . 

 for the real event - whatever it be - have take place , not in the Loggia , 
 but by the river . to behave wildly at the sight of death be pardonable . 
 but to discuss it afterwards , to pass from discussion into silence , 
 and through silence into sympathy , that be an error , not of a startled 
 emotion , but of the whole fabric . there be really something blameworthy 
  she think   in their joint contemplation of the shadowy stream , in the 
 common impulse which have turn they to the house without the passing of 
 a look or word . this sense of wickedness have be slight at first . she 
 have nearly join the party to the Torre del Gallo . but each time that 
 she avoid George it become more imperative that she should avoid 
 he again . and now celestial irony , work through her cousin and two 
 clergyman , do not suffer she to leave Florence till she have make this 
 expedition with he through the hill . 

 meanwhile Mr. Eager hold she in civil converse ; their little tiff be 
 over . 

 " so , Miss Honeychurch , you be travel ? as a student of art ? " 

 " oh , dear I , no - oh , no ! " 

 " perhaps as a student of human nature , " interpose Miss Lavish , " like 
 myself ? " 

 " oh , no . I be here as a tourist . " 

 " oh , indeed , " say Mr. Eager . " be you indeed ? if you will not think I 
 rude , we resident sometimes pity you poor tourist not a little - handed 
 about like a parcel of good from Venice to Florence , from Florence to 
 Rome , living herd together in pension or hotel , quite unconscious 
 of anything that be outside Baedeker , their one anxiety to get ' do ' 
 or ' through ' and go on somewhere else . the result be , they mix up town , 
 river , palace in one inextricable whirl . you know the american girl 
 in Punch who say : ' say , poppa , what do we see at Rome ? ' and the father 
 reply : ' why , guess Rome be the place where we see the yaller dog . ' 
 there be travel for you . ha ! ha ! ha ! " 

 " I quite agree , " say Miss Lavish , who have several time try to 
 interrupt his mordant wit . " the narrowness and superficiality of the 
 Anglo - Saxon tourist be nothing less than a menace . " 

 " quite so . now , the english colony at Florence , Miss Honeychurch - and it 
 be of considerable size , though , of course , not all equally - a few be 
 here for trade , for example . but the great part be student . Lady 
 Helen Laverstock be at present busy over Fra Angelico . I mention she 
 name because we be pass her villa on the left . no , you can only see 
 it if you stand - no , do not stand ; you will fall . she be very proud of 
 that thick hedge . inside , perfect seclusion . one might have go back 
 six hundred year . some critic believe that her garden be the scene of 
 the Decameron , which lend it an additional interest , do it not ? " 

 " it do indeed ! " cry Miss Lavish . " tell I , where do they place the 
 scene of that wonderful seventh day ? " 

 but Mr. Eager proceed to tell Miss Honeychurch that on the right live 
 Mr. Someone Something , an American of the good type - so rare ! - and that 
 the Somebody Elses be far down the hill . " doubtless you know 
 her monograph in the series of ' Mediaeval Byways ' ? he be work at 
 Gemistus Pletho . sometimes as I take tea in their beautiful ground I 
 hear , over the wall , the electric tram squeal up the new road with 
 its load of hot , dusty , unintelligent tourist who be go to ' do ' 
 Fiesole in an hour in order that they may say they have be there , and 
 I think - think - I think how little they think what lie so near they . " 

 during this speech the two figure on the box be sport with each 
 other disgracefully . Lucy have a spasm of envy . grant that they wish 
 to misbehave , it be pleasant for they to be able to do so . they be 
 probably the only people enjoy the expedition . the carriage sweep 
 with agonizing jolt up through the Piazza of Fiesole and into the 
 Settignano road . 

 " Piano ! piano ! " say Mr. Eager , elegantly wave his hand over his head . 

 " Va bene , signore , va bene , va bene , " croon the driver , and whip 
 his horse up again . 

 now Mr. Eager and Miss Lavish begin to talk against each other on the 
 subject of Alessio Baldovinetti . be he a cause of the Renaissance , or 
 be he one of its manifestation ? the other carriage be leave behind . as 
 the pace increase to a gallop the large , slumber form of Mr. Emerson 
 be throw against the chaplain with the regularity of a machine . 

 " Piano ! piano ! " say he , with a martyr look at Lucy . 

 an extra lurch make he turn angrily in his seat . Phaethon , who for some 
 time have be endeavour to kiss Persephone , have just succeed . 

 a little scene ensue , which , as Miss Bartlett say afterwards , be 
 most unpleasant . the horse be stop , the lover be order to 
 disentangle themselves , the boy be to lose his pourboire , the girl be 
 immediately to get down . 

 " she be my sister , " say he , turn round on they with piteous eye . 

 Mr. Eager take the trouble to tell he that he be a liar . 

 Phaethon hang down his head , not at the matter of the accusation , but 
 at its manner . at this point Mr. Emerson , whom the shock of stop 
 have awake , declare that the lover must on no account be separate , and 
 pat they on the back to signify his approval . and Miss Lavish , though 
 unwilling to ally he , feel bind to support the cause of Bohemianism . 

 " most certainly I would let they be , " she cry . " but I dare say I 
 shall receive scant support . I have always fly in the face of the 
 convention all my life . this be what I call an adventure . " 

 " we must not submit , " say Mr. Eager . " I know he be try it on . he be 
 treat we as if we be a party of Cook 's tourist . " 

 " surely no ! " say Miss Lavish , her ardour visibly decreasing . 

 the other carriage have draw up behind , and sensible Mr. Beebe 
 call out that after this warning the couple would be sure to behave 
 themselves properly . 

 " leave they alone , " Mr. Emerson beg the chaplain , of whom he stand 
 in no awe . " do we find happiness so often that we should turn it off the 
 box when it happen to sit there ? to be drive by lover - a king might 
 envy we , and if we part they it be more like sacrilege than anything I 
 know . " 

 here the voice of Miss Bartlett be hear say that a crowd have begin 
 to collect . 

 Mr. Eager , who suffer from an over - fluent tongue rather than a 
 resolute will , be determined to make himself hear . he address the 
 driver again . italian in the mouth of Italians be a deep - voice stream , 
 with unexpected cataract and boulder to preserve it from monotony . 
 in Mr. Eager 's mouth it resemble nothing so much as an acid whistle 
 fountain which play ever higher and high , and quick and quick , 
 and more and more shrilly , till abruptly it be turn off with a click . 

 " Signorina ! " say the man to Lucy , when the display have cease . why 
 should he appeal to Lucy ? 

 " Signorina ! " echo Persephone in her glorious contralto . she point at 
 the other carriage . why ? 

 for a moment the two girl look at each other . then Persephone get 
 down from the box . 

 " victory at last ! " say Mr. Eager , smite his hand together as the 
 carriage start again . 

 " it be not victory , " say Mr. Emerson . " it be defeat . you have part 
 two people who be happy . " 

 Mr. Eager shut his eye . he be oblige to sit next to Mr. Emerson , but 
 he would not speak to he . the old man be refresh by sleep , and take 
 up the matter warmly . he command Lucy to agree with he ; he shout 
 for support to his son . 

 " we have try to buy what can not be buy with money . he have bargain 
 to drive we , and he be do it . we have no right over his soul . " 

 Miss Lavish frown . it be hard when a person you have class as 
 typically british speak out of his character . 

 " he be not drive we well , " she say . " he jolt we . " 

 " that I deny . it be as restful as sleep . aha ! he be jolt we now . 
 can you wonder ? he would like to throw we out , and most certainly he be 
 justified . and if I be superstitious I would be frightened of the girl , 
 too . it do not   do to injure young people . have you ever hear of 
 Lorenzo de Medici ? " 

 Miss Lavish bristle . 

 " most certainly I have . do you refer to Lorenzo il Magnifico , or to 
 Lorenzo , Duke of Urbino , or to Lorenzo surname Lorenzino on account of 
 his diminutive stature ? " 

 " the Lord know . possibly he do know , for I refer to Lorenzo the poet . 
 he write a line - so I hear yesterday - which run like this : ' do not   go 
 fighting against the Spring . ' " 

 Mr. Eager could not resist the opportunity for erudition . 

 " non fate guerra al Maggio , " he murmur . " ' War not with the May ' would 
 render a correct meaning . " 

 " the point be , we have war with it . look . " he point to the Val 
 d'Arno , which be visible far below they , through the bud tree . 
 " fifty mile of Spring , and we have   come up to admire they . do you suppose 
 there be any difference between Spring in nature and spring in man ? but 
 there we go , praise the one and condemn the other as improper , 
 ashame that the same work eternally through both . " 

 no one encourage he to talk . presently Mr. Eager give a signal for the 
 carriage to stop and marshal the party for their ramble on the hill . 
 a hollow like a great amphitheatre , full of terrace step and misty 
 olive , now lie between they and the height of Fiesole , and the road , 
 still follow its curve , be about to sweep on to a promontory which 
 stand out in the plain . it be this promontory , uncultivated , wet , 
 cover with bush and occasional tree , which have catch the fancy of 
 Alessio Baldovinetti nearly five hundred year before . he have ascend 
 it , that diligent and rather obscure master , possibly with an eye to 
 business , possibly for the joy of ascend . stand there , he have see 
 that view of the Val d'Arno and distant Florence , which he afterwards 
 have introduce not very effectively into his work . but where exactly have 
 he stand ? that be the question which Mr. Eager hop to solve now . and 
 Miss Lavish , whose nature be attract by anything problematical , have 
 become equally enthusiastic . 

 but it be not easy to carry the picture of Alessio Baldovinetti in your 
 head , even if you have remember to look at they before start . and 
 the haze in the valley increase the difficulty of the quest . 

 the party spring about from tuft to tuft of grass , their anxiety to keep 
 together be only equal by their desire to go different direction . 
 finally they split into group . Lucy clung to Miss Bartlett and Miss 
 Lavish ; the Emersons return to hold laborious converse with the 
 driver ; while the two clergyman , who be expect to have topic in 
 common , be leave to each other . 

 the two elder lady soon throw off the mask . in the audible whisper 
 that be now so familiar to Lucy they begin to discuss , not Alessio 
 Baldovinetti , but the drive . Miss Bartlett have ask Mr. George Emerson 
 what his profession be , and he have answer " the railway . " she be very 
 sorry that she have ask he . she have no idea that it would be such a 
 dreadful answer , or she would not have ask he . Mr. Beebe have turn 
 the conversation so cleverly , and she hop that the young man be not 
 very much hurt at she ask he . 

 " the railway ! " gasp Miss Lavish . " oh , but I shall die ! of course it 
 be the railway ! " she could not control her mirth . " he be the image of a 
 porter - on , on the South - Eastern . " 

 " Eleanor , be quiet , " pluck at her vivacious companion . " Hush ! they will 
 hear - the Emersons - " 

 " I can not   stop . let I go my wicked way . a porter - " 

 " eleanor ! " 

 " I be sure it be all right , " put in Lucy . " the Emersons will not   hear , and 
 they would not   mind if they do . " 

 Miss Lavish do not seem pleased at this . 

 " Miss Honeychurch listen ! " she say rather crossly . " Pouf ! Wouf ! you 
 naughty girl ! go away ! " 

 " oh , Lucy , you ought to be with Mr. Eager , I be sure . " 

 " I can not   find they now , and I do not   want to either . " 

 " Mr. Eager will be offend . it be your party . " 

 " please , I would rather stop here with you . " 

 " no , I agree , " say Miss Lavish . " it be like a school feast ; the boy 
 have get separate from the girl . Miss Lucy , you be to go . we wish to 
 converse on high topic unsuited for your ear . " 

 the girl be stubborn . as her time at Florence draw to its close she be 
 only at ease amongst those to whom she feel indifferent . such a one be 
 Miss Lavish , and such for the moment be Charlotte . she wish she have 
 not call attention to herself ; they be both annoy at her remark 
 and seem determined to get rid of she . 

 " how tired one get , " say Miss Bartlett . " oh , I do wish Freddy and your 
 mother could be here . " 

 Unselfishness with Miss Bartlett have entirely usurp the function of 
 enthusiasm . Lucy do not look at the view either . she would not enjoy 
 anything till she be safe at Rome . 

 " then sit you down , " say Miss Lavish . " observe my foresight . " 

 with many a smile she produce two of those mackintosh square that 
 protect the frame of the tourist from damp grass or cold marble step . 
 she sit on one ; who be to sit on the other ? 

 " Lucy ; without a moment 's doubt , Lucy . the ground will do for I . really 
 I have not have rheumatism for year . if I do feel it come on I shall 
 stand . imagine your mother 's feeling if I let you sit in the wet 
 in your white linen . " she sit down heavily where the ground look 
 particularly moist . " here we be , all settle delightfully . even if my 
 dress be thin it will not show so much , be brown . sit down , dear ; 
 you be too unselfish ; you do not   assert yourself enough . " she clear 
 her throat . " now do not   be alarm ; this be not   a cold . it be the tiny 
 cough , and I have have it three day . it be nothing to do with sit 
 here at all . " 

 there be only one way of treat the situation . at the end of five 
 minute Lucy depart in search of Mr. Beebe and Mr. Eager , vanquish 
 by the mackintosh square . 

 she address herself to the driver , who be sprawl in the 
 carriage , perfume the cushion with cigar . the miscreant , a bony 
 young man scorch black by the sun , rise to greet she with the courtesy 
 of a host and the assurance of a relative . 

 " Dove ? " say Lucy , after much anxious thought . 

 his face light up . of course he know where , not so far either . his arm 
 sweep three - fourth of the horizon . he should just think he do know 
 where . he press his finger - tip to his forehead and then push they 
 towards she , as if ooze with visible extract of knowledge . 

 more seem necessary . what be the italian for " clergyman " ? 

 " Dove buoni uomini ? " say she at last . 

 good ? scarcely the adjective for those noble being ! he show she his 
 cigar . 

 " Uno - piu - piccolo , " be her next remark , imply " have the cigar be 
 give to you by Mr. Beebe , the small of the two good man ? " 

 she be correct as usual . he tie the horse to a tree , kick it to make 
 it stay quiet , dust the carriage , arrange his hair , remould his 
 hat , encourage his moustache , and in rather less than a quarter of a 
 minute be ready to conduct she . Italians be bear know the way . it 
 would seem that the whole earth lie before they , not as a map , but as a 
 chess - board , whereon they continually behold the change piece as well 
 as the square . any one can find place , but the finding of people be a 
 gift from God . 

 he only stop once , to pick she some great blue violet . she thank 
 he with real pleasure . in the company of this common man the world 
 be beautiful and direct . for the first time she feel the influence 
 of Spring . his arm sweep the horizon gracefully ; violet , like other 
 thing , exist in great profusion there ; " would she like to see they ? " 

 " Ma buoni uomini . " 

 he bow . certainly . good man first , violet afterwards . they proceed 
 briskly through the undergrowth , which become thick and thick . they 
 be near the edge of the promontory , and the view be steal round 
 they , but the brown network of the bush shatter it into countless 
 piece . he be occupy in his cigar , and in hold back the pliant 
 bough . she be rejoice in her escape from dullness . not a step , not a 
 twig , be unimportant to she . 

 " what be that ? " 

 there be a voice in the wood , in the distance behind they . the voice 
 of Mr. Eager ? he shrug his shoulder . an Italian 's ignorance be 
 sometimes more remarkable than his knowledge . she could not make he 
 understand that perhaps they have miss the clergyman . the view be 
 form at last ; she could discern the river , the golden plain , other 
 hill . 

 " Eccolo ! " he exclaim . 

 at the same moment the ground give way , and with a cry she fall out of 
 the wood . light and beauty envelop she . she have fall on to a little 
 open terrace , which be cover with violet from end to end . 

 " Courage ! " cry her companion , now stand some six foot above . 
 " courage and love . " 

 she do not answer . from her foot the ground slop sharply into view , 
 and violet run down in rivulet and stream and cataract , irrigate 
 the hillside with blue , eddying round the tree stem collect into 
 pool in the hollow , cover the grass with spot of azure foam . but 
 never again be they in such profusion ; this terrace be the well - head , 
 the primal source whence beauty gush out to water the earth . 

 stand at its brink , like a swimmer who prepare , be the good man . 
 but he be not the good man that she have expect , and he be alone . 

 George have turn at the sound of her arrival . for a moment he 
 contemplate she , as one who have fall out of heaven . he see radiant 
 joy in her face , he see the flower beat against her dress in blue 
 wave . the bush above they close . he step quickly forward and 
 kiss she . 

 before she could speak , almost before she could feel , a voice call , 
 " Lucy ! Lucy ! Lucy ! " the silence of life have be break by Miss Bartlett 
 who stand brown against the view . 



 Chapter VII : they return 

 some complicated game have be play up and down the hillside all the 
 afternoon . what it be and exactly how the player have side , Lucy 
 be slow to discover . Mr. Eager have meet they with a questioning eye . 
 Charlotte have repulse he with much small talk . Mr. Emerson , seek 
 his son , be tell whereabouts to find he . Mr. Beebe , who wear the 
 heated aspect of a neutral , be bid to collect the faction for the 
 return home . there be a general sense of groping and bewilderment . Pan 
 have be amongst they - not the great god Pan , who have be bury these 
 two thousand year , but the little god Pan , who preside over social 
 contretemp and unsuccessful picnic . Mr. Beebe have lose every one , and 
 have consume in solitude the tea - basket which he have bring up as a 
 pleasant surprise . Miss Lavish have lose Miss Bartlett . Lucy have lose Mr. 
 Eager . Mr. Emerson have lose George . Miss Bartlett have lose a mackintosh 
 square . Phaethon have lose the game . 

 that last fact be undeniable . he climb on to the box shivering , with 
 his collar up , prophesy the swift approach of bad weather . " let we go 
 immediately , " he tell they . " the signorino will walk . " 

 " all the way ? he will be hour , " say Mr. Beebe . 

 " apparently . I tell he it be unwise . " he would look no one in the 
 face ; perhaps defeat be particularly mortify for he . he alone have 
 play skilfully , use the whole of his instinct , while the other 
 have use scrap of their intelligence . he alone have divine what thing 
 be , and what he wish they to be . he alone have interpret the 
 message that Lucy have receive five day before from the lip of a 
 die man . Persephone , who spend half her life in the grave - she could 
 interpret it also . not so these English . they gain knowledge slowly , and 
 perhaps too late . 

 the thought of a cab - driver , however just , seldom affect the life of 
 his employer . he be the most competent of Miss Bartlett 's opponent , 
 but infinitely the least dangerous . once back in the town , he and his 
 insight and his knowledge would trouble english lady no more . of 
 course , it be most unpleasant ; she have see his black head in the 
 bush ; he might make a tavern story out of it . but after all , what have 
 we to do with tavern ? real menace belong to the drawing - room . it 
 be of drawing - room people that Miss Bartlett think as she journey 
 downward towards the fade sun . Lucy sit beside she ; Mr. Eager sit 
 opposite , try to catch her eye ; he be vaguely suspicious . they speak 
 of Alessio Baldovinetti . 

 rain and darkness come on together . the two lady huddle together 
 under an inadequate parasol . there be a lightning flash , and Miss 
 Lavish who be nervous , scream from the carriage in front . at the next 
 flash , Lucy scream also . Mr. Eager address she professionally : 

 " Courage , Miss Honeychurch , courage and faith . if I might say so , there 
 be something almost blasphemous in this horror of the element . be we 
 seriously to suppose that all these cloud , all this immense electrical 
 display , be simply call into existence to extinguish you or I ? " 

 " no - of course - " 

 " even from the scientific standpoint the chance against our being 
 strike be enormous . the steel knife , the only article which might 
 attract the current , be in the other carriage . and , in any case , we be 
 infinitely safe than if we be walk . courage - courage and faith . " 

 under the rug , Lucy feel the kindly pressure of her cousin 's hand . at 
 time our need for a sympathetic gesture be so great that we care 
 not what exactly it signify or how much we may have to pay for it 
 afterwards . Miss Bartlett , by this timely exercise of her muscle , 
 gain more than she would have get in hour of preach or cross 
 examination . 

 she renew it when the two carriage stop , half into Florence . 

 " Mr. Eager ! " call Mr. Beebe . " we want your assistance . will you 
 interpret for we ? " 

 " George ! " cry Mr. Emerson . " ask your driver which way George go . the 
 boy may lose his way . he may be kill . " 

 " go , Mr. Eager , " say Miss Bartlett , " do not   ask our driver ; our driver be 
 no help . go and support poor Mr. Beebe - , he be nearly demented . " 

 " he may be kill ! " cry the old man . " he may be kill ! " 

 " typical behaviour , " say the chaplain , as he quit the carriage . " in 
 the presence of reality that kind of person invariably break down . " 

 " what do he know ? " whisper Lucy as soon as they be alone . 
 " Charlotte , how much do Mr. Eager know ? " 

 " nothing , dearest ; he know nothing . but - " she point at the 
 driver-"he know everything . Dearest , have we well ? shall I ? " she take 
 out her purse . " it be dreadful to be entangle with low - class people . 
 he see it all . " tap Phaethon 's back with her guide - book , she say , 
 " Silenzio ! " and offer he a franc . 

 " Va bene , " he reply , and accept it . as well this end to his day 
 as any . but Lucy , a mortal maid , be disappoint in he . 

 there be an explosion up the road . the storm have strike the overhead 
 wire of the tramline , and one of the great support have fall . if they 
 have not stop perhaps they might have be hurt . they choose to regard 
 it as a miraculous preservation , and the flood of love and sincerity , 
 which fructify every hour of life , burst forth in tumult . they descend 
 from the carriage ; they embrace each other . it be as joyful to be 
 forgive past unworthiness as to forgive they . for a moment they 
 realize vast possibility of good . 

 the old people recover quickly . in the very height of their emotion 
 they know it to be unmanly or unladylike . Miss Lavish calculate that , 
 even if they have continue , they would not have be catch in the 
 accident . Mr. Eager mumble a temperate prayer . but the driver , through 
 mile of dark squalid road , pour out their soul to the dryad and the 
 saint , and Lucy pour out her to her cousin . 

 " Charlotte , dear Charlotte , kiss I . kiss I again . only you can 
 understand I . you warn I to be careful . and I - I think I be 
 develop . " 

 " do not cry , dearest . take your time . " 

 " I have be obstinate and silly - bad than you know , far bad . once 
 by the river - oh , but he be not   kill - he would not   be kill , would he ? " 

 the thought disturb her repentance . as a matter of fact , the storm be 
 worst along the road ; but she have be near danger , and so she think 
 it must be near to every one . 

 " I trust not . one would always pray against that . " 

 " he be really - I think he be take by surprise , just as I be before . 
 but this time I be not to blame ; I want you to believe that . I simply 
 slip into those violet . no , I want to be really truthful . I be a 
 little to blame . I have silly thought . the sky , you know , be gold , 
 and the ground all blue , and for a moment he look like some one in a 
 book . " 

 " in a book ? " 

 " Heroes - god - the nonsense of schoolgirl . " 

 " and then ? " 

 " but , Charlotte , you know what happen then . " 

 Miss Bartlett be silent . indeed , she have little more to learn . with a 
 certain amount of insight she draw her young cousin affectionately 
 to she . all the way back Lucy 's body be shake by deep sigh , which 
 nothing could repress . 

 " I want to be truthful , " she whisper . " it be so hard to be absolutely 
 truthful . " 

 " do not   be trouble , dearest . wait till you be calm . we will talk it 
 over before bed - time in my room . " 

 so they re - enter the city with hand clasp . it be a shock to the 
 girl to find how far emotion have ebb in other . the storm have cease , 
 and Mr. Emerson be easy about his son . Mr. Beebe have regain good 
 humour , and Mr. Eager be already snub Miss Lavish . Charlotte alone 
 she be sure of - Charlotte , whose exterior conceal so much insight and 
 love . 

 the luxury of self - exposure keep she almost happy through the long 
 evening . she think not so much of what have happen as of how she 
 should describe it . all her sensation , her spasm of courage , her 
 moment of unreasonable joy , her mysterious discontent , should be 
 carefully lay before her cousin . and together in divine confidence they 
 would disentangle and interpret they all . 

 " at last , " think she , " I shall understand myself . I shall not   again 
 be trouble by thing that come out of nothing , and mean I do not   know 
 what . " 

 Miss Alan ask she to play . she refuse vehemently . Music seem to 
 she the employment of a child . she sit close to her cousin , who , with 
 commendable patience , be listen to a long story about lose luggage . 
 when it be over she cap it by a story of her own . Lucy become rather 
 hysterical with the delay . in vain she try to check , or at all event 
 to accelerate , the tale . it be not till a late hour that Miss Bartlett 
 have recover her luggage and could say in her usual tone of gentle 
 reproach : 

 " well , dear , I at all event be ready for Bedfordshire . come into my 
 room , and I will give a good brush to your hair . " 

 with some solemnity the door be shut , and a cane chair place for the 
 girl . then Miss Bartlett say " so what be to be do ? " 

 she be unprepared for the question . it have not occur to she that she 
 would have to do anything . a detailed exhibition of her emotion be all 
 that she have count upon . 

 " what be to be do ? a point , dearest , which you alone can settle . " 

 the rain be stream down the black window , and the great room feel 
 damp and chilly , one candle burn trembling on the chest of drawer 
 close to Miss Bartlett 's toque , which cast monstrous and fantastic 
 shadow on the bolt door . a tram roar by in the dark , and Lucy feel 
 unaccountably sad , though she have long since dry her eye . she lift 
 they to the ceiling , where the griffin and bassoon be colourless and 
 vague , the very ghost of joy . 

 " it have be rain for nearly four hour , " she say at last . 

 Miss Bartlett ignore the remark . 

 " how do you propose to silence he ? " 

 " the driver ? " 

 " my dear girl , no ; Mr. George Emerson . " 

 Lucy begin to pace up and down the room . 

 " I do not   understand , " she say at last . 

 she understand very well , but she no long wish to be absolutely 
 truthful . 

 " how be you go to stop he talk about it ? " 

 " I have a feeling that talk be a thing he will never do . " 

 " I , too , intend to judge he charitably . but unfortunately I have meet 
 the type before . they seldom keep their exploit to themselves . " 

 " exploit ? " cry Lucy , wince under the horrible plural . 

 " my poor dear , do you suppose that this be his first ? come here 
 and listen to I . I be only gather it from his own remark . do you 
 remember that day at lunch when he argue with Miss Alan that like one 
 person be an extra reason for like another ? " 

 " yes , " say Lucy , whom at the time the argument have please . 

 " well , I be no prude . there be no need to call he a wicked young man , 
 but obviously he be thoroughly unrefined . let we put it down to his 
 deplorable antecedent and education , if you wish . but we be no far 
 on with our question . what do you propose to do ? " 

 an idea rush across Lucy 's brain , which , have she think of it soon 
 and make it part of she , might have prove victorious . 

 " I propose to speak to he , " say she . 

 Miss Bartlett utter a cry of genuine alarm . 

 " you see , Charlotte , your kindness - I shall never forget it . but - as you 
 say - it be my affair . mine and his . " 

 " and you be go to implore he , to beg he to keep silence ? " 

 " certainly not . there would be no difficulty . whatever you ask he he 
 answer , yes or no ; then it be over . I have be frightened of he . but 
 now I be not one little bit . " 

 " but we fear he for you , dear . you be so young and inexperienced , you 
 have live among such nice people , that you can not realize what man can 
 be - how they can take a brutal pleasure in insult a woman whom she 
 sex do not protect and rally round . this afternoon , for example , if I 
 have not arrive , what would have happen ? " 

 " I can not   think , " say Lucy gravely . 

 something in her voice make Miss Bartlett repeat her question , intone 
 it more vigorously . 

 " what would have happen if I have not   arrive ? " 

 " I can not   think , " say Lucy again . 

 " when he insult you , how would you have reply ? " 

 " I have not   time to think . you come . " 

 " yes , but will not   you tell I now what you would have do ? " 

 " I should have - " she check herself , and break the sentence off . she 
 go up to the dripping window and strain her eye into the darkness . 
 she could not think what she would have do . 

 " come away from the window , dear , " say Miss Bartlett . " you will be see 
 from the road . " 

 Lucy obey . she be in her cousin 's power . she could not modulate out 
 the key of self - abasement in which she have start . neither of they 
 refer again to her suggestion that she should speak to George and 
 settle the matter , whatever it be , with he . 

 Miss Bartlett become plaintive . 

 " oh , for a real man ! we be only two woman , you and I. Mr. Beebe be 
 hopeless . there be Mr. Eager , but you do not trust he . oh , for your 
 brother ! he be young , but I know that his sister 's insult would rouse 
 in he a very lion . thank God , chivalry be not yet dead . there be still 
 leave some man who can reverence woman . " 

 as she speak , she pull off her ring , of which she wear several , and 
 range they upon the pin cushion . then she blow into her glove and 
 say : 

 " it will be a push to catch the morning train , but we must try . " 

 " what train ? " 

 " the train to Rome . " she look at her glove critically . 

 the girl receive the announcement as easily as it have be give . 

 " when do the train to Rome go ? " 

 " at eight . " 

 " Signora Bertolini would be upset . " 

 " we must face that , " say Miss Bartlett , not like to say that she have 
 give notice already . 

 " she will make we pay for a whole week 's pension . " 

 " I expect she will . however , we shall be much more comfortable at the 
 Vyses ' hotel . be not   afternoon tea give there for nothing ? " 

 " yes , but they pay extra for wine . " after this remark she remain 
 motionless and silent . to her tired eye Charlotte throb and swell 
 like a ghostly figure in a dream . 

 they begin to sort their clothe for pack , for there be no time to 
 lose , if they be to catch the train to Rome . Lucy , when admonish , 
 begin to move to and fro between the room , more conscious of the 
 discomfort of pack by candlelight than of a subtler ill . Charlotte , 
 who be practical without ability , kneel by the side of an empty trunk , 
 vainly endeavour to pave it with book of vary thickness and size . 
 she give two or three sigh , for the stoop posture hurt she back , 
 and , for all her diplomacy , she feel that she be grow old . the girl 
 hear she as she enter the room , and be seize with one of those 
 emotional impulse to which she could never attribute a cause . she only 
 feel that the candle would burn well , the packing go easy , the world 
 be happy , if she could give and receive some human love . the impulse 
 have come before to - day , but never so strongly . she kneel down by her 
 cousin 's side and take she in her arm . 

 Miss Bartlett return the embrace with tenderness and warmth . but she 
 be not a stupid woman , and she know perfectly well that Lucy do not 
 love she , but need she to love . for it be in ominous tone that she 
 say , after a long pause : 

 " Dearest Lucy , how will you ever forgive I ? " 

 Lucy be on her guard at once , know by bitter experience what 
 forgive Miss Bartlett mean . her emotion relax , she modify she 
 embrace a little , and she say : 

 " Charlotte dear , what do you mean ? as if I have anything to forgive ! " 

 " you have a great deal , and I have a very great deal to forgive myself , 
 too . I know well how much I vex you at every turn . " 

 " but no - " 

 Miss Bartlett assume her favourite role , that of the prematurely aged 
 martyr . 

 " ah , but yes ! I feel that our tour together be hardly the success I have 
 hop . I might have know it would not do . you want some one young 
 and strong and more in sympathy with you . I be too uninteresting and 
 old - fashioned - only fit to pack and unpack your thing . " 

 " please - " 

 " my only consolation be that you find people more to your taste , and 
 be often able to leave I at home . I have my own poor idea of what a 
 lady ought to do , but I hope I do not inflict they on you more than be 
 necessary . you have your own way about these room , at all event . " 

 " you must not   say these thing , " say Lucy softly . 

 she still cling to the hope that she and Charlotte love each other , 
 heart and soul . they continue to pack in silence . 

 " I have be a failure , " say Miss Bartlett , as she struggle with the 
 strap of Lucy 's trunk instead of strap her own . " fail to make you 
 happy ; fail in my duty to your mother . she have be so generous to I ; 
 I shall never face she again after this disaster . " 

 " but mother will understand . it be not your fault , this trouble , and it 
 be not   a disaster either . " 

 " it be my fault , it be a disaster . she will never forgive I , and 
 rightly . fur instance , what right have I to make friend with Miss 
 Lavish ? " 

 " every right . " 

 " when I be here for your sake ? if I have vex you it be equally true 
 that I have neglect you . your mother will see this as clearly as I do , 
 when you tell she . " 

 Lucy , from a cowardly wish to improve the situation , say : 

 " why need mother hear of it ? " 

 " but you tell she everything ? " 

 " I suppose I do generally . " 

 " I dare not break your confidence . there be something sacred in it . 
 unless you feel that it be a thing you could not tell she . " 

 the girl would not be degrade to this . 

 " naturally I should have tell she . but in case she should blame you in 
 any way , I promise I will not , I be very willing not to . I will never 
 speak of it either to she or to any one . " 

 her promise bring the long - draw interview to a sudden close . Miss 
 Bartlett peck she smartly on both cheek , wish her good - night , and 
 send she to her own room . 

 for a moment the original trouble be in the background . George would 
 seem to have behave like a cad throughout ; perhaps that be the view 
 which one would take eventually . at present she neither acquit nor 
 condemn he ; she do not pass judgment . at the moment when she be 
 about to judge he her cousin 's voice have intervene , and , ever since , 
 it be Miss Bartlett who have dominate ; Miss Bartlett who , even 
 now , could be hear sigh into a crack in the partition wall ; 
 Miss Bartlett , who have really be neither pliable nor humble nor 
 inconsistent . she have work like a great artist ; for a time - indeed , 
 for year - she have be meaningless , but at the end there be present 
 to the girl the complete picture of a cheerless , loveless world in which 
 the young rush to destruction until they learn well - a shamefaced 
 world of precaution and barrier which may avert evil , but which do not 
 seem to bring good , if we may judge from those who have use they most . 

 Lucy be suffer from the most grievous wrong which this world have yet 
 discover : diplomatic advantage have be take of her sincerity , of 
 her craving for sympathy and love . such a wrong be not easily forget . 
 never again do she expose herself without due consideration and 
 precaution against rebuff . and such a wrong may react disastrously upon 
 the soul . 

 the door - bell rang , and she start to the shutter . before she reach 
 they she hesitate , turn , and blow out the candle . thus it be that , 
 though she see some one stand in the wet below , he , though he look 
 up , do not see she . 

 to reach his room he have to go by her . she be still dress . it strike 
 she that she might slip into the passage and just say that she would 
 be go before he be up , and that their extraordinary intercourse be 
 over . 

 whether she would have dare to do this be never prove . at the 
 critical moment Miss Bartlett open her own door , and her voice say : 

 " I wish one word with you in the drawing - room , Mr. Emerson , please . " 

 soon their footstep return , and Miss Bartlett say : " good - night , Mr. 
 Emerson . " 

 his heavy , tired breathing be the only reply ; the chaperon have do she 
 work . 

 Lucy cry aloud : " it be not   true . it can not   all be true . I want not to be 
 muddle . I want to grow old quickly . " 

 Miss Bartlett tap on the wall . 

 " go to bed at once , dear . you need all the rest you can get . " 

 in the morning they leave for Rome . 




 Part two 


 Chapter VIII : medieval 

 the drawing - room curtain at Windy Corner have be pull to meet , for 
 the carpet be new and deserved protection from the August sun . they 
 be heavy curtain , reach almost to the ground , and the light 
 that filter through they be subdue and varied . a poet - none be 
 present - might have quote , " life like a dome of many coloured glass , " 
 or might have compare the curtain to sluice - gate , lower against 
 the intolerable tide of heaven . without be pour a sea of radiance ; 
 within , the glory , though visible , be temper to the capacity of 
 man . 

 two pleasant people sit in the room . one - a boy of nineteen - be 
 study a small manual of anatomy , and peer occasionally at a bone 
 which lie upon the piano . from time to time he bounce in his chair and 
 puff and groan , for the day be hot and the print small , and the 
 human frame fearfully make ; and his mother , who be write a letter , 
 do continually read out to he what she have write . and continually 
 do she rise from her seat and part the curtain so that a rivulet of 
 light fall across the carpet , and make the remark that they be still 
 there . 

 " where be not   they ? " say the boy , who be Freddy , Lucy 's brother . " I 
 tell you I be get fairly sick . " 

 " for goodness ' sake go out of my drawing - room , then ? " cry Mrs. 
 Honeychurch , who hop to cure her child of slang by take it 
 literally . 

 Freddy do not move or reply . 

 " I think thing be come to a head , " she observe , rather want 
 her son 's opinion on the situation if she could obtain it without undue 
 supplication . 

 " time they do . " 

 " I be glad that Cecil be ask she this once more . " 

 " it be his third go , be not   it ? " 

 " Freddy I do call the way you talk unkind . " 

 " I do not   mean to be unkind . " then he add : " but I do think Lucy might 
 have get this off her chest in Italy . I do not   know how girl manage 
 thing , but she can not   have say ' no ' properly before , or she would not 
 have to say it again now . over the whole thing - I can not   explain - I do 
 feel so uncomfortable . " 

 " do you indeed , dear ? how interesting ! " 

 " I feel - never mind . " 

 he return to his work . 

 " just listen to what I have write to Mrs. Vyse . I say : ' Dear Mrs. 
 Vyse . ' " 

 " yes , mother , you tell I . a jolly good letter . " 

 " I say : ' Dear Mrs. Vyse , Cecil have just ask my permission about 
 it , and I should be delighted , if Lucy wish it . but - ' " she stop 
 reading , " I be rather amuse at Cecil ask my permission at all . he 
 have always go in for unconventionality , and parent nowhere , and so 
 forth . when it come to the point , he can not   get on without I . " 

 " nor I . " 

 " you ? " 

 Freddy nod . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " he ask I for my permission also . " 

 she exclaim : " how very odd of he ! " 

 " why so ? " ask the son and heir . " why should not   my permission be 
 ask ? " 

 " what do you know about Lucy or girl or anything ? what ever do you 
 say ? " 

 " I say to Cecil , ' take she or leave she ; it be no business of mine ! ' " 

 " what a helpful answer ! " but her own answer , though more normal in its 
 wording , have be to the same effect . 

 " the bother be this , " begin Freddy . 

 then he take up his work again , too shy to say what the bother be . Mrs. 
 Honeychurch go back to the window . 

 " Freddy , you must come . there they still be ! " 

 " I do not   see you ought to go peep like that . " 

 " peep like that ! can not   I look out of my own window ? " 

 but she return to the writing - table , observe , as she pass she 
 son , " still page 322 ? " Freddy snort , and turn over two leaf . for a 
 brief space they be silent . close by , beyond the curtain , the gentle 
 murmur of a long conversation have never cease . 

 " the bother be this : I have put my foot in it with Cecil most awfully . " 
 he give a nervous gulp . " not content with ' permission ' , which I do 
 give - that be to say , I say , ' I do not   mind ' - well , not content with 
 that , he want to know whether I be not   off my head with joy . he 
 practically put it like this : be not   it a splendid thing for Lucy and 
 for Windy Corner generally if he marry she ? and he would have an 
 answer - he say it would strengthen his hand . " 

 " I hope you give a careful answer , dear . " 

 " I answer ' no ' " say the boy , grind his tooth . " there ! fly into a 
 stew ! I can not   help it - have to say it . I have to say no . he ought never to 
 have ask I . " 

 " ridiculous child ! " cry his mother . " you think you be so holy and 
 truthful , but really it be only abominable conceit . do you suppose that 
 a man like Cecil would take the slight notice of anything you say ? I 
 hope he box your ear . how dare you say no ? " 

 " oh , do keep quiet , mother ! I have to say no when I could not   say yes . I 
 try to laugh as if I do not   mean what I say , and , as Cecil laugh 
 too , and go away , it may be all right . but I feel my foot be in it . oh , 
 do keep quiet , though , and let a man do some work . " 

 " no , " say Mrs. Honeychurch , with the air of one who have consider the 
 subject , " I shall not keep quiet . you know all that have pass between 
 they in Rome ; you know why he be down here , and yet you deliberately 
 insult he , and try to turn he out of my house . " 

 " not a bit ! " he plead . " I only let out I do not   like he . I do not   hate 
 he , but I do not   like he . what I mind be that he will tell Lucy . " 

 he glance at the curtain dismally . 

 " well , I like he , " say Mrs. Honeychurch . " I know his mother ; he be 
 good , he be clever , he be rich , he be well connected - oh , you need not   kick 
 the piano ! he be well connect - I will say it again if you like : he be 
 well connect . " she pause , as if rehearse her eulogy , but her face 
 remain dissatisfied . she add : " and he have beautiful manner . " 

 " I like he till just now . I suppose it be have he spoil Lucy 's 
 first week at home ; and it be also something that Mr. Beebe say , not 
 know . " 

 " Mr. Beebe ? " say his mother , try to conceal her interest . " I do not 
 see how Mr. Beebe come in . " 

 " you know Mr. Beebe 's funny way , when you never quite know what he 
 mean . he say : ' Mr. Vyse be an ideal bachelor . ' I be very cute , I 
 ask he what he mean . he say ' oh , he be like I - well detach . ' I 
 could not   make he say any more , but it set I think . since Cecil have 
 come after Lucy he have not   be so pleasant , at least - I can not   explain . " 

 " you never can , dear . but I can . you be jealous of Cecil because he may 
 stop Lucy knit you silk tie . " 

 the explanation seem plausible , and Freddy try to accept it . but at 
 the back of his brain there lurk a dim mistrust . cecil praise one too 
 much for be athletic . be that it ? Cecil make one talk in one 's own 
 way . this tired one . be that it ? and Cecil be the kind of fellow who 
 would never wear another fellow 's cap . Unaware of his own profundity , 
 Freddy check himself . he must be jealous , or he would not dislike a 
 man for such foolish reason . 

 " will this do ? " call his mother . " ' Dear Mrs. Vyse , - Cecil have just 
 ask my permission about it , and I should be delighted if Lucy wish 
 it . ' then I put in at the top , ' and I have tell Lucy so . ' I must write 
 the letter out again - ' and I have tell Lucy so . but Lucy seem very 
 uncertain , and in these day young people must decide for themselves . ' I 
 say that because I do not   want Mrs. Vyse to think we old - fashioned . she 
 go in for lecture and improve her mind , and all the time a thick 
 layer of flue under the bed , and the maid 's dirty thumb - mark where you 
 turn on the electric light . she keep that flat abominably - " 

 " suppose Lucy marry Cecil , would she live in a flat , or in the 
 country ? " 

 " do not   interrupt so foolishly . where be I ? oh yes - ' young people must 
 decide for themselves . I know that Lucy like your son , because she 
 tell I everything , and she write to I from Rome when he ask she 
 first . ' no , I will cross that last bit out - it look patronize . I will 
 stop at ' because she tell I everything . ' or shall I cross that out , 
 too ? " 

 " cross it out , too , " say Freddy . 

 Mrs. Honeychurch leave it in . 

 " then the whole thing run : ' Dear Mrs. Vyse . - Cecil have just ask my 
 permission about it , and I should be delighted if Lucy wish it , and 
 I have tell Lucy so . but Lucy seem very uncertain , and in these day 
 young people must decide for themselves . I know that Lucy like your 
 son , because she tell I everything . but I do not know - ' " 

 " look out ! " cry Freddy . 

 the curtain part . 

 Cecil 's first movement be one of irritation . he could not   bear the 
 Honeychurch habit of sit in the dark to save the furniture . 
 instinctively he give the curtain a twitch , and send they swing down 
 their pole . Light enter . there be reveal a terrace , such as be 
 own by many villa with tree each side of it , and on it a little 
 rustic seat , and two flower - bed . but it be transfigure by the view 
 beyond , for Windy Corner be build on the range that overlook the 
 Sussex Weald . Lucy , who be in the little seat , seem on the edge of a 
 green magic carpet which hover in the air above the tremulous world . 

 Cecil enter . 

 appear thus late in the story , Cecil must be at once describe . he 
 be medieval . like a Gothic statue . tall and refine , with shoulder 
 that seem braced square by an effort of the will , and a head that 
 be tilt a little high than the usual level of vision , he resemble 
 those fastidious saint who guard the portal of a french cathedral . 
 well educate , well endow , and not deficient physically , he 
 remain in the grip of a certain devil whom the modern world know 
 as self - consciousness , and whom the medieval , with dimmer vision , 
 worship as asceticism . a Gothic statue imply celibacy , just as 
 a greek statue imply fruition , and perhaps this be what Mr. Beebe 
 mean . and Freddy , who ignore history and art , perhaps mean the same 
 when he fail to imagine Cecil wear another fellow 's cap . 

 Mrs. Honeychurch leave her letter on the writing table and move towards 
 her young acquaintance . 

 " oh , Cecil ! " she exclaim - " oh , Cecil , do tell I ! " 

 " I promessi sposi , " say he . 

 they star at he anxiously . 

 " she have accept I , " he say , and the sound of the thing in English 
 make he flush and smile with pleasure , and look more human . 

 " I be so glad , " say Mrs. Honeychurch , while Freddy proffer a hand 
 that be yellow with chemical . they wish that they also know Italian , 
 for our phrase of approval and of amazement be so connected with 
 little occasion that we fear to use they on great one . we be oblige 
 to become vaguely poetic , or to take refuge in Scriptural reminiscence . 

 " welcome as one of the family ! " say Mrs. Honeychurch , wave her hand 
 at the furniture . " this be indeed a joyous day ! I feel sure that you 
 will make our dear Lucy happy . " 

 " I hope so , " reply the young man , shift his eye to the ceiling . 

 " we mother - " simper Mrs. Honeychurch , and then realize that she 
 be affect , sentimental , bombastic - all the thing she hat most . 
 why could she not be Freddy , who stand stiff in the middle of the room ; 
 look very cross and almost handsome ? 

 " I say , Lucy ! " call Cecil , for conversation seem to flag . 

 Lucy rise from the seat . she move across the lawn and smile in at 
 they , just as if she be go to ask they to play tennis . then she see 
 her brother 's face . her lip part , and she take he in her arm . he 
 say , " Steady on ! " 

 " not a kiss for I ? " ask her mother . 

 Lucy kiss she also . 

 " would you take they into the garden and tell Mrs. Honeychurch all about 
 it ? " Cecil suggest . " and I would stop here and tell my mother . " 

 " we go with Lucy ? " say Freddy , as if take order . 

 " yes , you go with Lucy . " 

 they pass into the sunlight . cecil watch they cross the terrace , 
 and descend out of sight by the step . they would descend - he know their 
 way - past the shrubbery , and past the tennis - lawn and the dahlia - bed , 
 until they reach the kitchen garden , and there , in the presence of the 
 potato and the pea , the great event would be discuss . 

 smile indulgently , he light a cigarette , and rehearse the event that 
 have lead to such a happy conclusion . 

 he have know Lucy for several year , but only as a commonplace girl 
 who happen to be musical . he could still remember his depression that 
 afternoon at Rome , when she and her terrible cousin fall on he out 
 of the blue , and demand to be take to St. Peter 's . that day she have 
 seem a typical tourist - shrill , crude , and gaunt with travel . but 
 Italy work some marvel in she . it give her light , and - which he hold 
 more precious - it give her shadow . soon he detect in she a wonderful 
 reticence . she be like a woman of Leonardo da Vinci 's , whom we love 
 not so much for herself as for the thing that she will not tell we , the 
 thing be assuredly not of this life ; no woman of Leonardo 's could have 
 anything so vulgar as a ' story . " she do develop most wonderfully day by 
 day . 

 so it happen that from patronize civility he have slowly pass if 
 not to passion , at least to a profound uneasiness . already at Rome he 
 have hint to she that they might be suitable for each other . it have 
 touch he greatly that she have not break away at the suggestion . 
 her refusal have be clear and gentle ; after it - as the horrid phrase 
 go - she have be exactly the same to he as before . three month 
 later , on the margin of Italy , among the flower - clothe Alps , he have ask 
 she again in bald , traditional language . she remind he of a Leonardo 
 more than ever ; her sunburnt feature be shadow by fantastic rock ; 
 at his word she have turn and stand between he and the light with 
 immeasurable plain behind she . he walk home with her unashamed , 
 feel not at all like a reject suitor . the thing that really 
 matter be unshaken . 

 so now he have ask she once more , and , clear and gentle as ever , she 
 have accept he , give no coy reason for her delay , but simply say 
 that she love he and would do she good to make he happy . his mother , 
 too , would be please ; she have counsel the step ; he must write she a 
 long account . 

 glance at his hand , in case any of Freddy 's chemical have come off 
 on it , he move to the writing table . there he see " Dear Mrs. Vyse , " 
 follow by many erasure . he recoil without read any more , and 
 after a little hesitation sit down elsewhere , and pencil a note on 
 his knee . 

 then he light another cigarette , which do not seem quite as divine as 
 the first , and consider what might be do to make Windy Corner 
 drawing - room more distinctive . with that outlook it should have be a 
 successful room , but the trail of Tottenham Court Road be upon it ; he 
 could almost visualize the motor - van of Messrs. Shoolbred and Messrs. 
 Maple arrive at the door and deposit this chair , those varnish 
 book - case , that writing - table . the table recall Mrs. Honeychurch 's 
 letter . he do not want to read that letter - his temptation never lay 
 in that direction ; but he worry about it none the less . it be his 
 own fault that she be discuss he with his mother ; he have want she 
 support in his third attempt to win Lucy ; he want to feel that other , 
 no matter who they be , agree with he , and so he have ask their 
 permission . Mrs. Honeychurch have be civil , but obtuse in essential , 
 while as for Freddy - " he be only a boy , " he reflect . " I represent all 
 that he despise . why should he want I for a brother - in - law ? " 

 the Honeychurches be a worthy family , but he begin to realize 
 that Lucy be of another clay ; and perhaps - he do not put it very 
 definitely - he ought to introduce she into more congenial circle as 
 soon as possible . 

 " Mr. Beebe ! " say the maid , and the new rector of Summer Street be 
 show in ; he have at once start on friendly relation , owe to Lucy 's 
 praise of he in her letter from Florence . 

 Cecil greet he rather critically . 

 " I have   come for tea , Mr. Vyse . do you suppose that I shall get it ? " 

 " I should say so . food be the thing one do get here - do not   sit in that 
 chair ; young Honeychurch have leave a bone in it . " 

 " Pfui ! " 

 " I know , " say Cecil . " I know . I can not   think why Mrs. Honeychurch allow 
 it . " 

 for Cecil consider the bone and the maple ' furniture separately ; he 
 do not realize that , take together , they kindle the room into the 
 life that he desire . 

 " I have   come for tea and for gossip . be not   this news ? " 

 " News ? I do not   understand you , " say Cecil . " News ? " 

 Mr. Beebe , whose news be of a very different nature , prattle forward . 

 " I meet Sir Harry Otway as I come up ; I have every reason to hope that I 
 be first in the field . he have buy Cissie and Albert from Mr. Flack ! " 

 " have he indeed ? " say Cecil , try to recover himself . into what a 
 grotesque mistake have he fall ! be it likely that a clergyman and a 
 gentleman would refer to his engagement in a manner so flippant ? but his 
 stiffness remain , and , though he ask who Cissie and Albert might be , 
 he still think Mr. Beebe rather a bounder . 

 " unpardonable question ! to have stop a week at Windy Corner and not 
 to have meet Cissie and Albert , the semi - detached villa that have be 
 run up opposite the church ! I will set Mrs. Honeychurch after you . " 

 " I be shockingly stupid over local affair , " say the young man 
 languidly . " I can not   even remember the difference between a Parish 
 Council and a Local Government Board . perhaps there be no difference , or 
 perhaps those be not   the right name . I only go into the country to see 
 my friend and to enjoy the scenery . it be very remiss of I . Italy and 
 London be the only place where I do not   feel to exist on sufferance . " 

 Mr. Beebe , distress at this heavy reception of Cissie and Albert , 
 determine to shift the subject . 

 " let I see , Mr. Vyse - I forget - what be your profession ? " 

 " I have no profession , " say Cecil . " it be another example of my 
 decadence . my attitude quite an indefensible one - be that so long as I 
 be no trouble to any one I have a right to do as I like . I know I ought 
 to be get money out of people , or devote myself to thing I do not 
 care a straw about , but somehow , I have   not be able to begin . " 

 " you be very fortunate , " say Mr. Beebe . " it be a wonderful 
 opportunity , the possession of leisure . " 

 his voice be rather parochial , but he do not quite see his way to 
 answer naturally . he feel , as all who have regular occupation must 
 feel , that other should have it also . 

 " I be glad that you approve . I dare not   face the healthy person - for 
 example , Freddy Honeychurch . " 

 " oh , Freddy be a good sort , be not   he ? " 

 " Admirable . the sort who have make England what she be . " 

 Cecil wonder at himself . why , on this day of all other , be he so 
 hopelessly contrary ? he try to get right by inquire effusively after 
 Mr. Beebe 's mother , an old lady for whom he have no particular regard . 
 then he flatter the clergyman , praise his liberal - mindedness , his 
 enlighten attitude towards philosophy and science . 

 " where be the other ? " say Mr. Beebe at last , " I insist on extract 
 tea before evening service . " 

 " I suppose Anne never tell they you be here . in this house one be so 
 coach in the servant the day one arrive . the fault of Anne be 
 that she beg your pardon when she hear you perfectly , and kick the 
 chair - leg with her foot . the fault of Mary - I forget the fault of 
 Mary , but they be very grave . shall we look in the garden ? " 

 " I know the fault of Mary . she leave the dust - pan stand on the 
 stair . " 

 " the fault of Euphemia be that she will not , simply will not , chop the 
 suet sufficiently small . " 

 they both laugh , and thing begin to go well . 

 " the fault of Freddy - " Cecil continue . 

 " ah , he have too many . no one but his mother can remember the fault of 
 Freddy . try the fault of Miss Honeychurch ; they be not innumerable . " 

 " she have none , " say the young man , with grave sincerity . 

 " I quite agree . at present she have none . " 

 " at present ? " 

 " I be not cynical . I be only think of my pet theory about Miss 
 Honeychurch . do it seem reasonable that she should play so 
 wonderfully , and live so quietly ? I suspect that one day she will be 
 wonderful in both . the water - tight compartment in she will break down , 
 and music and life will mingle . then we shall have she heroically good , 
 heroically bad - too heroic , perhaps , to be good or bad . " 

 Cecil find his companion interesting . 

 " and at present you think she not wonderful as far as life go ? " 

 " well , I must say I have   only see she at Tunbridge Wells , where she be 
 not wonderful , and at Florence . since I come to Summer Street she have 
 be away . you see she , do not   you , at Rome and in the Alps . oh , I 
 forget ; of course , you know she before . no , she be not   wonderful in 
 Florence either , but I keep on expect that she would be . " 

 " in what way ? " 

 Conversation have become agreeable to they , and they be pace up and 
 down the terrace . 

 " I could as easily tell you what tune she will play next . there be simply 
 the sense that she have find wing , and mean to use they . I can show 
 you a beautiful picture in my italian diary : Miss Honeychurch as a 
 kite , Miss Bartlett hold the string . picture number two : the string 
 break . " 

 the sketch be in his diary , but it have be make afterwards , when he 
 view thing artistically . at the time he have give surreptitious tug 
 to the string himself . 

 " but the string never break ? " 

 " no . I might not   have see Miss Honeychurch rise , but I should certainly 
 have hear Miss Bartlett fall . " 

 " it have break now , " say the young man in low , vibrate tone . 

 immediately he realize that of all the conceited , ludicrous , 
 contemptible way of announce an engagement this be the bad . he 
 curse his love of metaphor ; have he suggest that he be a star and 
 that Lucy be soar up to reach he ? 

 " Broken ? what do you mean ? " 

 " I mean , " say cecil stiffly , " that she be go to marry I . " 

 the clergyman be conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could 
 not keep out of his voice . 

 " I be sorry ; I must apologize . I have no idea you be intimate with she , 
 or I should never have talk in this flippant , superficial way . Mr. 
 Vyse , you ought to have stop I . " and down the garden he see Lucy 
 herself ; yes , he be disappoint . 

 Cecil , who naturally prefer congratulation to apology , draw down 
 his mouth at the corner . be this the reception his action would get 
 from the world ? of course , he despise the world as a whole ; every 
 thoughtful man should ; it be almost a test of refinement . but he be 
 sensitive to the successive particle of it which he encounter . 

 occasionally he could be quite crude . 

 " I be sorry I have give you a shock , " he say dryly . " I fear that 
 Lucy 's choice do not meet with your approval . " 

 " not that . but you ought to have stop I . I know Miss Honeychurch 
 only a little as time go . perhaps I ought not   to have discuss she so 
 freely with any one ; certainly not with you . " 

 " you be conscious of have say something indiscreet ? " 

 Mr. Beebe pull himself together . really , Mr. Vyse have the art of 
 place one in the most tiresome position . he be drive to use the 
 prerogative of his profession . 

 " no , I have say nothing indiscreet . I foresaw at Florence that her 
 quiet , uneventful childhood must end , and it have end . I realize dimly 
 enough that she might take some momentous step . she have take it . she 
 have learn - you will let I talk freely , as I have begin freely - she have 
 learn what it be to love : the great lesson , some people will tell 
 you , that our earthly life provide . " it be now time for he to wave 
 his hat at the approach trio . he do not omit to do so . " she have 
 learn through you , " and if his voice be still clerical , it be now 
 also sincere ; " let it be your care that her knowledge be profitable to 
 she . " 

 " Grazie tante ! " say Cecil , who do not like parson . 

 " have you hear ? " shout Mrs. Honeychurch as she toil up the sloping 
 garden . " oh , Mr. Beebe , have you hear the news ? " 

 Freddy , now full of geniality , whistle the wedding march . youth seldom 
 criticize the accomplished fact . 

 " indeed I have ! " he cry . he look at Lucy . in her presence he could 
 not act the parson any long - at all event not without apology . 
 " Mrs. Honeychurch , I be go to do what I be always suppose to do , but 
 generally I be too shy . I want to invoke every kind of blessing on 
 they , grave and gay , great and small . I want they all their life to be 
 supremely good and supremely happy as husband and wife , as father and 
 mother . and now I want my tea . " 

 " you only ask for it just in time , " the lady retort . " how dare you 
 be serious at Windy Corner ? " 

 he take his tone from she . there be no more heavy beneficence , no more 
 attempt to dignify the situation with poetry or the scripture . none of 
 they dare or be able to be serious any more . 

 an engagement be so potent a thing that soon or later it reduce all 
 who speak of it to this state of cheerful awe . away from it , in the 
 solitude of their room , Mr. Beebe , and even Freddy , might again be 
 critical . but in its presence and in the presence of each other they 
 be sincerely hilarious . it have a strange power , for it compel not 
 only the lip , but the very heart . the chief parallel to compare one 
 great thing with another - be the power over we of a temple of some alien 
 creed . stand outside , we deride or oppose it , or at the most feel 
 sentimental . inside , though the saint and god be not ours , we become 
 true believer , in case any true believer should be present . 

 so it be that after the groping and the misgiving of the afternoon 
 they pull themselves together and settle down to a very pleasant 
 tea - party . if they be hypocrite they do not know it , and their 
 hypocrisy have every chance of set and of become true . Anne , 
 put down each plate as if it be a wedding present , stimulate they 
 greatly . they could not lag behind that smile of hers which she give 
 they ere she kick the drawing - room door . Mr. Beebe chirrup . Freddy 
 be at his wittiest , refer to Cecil as the " Fiasco " - family honour 
 pun on fiance . Mrs. Honeychurch , amusing and portly , promise well as 
 a mother - in - law . as for Lucy and Cecil , for whom the temple have be 
 build , they also join in the merry ritual , but wait , as earnest 
 worshipper should , for the disclosure of some holier shrine of joy . 



 chapter IX : Lucy as a work of Art 

 a few day after the engagement be announce Mrs. Honeychurch make Lucy 
 and her Fiasco come to a little garden - party in the neighbourhood , for 
 naturally she want to show people that her daughter be marry a 
 presentable man . 

 Cecil be more than presentable ; he look distinguished , and it be 
 very pleasant to see his slim figure keep step with Lucy , and his 
 long , fair face respond when Lucy speak to he . People congratulate 
 Mrs. Honeychurch , which be , I believe , a social blunder , but it please 
 she , and she introduce Cecil rather indiscriminately to some stuffy 
 dowager . 

 at tea a misfortune take place : a cup of coffee be upset over Lucy 's 
 figured silk , and though Lucy feign indifference , her mother feign 
 nothing of the sort but drag her indoor to have the frock treat 
 by a sympathetic maid . they be go some time , and Cecil be leave with 
 the dowager . when they return he be not as pleasant as he have be . 

 " do you go to much of this sort of thing ? " he ask when they be 
 drive home . 

 " oh , now and then , " say Lucy , who have rather enjoy herself . 

 " be it typical of country society ? " 

 " I suppose so . mother , would it be ? " 

 " plenty of society , " say Mrs. Honeychurch , who be try to remember 
 the hang of one of the dress . 

 see that her thought be elsewhere , cecil bent towards Lucy and 
 say : 

 " to I it seem perfectly appalling , disastrous , portentous . " 

 " I be so sorry that you be strand . " 

 " not that , but the congratulation . it be so disgusting , the way an 
 engagement be regard as public property - a kind of waste place where 
 every outsider may shoot his vulgar sentiment . all those old woman 
 smirk ! " 

 " one have to go through it , I suppose . they will not   notice we so much next 
 time . " 

 " but my point be that their whole attitude be wrong . an 
 engagement - horrid word in the first place - be a private matter , and 
 should be treat as such . " 

 yet the smirk old woman , however wrong individually , be racially 
 correct . the spirit of the generation have smile through they , 
 rejoice in the engagement of Cecil and Lucy because it promise the 
 continuance of life on earth . to Cecil and Lucy it promise something 
 quite different - personal love . Hence Cecil 's irritation and Lucy 's 
 belief that his irritation be just . 

 " how tiresome ! " she say . " could not   you have escape to tennis ? " 

 " I do not   play tennis - at least , not in public . the neighbourhood be 
 deprive of the romance of I be athletic . such romance as I have be 
 that of the Inglese Italianato . " 

 " Inglese Italianato ? " 

 " E un diavolo incarnato ! you know the proverb ? " 

 she do not . nor do it seem applicable to a young man who have spend a 
 quiet winter in Rome with his mother . but Cecil , since his engagement , 
 have take to affect a cosmopolitan naughtiness which he be far from 
 possessing . 

 " well , " say he , " I can not help it if they do disapprove of I . there 
 be certain irremovable barrier between myself and they , and I must 
 accept they . " 

 " we all have our limitation , I suppose , " say wise Lucy . 

 " sometimes they be force on we , though , " say Cecil , who see from her 
 remark that she do not quite understand his position . 

 " how ? " 

 " it make a difference do not   it , whether we fully fence ourselves in , 
 or whether we be fence out by the barrier of other ? " 

 she think a moment , and agree that it do make a difference . 

 " difference ? " cry Mrs. Honeychurch , suddenly alert . " I do not   see any 
 difference . fence be fence , especially when they be in the same 
 place . " 

 " we be speak of motif , " say Cecil , on whom the interruption 
 jarred . 

 " my dear Cecil , look here . " she spread out her knee and perch she 
 card - case on her lap . " this be I . that be Windy Corner . the rest of the 
 pattern be the other people . motif be all very well , but the fence 
 come here . " 

 " we be not   talk of real fence , " say Lucy , laugh . 

 " oh , I see , dear - poetry . " 

 she leant placidly back . Cecil wonder why Lucy have be amuse . 

 " I tell you who have no ' fence , ' as you call they , " she say , " and 
 that be Mr. Beebe . " 

 " a parson fenceless would mean a parson defenceless . " 

 Lucy be slow to follow what people say , but quick enough to detect 
 what they mean . she miss Cecil 's epigram , but grasp the feeling 
 that prompt it . 

 " do not   you like Mr. Beebe ? " she ask thoughtfully . 

 " I never say so ! " he cry . " I consider he far above the average . I 
 only deny - " and he sweep off on the subject of fence again , and be 
 brilliant . 

 " now , a clergyman that I do hate , " say she want to say something 
 sympathetic , " a clergyman that do have fence , and the most dreadful 
 one , be Mr. Eager , the english chaplain at Florence . he be truly 
 insincere - not merely the manner unfortunate . he be a snob , and so 
 conceited , and he do say such unkind thing . " 

 " what sort of thing ? " 

 " there be an old man at the Bertolini whom he say have murder his 
 wife . " 

 " perhaps he have . " 

 " no ! " 

 " why ' no ' ? " 

 " he be such a nice old man , I be sure . " 

 Cecil laugh at her feminine inconsequence . 

 " well , I do try to sift the thing . Mr. Eager would never come to the 
 point . he prefer it vague - say the old man have ' practically ' murder 
 his wife - have murder she in the sight of God . " 

 " hush , dear ! " say Mrs. Honeychurch absently . " but be not   it intolerable 
 that a person whom we be tell to imitate should go round spread 
 slander ? it be , I believe , chiefly owe to he that the old man be 
 drop . People pretend he be vulgar , but he certainly be not   that . " 

 " poor old man ! what be his name ? " 

 " Harris , " say Lucy glibly . 

 " let us hope that Mrs. Harris there warn't   no sich person , " say she 
 mother . 

 Cecil nod intelligently . 

 " be not   Mr. Eager a parson of the cultured type ? " he ask . 

 " I do not   know . I hate he . I have   hear he lecture on Giotto . I hate he . 
 nothing can hide a petty nature . I hate he . " 

 " my goodness gracious I , child ! " say Mrs. Honeychurch . " you will blow 
 my head off ! whatever be there to shout over ? I forbid you and Cecil to 
 hate any more clergyman . " 

 he smile . there be indeed something rather incongruous in Lucy 's moral 
 outburst over Mr. Eager . it be as if one should see the Leonardo on the 
 ceiling of the Sistine . he long to hint to she that not here lay 
 her vocation ; that a woman 's power and charm reside in mystery , not 
 in muscular rant . but possibly rant be a sign of vitality : it mar the 
 beautiful creature , but show that she be alive . after a moment , he 
 contemplate her flushed face and excited gesture with a certain 
 approval . he forebore to repress the source of youth . 

 nature - simple of topic , he think - lie around they . he praise the 
 pine - wood , the deep last of bracken , the crimson leave that spot 
 the hurt - bush , the serviceable beauty of the turnpike road . the 
 outdoor world be not very familiar to he , and occasionally he go 
 wrong in a question of fact . Mrs. Honeychurch 's mouth twitch when he 
 speak of the perpetual green of the larch . 

 " I count myself a lucky person , " he conclude , " when I be in London I 
 feel I could never live out of it . when I be in the country I feel the 
 same about the country . after all , I do believe that bird and tree and 
 the sky be the most wonderful thing in life , and that the people who 
 live amongst they must be the good . it be true that in nine case out of 
 ten they do not   seem to notice anything . the country gentleman and 
 the country labourer be each in their way the most depressing of 
 companion . yet they may have a tacit sympathy with the working 
 of Nature which be deny to we of the town . do you feel that , Mrs. 
 Honeychurch ? " 

 Mrs. Honeychurch start and smile . she have not be attend . 
 Cecil , who be rather crush on the front seat of the victoria , feel 
 irritable , and determine not to say anything interesting again . 

 Lucy have not attend either . her brow be wrinkle , and she still 
 look furiously cross - the result , he conclude , of too much moral 
 gymnastic . it be sad to see she thus blind to the beauty of an 
 August wood . 

 " ' come down , o maid , from yonder mountain height , ' " he quote , and 
 touch her knee with his own . 

 she flush again and say : " what height ? " 

 " ' come down , o maid , from yonder mountain height , what pleasure live 
 in height   the shepherd sing . in height and in the splendour of the 
 hill ? ' let we take Mrs. Honeychurch 's advice and hate clergyman no 
 more . what be this place ? " 

 " Summer Street , of course , " say Lucy , and rouse herself . 

 the wood have open to leave space for a slop triangular meadow . 
 Pretty cottage line it on two side , and the upper and third side be 
 occupy by a new stone church , expensively simple , a charming shingle 
 spire . Mr. Beebe 's house be near the church . in height it scarcely 
 exceed the cottage . some great mansion be at hand , but they be 
 hide in the tree . the scene suggest a Swiss Alp rather than the 
 shrine and centre of a leisure world , and be mar only by two ugly 
 little villa - the villa that have compete with Cecil 's engagement , 
 have be acquire by Sir Harry Otway the very afternoon that Lucy have 
 be acquire by Cecil . 

 " Cissie " be the name of one of these villa , " Albert " of the other . 
 these title be not only pick out in shade Gothic on the garden 
 gate , but appear a second time on the porch , where they follow 
 the semicircular curve of the entrance arch in block capital . " Albert " 
 be inhabit . his tortured garden be bright with geranium and 
 lobelia and polished shell . his little window be chastely swathe 
 in Nottingham lace . " Cissie " be to let . three notice - board , belong 
 to Dorking agent , loll on her fence and announce the not surprising 
 fact . her path be already weedy ; her pocket - handkerchief of a lawn 
 be yellow with dandelion . 

 " the place be ruin ! " say the lady mechanically . " Summer Street will 
 never be the same again . " 

 as the carriage pass , " Cissie 's " door open , and a gentleman come out 
 of she . 

 " stop ! " cry Mrs. Honeychurch , touch the coachman with her parasol . 
 " here 's Sir Harry . now we shall know . Sir Harry , pull those thing down 
 at once ! " 

 Sir Harry Otway - who need not be describe - come to the carriage and 
 say " Mrs. Honeychurch , I mean to . I can not , I really can not   turn out 
 Miss Flack . " 

 " be I not always right ? she ought to have go before the contract be 
 sign . do she still live rent free , as she do in her nephew 's time ? " 

 " but what can I do ? " he lower his voice . " an old lady , so very vulgar , 
 and almost bedridden . " 

 " turn she out , " say Cecil bravely . 

 Sir Harry sigh , and look at the villa mournfully . he have have full 
 warning of Mr. Flack 's intention , and might have buy the plot before 
 building commence : but he be apathetic and dilatory . he have know 
 Summer Street for so many year that he could not imagine it be 
 spoilt . not till Mrs. Flack have lay the foundation stone , and the 
 apparition of red and cream brick begin to rise do he take alarm . 
 he call on Mr. Flack , the local builder , - a most reasonable and 
 respectful man - who agree that tile would have make more artistic 
 roof , but point out that slate be cheap . he venture to differ , 
 however , about the corinthian column which be to cling like leech 
 to the frame of the bow window , say that , for his part , he like 
 to relieve the facade by a bit of decoration . Sir Harry hint that a 
 column , if possible , should be structural as well as decorative . 

 Mr. Flack reply that all the column have be order , add , " and 
 all the capital different - one with dragon in the foliage , another 
 approach to the ionian style , another introduce Mrs. Flack 's 
 initial - every one different . " for he have read his Ruskin . he build 
 his villa accord to his desire ; and not until he have insert an 
 immovable aunt into one of they do Sir Harry buy . 

 this futile and unprofitable transaction fill the knight with sadness 
 as he leant on Mrs. Honeychurch 's carriage . he have fail in his duty 
 to the country - side , and the country - side be laugh at he as well . 
 he have spend money , and yet Summer Street be spoil as much as ever . 
 all he could do now be to find a desirable tenant for " Cissie " - some 
 one really desirable . 

 " the rent be absurdly low , " he tell they , " and perhaps I be an easy 
 landlord . but it be such an awkward size . it be too large for the 
 peasant class and too small for any one the least like ourselves . " 

 Cecil have be hesitate whether he should despise the villa or 
 despise Sir Harry for despise they . the latter impulse seem the more 
 fruitful . 

 " you ought to find a tenant at once , " he say maliciously . " it would be 
 a perfect paradise for a bank clerk . " 

 " exactly ! " say Sir Harry excitedly . " that be exactly what I fear , Mr. 
 Vyse . it will attract the wrong type of people . the train service have 
 improve - a fatal improvement , to my mind . and what be five mile from 
 a station in these day of bicycle ? " 

 " rather a strenuous clerk it would be , " say Lucy . 

 Cecil , who have his full share of mediaeval mischievousness , reply 
 that the physique of the low middle class be improve at a 
 most appalling rate . she see that he be laugh at their harmless 
 neighbour , and rouse herself to stop he . 

 " Sir Harry ! " she exclaim , " I have an idea . how would you like 
 spinster ? " 

 " my dear Lucy , it would be splendid . do you know any such ? " 

 " yes ; I meet they abroad . " 

 " Gentlewomen ? " he ask tentatively . 

 " yes , indeed , and at the present moment homeless . I hear from they last 
 week - Miss Teresa and Miss Catharine Alan . I be really not joke . they 
 be quite the right people . Mr. Beebe know they , too . may I tell they 
 to write to you ? " 

 " indeed you may ! " he cry . " here we be with the difficulty solve 
 already . how delightful it be ! extra facility - please tell they they 
 shall have extra facility , for I shall have no agent ' fee . oh , 
 the agent ! the appalling people they have send I ! one woman , when 
 I write - a tactful letter , you know - ask she to explain her social 
 position to I , reply that she would pay the rent in advance . as 
 if one care about that ! and several reference I take up be most 
 unsatisfactory - people swindler , or not respectable . and oh , the 
 deceit ! I have see a good deal of the seamy side this last week . the 
 deceit of the most promising people . my dear Lucy , the deceit ! " 

 she nod . 

 " my advice , " put in Mrs. Honeychurch , " be to have nothing to do with 
 Lucy and her decayed gentlewoman at all . I know the type . preserve I 
 from people who have see well day , and bring heirloom with they 
 that make the house smell stuffy . it be a sad thing , but I would far rather 
 let to some one who be go up in the world than to some one who have 
 come down . " 

 " I think I follow you , " say Sir Harry ; " but it be , as you say , a very 
 sad thing . " 

 " the Misses Alan be not   that ! " cry Lucy . 

 " yes , they be , " say Cecil . " I have not   meet they but I should say they 
 be a highly unsuitable addition to the neighbourhood . " 

 " do not   listen to he , Sir Harry - he be tiresome . " 

 " it be I who be tiresome , " he reply . " I ought not   to come with my 
 trouble to young people . but really I be so worried , and Lady Otway 
 will only say that I can not be too careful , which be quite true , but no 
 real help . " 

 " then may I write to my Misses Alan ? " 

 " please ! " 

 but his eye waver when Mrs. Honeychurch exclaim : 

 " beware ! they be certain to have canary . Sir Harry , beware of 
 canary : they spit the seed out through the bar of the cage and then 
 the mouse come . beware of woman altogether . only let to a man . " 

 " really - " he murmur gallantly , though he see the wisdom of her 
 remark . 

 " man do not   gossip over tea - cup . if they get drunk , there be an end of 
 they - they lie down comfortably and sleep it off . if they be vulgar , 
 they somehow keep it to themselves . it do not   spread so . give I a 
 man - of course , provide he be clean . " 

 Sir Harry blush . neither he nor Cecil enjoy these open compliment 
 to their sex . even the exclusion of the dirty do not leave they much 
 distinction . he suggest that Mrs. Honeychurch , if she have time , should 
 descend from the carriage and inspect " Cissie " for herself . she be 
 delighted . nature have intend she to be poor and to live in such a 
 house . domestic arrangement always attract she , especially when they 
 be on a small scale . 

 Cecil pull Lucy back as she follow her mother . 

 " Mrs. Honeychurch , " he say , " what if we two walk home and leave you ? " 

 " certainly ! " be her cordial reply . 

 Sir Harry likewise seem almost too glad to get rid of they . he beam 
 at they knowingly , say , " Aha ! young people , young people ! " and then 
 hasten to unlock the house . 

 " hopeless vulgarian ! " exclaim Cecil , almost before they be out of 
 earshot . 

 " oh , Cecil ! " 

 " I can not   help it . it would be wrong not to loathe that man . " 

 " he be not   clever , but really he be nice . " 

 " no , Lucy , he stand for all that be bad in country life . in London he 
 would keep his place . he would belong to a brainless club , and his wife 
 would give brainless dinner party . but down here he act the little 
 god with his gentility , and his patronage , and his sham aesthetic , and 
 every one - even your mother - be take in . " 

 " all that you say be quite true , " say Lucy , though she feel 
 discourage . " I wonder whether - whether it matter so very much . " 

 " it matter supremely . Sir Harry be the essence of that garden - party . 
 oh , goodness , how cross I feel ! how I do hope he will get some vulgar 
 tenant in that villa - some woman so really vulgar that he will notice 
 it . GENTLEFOLKS ! Ugh ! with his bald head and retreat chin ! but let us 
 forget he . " 

 this Lucy be glad enough to do . if Cecil dislike Sir Harry Otway and 
 Mr. Beebe , what guarantee be there that the people who really matter 
 to she would escape ? for instance , Freddy . Freddy be neither clever , 
 nor subtle , nor beautiful , and what prevent Cecil from say , any 
 minute , " it would be wrong not to loathe Freddy " ? and what would she 
 reply ? far than Freddy she do not go , but he give her anxiety 
 enough . she could only assure herself that Cecil have know Freddy some 
 time , and that they have always get on pleasantly , except , perhaps , 
 during the last few day , which be an accident , perhaps . 

 " which way shall we go ? " she ask he . 

 nature - simple of topic , she think - be around they . Summer Street 
 lie deep in the wood , and she have stop where a footpath diverge 
 from the highroad . 

 " be there two way ? " 

 " perhaps the road be more sensible , as we be get up smart . " 

 " I would rather go through the wood , " say Cecil , with that subdue 
 irritation that she have notice in he all the afternoon . " why be it , 
 Lucy , that you always say the road ? do you know that you have never once 
 be with I in the field or the wood since we be engage ? " 

 " have not   I ? the wood , then , " say Lucy , startle at his queerness , but 
 pretty sure that he would explain later ; it be not his habit to leave 
 she in doubt as to his meaning . 

 she lead the way into the whispering pine , and sure enough he do 
 explain before they have go a dozen yard . 

 " I have get an idea - I dare say wrongly - that you feel more at home with 
 I in a room . " 

 " a room ? " she echo , hopelessly bewildered . 

 " yes . or , at the most , in a garden , or on a road . never in the real 
 country like this . " 

 " oh , Cecil , whatever do you mean ? I have never feel anything of the 
 sort . you talk as if I be a kind of poetess sort of person . " 

 " I do not   know that you be not . I connect you with a view - a certain type 
 of view . why should not   you connect I with a room ? " 

 she reflect a moment , and then say , laugh : 

 " do you know that you be right ? I do . I must be a poetess after all . 
 when I think of you it be always as in a room . how funny ! " 

 to her surprise , he seem annoyed . 

 " a drawing - room , pray ? with no view ? " 

 " yes , with no view , I fancy . why not ? " 

 " I would rather , " he say reproachfully , " that connect I with the open 
 air . " 

 she say again , " oh , Cecil , whatever do you mean ? " 

 as no explanation be forthcoming , she shake off the subject as too 
 difficult for a girl , and lead he far into the wood , pause every 
 now and then at some particularly beautiful or familiar combination of 
 the tree . she have know the wood between Summer Street and Windy Corner 
 ever since she could walk alone ; she have play at lose Freddy in it , 
 when Freddy be a purple - face baby ; and though she have be to Italy , 
 it have lose none of its charm . 

 presently they come to a little clearing among the pine - another tiny 
 green alp , solitary this time , and hold in its bosom a shallow pool . 

 she exclame , " the Sacred Lake ! " 

 " why do you call it that ? " 

 " I can not   remember why . I suppose it come out of some book . it be only a 
 puddle now , but you see that stream go through it ? well , a good deal 
 of water come down after heavy rain , and can not   get away at once , and 
 the pool become quite large and beautiful . then Freddy use to bathe 
 there . he be very fond of it . " 

 " and you ? " 

 he mean , " be you fond of it ? " but she answer dreamily , " I bath 
 here , too , till I be find out . then there be a row . " 

 at another time he might have be shock , for he have depth of 
 prudishness within he . but now ? with his momentary cult of the fresh 
 air , he be delighted at her admirable simplicity . he look at she as 
 she stand by the pool 's edge . she be get up smart , as she phrase it , 
 and she remind he of some brilliant flower that have no leaf of its 
 own , but bloom abruptly out of a world of green . 

 " who find you out ? " 

 " Charlotte , " she murmur . " she be stop with we . 
 Charlotte - Charlotte . " 

 " poor girl ! " 

 she smile gravely . a certain scheme , from which hitherto he have shrink , 
 now appear practical . 

 " Lucy ! " 

 " yes , I suppose we ought to be go , " be her reply . 

 " Lucy , I want to ask something of you that I have never ask before . " 

 at the serious note in his voice she step frankly and kindly towards 
 he . 

 " what , Cecil ? " 

 " Hitherto never - not even that day on the lawn when you agree to marry 
 I - " 

 he become self - conscious and keep glance round to see if they be 
 observe . his courage have go . 

 " yes ? " 

 " up to now I have never kiss you . " 

 she be as scarlet as if he have put the thing most indelicately . 

 " no - more you have , " she stammer . 

 " then I ask you - may I now ? " 

 " of course , you may , Cecil . you might before . I can not   run at you , you 
 know . " 

 at that supreme moment he be conscious of nothing but absurdity . her 
 reply be inadequate . she give such a business - like lift to her veil . 
 as he approach she he find time to wish that he could recoil . as 
 he touch she , his gold pince - nez become dislodged and be flatten 
 between they . 

 such be the embrace . he consider , with truth , that it have be a 
 failure . passion should believe itself irresistible . it should forget 
 civility and consideration and all the other curse of a refined nature . 
 above all , it should never ask for leave where there be a right of way . 
 why could he not do as any labourer or navvy - nay , as any young man 
 behind the counter would have do ? he recast the scene . Lucy be 
 stand flowerlike by the water , he rush up and take she in his 
 arm ; she rebuke he , permit he and revere he ever after for his 
 manliness . for he believe that woman revere man for their manliness . 

 they leave the pool in silence , after this one salutation . he wait for 
 she to make some remark which should show he her inmost thought . at 
 last she speak , and with fitting gravity . 

 " Emerson be the name , not Harris . " 

 " what name ? " 

 " the old man 's . " 

 " what old man ? " 

 " that old man I tell you about . the one Mr. Eager be so unkind to . " 

 he could not know that this be the most intimate conversation they have 
 ever have . 



 chapter x : cecil as a Humourist 

 the society out of which Cecil propose to rescue Lucy be perhaps no 
 very splendid affair , yet it be more splendid than her antecedent 
 entitle she to . her father , a prosperous local solicitor , have build 
 Windy Corner , as a speculation at the time the district be open up , 
 and , fall in love with his own creation , have end by live there 
 himself . soon after his marriage the social atmosphere begin to alter . 
 other house be build on the brow of that steep southern slope and 
 other , again , among the pine - tree behind , and northward on the chalk 
 barrier of the down . Most of these house be large than Windy 
 Corner , and be fill by people who come , not from the district , but 
 from London , and who mistook the Honeychurches for the remnant of an 
 indigenous aristocracy . he be inclined to be frightened , but his wife 
 accept the situation without either pride or humility . " I can not think 
 what people be do , " she would say , " but it be extremely fortunate 
 for the child . " she call everywhere ; her call be return with 
 enthusiasm , and by the time people find out that she be not exactly 
 of their milieu , they like she , and it do not seem to matter . when Mr. 
 Honeychurch die , he have the satisfaction - which few honest solicitor 
 despise - of leave his family root in the good society obtainable . 

 the good obtainable . certainly many of the immigrant be rather 
 dull , and Lucy realize this more vividly since her return from Italy . 
 Hitherto she have accept their ideal without question - their kindly 
 affluence , their inexplosive religion , their dislike of paper - bag , 
 orange - peel , and broken bottle . a Radical out and out , she learn to 
 speak with horror of Suburbia . life , so far as she trouble to conceive 
 it , be a circle of rich , pleasant people , with identical interest and 
 identical foe . in this circle , one thought , marry , and die . outside 
 it be poverty and vulgarity for ever try to enter , just as the 
 London fog try to enter the pine - wood pour through the gap in 
 the northern hill . but , in Italy , where any one who choose may warm 
 himself in equality , as in the sun , this conception of life vanish . 
 her sens expand ; she feel that there be no one whom she might not 
 get to like , that social barrier be irremovable , doubtless , but not 
 particularly high . you jump over they just as you jump into a peasant 's 
 olive - yard in the Apennines , and he be glad to see you . she return 
 with new eye . 

 so do Cecil ; but Italy have quicken Cecil , not to tolerance , but to 
 irritation . he see that the local society be narrow , but , instead 
 of say , " do that very much matter ? " he rebel , and try to 
 substitute for it the society he call broad . he do not realize that 
 Lucy have consecrate her environment by the thousand little civility 
 that create a tenderness in time , and that though her eye see its 
 defect , her heart refuse to despise it entirely . nor do he realize 
 a more important point - that if she be too great for this society , she 
 be too great for all society , and have reach the stage where personal 
 intercourse would alone satisfy she . a rebel she be , but not of the 
 kind he understand - a rebel who desire , not a wide dwelling - room , but 
 equality beside the man she love . for Italy be offer she the most 
 priceless of all possession - her own soul . 

 play bumble - puppy with Minnie Beebe , niece to the rector , and 
 age thirteen - an ancient and most honourable game , which consist in 
 strike tennis - ball high into the air , so that they fall over the net 
 and immoderately bounce ; some hit Mrs. Honeychurch ; other be lose . the 
 sentence be confused , but the well illustrate Lucy 's state of mind , 
 for she be try to talk to Mr. Beebe at the same time . 

 " oh , it have be such a nuisance - first he , then they - no one know 
 what they want , and every one so tiresome . " 

 " but they really be come now , " say Mr. Beebe . " I write to Miss 
 Teresa a few day ago - she be wonder how often the butcher call , 
 and my reply of once a month must have impress she favourably . they 
 be come . I hear from they this morning . 

 " I shall hate those Miss Alans ! " Mrs. Honeychurch cry . " just because 
 they be old and silly one 's expect to say ' how sweet ! ' I hate 
 their ' if'-ing and ' but'-e and ' and'-e . and poor Lucy - serve she 
 right - worn to a shadow . " 

 Mr. Beebe watch the shadow spring and shout over the 
 tennis - court . cecil be absent - one do not play bumble - puppy when he 
 be there . 

 " well , if they be come - no , Minnie , not Saturn . " Saturn be a 
 tennis - ball whose skin be partially unsewn . when in motion his orb be 
 encircle by a ring . " if they be come , Sir Harry will let they move 
 in before the twenty - ninth , and he will cross out the clause about 
 whitewash the ceiling , because it make they nervous , and put in the 
 fair wear and tear one . - that do not   count . I tell you not Saturn . " 

 " Saturn 's all right for bumble - puppy , " cry Freddy , join they . 
 " Minnie , do not   you listen to she . " 

 " saturn do not   bounce . " 

 " saturn bounce enough . " 

 " no , he do not . " 

 " well ; he bounce well than the Beautiful White Devil . " 

 " hush , dear , " say Mrs. Honeychurch . 

 " but look at Lucy - complain of Saturn , and all the time 's get the 
 Beautiful White Devil in her hand , ready to plug it in . that be right , 
 Minnie , go for she - get she over the shin with the racquet - get she 
 over the shin ! " 

 Lucy fall , the Beautiful White Devil roll from her hand . 

 Mr. Beebe pick it up , and say : " the name of this ball be Vittoria 
 Corombona , please . " but his correction pass unheeded . 

 Freddy possess to a high degree the power of lash little girl 
 to fury , and in half a minute he have transform Minnie from a 
 well - mannered child into a howl wilderness . up in the house Cecil 
 hear they , and , though he be full of entertaining news , he do not 
 come down to impart it , in case he get hurt . he be not a coward and 
 bore necessary pain as well as any man . but he hat the physical 
 violence of the young . how right it be ! sure enough it end in a cry . 

 " I wish the Miss Alans could see this , " observe Mr. Beebe , just as 
 Lucy , who be nurse the injure Minnie , be in turn lift off her 
 foot by her brother . 

 " who be the Miss Alans ? " Freddy pant . 

 " they have take Cissie Villa . " 

 " that be not   the name - " 

 here his foot slip , and they all fall most agreeably on to the grass . 
 an interval elapse . 

 " be not   what name ? " ask Lucy , with her brother 's head in her lap . 

 " Alan be not   the name of the people Sir Harry 's let to . " 

 " Nonsense , Freddy ! you know nothing about it . " 

 " nonsense yourself ! I have   this minute see he . he say to I : ' ahem ! 
 honeychurch , ' " - Freddy be an indifferent mimic - " ' ahem ! ahem ! I have at 
 last procure really dee - sire - rebel tenant . ' I say , ' ooray , old boy ! ' 
 and slap he on the back . " 

 " exactly . the Miss Alans ? " 

 " rather not . more like Anderson . " 

 " oh , good gracious , there be not   go to be another muddle ! " Mrs. 
 Honeychurch exclaim . " do you notice , Lucy , I be always right ? I say 
 do not   interfere with Cissie Villa . I be always right . I be quite uneasy at 
 be always right so often . " 

 " it be only another muddle of Freddy 's . Freddy do not   even know the name 
 of the people he pretend have take it instead . " 

 " yes , I do . I have   get it . Emerson . " 

 " what name ? " 

 " Emerson . I will bet you anything you like . " 

 " what a weathercock Sir Harry be , " say Lucy quietly . " I wish I have 
 never bother over it at all . " 

 then she lie on her back and gaze at the cloudless sky . Mr. Beebe , 
 whose opinion of she rise daily , whisper to his niece that that be 
 the proper way to behave if any little thing go wrong . 

 meanwhile the name of the new tenant have divert Mrs. Honeychurch from 
 the contemplation of her own ability . 

 " Emerson , Freddy ? do you know what emerson they be ? " 

 " I do not   know whether they be any Emersons , " retort Freddy , who be 
 democratic . like his sister and like most young people , he be naturally 
 attract by the idea of equality , and the undeniable fact that there 
 be different kind of Emersons annoy he beyond measure . 

 " I trust they be the right sort of person . all right , Lucy " - she be 
 sit up again - " I see you look down your nose and think your 
 mother 's a snob . but there be a right sort and a wrong sort , and it be 
 affectation to pretend there be not . " 

 " Emerson be a common enough name , " Lucy remark . 

 she be gaze sideways . seat on a promontory herself , she could see 
 the pine - clothe promontory descend one beyond another into the Weald . 
 the further one descend the garden , the more glorious be this lateral 
 view . 

 " I be merely go to remark , Freddy , that I trust they be no 
 relation of Emerson the philosopher , a most try man . pray , do that 
 satisfy you ? " 

 " oh , yes , " he grumble . " and you will be satisfied , too , for they be 
 friend of Cecil ; so " - elaborate irony - " you and the other country 
 family will be able to call in perfect safety . " 

 " CECIL ? " exclaim Lucy . 

 " do not   be rude , dear , " say his mother placidly . " Lucy , do not   screech . 
 it be a new bad habit you be get into . " 

 " but have cecil - " 

 " friend of Cecil 's , " he repeat , " ' and so really dee - sire - rebel . ahem ! 
 honeychurch , I have just telegraph to they . ' " 

 she get up from the grass . 

 it be hard on Lucy . Mr. Beebe sympathize with she very much . while she 
 believe that her snub about the Miss Alans come from Sir Harry Otway , 
 she have bear it like a good girl . she might well ' screech " when 
 she hear that it come partly from her lover . Mr. Vyse be a 
 tease - something bad than a tease : he take a malicious pleasure 
 in thwart people . the clergyman , know this , look at Miss 
 Honeychurch with more than his usual kindness . 

 when she exclaim , " but Cecil 's Emersons - they can not   possibly be the 
 same one - there be that - " he do not consider that the exclamation 
 be strange , but see in it an opportunity of divert the conversation 
 while she recover her composure . he divert it as follow : 

 " the Emersons who be at Florence , do you mean ? no , I do not   suppose it 
 will prove to be they . it be probably a long cry from they to friend 
 of Mr. Vyse 's . oh , Mrs. Honeychurch , the oddest people ! the queer 
 people ! for our part we like they , do not   we ? " he appeal to Lucy . 
 " there be a great scene over some violet . they pick violet and 
 fill all the vas in the room of these very Miss Alans who have 
 fail to come to Cissie Villa . poor little lady ! so shocked and so 
 please . it use to be one of Miss Catharine 's great story . ' my dear 
 sister love flower , ' it begin . they find the whole room a mass of 
 blue - vas and jug - and the story end with ' so ungentlemanly and yet 
 so beautiful . ' it be all very difficult . yes , I always connect those 
 Florentine Emersons with violet . " 

 " Fiasco 's do you this time , " remark Freddy , not see that his 
 sister 's face be very red . she could not recover herself . Mr. Beebe see 
 it , and continue to divert the conversation . 

 " these particular Emersons consist of a father and a son - the son 
 a goodly , if not a good young man ; not a fool , I fancy , but very 
 immature - pessimism , et cetera . our special joy be the father - such a 
 sentimental darling , and people declare he have murder his wife . " 

 in his normal state Mr. Beebe would never have repeat such gossip , 
 but he be try to shelter Lucy in her little trouble . he repeat any 
 rubbish that come into his head . 

 " murder his wife ? " say Mrs. Honeychurch . " Lucy , do not   desert we - go 
 on play bumble - puppy . really , the Pension Bertolini must have be 
 the oddest place . that be the second murderer I have   hear of as be 
 there . whatever be Charlotte do to stop ? by - the - by , we really must 
 ask Charlotte here some time . " 

 Mr. Beebe could recall no second murderer . he suggest that his hostess 
 be mistaken . at the hint of opposition she warm . she be perfectly 
 sure that there have be a second tourist of whom the same story have 
 be tell . the name escape she . what be the name ? oh , what be the 
 name ? she clasp her knee for the name . something in Thackeray . she 
 strike her matronly forehead . 

 Lucy ask her brother whether Cecil be in . 

 " oh , do not   go ! " he cry , and try to catch she by the ankle . 

 " I must go , " she say gravely . " do not   be silly . you always overdo it 
 when you play . " 

 as she leave they her mother 's shout of " Harris ! " shiver the tranquil 
 air , and remind she that she have tell a lie and have never put it 
 right . such a senseless lie , too , yet it shatter her nerve and 
 make she connect these Emersons , friend of Cecil 's , with a pair of 
 nondescript tourist . Hitherto truth have come to she naturally . she 
 see that for the future she must be more vigilant , and be - absolutely 
 truthful ? well , at all event , she must not tell lie . she hurry up 
 the garden , still flush with shame . a word from Cecil would soothe 
 she , she be sure . 

 " Cecil ! " 

 " Hullo ! " he call , and leant out of the smoking - room window . he 
 seem in high spirit . " I be hop you would come . I hear you all 
 bear - gardening , but there be well fun up here . I , even I , have win a 
 great victory for the Comic Muse . George Meredith 's right - the cause of 
 Comedy and the cause of Truth be really the same ; and I , even I , have 
 find tenant for the distressful Cissie Villa . do not   be angry ! do not   be 
 angry ! you will forgive I when you hear it all . " 

 he look very attractive when his face be bright , and he dispel she 
 ridiculous foreboding at once . 

 " I have hear , " she say . " Freddy have tell we . Naughty Cecil ! I suppose 
 I must forgive you . just think of all the trouble I take for nothing ! 
 certainly the Miss Alans be a little tiresome , and I would rather have nice 
 friend of your . but you ought not   to tease one so . " 

 " friend of mine ? " he laugh . " but , Lucy , the whole joke be to come ! 
 come here . " but she remain stand where she be . " do you know where 
 I meet these desirable tenant ? in the National Gallery , when I be up to 
 see my mother last week . " 

 " what an odd place to meet people ! " she say nervously . " I do not   quite 
 understand . " 

 " in the Umbrian Room . absolute stranger . they be admire Luca 
 Signorelli - of course , quite stupidly . however , we get talk , and they 
 refresh I not - a little . they have be to Italy . " 

 " but , Cecil - " proceed hilariously . 

 " in the course of conversation they say that they want a country 
 cottage - the father to live there , the son to run down for week - end . 
 I think , ' what a chance of score off Sir Harry ! ' and I take 
 their address and a London reference , find they be not   actual 
 blackguard - it be great sport - and write to he , make out - " 

 " Cecil ! no , it be not fair . I have   probably meet they before - " 

 he bear she down . 

 " perfectly fair . anything be fair that punish a snob . that old man 
 will do the neighbourhood a world of good . Sir Harry be too disgusting 
 with his ' decayed gentlewoman . ' I mean to read he a lesson some time . 
 no , Lucy , the class ought to mix , and before long you will agree with 
 I . there ought to be intermarriage - all sort of thing . I believe in 
 democracy - " 

 " no , you do not , " she snap . " you do not   know what the word mean . " 

 he star at she , and feel again that she have fail to be Leonardesque . 
 " no , you do not ! " 

 her face be inartistic - that of a peevish virago . 

 " it be not   fair , Cecil . I blame you - I blame you very much indeed . you 
 have no business to undo my work about the Miss Alans , and make I look 
 ridiculous . you call it score off Sir Harry , but do you realize that 
 it be all at my expense ? I consider it most disloyal of you . " 

 she leave he . 

 " Temper ! " he think , raise his eyebrow . 

 no , it be bad than temper - snobbishness . as long as Lucy think 
 that his own smart friend be supplant the Miss Alans , she have 
 not minded . he perceive that these new tenant might be of value 
 educationally . he would tolerate the father and draw out the son , who 
 be silent . in the interest of the Comic Muse and of Truth , he would 
 bring they to Windy Corner . 



 chapter XI : in Mrs. Vyse 's Well - appoint Flat 

 the Comic Muse , though able to look after her own interest , do not 
 disdain the assistance of Mr. Vyse . his idea of bring the Emersons to 
 Windy Corner strike she as decidedly good , and she carry through the 
 negotiation without a hitch . Sir Harry Otway sign the agreement , 
 meet Mr. Emerson , who be duly disillusion . the Miss Alans be 
 duly offend , and write a dignified letter to Lucy , whom they hold 
 responsible for the failure . Mr. Beebe plan pleasant moment for the 
 new - comer , and tell Mrs. Honeychurch that Freddy must call on they as 
 soon as they arrive . indeed , so ample be the Muse 's equipment that she 
 permit Mr. Harris , never a very robust criminal , to droop his head , 
 to be forget , and to die . 

 Lucy - to descend from bright heaven to earth , whereon there be shadow 
 because there be hill - Lucy be at first plunge into despair , but 
 settle after a little thought that it do not matter the very least . 
 now that she be engage , the Emersons would scarcely insult she and 
 be welcome into the neighbourhood . and Cecil be welcome to bring whom 
 he would into the neighbourhood . therefore Cecil be welcome to bring 
 the Emersons into the neighbourhood . but , as I say , this take a little 
 thinking , and - so illogical be girl - the event remain rather great 
 and rather more dreadful than it should have do . she be glad that 
 a visit to Mrs. Vyse now fall due ; the tenant move into Cissie Villa 
 while she be safe in the London flat . 

 " Cecil - Cecil darling , " she whisper the evening she arrive , and creep 
 into his arm . 

 Cecil , too , become demonstrative . he see that the needful fire have be 
 kindle in Lucy . at last she long for attention , as a woman should , 
 and look up to he because he be a man . 

 " so you do love I , little thing ? " he murmur . 

 " oh , Cecil , I do , I do ! I do not   know what I should do without you . " 

 several day pass . then she have a letter from Miss Bartlett . a 
 coolness have spring up between the two cousin , and they have not 
 correspond since they part in August . the coolness date from what 
 Charlotte would call " the flight to Rome , " and in Rome it have increase 
 amazingly . for the companion who be merely uncongenial in the mediaeval 
 world become exasperate in the classical . Charlotte , unselfish in the 
 Forum , would have try a sweet temper than Lucy 's , and once , in the 
 Baths of Caracalla , they have doubt whether they could continue 
 their tour . Lucy have say she would join the Vyses - Mrs. Vyse be an 
 acquaintance of her mother , so there be no impropriety in the plan and 
 Miss Bartlett have reply that she be quite used to be abandon 
 suddenly . finally nothing happen ; but the coolness remain , and , for 
 Lucy , be even increase when she open the letter and read as follow . 
 it have be forward from Windy Corner . 


 " Tunbridge Wells , 

 " September . 

 " Dearest Lucia , 

 " I have news of you at last ! Miss Lavish have be bicycle in your 
 part , but be not sure whether a call would be welcome . puncture 
 her tire near Summer Street , and it be mend while she sit very 
 woebegone in that pretty churchyard , she see to her astonishment , a door 
 open opposite and the young Emerson man come out . he say his father 
 have just take the house . he say he do not know that you live in the 
 neighbourhood   ? . he never suggest give Eleanor a cup of tea . dear 
 Lucy , I be much worried , and I advise you to make a clean breast of his 
 past behaviour to your mother , Freddy , and Mr. Vyse , who will forbid he 
 to enter the house , etc . that be a great misfortune , and I dare say you 
 have tell they already . Mr. Vyse be so sensitive . I remember how I use 
 to get on his nerve at Rome . I be very sorry about it all , and should 
 not feel easy unless I warn you . 

 " believe I , 

 " your anxious and loving cousin , 

 " Charlotte . " 


 Lucy be much annoyed , and reply as follow : 


 " Beauchamp Mansions , S.W. 

 " Dear Charlotte , 

 " many thank for your warning . when Mr. Emerson forget himself on the 
 mountain , you make I promise not to tell mother , because you say she 
 would blame you for not be always with I . I have keep that promise , 
 and can not possibly tell she now . I have say both to she and Cecil 
 that I meet the Emersons at Florence , and that they be respectable 
 people - which I do think - and the reason that he offer Miss Lavish no 
 tea be probably that he have none himself . she should have try at the 
 Rectory . I can not begin make a fuss at this stage . you must see that 
 it would be too absurd . if the Emersons hear I have complain of they , 
 they would think themselves of importance , which be exactly what they 
 be not . I like the old father , and look forward to see he again . 
 as for the son , I be sorry for he when we meet , rather than for myself . 
 they be know to Cecil , who be very well and speak of you the other 
 day . we expect to be marry in January . 

 " Miss Lavish can not have tell you much about I , for I be not at Windy 
 Corner at all , but here . please do not put ' private ' outside your 
 envelope again . no one open my letter . 

 " your affectionately , 

 " L. M. Honeychurch . " 


 Secrecy have this disadvantage : we lose the sense of proportion ; we 
 can not tell whether our secret be important or not . be Lucy and her 
 cousin closet with a great thing which would destroy Cecil 's life if 
 he discover it , or with a little thing which he would laugh at ? Miss 
 Bartlett suggest the former . perhaps she be right . it have become a 
 great thing now . leave to herself , Lucy would have tell her mother 
 and her lover ingenuously , and it would have remain a little thing . 
 " Emerson , not Harris " ; it be only that a few week ago . she try to 
 tell Cecil even now when they be laugh about some beautiful 
 lady who have smite his heart at school . but her body behave so 
 ridiculously that she stop . 

 she and her secret stay ten day long in the deserted Metropolis 
 visit the scene they be to know so well later on . it do she no 
 harm , Cecil thought , to learn the framework of society , while society 
 itself be absent on the golf - link or the moor . the weather be cool , 
 and it do she no harm . in spite of the season , Mrs. Vyse manage to 
 scrape together a dinner - party consist entirely of the grandchild 
 of famous people . the food be poor , but the talk have a witty weariness 
 that impress the girl . one be tired of everything , it seem . one 
 launch into enthusiasm only to collapse gracefully , and pick oneself 
 up amid sympathetic laughter . in this atmosphere the Pension Bertolini 
 and Windy Corner appear equally crude , and Lucy see that her London 
 career would estrange she a little from all that she have love in the 
 past . 

 the grandchild ask she to play the piano . 

 she play Schumann . " now some Beethoven " call Cecil , when the 
 querulous beauty of the music have die . she shake her head and play 
 Schumann again . the melody rise , unprofitably magical . it break ; it 
 be resume break , not march once from the cradle to the grave . the 
 sadness of the incomplete - the sadness that be often life , but should 
 never be art - throb in its disjected phrase , and make the nerve of 
 the audience throb . not thus have she play on the little drape piano 
 at the Bertolini , and " too much Schumann " be not the remark that Mr. 
 Beebe have pass to himself when she return . 

 when the guest be go , and Lucy have go to bed , Mrs. Vyse pace 
 up and down the drawing - room , discuss her little party with her son . 
 Mrs. Vyse be a nice woman , but her personality , like many another 's , 
 have be swamp by London , for it need a strong head to live among 
 many people . the too vast orb of her fate have crush she ; and she have 
 see too many season , too many city , too many man , for her ability , 
 and even with Cecil she be mechanical , and behave as if he be not one 
 son , but , so to speak , a filial crowd . 

 " make Lucy one of we , " she say , look round intelligently at the end 
 of each sentence , and strain her lip apart until she speak again . 
 " Lucy be become wonderful - wonderful . " 

 " her music always be wonderful . " 

 " yes , but she be purge off the Honeychurch taint , most excellent 
 honeychurche , but you know what I mean . she be not always quote 
 servant , or ask one how the pudding be make . " 

 " Italy have do it . " 

 " perhaps , " she murmur , think of the museum that represent Italy 
 to she . " it be just possible . cecil , mind you marry she next January . 
 she be one of we already . " 

 " but her music ! " he exclaim . " the style of she ! how she keep to 
 Schumann when , like an idiot , I want Beethoven . Schumann be right for 
 this evening . Schumann be the thing . do you know , mother , I shall have 
 our child educate just like Lucy . bring they up among honest country 
 folk for freshness , send they to Italy for subtlety , and then - not 
 till then - let they come to London . I do not   believe in these London 
 education - " he break off , remember that he have have one himself , and 
 conclude , " at all event , not for woman . " 

 " make her one of we , " repeat Mrs. Vyse , and process to bed . 

 as she be doze off , a cry - the cry of nightmare - rang from Lucy 's 
 room . Lucy could ring for the maid if she like but Mrs. Vyse think it 
 kind to go herself . she find the girl sit upright with her hand on 
 her cheek . 

 " I be so sorry , Mrs. Vyse - it be these dream . " 

 " bad dream ? " 

 " just dream . " 

 the eld lady smile and kiss she , say very distinctly : " you 
 should have hear we talk about you , dear . he admire you more than 
 ever . dream of that . " 

 Lucy return the kiss , still cover one cheek with her hand . Mrs. 
 Vyse recess to bed . cecil , whom the cry have not awake , snore . 
 Darkness envelop the flat . 



 Chapter XII : twelfth chapter 

 it be a Saturday afternoon , gay and brilliant after abundant rain , and 
 the spirit of youth dwelt in it , though the season be now autumn . all 
 that be gracious triumph . as the motorcar pass through Summer 
 Street they raise only a little dust , and their stench be soon 
 disperse by the wind and replace by the scent of the wet birch or 
 of the pine . Mr. Beebe , at leisure for life 's amenity , leant over his 
 Rectory gate . freddy leant by he , smoke a pendant pipe . 

 " suppose we go and hinder those new people opposite for a little . " 

 " M'm . " 

 " they might amuse you . " 

 Freddy , whom his fellow - creature never amuse , suggest that the new 
 people might be feel a bit busy , and so on , since they have only just 
 move in . 

 " I suggest we should hinder they , " say Mr. Beebe . " they be worth 
 it . " unlatche the gate , he saunter over the triangular green to 
 Cissie Villa . " Hullo ! " he cry , shout in at the open door , through 
 which much squalor be visible . 

 a grave voice reply , " Hullo ! " 

 " I have   bring some one to see you . " 

 " I will be down in a minute . " 

 the passage be block by a wardrobe , which the removal man have fail 
 to carry up the stair . Mr. Beebe edge round it with difficulty . the 
 sitting - room itself be block with book . 

 " be these people great reader ? " Freddy whisper . " be they that 
 sort ? " 

 " I fancy they know how to read - a rare accomplishment . what have they 
 get ? Byron . exactly . a Shropshire Lad . never hear of it . the way of 
 all Flesh . never hear of it . Gibbon . Hullo ! dear George read German . 
 um - um - Schopenhauer , Nietzsche , and so we go on . well , I suppose your 
 generation know its own business , Honeychurch . " 

 " Mr. Beebe , look at that , " say Freddy in awestruck tone . 

 on the cornice of the wardrobe , the hand of an amateur have paint this 
 inscription : " Mistrust all enterprise that require new clothe . " 

 " I know . be not   it jolly ? I like that . I be certain that be the old man 's 
 do . " 

 " how very odd of he ! " 

 " surely you agree ? " 

 but Freddy be his mother 's son and feel that one ought not to go on 
 spoil the furniture . 

 " picture ! " the clergyman continue , scramble about the room . 
 " giotto - they get that at Florence , I will be bind . " 

 " the same as Lucy 's get . " 

 " oh , by - the - by , do Miss Honeychurch enjoy London ? " 

 " she come back yesterday . " 

 " I suppose she have a good time ? " 

 " yes , very , " say Freddy , take up a book . " she and Cecil be thick 
 than ever . " 

 " that be good hearing . " 

 " I wish I be not   such a fool , Mr. Beebe . " 

 Mr. Beebe ignore the remark . 

 " Lucy use to be nearly as stupid as I be , but it will be very different 
 now , mother think . she will read all kind of book . " 

 " so will you . " 

 " only medical book . not book that you can talk about afterwards . cecil 
 be teach Lucy Italian , and he say her playing be wonderful . there 
 be all kind of thing in it that we have never notice . cecil say - " 

 " what on earth be those people do upstairs ? Emerson - we think we will 
 come another time . " 

 George run down - stair and push they into the room without speak . 

 " let I introduce Mr. Honeychurch , a neighbour . " 

 then Freddy hurl one of the thunderbolt of youth . perhaps he be shy , 
 perhaps he be friendly , or perhaps he think that George 's face want 
 washing . at all event he greet he with , " how d'ye do ? come and have 
 a bathe . " 

 " oh , all right , " say George , impassive . 

 Mr. Beebe be highly entertain . 

 " ' how d'ye do ? how d'ye do ? come and have a bathe , ' " he chuckle . 
 " that be the good conversational opening I have   ever hear . but I be afraid 
 it will only act between man . can you picture a lady who have be 
 introduce to another lady by a third lady opening civility with ' how 
 do you do ? come and have a bathe ' ? and yet you will tell I that the 
 sex be equal . " 

 " I tell you that they shall be , " say Mr. Emerson , who have be slowly 
 descend the stair . " good afternoon , Mr. Beebe . I tell you they shall 
 be comrade , and George think the same . " 

 " we be to raise lady to our level ? " the clergyman inquire . 

 " the Garden of Eden , " pursue Mr. Emerson , still descend , " which you 
 place in the past , be really yet to come . we shall enter it when we no 
 long despise our body . " 

 Mr. Beebe disclaim place the Garden of Eden anywhere . 

 " in this - not in other thing - we man be ahead . we despise the body 
 less than woman do . but not until we be comrade shall we enter the 
 garden . " 

 " I say , what about this bathe ? " murmur Freddy , appal at the mass of 
 philosophy that be approach he . 

 " I believe in a return to Nature once . but how can we return to 
 nature when we have never be with she ? to - day , I believe that we must 
 discover Nature . after many conquest we shall attain simplicity . it be 
 our heritage . " 

 " let I introduce Mr. Honeychurch , whose sister you will remember at 
 Florence . " 

 " how do you do ? very glad to see you , and that you be take George for 
 a bathe . very glad to hear that your sister be go to marry . marriage 
 be a duty . I be sure that she will be happy , for we know Mr. Vyse , too . 
 he have be most kind . he meet we by chance in the National Gallery , and 
 arrange everything about this delightful house . though I hope I have 
 not vex Sir Harry Otway . I have meet so few liberal landowner , and 
 I be anxious to compare his attitude towards the game law with the 
 conservative attitude . ah , this wind ! you do well to bathe . your be a 
 glorious country , Honeychurch ! " 

 " not a bit ! " mumble Freddy . " I must - that be to say , I have to - have 
 the pleasure of call on you later on , my mother say , I hope . " 

 " CALL , my lad ? who teach we that drawing - room twaddle ? call on your 
 grandmother ! listen to the wind among the pine ! your be a glorious 
 country . " 

 Mr. Beebe come to the rescue . 

 " Mr. Emerson , he will call , I shall call ; you or your son will return 
 our call before ten day have elapse . I trust that you have realize 
 about the ten day ' interval . it do not count that I help you with 
 the stair - eye yesterday . it do not count that they be go to bathe 
 this afternoon . " 

 " yes , go and bathe , George . why do you dawdle talk ? bring they back 
 to tea . bring back some milk , cake , honey . the change will do you good . 
 George have be work very hard at his office . I can not   believe he be 
 well . " 

 George bow his head , dusty and sombre , exhale the peculiar smell of 
 one who have handle furniture . 

 " do you really want this bathe ? " Freddy ask he . " it be only a pond , 
 do not   you know . I dare say you be use to something well . " 

 " yes - I have say ' yes ' already . " 

 Mr. Beebe feel bind to assist his young friend , and lead the way out 
 of the house and into the pine - wood . how glorious it be ! for a little 
 time the voice of old Mr. Emerson pursue they dispense good wish 
 and philosophy . it cease , and they only hear the fair wind blow the 
 bracken and the tree . Mr. Beebe , who could be silent , but who could not 
 bear silence , be compel to chatter , since the expedition look like 
 a failure , and neither of his companion would utter a word . he speak of 
 Florence . George attend gravely , assent or dissent with slight 
 but determined gesture that be as inexplicable as the motion of the 
 tree - top above their head . 

 " and what a coincidence that you should meet Mr. Vyse ! do you realize 
 that you would find all the Pension Bertolini down here ? " 

 " I do not . Miss Lavish tell I . " 

 " when I be a young man , I always mean to write a ' history of 
 Coincidence . ' " 

 no enthusiasm . 

 " though , as a matter of fact , coincidence be much rare than we 
 suppose . for example , it be not   purely coincidentally that you be here 
 now , when one come to reflect . " 

 to his relief , George begin to talk . 

 " it be . I have reflect . it be Fate . everything be Fate . we be fling 
 together by Fate , draw apart by Fate - fling together , draw apart . the 
 twelve wind blow we - we settle nothing - " 

 " you have not reflect at all , " rap the clergyman . " let I give you 
 a useful tip , Emerson : attribute nothing to fate . do not   say , ' I do not 
 do this , ' for you do it , ten to one . now I will cross - question you . where 
 do you first meet Miss Honeychurch and myself ? " 

 " Italy . " 

 " and where do you meet Mr. Vyse , who be go to marry Miss 
 Honeychurch ? " 

 " National Gallery . " 

 " look at italian art . there you be , and yet you talk of coincidence 
 and Fate . you naturally seek out thing italian , and so do we and our 
 friend . this narrow the field immeasurably we meet again in it . " 

 " it be fate that I be here , " persist George . " but you can call it 
 Italy if it make you less unhappy . " 

 Mr. Beebe slide away from such heavy treatment of the subject . but he be 
 infinitely tolerant of the young , and have no desire to snub George . 

 " and so for this and for other reason my ' history of Coincidence ' be 
 still to write . " 

 Silence . 

 wish to round off the episode , he add ; " we be all so glad that you 
 have come . " 

 Silence . 

 " here we be ! " call Freddy . 

 " oh , good ! " exclaim Mr. Beebe , mop his brow . 

 " in there be the pond . I wish it be big , " he add apologetically . 

 they climb down a slippery bank of pine - needle . there lie the pond , 
 set in its little alp of green - only a pond , but large enough to contain 
 the human body , and pure enough to reflect the sky . on account of the 
 rain , the water have flood the surround grass , which show like a 
 beautiful emerald path , tempt these foot towards the central pool . 

 " it be distinctly successful , as pond go , " say Mr. Beebe . " no apology 
 be necessary for the pond . " 

 George sit down where the ground be dry , and drearily unlace his 
 boot . 

 " be not   those mass of willow - herb splendid ? I love willow - herb in 
 seed . what be the name of this aromatic plant ? " 

 no one know , or seem to care . 

 " these abrupt change of vegetation - this little spongeous tract of 
 water plant , and on either side of it all the growth be tough or 
 brittle - heather , bracken , hurt , pine . very charming , very charming . 

 " Mr. Beebe , be not   you bath ? " call Freddy , as he strip himself . 

 Mr. Beebe think he be not . 

 " Water 's wonderful ! " cry Freddy , prance in . 

 " Water 's water , " murmur George . wet his hair first - a sure sign of 
 apathy - he follow Freddy into the divine , as indifferent as if he be 
 a statue and the pond a pail of soapsud . it be necessary to use his 
 muscle . it be necessary to keep clean . Mr. Beebe watch they , and 
 watch the seed of the willow - herb dance chorically above their head . 

 " Apooshoo , apooshoo , apooshoo , " go Freddy , swim for two stroke in 
 either direction , and then become involve in reed or mud . 

 " be it worth it ? " ask the other , Michelangelesque on the flooded 
 margin . 

 the bank break away , and he fall into the pool before he have weigh the 
 question properly . 

 " hee - poof - I have   swallow a pollywog , Mr. Beebe , water 's wonderful , 
 water 's simply rip . " 

 " Water be not so bad , " say George , reappear from his plunge , and 
 sputtering at the sun . 

 " Water 's wonderful . Mr. Beebe , do . " 

 " Apooshoo , kouf . " 

 Mr. Beebe , who be hot , and who always acquiesce where possible , look 
 around he . he could detect no parishioner except the pine - tree , 
 rise up steeply on all side , and gesture to each other against 
 the blue . how glorious it be ! the world of motor - car and rural Deans 
 recede inimitably . water , sky , evergreen , a wind - these thing not 
 even the season can touch , and surely they lie beyond the intrusion of 
 man ? 

 " I may as well wash too " ; and soon his garment make a third little pile 
 on the sward , and he too assert the wonder of the water . 

 it be ordinary water , nor be there very much of it , and , as Freddy 
 say , it remind one of swim in a salad . the three gentleman 
 rotate in the pool breast high , after the fashion of the nymph in 
 Gotterdammerung . but either because the rain have give a freshness or 
 because the sun be shed a most glorious heat , or because two of the 
 gentleman be young in year and the third young in spirit - for some 
 reason or other a change come over they , and they forget Italy and 
 Botany and Fate . they begin to play . Mr. Beebe and Freddy splash each 
 other . a little deferentially , they splash George . he be quiet : they 
 fear they have offend he . then all the force of youth burst out . he 
 smile , fling himself at they , splash they , duck they , kick they , 
 muddy they , and drive they out of the pool . 

 " race you round it , then , " cry Freddy , and they race in the sunshine , 
 and George take a short cut and dirty his shin , and have to bathe a 
 second time . then Mr. Beebe consent to run - a memorable sight . 

 they run to get dry , they bath to get cool , they play at be 
 Indians in the willow - herb and in the bracken , they bath to get 
 clean . and all the time three little bundle lie discreetly on the 
 sward , proclaim : 

 " no . we be what matter . without we shall no enterprise begin . to we 
 shall all flesh turn in the end . " 

 " a try ! a try ! " yell Freddy , snatch up George 's bundle and place 
 it beside an imaginary goal - post . 

 " socker rule , " George retort , scatter Freddy 's bundle with a kick . 

 " Goal ! " 

 " Goal ! " 

 " Pass ! " 

 " take care my watch ! " cry Mr. Beebe . 

 clothe fly in all direction . 

 " take care my hat ! no , that be enough , Freddy . dress now . no , I say ! " 

 but the two young man be delirious . away they twinkle into the tree , 
 Freddy with a clerical waistcoat under his arm , George with a wide - awake 
 hat on his dripping hair . 

 " that will do ! " shout Mr. Beebe , remember that after all he be in 
 his own parish . then his voice change as if every pine - tree be a Rural 
 Dean . " hi ! Steady on ! I see people come you fellow ! " 

 yell , and widen circle over the dapple earth . 

 " hi ! hi ! lady ! " 

 neither George nor Freddy be truly refine . still , they do not hear 
 Mr. Beebe 's last warning or they would have avoid Mrs. Honeychurch , 
 Cecil , and Lucy , who be walk down to call on old Mrs. Butterworth . 
 Freddy drop the waistcoat at their foot , and dash into some 
 bracken . George whoop in their face , turn and scud away down the 
 path to the pond , still clothe in Mr. Beebe 's hat . 

 " gracious alive ! " cry Mrs. Honeychurch . " whoever be those 
 unfortunate people ? oh , dear , look away ! and poor Mr. Beebe , too ! 
 whatever have happen ? " 

 " come this way immediately , " command Cecil , who always feel that he 
 must lead woman , though know not whither , and protect they , though he 
 know not against what . he lead they now towards the bracken where Freddy 
 sit conceal . 

 " oh , poor Mr. Beebe ! be that his waistcoat we leave in the path ? Cecil , 
 Mr. Beebe 's waistcoat - " 

 no business of ours , say Cecil , glance at Lucy , who be all parasol 
 and evidently " minded . " 

 " I fancy Mr. Beebe jump back into the pond . " 

 " this way , please , Mrs. Honeychurch , this way . " 

 they follow he up the bank attempt the tense yet nonchalant 
 expression that be suitable for lady on such occasion . 

 " well , I can not   help it , " say a voice close ahead , and Freddy rear a 
 freckle face and a pair of snowy shoulder out of the frond . " I can not 
 be tread on , can I ? " 

 " good gracious I , dear ; so it be you ! what miserable management ! why not 
 have a comfortable bath at home , with hot and cold lay on ? " 

 " look here , mother , a fellow must wash , and a fellow 's get to dry , and 
 if another fellow - " 

 " dear , no doubt you be right as usual , but you be in no position to 
 argue . Come , Lucy . " they turn . " oh , look - do not   look ! oh , poor Mr. 
 Beebe ! how unfortunate again - " 

 for Mr. Beebe be just crawl out of the pond , on whose surface 
 garment of an intimate nature do float ; while George , the world - weary 
 George , shout to Freddy that he have hook a fish . 

 " and I , I have   swallow one , " answer he of the bracken . " I have 
 swallow a pollywog . it wriggleth in my tummy . I shall die - Emerson you 
 beast , you have   get on my bag . " 

 " hush , dear , " say Mrs. Honeychurch , who find it impossible to remain 
 shocked . " and do be sure you dry yourself thoroughly first . all these 
 cold come of not dry thoroughly . " 

 " Mother , do come away , " say Lucy . " oh for goodness ' sake , do come . " 

 " Hullo ! " cry George , so that again the lady stop . 

 he regard himself as dress . barefoot , bare - cheste , radiant and 
 personable against the shadowy wood , he call : 

 " Hullo , Miss Honeychurch ! Hullo ! " 

 " Bow , Lucy ; well bow . whoever be it ? I shall bow . " 

 Miss Honeychurch bow . 

 that evening and all that night the water run away . on the morrow the 
 pool have shrink to its old size and lose its glory . it have be a 
 call to the blood and to the relaxed will , a pass benediction whose 
 influence do not pass , a holiness , a spell , a momentary chalice for 
 youth . 



 chapter xiii : how Miss Bartlett 's boiler be so Tiresome 

 how often have Lucy rehearse this bow , this interview ! but she have 
 always rehearse they indoor , and with certain accessory , which 
 surely we have a right to assume . who could foretell that she and George 
 would meet in the rout of a civilization , amidst an army of coat 
 and collar and boot that lie wound over the sunlit earth ? she have 
 imagine a young Mr. Emerson , who might be shy or morbid or indifferent 
 or furtively impudent . she be prepare for all of these . but she have 
 never imagine one who would be happy and greet she with the shout of 
 the morning star . 

 indoor herself , partake of tea with old Mrs. Butterworth , she 
 reflect that it be impossible to foretell the future with any degree 
 of accuracy , that it be impossible to rehearse life . a fault in the 
 scenery , a face in the audience , an irruption of the audience on to the 
 stage , and all our carefully plan gesture mean nothing , or mean too 
 much . " I will bow , " she have think . " I will not shake hand with he . 
 that will be just the proper thing . " she have bow - but to whom ? to 
 god , to hero , to the nonsense of school - girl ! she have bow across 
 the rubbish that cumber the world . 

 so run her thought , while her faculty be busy with Cecil . it be 
 another of those dreadful engagement call . Mrs. Butterworth have want 
 to see he , and he do not want to be see . he do not want to hear 
 about hydrangea , why they change their colour at the seaside . he do 
 not want to join the C. O. S. when cross he be always elaborate , and 
 make long , clever answer where " yes " or " no " would have do . Lucy 
 soothe he and tinker at the conversation in a way that promise well 
 for their married peace . no one be perfect , and surely it be wise to 
 discover the imperfection before wedlock . Miss Bartlett , indeed , though 
 not in word , have teach the girl that this our life contain nothing 
 satisfactory . Lucy , though she dislike the teacher , regard the 
 teaching as profound , and apply it to her lover . 

 " Lucy , " say her mother , when they get home , " be anything the matter 
 with Cecil ? " 

 the question be ominous ; up till now Mrs. Honeychurch have behave with 
 charity and restraint . 

 " no , I do not   think so , mother ; Cecil 's all right . " 

 " perhaps he be tired . " 

 Lucy compromise : perhaps Cecil be a little tired . 

 " because otherwise " - she pull out her bonnet - pin with gathering 
 displeasure - " because otherwise I can not account for he . " 

 " I do think Mrs. Butterworth be rather tiresome , if you mean that . " 

 " Cecil have tell you to think so . you be devoted to she as a little 
 girl , and nothing will describe she goodness to you through the typhoid 
 fever . no - it be just the same thing everywhere . " 

 " let I just put your bonnet away , may I ? " 

 " surely he could answer she civilly for one half - hour ? " 

 " cecil have a very high standard for people , " falter Lucy , see 
 trouble ahead . " it be part of his ideal - it be really that that make 
 he sometimes seem - " 

 " oh , rubbish ! if high ideal make a young man rude , the soon he get 
 rid of they the well , " say Mrs. Honeychurch , hand she the bonnet . 

 " now , mother ! I have   see you cross with Mrs. Butterworth yourself ! " 

 " not in that way . at time I could wring her neck . but not in that way . 
 no . it be the same with cecil all over . " 

 " by - the - by - I never tell you . I have a letter from Charlotte while I be 
 away in London . " 

 this attempt to divert the conversation be too puerile , and Mrs. 
 Honeychurch resent it . 

 " since Cecil come back from London , nothing appear to please he . 
 whenever I speak he wince ; - I see he , Lucy ; it be useless to 
 contradict I . no doubt I be neither artistic nor literary nor 
 intellectual nor musical , but I can not help the drawing - room furniture ; 
 your father buy it and we must put up with it , will Cecil kindly 
 remember . " 

 " I - I see what you mean , and certainly Cecil ought not   to . but he do 
 not mean to be uncivil - he once explain - it be the thing that upset 
 he - he be easily upset by ugly thing - he be not uncivil to PEOPLE . " 

 " be it a thing or a person when Freddy sing ? " 

 " you can not   expect a really musical person to enjoy comic song as we 
 do . " 

 " then why do not   he leave the room ? why sit wriggling and sneer and 
 spoil everyone 's pleasure ? " 

 " we must not   be unjust to people , " falter Lucy . something have enfeeble 
 she , and the case for Cecil , which she have master so perfectly in 
 London , would not come forth in an effective form . the two civilization 
 have clashed - Cecil hint that they might - and she be dazzle and 
 bewilder , as though the radiance that lie behind all civilization 
 have blind her eye . good taste and bad taste be only catchword , 
 garment of diverse cut ; and music itself dissolve to a whisper through 
 pine - tree , where the song be not distinguishable from the comic song . 

 she remain in much embarrassment , while Mrs. Honeychurch change 
 her frock for dinner ; and every now and then she say a word , and make 
 thing no well . there be no conceal the fact , Cecil have mean 
 to be supercilious , and he have succeed . and Lucy - she know not 
 why - wish that the trouble could have come at any other time . 

 " go and dress , dear ; you will be late . " 

 " all right , mother - " 

 " do not   say ' all right ' and stop . go . " 

 she obey , but loiter disconsolately at the landing window . it face 
 north , so there be little view , and no view of the sky . now , as in the 
 winter , the pine - tree hang close to her eye . one connect the landing 
 window with depression . no definite problem menace she , but she sigh 
 to herself , " oh , dear , what shall I do , what shall I do ? " it seem to 
 she that every one else be behave very badly . and she ought not to 
 have mention Miss Bartlett 's letter . she must be more careful ; her 
 mother be rather inquisitive , and might have ask what it be about . 
 oh , dear , should she do ? - and then Freddy come bound up - stair , and 
 join the rank of the ill - behaved . 

 " I say , those be top people . " 

 " my dear baby , how tiresome you have   be ! you have no business to take 
 they bath in the sacred it be much too public . it be all right for 
 you but most awkward for every one else . do be more careful . you forget 
 the place be grow half suburban . " 

 " I say , be anything on to - morrow week ? " 

 " not that I know of . " 

 " then I want to ask the Emersons up to Sunday tennis . " 

 " oh , I would not   do that , Freddy , I would not   do that with all this 
 muddle . " 

 " what be wrong with the court ? they will not   mind a bump or two , and I have 
 order new ball . " 

 " I mean it be well not . I really mean it . " 

 he seize she by the elbow and humorously dance she up and down the 
 passage . she pretend not to mind , but she could have scream with 
 temper . cecil glance at they as he proceed to his toilet and they 
 impede Mary with her brood of hot - water can . then Mrs. Honeychurch 
 open her door and say : " Lucy , what a noise you be make ! I 
 have something to say to you . do you say you have have a letter from 
 Charlotte ? " and Freddy run away . 

 " yes . I really can not   stop . I must dress too . " 

 " how be Charlotte ? " 

 " all right . " 

 " Lucy ! " 

 the unfortunate girl return . 

 " you have   a bad habit of hurry away in the middle of one 's sentence . 
 do Charlotte mention her boiler ? " 

 " her what ? " 

 " do not   you remember that her boiler be to be have out in October , and 
 her bath cistern clean out , and all kind of terrible to - doing ? " 

 " I can not   remember all Charlotte 's worry , " say Lucy bitterly . " I shall 
 have enough of my own , now that you be not pleased with Cecil . " 

 Mrs. Honeychurch might have flame out . she do not . she say : " come 
 here , old lady - thank you for put away my bonnet - kiss I . " and , 
 though nothing be perfect , Lucy feel for the moment that her mother and 
 Windy Corner and the Weald in the decline sun be perfect . 

 so the grittiness go out of life . it generally do at Windy Corner . 
 at the last minute , when the social machine be clog hopelessly , one 
 member or other of the family pour in a drop of oil . cecil despise 
 their method - perhaps rightly . at all event , they be not his own . 

 Dinner be at half - past seven . Freddy gabble the grace , and they draw 
 up their heavy chair and fall to . fortunately , the man be hungry . 
 nothing untoward occur until the pudding . then Freddy say : 

 " Lucy , what be Emerson like ? " 

 " I see he in Florence , " say Lucy , hop that this would pass for a 
 reply . 

 " be he the clever sort , or be he a decent chap ? " 

 " ask Cecil ; it be Cecil who bring he here . " 

 " he be the clever sort , like myself , " say Cecil . 

 Freddy look at he doubtfully . 

 " how well do you know they at the Bertolini ? " ask Mrs. Honeychurch . 

 " oh , very slightly . I mean , Charlotte know they even less than I do . " 

 " oh , that remind I - you never tell I what Charlotte say in her 
 letter . " 

 " one thing and another , " say Lucy , wonder whether she would get 
 through the meal without a lie . " among other thing , that an awful 
 friend of hers have be bicycle through Summer Street , wonder if 
 she would come up and see we , and mercifully do not . " 

 " Lucy , I do call the way you talk unkind . " 

 " she be a novelist , " say Lucy craftily . the remark be a happy one , 
 for nothing rouse Mrs. Honeychurch so much as literature in the hand 
 of female . she would abandon every topic to inveigh against those woman 
 who   instead of mind their house and their child   seek notoriety 
 by print . her attitude be : " if book must be write , let they be 
 write by man " ; and she develop it at great length , while Cecil 
 yawned and Freddy play at " this year , next year , now , never , " with his 
 plum - stone , and Lucy artfully feed the flame of her mother 's wrath . but 
 soon the conflagration die down , and the ghost begin to gather in the 
 darkness . there be too many ghost about . the original ghost - that 
 touch of lip on her cheek - have surely be lay long ago ; it could be 
 nothing to she that a man have kiss she on a mountain once . but it 
 have beget a spectral family - Mr. Harris , Miss Bartlett 's letter , 
 Mr. Beebe 's memory of violet - and one or other of these be bind to 
 haunt she before Cecil 's very eye . it be Miss Bartlett who return 
 now , and with appal vividness . 

 " I have be think , Lucy , of that letter of Charlotte 's . how be she ? " 

 " I tear the thing up . " 

 " do not   she say how she be ? how do she sound ? cheerful ? " 

 " oh , yes I suppose so - no - not very cheerful , I suppose . " 

 " then , depend upon it , it be the boiler . I know myself how water prey 
 upon one 's mind . I would rather anything else - even a misfortune with 
 the meat . " 

 Cecil lay his hand over his eye . 

 " so would I , " assert Freddy , back his mother up - back up the 
 spirit of her remark rather than the substance . 

 " and I have be think , " she add rather nervously , ' surely we could 
 squeeze Charlotte in here next week , and give she a nice holiday while 
 plumber at Tunbridge Wells finish . I have not see poor Charlotte for 
 so long . " 

 it be more than her nerve could stand . and she could not protest 
 violently after her mother 's goodness to her upstairs . 

 " Mother , no ! " she plead . " it be impossible . we can not   have Charlotte on 
 the top of the other thing ; we be squeeze to death as it be . Freddy 's 
 get a friend come Tuesday , there be Cecil , and you have   promise to take 
 in Minnie Beebe because of the diphtheria scare . it simply can not   be 
 do . " 

 " Nonsense ! it can . " 

 " if Minnie sleep in the bath . not otherwise . " 

 " Minnie can sleep with you . " 

 " I will not   have she . " 

 " then , if you be so selfish , Mr. Floyd must share a room with Freddy . " 

 " Miss Bartlett , Miss Bartlett , Miss Bartlett , " moan Cecil , again 
 lay his hand over his eye . 

 " it be impossible , " repeat Lucy . " I do not   want to make difficulty , 
 but it really be not   fair on the maid to fill up the house so . " 

 alas ! 

 " the truth be , dear , you do not   like Charlotte . " 

 " no , I do not . and no more do Cecil . she get on our nerve . you 
 have not   see she lately , and do not   realize how tiresome she can be , 
 though so good . so please , mother , do not   worry we this last summer ; but 
 spoil we by not ask she to come . " 

 " hear , hear ! " say Cecil . 

 Mrs. Honeychurch , with more gravity than usual , and with more feeling 
 than she usually permit herself , reply : " this be not   very kind of 
 you two . you have each other and all these wood to walk in , so full of 
 beautiful thing ; and poor Charlotte have only the water turn off and 
 plumber . you be young , dear , and however clever young people be , and 
 however many book they read , they will never guess what it feel like 
 to grow old . " 

 Cecil crumble his bread . 

 " I must say Cousin Charlotte be very kind to I that year I call on 
 my bike , " put in Freddy . " she thank I for come till I feel like 
 such a fool , and fuss round no end to get an egg boil for my tea 
 just right . " 

 " I know , dear . she be kind to every one , and yet Lucy make this 
 difficulty when we try to give she some little return . " 

 but Lucy harden her heart . it be no good be kind to Miss Bartlett . 
 she have try herself too often and too recently . one might lay up 
 treasure in heaven by the attempt , but one enrich neither Miss 
 Bartlett nor any one else upon earth . she be reduce to say : " I 
 can not   help it , mother . I do not   like Charlotte . I admit it be horrid of 
 I . " 

 " from your own account , you tell she as much . " 

 " well , she would leave Florence so stupidly . she flurry - " 

 the ghost be return ; they fill Italy , they be even usurping 
 the place she have know as a child . the Sacred Lake would never be the 
 same again , and , on Sunday week , something would even happen to Windy 
 Corner . how would she fight against ghost ? for a moment the visible 
 world fade away , and memory and emotion alone seem real . 

 " I suppose Miss Bartlett must come , since she boil egg so well , " 
 say Cecil , who be in rather a happy frame of mind , thank to the 
 admirable cooking . 

 " I do not   mean the egg be well boil , " correct Freddy , " because in 
 point of fact she forget to take it off , and as a matter of fact I do not 
 care for egg . I only mean how jolly kind she seem . " 

 Cecil frown again . oh , these honeychurche ! Eggs , boiler , hydrangea , 
 maid - of such be their life compact . " may I and Lucy get down from 
 our chair ? " he ask , with scarcely veil insolence . " we do not   want no 
 dessert . " 



 Chapter XIV : how Lucy Faced the External Situation Bravely 

 of course Miss Bartlett accept . and , equally of course , she feel sure 
 that she would prove a nuisance , and beg to be give an inferior 
 spare room - something with no view , anything . her love to Lucy . and , 
 equally of course , George Emerson could come to tennis on the Sunday 
 week . 

 Lucy face the situation bravely , though , like most of we , she only 
 face the situation that encompass she . she never gaze inward . if at 
 time strange image rise from the depth , she put they down to nerve . 
 when Cecil bring the Emersons to Summer Street , it have upset her 
 nerve . Charlotte would burnish up past foolishness , and this might 
 upset her nerve . she be nervous at night . when she talk to 
 George - they meet again almost immediately at the Rectory - his voice 
 move she deeply , and she wish to remain near he . how dreadful if she 
 really wish to remain near he ! of course , the wish be due to nerve , 
 which love to play such perverse trick upon we . once she have suffer 
 from " thing that come out of nothing and mean she do not   know what . " 
 now Cecil have explain psychology to her one wet afternoon , and all the 
 trouble of youth in an unknown world could be dismiss . 

 it be obvious enough for the reader to conclude , " she love young 
 Emerson . " a reader in Lucy 's place would not find it obvious . life be 
 easy to chronicle , but bewilder to practice , and we welcome " nerve " 
 or any other shibboleth that will cloak our personal desire . she love 
 Cecil ; George make she nervous ; will the reader explain to she that the 
 phrase should have be reverse ? 

 but the external situation - she will face that bravely . 

 the meeting at the Rectory have pass off well enough . stand between 
 Mr. Beebe and Cecil , she have make a few temperate allusion to Italy , 
 and George have reply . she be anxious to show that she be not shy , 
 and be glad that he do not seem shy either . 

 " a nice fellow , " say Mr. Beebe afterwards " he will work off his 
 crudity in time . I rather mistrust young man who slip into life 
 gracefully . " 

 Lucy say , " he seem in well spirit . he laugh more . " 

 " yes , " reply the clergyman . " he be wake up . " 

 that be all . but , as the week wear on , more of her defence fall , 
 and she entertain an image that have physical beauty . in spite of the 
 clear direction , Miss Bartlett contrive to bungle her arrival . 
 she be due at the south - eastern station at Dorking , whither Mrs. 
 Honeychurch drive to meet she . she arrive at the London and Brighton 
 station , and have to hire a cab up . no one be at home except Freddy 
 and his friend , who have to stop their tennis and to entertain she for 
 a solid hour . Cecil and Lucy turn up at four o'clock , and these , with 
 little Minnie Beebe , make a somewhat lugubrious sextette upon the upper 
 lawn for tea . 

 " I shall never forgive myself , " say Miss Bartlett , who keep on rise 
 from her seat , and have to be beg by the united company to remain . 
 " I have upset everything . burst in on young people ! but I insist on 
 pay for my cab up . grant that , at any rate . " 

 " our visitor never do such dreadful thing , " say Lucy , while her 
 brother , in whose memory the boil egg have already grow unsubstantial , 
 exclaim in irritable tone : " just what I have   be try to convince 
 Cousin Charlotte of , Lucy , for the last half hour . " 

 " I do not feel myself an ordinary visitor , " say Miss Bartlett , and 
 look at her fray glove . 

 " all right , if you would really rather . five shilling , and I give a bob to 
 the driver . " 

 Miss Bartlett look in her purse . only sovereign and penny . could 
 any one give her change ? Freddy have half a quid and his friend have four 
 half - crown . Miss Bartlett accept their money and then say : " but who 
 be I to give the sovereign to ? " 

 " let us leave it all till mother come back , " suggest Lucy . 

 " no , dear ; your mother may take quite a long drive now that she be not 
 hamper with I . we all have our little foible , and mine be the prompt 
 settling of account . " 

 here Freddy 's friend , Mr. Floyd , make the one remark of his that need be 
 quote : he offer to toss Freddy for Miss Bartlett 's quid . a solution 
 seem in sight , and even Cecil , who have be ostentatiously drink 
 his tea at the view , feel the eternal attraction of Chance , and turn 
 round . 

 but this do not do , either . 

 " please - please - I know I be a sad spoilsport , but it would make I 
 wretched . I should practically be rob the one who lose . " 

 " Freddy owe I fifteen shilling , " interpose Cecil . " so it will work 
 out right if you give the pound to I . " 

 " fifteen shilling , " say Miss Bartlett dubiously . " how be that , Mr. 
 Vyse ? " 

 " because , do not   you see , Freddy pay your cab . give I the pound , and we 
 shall avoid this deplorable gambling . " 

 Miss Bartlett , who be poor at figure , become bewildered and render 
 up the sovereign , amidst the suppress gurgle of the other youth . for 
 a moment Cecil be happy . he be play at nonsense among his peer . 
 then he glance at Lucy , in whose face petty anxiety have mar the 
 smile . in January he would rescue his Leonardo from this stupefying 
 twaddle . 

 " but I do not   see that ! " exclaim Minnie Beebe who have narrowly watch 
 the iniquitous transaction . " I do not   see why Mr. Vyse be to have the 
 quid . " 

 " because of the fifteen shilling and the five , " they say solemnly . 
 " fifteen shilling and five shilling make one pound , you see . " 

 " but I do not   see - " 

 they try to stifle she with cake . 

 " no , thank you . I be do . I do not   see why - Freddy , do not   poke I . Miss 
 Honeychurch , your brother 's hurt I . ow ! what about Mr. Floyd 's 
 ten shilling ? ow ! no , I do not   see and I never shall see why Miss 
 What's - she - name should not   pay that bob for the driver . " ' 

 " I have forget the driver , " say Miss Bartlett , redden . " thank you , 
 dear , for remind I . a shilling be it ? can any one give I change 
 for half a crown ? " 

 " I will get it , " say the young hostess , rise with decision . 

 " Cecil , give I that sovereign . no , give I up that sovereign . I will get 
 euphemia to change it , and we will start the whole thing again from the 
 beginning . " 

 " Lucy - Lucy - what a nuisance I be ! " protest Miss Bartlett , and 
 follow she across the lawn . Lucy trip ahead , simulate hilarity . 
 when they be out of earshot Miss Bartlett stop her wail and say 
 quite briskly : " have you tell he about he yet ? " 

 " no , I have not , " reply Lucy , and then could have bite her tongue 
 for understanding so quickly what her cousin mean . " let I see - a 
 sovereign 's worth of silver . " 

 she escape into the kitchen . Miss Bartlett 's sudden transition be 
 too uncanny . it sometimes seem as if she plan every word she speak 
 or cause to be speak ; as if all this worry about cab and change have 
 be a ruse to surprise the soul . 

 " no , I have not   tell Cecil or any one , " she remark , when she return . 
 " I promise you I should not . here be your money - all shilling , except 
 two half - crown . would you count it ? you can settle your debt nicely 
 now . " 

 Miss Bartlett be in the drawing - room , gaze at the photograph of St. 
 John ascending , which have be frame . 

 " how dreadful ! " she murmur , " how more than dreadful , if Mr. Vyse 
 should come to hear of it from some other source . " 

 " oh , no , Charlotte , " say the girl , enter the battle . " George Emerson 
 be all right , and what other source be there ? " 

 Miss Bartlett consider . " for instance , the driver . I see he look 
 through the bush at you , remember he have a violet between his tooth . " 

 Lucy shudder a little . " we shall get the silly affair on our nerve 
 if we be not   careful . how could a florentine cab - driver ever get hold of 
 Cecil ? " 

 " we must think of every possibility . " 

 " oh , it be all right . " 

 " or perhaps old Mr. Emerson know . in fact , he be certain to know . " 

 " I do not   care if he do . I be grateful to you for your letter , but 
 even if the news do get round , I think I can trust Cecil to laugh at 
 it . " 

 " to contradict it ? " 

 " no , to laugh at it . " but she know in her heart that she could not trust 
 he , for he desire she untouched . 

 " very well , dear , you know well . perhaps gentleman be different to what 
 they be when I be young . lady be certainly different . " 

 " now , Charlotte ! " she strike at she playfully . " you kind , anxious thing . 
 what would you have I do ? first you say ' do not   tell ' ; and then you say , 
 ' tell ' . which be it to be ? quick ! " 

 Miss Bartlett sigh " I be no match for you in conversation , dearest . I 
 blush when I think how I interfere at Florence , and you so well able 
 to look after yourself , and so much cleverer in all way than I be . you 
 will never forgive I . " 

 " shall we go out , then . they will smash all the china if we do not . " 

 for the air ring with the shriek of Minnie , who be be scalp with 
 a teaspoon . 

 " dear , one moment - we may not have this chance for a chat again . have 
 you see the young one yet ? " 

 " yes , I have . " 

 " what happen ? " 

 " we meet at the Rectory . " 

 " what line be he take up ? " 

 " no line . he talk about Italy , like any other person . it be really all 
 right . what advantage would he get from be a cad , to put it bluntly ? 
 I do wish I could make you see it my way . he really will not   be any 
 nuisance , Charlotte . " 

 " once a cad , always a cad . that be my poor opinion . " 

 Lucy pause . " Cecil say one day - and I think it so profound - that 
 there be two kind of cad - the conscious and the subconscious . " she 
 pause again , to be sure of do justice to Cecil 's profundity . through 
 the window she see Cecil himself , turn over the page of a novel . it 
 be a new one from Smith 's library . her mother must have return from 
 the station . 

 " once a cad , always a cad , " drone Miss Bartlett . 

 " what I mean by subconscious be that Emerson lose his head . I fall into 
 all those violet , and he be silly and surprised . I do not   think we 
 ought to blame he very much . it make such a difference when you see a 
 person with beautiful thing behind he unexpectedly . it really do ; 
 it make an enormous difference , and he lose his head : he do not   admire 
 I , or any of that nonsense , one straw . Freddy rather like he , and 
 have ask he up here on Sunday , so you can judge for yourself . he have 
 improve ; he do not   always look as if he be go to burst into 
 tear . he be a clerk in the General Manager 's office at one of the big 
 railway - not a porter ! and run down to his father for week - end . Papa 
 be to do with journalism , but be rheumatic and have retire . there ! 
 now for the garden . " she take hold of her guest by the arm . " suppose we 
 do not   talk about this silly italian business any more . we want you to 
 have a nice restful visit at Windy Corner , with no worriting . " 

 Lucy think this rather a good speech . the reader may have detect 
 an unfortunate slip in it . whether Miss Bartlett detect the slip one 
 can not say , for it be impossible to penetrate into the mind of elderly 
 people . she might have speak far , but they be interrupt by the 
 entrance of her hostess . explanation take place , and in the midst of 
 they Lucy escape , the image throb a little more vividly in her 
 brain . 



 Chapter XV : the disaster within 

 the Sunday after Miss Bartlett 's arrival be a glorious day , like most 
 of the day of that year . in the Weald , autumn approach , break up 
 the green monotony of summer , touch the park with the grey bloom of 
 mist , the beech - tree with russet , the oak - tree with gold . up on the 
 height , battalion of black pine witness the change , themselves 
 unchangeable . either country be span by a cloudless sky , and in 
 either arise the tinkle of church bell . 

 the garden of Windy Corners be desert except for a red book , which 
 lie sun itself upon the gravel path . from the house come incoherent 
 sound , as of female prepare for worship . " the man say they will not 
 go " - " well , I do not   blame they " - Minnie say , " need she go ? " - " tell 
 she , no nonsense " - " Anne ! Mary ! hook I behind ! " - " Dearest Lucia , may I 
 trespass upon you for a pin ? " for Miss Bartlett have announce that she 
 at all event be one for church . 

 the sun rise higher on its journey , guide , not by Phaethon , but by 
 Apollo , competent , unswerve , divine . its ray fall on the lady 
 whenever they advance towards the bedroom window ; on Mr. Beebe down 
 at Summer Street as he smile over a letter from Miss Catharine Alan ; on 
 George Emerson clean his father 's boot ; and lastly , to complete the 
 catalogue of memorable thing , on the red book mention previously . the 
 lady move , Mr. Beebe move , George move , and movement may engender 
 shadow . but this book lie motionless , to be caress all the morning 
 by the sun and to raise its cover slightly , as though acknowledge the 
 caress . 

 presently Lucy step out of the drawing - room window . her new cerise 
 dress have be a failure , and make she look tawdry and wan . at her 
 throat be a garnet brooch , on her finger a ring set with ruby - an 
 engagement ring . her eye be bent to the Weald . she frown a 
 little - not in anger , but as a brave child frown when he be try not 
 to cry . in all that expanse no human eye be look at she , and she may 
 frown unrebuked and measure the space that yet survive between Apollo 
 and the western hill . 

 " Lucy ! Lucy ! what be that book ? who be be take a book out of the shelf 
 and leave it about to spoil ? " 

 " it be only the library book that Cecil 's be read . " 

 " but pick it up , and do not   stand idle there like a flamingo . " 

 Lucy pick up the book and glance at the title listlessly , under a 
 Loggia . she no long read novel herself , devote all her spare time 
 to solid literature in the hope of catch Cecil up . it be dreadful 
 how little she know , and even when she think she know a thing , like 
 the italian painter , she find she have forget it . only this morning 
 she have confuse Francesco Francia with Piero della Francesca , and Cecil 
 have say , " what ! you be not   forget your Italy already ? " and this too 
 have lend anxiety to her eye when she salute the dear view and the 
 dear garden in the foreground , and above they , scarcely conceivable 
 elsewhere , the dear sun . 

 " Lucy - have you a sixpence for Minnie and a shilling for yourself ? " 

 she hasten in to her mother , who be rapidly work herself into a 
 Sunday fluster . 

 " it be a special collection - I forget what for . I do beg , no vulgar 
 clink in the plate with halfpenny ; see that Minnie have a nice 
 bright sixpence . where be the child ? Minnie ! that book 's all warp . 
  gracious , how plain you look !   put it under the Atlas to press . 
 Minnie ! " 

 " oh , Mrs. Honeychurch - " from the upper region . 

 " Minnie , do not   be late . here come the horse " - it be always the horse , 
 never the carriage . " where 's Charlotte ? run up and hurry she . why be she 
 so long ? she have nothing to do . she never bring anything but blouse . 
 Poor Charlotte - how I do det blouse ! Minnie ! " 

 paganism be infectious - more infectious than diphtheria or piety - and 
 the Rector 's niece be take to church protest . as usual , she do not 
 see why . why should not   she sit in the sun with the young man ? the 
 young man , who have now appear , mock she with ungenerous word . Mrs. 
 Honeychurch defend orthodoxy , and in the midst of the confusion Miss 
 Bartlett , dress in the very height of the fashion , come stroll down 
 the stair . 

 " Dear Marian , I be very sorry , but I have no small change - nothing but 
 sovereign and half crown . could any one give I - " 

 " yes , easily . jump in . gracious I , how smart you look ! what a lovely 
 frock ! you put we all to shame . " 

 " if I do not wear my good rag and tatter now , when should I wear 
 they ? " say Miss Bartlett reproachfully . she get into the victoria and 
 place herself with she back to the horse . the necessary roar ensue , 
 and then they drive off . 

 " good - bye ! be good ! " call out Cecil . 

 Lucy bite her lip , for the tone be sneer . on the subject of " church 
 and so on " they have have rather an unsatisfactory conversation . he have 
 say that people ought to overhaul themselves , and she do not want to 
 overhaul herself ; she do not know it be do . honest orthodoxy 
 Cecil respect , but he always assume that honesty be the result of a 
 spiritual crisis ; he could not imagine it as a natural birthright , that 
 might grow heavenward like flower . all that he say on this subject 
 pain she , though he exude tolerance from every pore ; somehow the 
 Emersons be different . 

 she see the Emersons after church . there be a line of carriage down 
 the road , and the Honeychurch vehicle happen to be opposite Cissie 
 Villa . to save time , they walk over the green to it , and find father 
 and son smoke in the garden . 

 " introduce I , " say her mother . " unless the young man consider that he 
 know I already . " 

 he probably do ; but Lucy ignore the Sacred Lake and introduce they 
 formally . Old Mr. Emerson claim she with much warmth , and say how 
 glad he be that she be go to be marry . she say yes , she be glad 
 too ; and then , as Miss Bartlett and Minnie be linger behind with 
 Mr. Beebe , she turn the conversation to a less disturbing topic , and 
 ask he how he like his new house . 

 " very much , " he reply , but there be a note of offence in his voice ; 
 she have never know he offend before . he add : " we find , though , 
 that the Miss Alans be come , and that we have turn they out . woman 
 mind such a thing . I be very much upset about it . " 

 " I believe that there be some misunderstanding , " say Mrs. Honeychurch 
 uneasily . 

 " our landlord be tell that we should be a different type of person , " 
 say George , who seem disposed to carry the matter far . " he 
 think we should be artistic . he be disappoint . " 

 " and I wonder whether we ought to write to the Miss Alans and offer to 
 give it up . what do you think ? " he appeal to Lucy . 

 " oh , stop now you have come , " say Lucy lightly . she must avoid 
 censuring Cecil . for it be on Cecil that the little episode turn , 
 though his name be never mention . 

 " so George say . he say that the Miss Alans must go to the wall . yet it 
 do seem so unkind . " 

 " there be only a certain amount of kindness in the world , " say George , 
 watch the sunlight flash on the panel of the pass carriage . 

 " yes ! " exclaim Mrs. Honeychurch . " that be exactly what I say . why all 
 this twiddling and twaddle over two Miss Alans ? " 

 " there be a certain amount of kindness , just as there be a certain 
 amount of light , " he continue in measured tone . " we cast a shadow 
 on something wherever we stand , and it be no good move from place to 
 place to save thing ; because the shadow always follow . choose a place 
 where you will not   do harm - yes , choose a place where you will not   do very 
 much harm , and stand in it for all you be worth , face the sunshine . " 

 " oh , Mr. Emerson , I see you be clever ! " 

 " eh - ? " 

 " I see you be go to be clever . I hope you do not   go behave like 
 that to poor Freddy . " 

 George 's eye laugh , and Lucy suspect that he and her mother would 
 get on rather well . 

 " no , I do not , " he say . " he behave that way to I . it be his 
 philosophy . only he start life with it ; and I have try the Note of 
 interrogation first . " 

 " what do you mean ? no , never mind what you mean . do not   explain . he look 
 forward to see you this afternoon . do you play tennis ? do you mind 
 tennis on Sunday - ? " 

 " George mind tennis on Sunday ! George , after his education , distinguish 
 between Sunday - " 

 " very well , George do not   mind tennis on Sunday . no more do I. that be 
 settle . Mr. Emerson , if you could come with your son we should be so 
 pleased . " 

 he thank she , but the walk sound rather far ; he could only potter 
 about in these day . 

 she turn to George : " and then he want to give up his house to the 
 Miss Alans . " 

 " I know , " say George , and put his arm round his father 's neck . the 
 kindness that Mr. Beebe and Lucy have always know to exist in he come 
 out suddenly , like sunlight touch a vast landscape - a touch of the 
 morning sun ? she remember that in all his perversity he have never 
 speak against affection . 

 Miss Bartlett approach . 

 " you know our cousin , Miss Bartlett , " say Mrs. Honeychurch pleasantly . 
 " you meet she with my daughter in Florence . " 

 " yes , indeed ! " say the old man , and make as if he would come out of the 
 garden to meet the lady . Miss Bartlett promptly get into the victoria . 
 thus entrench , she emit a formal bow . it be the pension Bertolini 
 again , the dining - table with the decanter of water and wine . it be the 
 old , old battle of the room with the view . 

 George do not respond to the bow . like any boy , he blush and be 
 ashamed ; he know that the chaperon remember . he say : " I - I will come up 
 to tennis if I can manage it , " and go into the house . perhaps anything 
 that he do would have please Lucy , but his awkwardness go straight 
 to her heart ; man be not god after all , but as human and as clumsy as 
 girl ; even man might suffer from unexplained desire , and need help . to 
 one of her upbringing , and of her destination , the weakness of man be a 
 truth unfamiliar , but she have surmise it at Florence , when George throw 
 her photograph into the River Arno . 

 " George , do not   go , " cry his father , who think it a great treat for 
 people if his son would talk to they . " George have be in such good 
 spirit today , and I be sure he will end by come up this afternoon . " 

 Lucy catch her cousin 's eye . something in its mute appeal make she 
 reckless . " yes , " she say , raise her voice , " I do hope he will . " then 
 she go to the carriage and murmur , " the old man have not   be tell ; 
 I know it be all right . " Mrs. Honeychurch follow she , and they drive 
 away . 

 satisfactory that Mr. Emerson have not be tell of the Florence 
 escapade ; yet Lucy 's spirit should not have leapt up as if she have 
 sight the rampart of heaven . satisfactory ; yet surely she greet 
 it with disproportionate joy . all the way home the horse ' hoof sing a 
 tune to she : " he have not tell , he have not tell . " her brain expand the 
 melody : " he have not tell his father - to whom he tell all thing . it be 
 not an exploit . he do not laugh at I when I have go . " she raise she 
 hand to her cheek . " he do not love I . no . how terrible if he do ! but 
 he have not tell . he will not tell . " 

 she long to shout the word : " it be all right . it be a secret between 
 us two for ever . cecil will never hear . " she be even glad that Miss 
 Bartlett have make her promise secrecy , that last dark evening at 
 Florence , when they have kneel pack in his room . the secret , big or 
 little , be guard . 

 only three english people know of it in the world . thus she interpret 
 her joy . she greet Cecil with unusual radiance , because she feel so 
 safe . as he help she out of the carriage , she say : 

 " the Emersons have be so nice . George Emerson have improve 
 enormously . " 

 " how be my protege ? " ask Cecil , who take no real interest in they , 
 and have long since forget his resolution to bring they to Windy 
 Corner for educational purpose . 

 " Proteges ! " she exclaim with some warmth . for the only relationship 
 which Cecil conceive be feudal : that of protector and protect . he 
 have no glimpse of the comradeship after which the girl 's soul yearn . 

 " you shall see for yourself how your protege be . George Emerson be 
 come up this afternoon . he be a most interesting man to talk to . only 
 do not   - " she nearly say , " do not   protect he . " but the bell be ring 
 for lunch , and , as often happen , Cecil have pay no great attention to 
 her remark . Charm , not argument , be to be her forte . 

 Lunch be a cheerful meal . generally Lucy be depress at meal . some 
 one have to be soothe - either Cecil or Miss Bartlett or a be not 
 visible to the mortal eye - a being who whisper to her soul : " it 
 will not last , this cheerfulness . in January you must go to London to 
 entertain the grandchild of celebrated man . " but to - day she feel she 
 have receive a guarantee . her mother would always sit there , her brother 
 here . the sun , though it have move a little since the morning , would 
 never be hide behind the western hill . after luncheon they ask she 
 to play . she have see Gluck 's Armide that year , and play from memory 
 the music of the enchant garden - the music to which renaud approach , 
 beneath the light of an eternal dawn , the music that never gain , never 
 wane , but ripple for ever like the tideless sea of fairyland . such 
 music be not for the piano , and her audience begin to get restive , 
 and Cecil , share the discontent , call out : " now play we the other 
 garden - the one in Parsifal . " 

 she close the instrument . 

 " not very dutiful , " say her mother 's voice . 

 fear that she have offend Cecil , she turn quickly round . there 
 George be . he have creep in without interrupt she . 

 " oh , I have no idea ! " she exclaim , get very red ; and then , without 
 a word of greeting , she reopen the piano . cecil should have the 
 Parsifal , and anything else that he like . 

 " our performer have change her mind , " say Miss Bartlett , perhaps 
 imply , she will play the music to Mr. Emerson . Lucy do not know 
 what to do nor even what she want to do . she play a few bar of the 
 Flower Maidens ' song very badly and then she stop . 

 " I vote tennis , " say Freddy , disgust at the scrappy entertainment . 

 " yes , so do I. " once more she close the unfortunate piano . " I vote you 
 have a man 's four . " 

 " all right . " 

 " not for I , thank you , " say Cecil . " I will not spoil the set . " he 
 never realize that it may be an act of kindness in a bad player to make 
 up a fourth . 

 " oh , come along Cecil . I be bad , Floyd 's rotten , and so I dare say 's 
 Emerson . " 

 George correct he : " I be not bad . " 

 one look down one 's nose at this . " then certainly I will not   play , " say 
 Cecil , while Miss Bartlett , under the impression that she be snub 
 George , add : " I agree with you , Mr. Vyse . you have much well not 
 play . much well not . " 

 Minnie , rush in where Cecil fear to tread , announce that she would 
 play . " I shall miss every ball anyway , so what do it matter ? " but 
 Sunday intervene and stamp heavily upon the kindly suggestion . 

 " then it will have to be Lucy , " say Mrs. Honeychurch ; " you must fall 
 back on Lucy . there be no other way out of it . Lucy , go and change your 
 frock . " 

 Lucy 's Sabbath be generally of this amphibious nature . she keep it 
 without hypocrisy in the morning , and break it without reluctance in 
 the afternoon . as she change her frock , she wonder whether Cecil be 
 sneer at she ; really she must overhaul herself and settle everything 
 up before she marry he . 

 Mr. Floyd be her partner . she like music , but how much well tennis 
 seem . how much well to run about in comfortable clothe than to sit 
 at the piano and feel girt under the arm . once more music appear to 
 she the employment of a child . George serve , and surprise she by his 
 anxiety to win . she remember how he have sigh among the tomb at 
 Santa Croce because thing would not   fit ; how after the death of that 
 obscure italian he have leant over the parapet by the Arno and say to 
 she : " I shall want to live , I tell you , " he want to live now , to win 
 at tennis , to stand for all he be worth in the sun - the sun which have 
 begin to decline and be shin in her eye ; and he do win . 

 ah , how beautiful the Weald look ! the hill stand out above its 
 radiance , as Fiesole stand above the Tuscan Plain , and the South Downs , 
 if one choose , be the mountain of Carrara . she might be forget she 
 Italy , but she be notice more thing in her England . one could play 
 a new game with the view , and try to find in its innumerable fold some 
 town or village that would do for Florence . ah , how beautiful the Weald 
 look ! 

 but now Cecil claim she . he chance to be in a lucid critical mood , 
 and would not sympathize with exaltation . he have be rather a nuisance 
 all through the tennis , for the novel that he be read be so bad 
 that he be oblige to read it aloud to other . he would stroll round 
 the precinct of the court and call out : " I say , listen to this , Lucy . 
 three split infinitive . " 

 " dreadful ! " say Lucy , and miss her stroke . when they have finish 
 their set , he still go on reading ; there be some murder scene , and 
 really every one must listen to it . Freddy and Mr. Floyd be oblige to 
 hunt for a lost ball in the laurel , but the other two acquiesce . 

 " the scene be lay in Florence . " 

 " what fun , Cecil ! read away . come , Mr. Emerson , sit down after all your 
 energy . " she have " forgive " George , as she put it , and she make a point 
 of be pleasant to he . 

 he jump over the net and sit down at her foot ask : " you - and be 
 you tired ? " 

 " of course I be not ! " 

 " do you mind be beat ? " 

 she be go to answer , " no , " when it strike she that she do mind , 
 so she answer , " yes . " she add merrily , " I do not   see you be such 
 a splendid player , though . the light be behind you , and it be in my 
 eye . " 

 " I never say I be . " 

 " why , you do ! " 

 " you do not   attend . " 

 " you say - oh , do not   go in for accuracy at this house . we all 
 exaggerate , and we get very angry with people who do not . " 

 " ' the scene be lay in Florence , ' " repeat Cecil , with an upward note . 

 Lucy recollect herself . 

 " ' Sunset . Leonora be speed - ' " 

 Lucy interrupt . " Leonora ? be Leonora the heroine ? who be the book by ? " 

 " Joseph Emery Prank . ' Sunset . Leonora speed across the square . pray 
 the saint she might not arrive too late . Sunset - the sunset of Italy . 
 under Orcagna 's Loggia - the Loggia de ' Lanzi , as we sometimes call it 
 now - ' " 

 Lucy burst into laughter . " ' Joseph Emery Prank ' indeed ! why it be Miss 
 Lavish ! it be Miss Lavish 's novel , and she be publish it under somebody 
 else 's name . " 

 " who may Miss Lavish be ? " 

 " oh , a dreadful person - Mr. Emerson , you remember Miss Lavish ? " 

 excite by her pleasant afternoon , she clap her hand . 

 George look up . " of course I do . I see she the day I arrive at Summer 
 Street . it be she who tell I that you live here . " 

 " be not   you please ? " she mean " to see Miss Lavish , " but when he bend 
 down to the grass without reply , it strike she that she could mean 
 something else . she watch his head , which be almost rest against 
 her knee , and she think that the ear be redden . " no wonder the 
 novel 's bad , " she add . " I never like Miss Lavish . but I suppose one 
 ought to read it as one 's meet she . " 

 " all modern book be bad , " say Cecil , who be annoy at her 
 inattention , and vent his annoyance on literature . " every one write 
 for money in these day . " 

 " oh , Cecil - ! " 

 " it be so . I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no long . " 

 Cecil , this afternoon seem such a twittering sparrow . the up and 
 down in his voice be noticeable , but they do not affect she . she have 
 dwelt amongst melody and movement , and her nerve refuse to answer to 
 the clang of his . leave he to be annoy , she gaze at the black head 
 again . she do not want to stroke it , but she see herself want to 
 stroke it ; the sensation be curious . 

 " how do you like this view of ours , Mr. Emerson ? " 

 " I never notice much difference in view . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " because they be all alike . because all that matter in they be distance 
 and air . " 

 " H'm ! " say Cecil , uncertain whether the remark be strike or not . 

 " my father " - he look up at she   and he be a little flushed   - ' say 
 that there be only one perfect view - the view of the sky straight over 
 our head , and that all these view on earth be but bungle copy of 
 it . " 

 " I expect your father have be read Dante , " say Cecil , finger the 
 novel , which alone permit he to lead the conversation . 

 " he tell we another day that view be really crowd - crowd of tree 
 and house and hill - and be bind to resemble each other , like human 
 crowd - and that the power they have over we be sometimes supernatural , 
 for the same reason . " 

 Lucy 's lip part . 

 " for a crowd be more than the people who make it up . something get 
 add to it - no one know how - just as something have get add to those 
 hill . " 

 he point with his racquet to the South Downs . 

 " what a splendid idea ! " she murmur . " I shall enjoy hear your father 
 talk again . I be so sorry he be not so well . " 

 " no , he be not   well . " 

 " there be an absurd account of a view in this book , " say Cecil . " also 
 that man fall into two class - those who forget view and those who 
 remember they , even in small room . " 

 " Mr. Emerson , have you any brother or sister ? " 

 " none . why ? " 

 " you speak of ' we . ' " 

 " my mother , I be mean . " 

 Cecil close the novel with a bang . 

 " oh , cecil - how you make I jump ! " 

 " I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no long . " 

 " I can just remember we all three go into the country for the day and 
 see as far as Hindhead . it be the first thing that I remember . " 

 Cecil get up ; the man be ill - breed - he have not   put on his coat after 
 tennis - he do not   do . he would have stroll away if Lucy have not 
 stop he . 

 " Cecil , do read the thing about the view . " 

 " not while Mr. Emerson be here to entertain we . " 

 " no - read away . I think nothing be funny than to hear silly thing read 
 out loud . if Mr. Emerson think we frivolous , he can go . " 

 this strike Cecil as subtle , and please he . it put their visitor in 
 the position of a prig . somewhat mollify , he sit down again . 

 " Mr. Emerson , go and find tennis ball . " she open the book . cecil 
 must have his reading and anything else that he like . but her attention 
 wander to George 's mother , who - accord to Mr. Eager - have be 
 murder in the sight of God accord to her son - have see as far as 
 Hindhead . 

 " be I really to go ? " ask George . 

 " no , of course not really , " she answer . 

 " chapter two , " say Cecil , yawn . " find I chapter two , if it be not 
 bother you . " 

 chapter two be find , and she glance at its opening sentence . 

 she think she have go mad . 

 " here - hand I the book . " 

 she hear her voice say : " it be not   worth read - it be too silly 
 to read - I never see such rubbish - it ought not   to be allow to be 
 print . " 

 he take the book from she . 

 " ' Leonora , ' " he read , " ' sit pensive and alone . before she lie the rich 
 champaign of Tuscany , dot over with many a smile village . the 
 season be spring . ' " 

 Miss Lavish know , somehow , and have print the past in draggle prose , 
 for Cecil to read and for George to hear . 

 " ' a golden haze , ' " he read . he read : " ' afar off the tower of Florence , 
 while the bank on which she sit be carpet with violet . all 
 unobserve Antonio steal up behind she - ' " 

 Lest Cecil should see her face she turn to George and see his face . 

 he read : " ' there come from his lip no wordy protestation such as formal 
 lover use . no eloquence be his , nor do he suffer from the lack of it . 
 he simply enfold she in his manly arm . ' " 

 " this be not   the passage I want , " he inform they , " there be another 
 much funny , far on . " he turn over the leaf . 

 " should we go in to tea ? " say Lucy , whose voice remain steady . 

 she lead the way up the garden , Cecil follow she , George last . she 
 think a disaster be avert . but when they enter the shrubbery 
 it come . the book , as if it have not work mischief enough , have 
 be forget , and Cecil must go back for it ; and George , who love 
 passionately , must blunder against she in the narrow path . 

 " no - " she gasp , and , for the second time , be kiss by he . 

 as if no more be possible , he slip back ; Cecil rejoin she ; they 
 reach the upper lawn alone . 



 Chapter XVI : lie to George 

 but Lucy have develop since the spring . that be to say , she be now 
 well able to stifle the emotion of which the convention and the 
 world disapprove . though the danger be great , she be not shake by 
 deep sob . she say to Cecil , " I be not come in to tea - tell mother - I 
 must write some letter , " and go up to her room . then she prepare 
 for action . Love feel and return , love which our body exact and 
 our heart have transfigure , love which be the most real thing that 
 we shall ever meet , reappear now as the world 's enemy , and she must 
 stifle it . 

 she send for Miss Bartlett . 

 the contest lie not between love and duty . perhaps there never be such a 
 contest . it lie between the real and the pretended , and Lucy 's first aim 
 be to defeat herself . as her brain cloud over , as the memory of the 
 view grow dim and the word of the book die away , she return to her 
 old shibboleth of nerve . she " conquer her breakdown . " tamper with 
 the truth , she forget that the truth have ever be . remember that she 
 be engage to Cecil , she compel herself to confused remembrance 
 of George ; he be nothing to she ; he never have be anything ; he 
 have behave abominably ; she have never encourage he . the armour of 
 falsehood be subtly work out of darkness , and hide a man not only 
 from other , but from his own soul . in a few moment Lucy be equip 
 for battle . 

 " something too awful have happen , " she begin , as soon as her cousin 
 arrive . " do you know anything about Miss Lavish 's novel ? " 

 Miss Bartlett look surprised , and say that she have not read the book , 
 nor know that it be publish ; Eleanor be a reticent woman at heart . 

 " there be a scene in it . the hero and heroine make love . do you know 
 about that ? " 

 " Dear - ? " 

 " do you know about it , please ? " she repeat . " they be on a hillside , 
 and Florence be in the distance . " 

 " my good Lucia , I be all at sea . I know nothing about it whatever . " 

 " there be violet . I can not believe it be a coincidence . Charlotte , 
 Charlotte , how could you have tell she ? I have think before speak ; 
 it must be you . " 

 " tell she what ? " she ask , with grow agitation . 

 " about that dreadful afternoon in February . " 

 Miss Bartlett be genuinely move . " oh , Lucy , dearest girl - she have not 
 put that in her book ? " 

 Lucy nod . 

 " not so that one could recognize it . yes . " 

 " then never - never - never more shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of 
 mine . " 

 " so you do tell ? " 

 " I do just happen - when I have tea with she at Rome - in the course of 
 conversation - " 

 " but Charlotte - what about the promise you give I when we be pack ? 
 why do you tell Miss Lavish , when you would not   even let I tell 
 mother ? " 

 " I will never forgive Eleanor . she have betray my confidence . " 

 " why do you tell she , though ? this be a most serious thing . " 

 why do any one tell anything ? the question be eternal , and it be not 
 surprising that Miss Bartlett should only sigh faintly in response . she 
 have do wrong - she admit it , she only hop that she have not do 
 harm ; she have tell Eleanor in the strict confidence . 

 Lucy stamp with irritation . 

 " Cecil happen to read out the passage aloud to I and to Mr. Emerson ; 
 it upset Mr. Emerson and he insult I again . behind Cecil 's back . ugh ! 
 be it possible that man be such brute ? behind Cecil 's back as we be 
 walk up the garden . " 

 Miss Bartlett burst into self - accusation and regret . 

 " what be to be do now ? can you tell I ? " 

 " oh , Lucy - I shall never forgive myself , never to my die day . Fancy if 
 your prospect - " 

 " I know , " say Lucy , wince at the word . " I see now why you want I 
 to tell Cecil , and what you mean by ' some other source . ' you know that 
 you have tell Miss Lavish , and that she be not reliable . " 

 it be Miss Bartlett 's turn to wince . " however , " say the girl , 
 despise her cousin 's shiftiness , " what be do 's do . you have put I 
 in a most awkward position . how be I to get out of it ? " 

 Miss Bartlett could not think . the day of her energy be over . she be 
 a visitor , not a chaperon , and a discredit visitor at that . she stand 
 with clasped hand while the girl work herself into the necessary 
 rage . 

 " he must - that man must have such a setting down that he will not   forget . 
 and who be to give it he ? I can not   tell mother now - owe to you . nor 
 Cecil , Charlotte , owe to you . I be catch up every way . I think I 
 shall go mad . I have no one to help I . that be why I have   send for you . 
 what be want be a man with a whip . " 

 Miss Bartlett agree : one want a man with a whip . 

 " yes - but it be no good agreeing . what be to be do . we woman go 
 maunder on . what do a girl do when she come across a cad ? " 

 " I always say he be a cad , dear . give I credit for that , at all 
 event . from the very first moment - when he say his father be have a 
 bath . " 

 " oh , bother the credit and who be be right or wrong ! we have   both make a 
 muddle of it . George Emerson be still down the garden there , and be he 
 to be leave unpunished , or be not   he ? I want to know . " 

 Miss Bartlett be absolutely helpless . her own exposure have unnerve 
 she , and thought be collide painfully in her brain . she move 
 feebly to the window , and try to detect the cad 's white flannel among 
 the laurel . 

 " you be ready enough at the Bertolini when you rush I off to Rome . 
 can not   you speak again to he now ? " 

 " Willingly would I move heaven and earth - " 

 " I want something more definite , " say Lucy contemptuously . " will you 
 speak to he ? it be the least you can do , surely , consider it all 
 happen because you break your word . " 

 " never again shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of mine . " 

 really , Charlotte be outdo herself . 

 " yes or no , please ; yes or no . " 

 " it be the kind of thing that only a gentleman can settle . " George 
 Emerson be come up the garden with a tennis ball in his hand . 

 " very well , " say Lucy , with an angry gesture . " no one will help I . I 
 will speak to he myself . " and immediately she realize that this be 
 what her cousin have intend all along . 

 " Hullo , Emerson ! " call Freddy from below . " find the lost ball ? good 
 man ! want any tea ? " and there be an irruption from the house on to the 
 terrace . 

 " oh , Lucy , but that be brave of you ! I admire you - " 

 they have gather round George , who beckon , she feel , over the 
 rubbish , the sloppy thought , the furtive yearning that be begin 
 to cumber her soul . her anger fade at the sight of he . ah ! the 
 Emersons be fine people in their way . she have to subdue a rush in her 
 blood before say : 

 " Freddy have take he into the dining - room . the other be go down 
 the garden . come . let we get this over quickly . come . I want you in the 
 room , of course . " 

 " Lucy , do you mind do it ? " 

 " how can you ask such a ridiculous question ? " 

 " Poor Lucy - " she stretch out her hand . " I seem to bring nothing 
 but misfortune wherever I go . " Lucy nod . she remember their 
 last evening at Florence - the packing , the candle , the shadow of Miss 
 Bartlett 's toque on the door . she be not to be trap by pathos a 
 second time . elude her cousin 's caress , she lead the way downstairs . 

 " try the jam , " Freddy be say . " the jam 's jolly good . " 

 George , look big and dishevel , be pace up and down the 
 dining - room . as she enter he stop , and say : 

 " no - nothing to eat . " 

 " you go down to the other , " say Lucy ; " Charlotte and I will give Mr. 
 Emerson all he want . where 's mother ? " 

 " she be start on her Sunday writing . she be in the drawing - room . " 

 " that be all right . you go away . " 

 he go off singing . 

 Lucy sit down at the table . Miss Bartlett , who be thoroughly 
 frightened , take up a book and pretend to read . 

 she would not be draw into an elaborate speech . she just say : " I can not 
 have it , Mr. Emerson . I can not even talk to you . go out of this house , 
 and never come into it again as long as I live here - " flush as she 
 speak and point to the door . " I hate a row . go please . " 

 " what - " 

 " no discussion . " 

 " but I can not   - " 

 she shake her head . " go , please . I do not want to call in Mr. Vyse . " 

 " you do not   mean , " he say , absolutely ignore Miss Bartlett - " you do not 
 mean that you be go to marry that man ? " 

 the line be unexpected . 

 she shrug her shoulder , as if his vulgarity weary she . " you be 
 merely ridiculous , " she say quietly . 

 then his word rise gravely over her : " you can not live with Vyse . he be 
 only for an acquaintance . he be for society and cultivate talk . he 
 should know no one intimately , least of all a woman . " 

 it be a new light on Cecil 's character . 

 " have you ever talk to Vyse without feel tired ? " 

 " I can scarcely discuss - " 

 " no , but have you ever ? he be the sort who be all right so long as 
 they keep to thing - book , picture - but kill when they come to 
 people . that be why I will speak out through all this muddle even now . it be 
 shocking enough to lose you in any case , but generally a man must 
 deny himself joy , and I would have hold back if your Cecil have be a 
 different person . I would never have let myself go . but I see he first 
 in the National Gallery , when he wince because my father mispronounce 
 the name of great painter . then he bring we here , and we find it 
 be to play some silly trick on a kind neighbour . that be the man all 
 over - play trick on people , on the most sacred form of life that 
 he can find . next , I meet you together , and find he protect and 
 teach you and your mother to be shock , when it be for you to 
 settle whether you be shocked or no . cecil all over again . he dare not 
 let a woman decide . he be the type who be keep Europe back for a thousand 
 year . every moment of his life he be form you , tell you what be 
 charming or amusing or ladylike , tell you what a man think womanly ; 
 and you , you of all woman , listen to his voice instead of to your own . 
 so it be at the Rectory , when I meet you both again ; so it have be 
 the whole of this afternoon . therefore - not ' therefore I kiss you , ' 
 because the book make I do that , and I wish to goodness I have more 
 self - control . I be not ashamed . I do not   apologize . but it have frighten 
 you , and you may not have notice that I love you . or would you have 
 tell I to go , and deal with a tremendous thing so lightly ? but 
 therefore - therefore I settle to fight he . " 

 Lucy think of a very good remark . 

 " you say Mr. Vyse want I to listen to he , Mr. Emerson . pardon I for 
 suggest that you have catch the habit . " 

 and he take the shoddy reproof and touch it into immortality . he say : 

 " yes , I have , " and sink down as if suddenly weary . " I be the same kind of 
 brute at bottom . this desire to govern a woman - it lie very deep , and 
 man and woman must fight it together before they shall enter the garden . 
 but I do love you surely in a well way than he do . " he think . 
 " yes - really in a well way . I want you to have your own thought even 
 when I hold you in my arm , " he stretch they towards she . " Lucy , be 
 quick - there be no time for we to talk now - come to I as you come in the 
 spring , and afterwards I will be gentle and explain . I have care 
 for you since that man die . I can not live without you , ' no good , ' I 
 think ; ' she be marry some one else ' ; but I meet you again when all 
 the world be glorious water and sun . as you come through the wood I 
 see that nothing else matter . I call . I want to live and have my 
 chance of joy . " 

 " and Mr. Vyse ? " say Lucy , who keep commendably calm . " do he not 
 matter ? that I love Cecil and shall be his wife shortly ? a detail of no 
 importance , I suppose ? " 

 but he stretch his arm over the table towards she . 

 " may I ask what you intend to gain by this exhibition ? " 

 he say : " it be our last chance . I shall do all that I can . " and as 
 if he have do all else , he turn to Miss Bartlett , who sit like some 
 portent against the sky of the evening . " you would not   stop we this 
 second time if you understand , " he say . " I have be into the dark , and 
 I be go back into it , unless you will try to understand . " 

 her long , narrow head drive backwards and forwards , as though 
 demolish some invisible obstacle . she do not answer . 

 " it be be young , " he say quietly , pick up his racquet from the 
 floor and prepare to go . " it be be certain that Lucy care for I 
 really . it be that love and youth matter intellectually . " 

 in silence the two woman watch he . his last remark , they know , be 
 nonsense , but be he go after it or not ? would not he , the cad , 
 the charlatan , attempt a more dramatic finish ? no . he be apparently 
 content . he leave they , carefully close the front door ; and when they 
 look through the hall window , they see he go up the drive and begin 
 to climb the slope of wither fern behind the house . their tongue 
 be loose , and they burst into stealthy rejoicing . 

 " oh , Lucia - come back here - oh , what an awful man ! " 

 Lucy have no reaction - at least , not yet . " well , he amuse I , " she 
 say . " either I be mad , or else he be , and I be inclined to think it be the 
 latter . one more fuss through with you , Charlotte . many thank . I think , 
 though , that this be the last . my admirer will hardly trouble I again . " 

 and Miss Bartlett , too , essay the roguish : 

 " well , it be not   every one who could boast such a conquest , dearest , be 
 it ? oh , one ought not   to laugh , really . it might have be very serious . 
 but you be so sensible and brave - so unlike the girl of my day . " 

 " let us go down to they . " 

 but , once in the open air , she pause . some emotion - pity , terror , love , 
 but the emotion be strong - seize she , and she be aware of autumn . 
 Summer be end , and the evening bring her odour of decay , the 
 more pathetic because they be reminiscent of spring . that something or 
 other matter intellectually ? a leaf , violently agitated , dance past 
 she , while other leaf lie motionless . that the earth be hasten to 
 re - enter darkness , and the shadow of those tree over Windy Corner ? 

 " Hullo , Lucy ! there be still light enough for another set , if you two'll 
 hurry . " 

 " Mr. Emerson have have to go . " 

 " what a nuisance ! that spoil the four . I say , Cecil , do play , do , 
 there be a good chap . it be Floyd 's last day . do play tennis with we , just 
 this once . " 

 Cecil 's voice come : " my dear Freddy , I be no athlete . as you well 
 remark this very morning , ' there be some chap who be no good for 
 anything but book ' ; I plead guilty to be such a chap , and will not 
 inflict myself on you . " 

 the scale fall from Lucy 's eye . how have she stand Cecil for a moment ? 
 he be absolutely intolerable , and the same evening she break off her 
 engagement . 



 chapter XVII : lie to Cecil 

 he be bewilder . he have nothing to say . he be not even angry , but 
 stand , with a glass of whiskey between his hand , try to think what 
 have lead she to such a conclusion . 

 she have choose the moment before bed , when , in accordance with their 
 bourgeois habit , she always dispense drink to the man . Freddy and Mr. 
 Floyd be sure to retire with their glass , while Cecil invariably 
 linger , sip at his while she lock up the sideboard . 

 " I be very sorry about it , " she say ; " I have carefully think thing 
 over . we be too different . I must ask you to release I , and try to 
 forget that there ever be such a foolish girl . " 

 it be a suitable speech , but she be more angry than sorry , and her 
 voice show it . 

 " different - how - how - " 

 " I have not   have a really good education , for one thing , " she continue , 
 still on her knee by the sideboard . " my italian trip come too late , and 
 I be forget all that I learn there . I shall never be able to talk 
 to your friend , or behave as a wife of yours should . " 

 " I do not   understand you . you be not   like yourself . you be tired , Lucy . " 

 " tired ! " she retort , kindling at once . " that be exactly like you . you 
 always think woman do not   mean what they say . " 

 " well , you sound tired , as if something have worry you . " 

 " what if I do ? it do not   prevent I from realize the truth . I can not 
 marry you , and you will thank I for say so some day . " 

 " you have that bad headache yesterday - all right " - for she have exclaim 
 indignantly : " I see it be much more than headache . but give I a 
 moment 's time . " he close his eye . " you must excuse I if I say stupid 
 thing , but my brain have go to piece . part of it live three minute 
 back , when I be sure that you love I , and the other part - I find it 
 difficult - I be likely to say the wrong thing . " 

 it strike she that he be not behave so badly , and her irritation 
 increase . she again desire a struggle , not a discussion . to bring on 
 the crisis , she say : 

 " there be day when one see clearly , and this be one of they . thing 
 must come to a breaking - point some time , and it happen to be to - day . if 
 you want to know , quite a little thing decide I to speak to you - when 
 you would not   play tennis with Freddy . " 

 " I never do play tennis , " say Cecil , painfully bewilder ; " I never 
 could play . I do not   understand a word you say . " 

 " you can play well enough to make up a four . I think it abominably 
 selfish of you . " 

 " no , I can not   - well , never mind the tennis . why could not   you - could not 
 you have warn I if you feel anything wrong ? you talk of our wedding 
 at lunch - at least , you let I talk . " 

 " I know you would not   understand , " say Lucy quite crossly . " I might have 
 know there would have be these dreadful explanation . of course , 
 it be not   the tennis - that be only the last straw to all I have be 
 feel for week . surely it be well not to speak until I feel 
 certain . " she develop this position . " often before I have wonder if 
 I be fit for your wife - for instance , in London ; and be you fit 
 to be my husband ? I do not   think so . you do not   like Freddy , nor my 
 mother . there be always a lot against our engagement , Cecil , but all 
 our relation seem pleased , and we meet so often , and it be no good 
 mention it until - well , until all thing come to a point . they have 
 to - day . I see clearly . I must speak . that be all . " 

 " I can not think you be right , " say Cecil gently . " I can not tell 
 why , but though all that you say sound true , I feel that you be not 
 treat I fairly . it be all too horrible . " 

 " what be the good of a scene ? " 

 " no good . but surely I have a right to hear a little more . " 

 he put down his glass and open the window . from where she knelt , 
 jangle her key , she could see a slit of darkness , and , peer into 
 it , as if it would tell he that " little more , " his long , thoughtful 
 face . 

 " do not   open the window ; and you would well draw the curtain , too ; Freddy 
 or any one might be outside . " he obey . " I really think we have well 
 go to bed , if you do not   mind . I shall only say thing that will make I 
 unhappy afterwards . as you say it be all too horrible , and it be no good 
 talk . " 

 but to Cecil , now that he be about to lose she , she seem each moment 
 more desirable . he look at she , instead of through she , for the first 
 time since they be engage . from a Leonardo she have become a living 
 woman , with mystery and force of her own , with quality that even 
 eluded art . his brain recover from the shock , and , in a burst of 
 genuine devotion , he cry : " but I love you , and I do think you love 
 I ! " 

 " I do not , " she say . " I think I do at first . I be sorry , and ought 
 to have refuse you this last time , too . " 

 he begin to walk up and down the room , and she grow more and more vexed 
 at his dignified behaviour . she have count on his be petty . it would 
 have make thing easy for she . by a cruel irony she be draw out 
 all that be fine in his disposition . 

 " you do not   love I , evidently . I dare say you be right not to . but it 
 would hurt a little less if I know why . " 

 " because " - a phrase come to she , and she accept it - " you be the sort 
 who can not   know any one intimately . " 

 a horrified look come into his eye . 

 " I do not   mean exactly that . but you will question I , though I beg you 
 not to , and I must say something . it be that , more or less . when we 
 be only acquaintance , you let I be myself , but now you be always 
 protect I . " her voice swell . " I will not   be protect . I will choose 
 for myself what be ladylike and right . to shield I be an insult . can not 
 I be trust to face the truth but I must get it second - hand through 
 you ? a woman 's place ! you despise my mother - I know you do - because 
 she be conventional and bother over pudding ; but , oh goodness ! " - she 
 rise to her foot - " conventional , Cecil , you be that , for you may 
 understand beautiful thing , but you do not   know how to use they ; and you 
 wrap yourself up in art and book and music , and would try to wrap up 
 I . I will not   be stifle , not by the most glorious music , for people be 
 more glorious , and you hide they from I . that be why I break off my 
 engagement . you be all right as long as you keep to thing , but when 
 you come to people - " she stop . 

 there be a pause . then Cecil say with great emotion : 

 " it be true . " 

 " true on the whole , " she correct , full of some vague shame . 

 " true , every word . it be a revelation . it be - i. " 

 " anyhow , those be my reason for not be your wife . " 

 he repeat : " ' the sort that can know no one intimately . ' it be true . I 
 fall to piece the very first day we be engage . I behave like a cad 
 to Beebe and to your brother . you be even great than I think . " she 
 withdraw a step . " I be not go to worry you . you be far too good to 
 I . I shall never forget your insight ; and , dear , I only blame you for 
 this : you might have warn I in the early stage , before you feel 
 you would not   marry I , and so have give I a chance to improve . I have 
 never know you till this evening . I have just use you as a peg for 
 my silly notion of what a woman should be . but this evening you be a 
 different person : new thought - even a new voice - " 

 " what do you mean by a new voice ? " she ask , seize with incontrollable 
 anger . 

 " I mean that a new person seem speak through you , " say he . 

 then she lose her balance . she cry : " if you think I be in love with 
 some one else , you be very much mistaken . " 

 " of course I do not   think that . you be not that kind , Lucy . " 

 " oh , yes , you do think it . it be your old idea , the idea that have keep 
 Europe back - I mean the idea that woman be always think of man . if 
 a girl break off her engagement , every one say : ' oh , she have some 
 one else in her mind ; she hop to get some one else . ' it be disgusting , 
 brutal ! as if a girl can not   break it off for the sake of freedom . " 

 he answer reverently : " I may have say that in the past . I shall never 
 say it again . you have teach I well . " 

 she begin to redden , and pretend to examine the window again . " of 
 course , there be no question of ' some one else ' in this , no ' jilting ' or 
 any such nauseous stupidity . I beg your pardon most humbly if my word 
 suggest that there be . I only mean that there be a force in you 
 that I have not   know of up till now . " 

 " all right , Cecil , that will do . do not   apologize to I . it be my 
 mistake . " 

 " it be a question between ideal , your and mine - pure abstract ideal , 
 and yours be the nobler . I be bind up in the old vicious notion , 
 and all the time you be splendid and new . " his voice break . " I must 
 actually thank you for what you have do - for show I what I really 
 be . solemnly , I thank you for show I a true woman . will you shake 
 hand ? " 

 " of course I will , " say Lucy , twist up her other hand in the 
 curtain . " good - night , Cecil . good - bye . that be all right . I be sorry 
 about it . thank you very much for your gentleness . " 

 " let I light your candle , shall I ? " 

 they go into the hall . 

 " thank you . good - night again . God bless you , Lucy ! " 

 " good - bye , Cecil . " 

 she watch he steal up - stair , while the shadow from three banister 
 pass over her face like the beat of wing . on the landing he pause 
 strong in his renunciation , and give she a look of memorable beauty . for 
 all his culture , Cecil be an ascetic at heart , and nothing in his love 
 become he like the leaving of it . 

 she could never marry . in the tumult of her soul , that stand firm . cecil 
 believe in she ; she must some day believe in herself . she must be one 
 of the woman whom she have praise so eloquently , who care for liberty 
 and not for man ; she must forget that George love she , that George have 
 be think through she and gain she this honourable release , that 
 George have go away into - what be it ? - the darkness . 

 she put out the lamp . 

 it do not do to think , nor , for the matter of that to feel . she give up 
 try to understand herself , and the vast army of the benighted , who 
 follow neither the heart nor the brain , and march to their destiny by 
 catch - word . the army be full of pleasant and pious folk . but they 
 have yield to the only enemy that matter - the enemy within . they have 
 sin against passion and truth , and vain will be their strife after 
 virtue . as the year pass , they be censure . their pleasantry and 
 their piety show crack , their wit become cynicism , their unselfishness 
 hypocrisy ; they feel and produce discomfort wherever they go . they have 
 sin against Eros and against Pallas Athene , and not by any heavenly 
 intervention , but by the ordinary course of nature , those ally deity 
 will be avenge . 

 Lucy enter this army when she pretend to George that she do not 
 love he , and pretend to Cecil that she love no one . the night 
 receive she , as it have receive Miss Bartlett thirty year before . 



 Chapter xviii : lie to Mr. Beebe , Mrs. Honeychurch , Freddy , and the 
 Servants 

 Windy Corner lie , not on the summit of the ridge , but a few hundred foot 
 down the southern slope , at the springing of one of the great buttress 
 that support the hill . on either side of it be a shallow ravine , 
 fill with fern and pine - tree , and down the ravine on the left run 
 the highway into the Weald . 

 whenever Mr. Beebe cross the ridge and catch sight of these noble 
 disposition of the earth , and , poise in the middle of they , Windy 
 Corner , - he laugh . the situation be so glorious , the house so 
 commonplace , not to say impertinent . the late Mr. Honeychurch have 
 affect the cube , because it give he the most accommodation for his 
 money , and the only addition make by his widow have be a small turret , 
 shape like a rhinoceros ' horn , where she could sit in wet weather and 
 watch the cart go up and down the road . so impertinent - and yet the 
 house " do , " for it be the home of people who love their surrounding 
 honestly . other house in the neighborhood have be build by expensive 
 architect , over other their inmate have fidget sedulously , yet all 
 these suggest the accidental , the temporary ; while Windy Corner seem 
 as inevitable as an ugliness of Nature 's own creation . one might laugh 
 at the house , but one never shudder . Mr. Beebe be bicycle over 
 this Monday afternoon with a piece of gossip . he have hear from the Miss 
 Alans . these admirable lady , since they could not go to Cissie Villa , 
 have change their plan . they be go to Greece instead . 

 " since Florence do my poor sister so much good , " write Miss Catharine , 
 " we do not see why we should not try Athens this winter . of course , 
 Athens be a plunge , and the doctor have order her special digestive 
 bread ; but , after all , we can take that with we , and it be only get 
 first into a steamer and then into a train . but be there an English 
 Church ? " and the letter go on to say : " I do not expect we shall go any 
 far than Athens , but if you know of a really comfortable pension at 
 Constantinople , we should be so grateful . " 

 Lucy would enjoy this letter , and the smile with which Mr. Beebe greet 
 Windy Corner be partly for she . she would see the fun of it , and some 
 of its beauty , for she must see some beauty . though she be hopeless 
 about picture , and though she dress so unevenly - oh , that cerise 
 frock yesterday at church ! - she must see some beauty in life , or she 
 could not play the piano as she do . he have a theory that musician be 
 incredibly complex , and know far less than other artist what they want 
 and what they be ; that they puzzle themselves as well as their friend ; 
 that their psychology be a modern development , and have not yet be 
 understand . this theory , have he know it , have possibly just be 
 illustrate by fact . ignorant of the event of yesterday he be only 
 rid over to get some tea , to see his niece , and to observe whether 
 Miss Honeychurch see anything beautiful in the desire of two old lady 
 to visit Athens . 

 a carriage be draw up outside Windy Corner , and just as he catch 
 sight of the house it start , bowl up the drive , and stop abruptly 
 when it reach the main road . therefore it must be the horse , who 
 always expect people to walk up the hill in case they tire he . the 
 door open obediently , and two man emerge , whom Mr. Beebe recognize 
 as Cecil and Freddy . they be an odd couple to go drive ; but he see 
 a trunk beside the coachman 's leg . Cecil , who wear a bowler , must be 
 go away , while Freddy   a cap   - be see he to the station . they 
 walk rapidly , take the short cut , and reach the summit while the 
 carriage be still pursue the winding of the road . 

 they shake hand with the clergyman , but do not speak . 

 " so you be off for a minute , Mr. Vyse ? " he ask . 

 Cecil say , " yes , " while Freddy edge away . 

 " I be come to show you this delightful letter from those friend 
 of Miss Honeychurch . " he quote from it . " be not   it wonderful ? be not   it 
 romance ? most certainly they will go to Constantinople . they be take 
 in a snare that can not fail . they will end by go round the world . " 

 Cecil listen civilly , and say he be sure that Lucy would be amuse 
 and interested . 

 " be not   romance capricious ! I never notice it in you young people ; you 
 do nothing but play lawn tennis , and say that romance be dead , while the 
 Miss Alans be struggle with all the weapon of propriety against the 
 terrible thing . ' a really comfortable pension at Constantinople ! ' so 
 they call it out of decency , but in their heart they want a pension 
 with magic window opening on the foam of perilous sea in fairyland 
 forlorn ! no ordinary view will content the Miss Alans . they want the 
 Pension Keats . " 

 " I be awfully sorry to interrupt , Mr. Beebe , " say Freddy , " but have you 
 any match ? " 

 " I have , " say Cecil , and it do not escape Mr. Beebe 's notice that he 
 speak to the boy more kindly . 

 " you have never meet these Miss Alans , have you , Mr. Vyse ? " 

 " never . " 

 " then you do not   see the wonder of this greek visit . I have not   be 
 to Greece myself , and do not   mean to go , and I can not   imagine any of my 
 friend go . it be altogether too big for our little lot . do not   you 
 think so ? Italy be just about as much as we can manage . Italy be heroic , 
 but Greece be godlike or devilish - I be not sure which , and in either 
 case absolutely out of our suburban focus . all right , Freddy - I be 
 not be clever , upon my word I be not - I take the idea from another 
 fellow ; and give I those match when you have   do with they . " he light a 
 cigarette , and go on talk to the two young man . " I be say , if 
 our poor little Cockney life must have a background , let it be italian . 
 big enough in all conscience . the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel for 
 I . there the contrast be just as much as I can realize . but not the 
 Parthenon , not the frieze of Phidias at any price ; and here come the 
 victoria . " 

 " you be quite right , " say Cecil . " Greece be not for our little lot " ; 
 and he get in . Freddy follow , nod to the clergyman , whom he 
 trust not to be pull one 's leg , really . and before they have go a 
 dozen yard he jump out , and come run back for Vyse 's match - box , 
 which have not be return . as he take it , he say : " I be so glad you 
 only talk about book . Cecil 's hard hit . Lucy will not   marry he . if 
 you would go on about she , as you do about they , he might have break 
 down . " 

 " but when - " 

 " late last night . I must go . " 

 " perhaps they will not   want I down there . " 

 " no - go on . good - bye . " 

 " thank goodness ! " exclaim Mr. Beebe to himself , and strike the saddle 
 of his bicycle approvingly , " it be the one foolish thing she ever 
 do . oh , what a glorious riddance ! " and , after a little thought , he 
 negotiate the slope into Windy Corner , light of heart . the house be 
 again as it ought to be - cut off forever from Cecil 's pretentious world . 

 he would find Miss Minnie down in the garden . 

 in the drawing - room Lucy be tinkle at a Mozart Sonata . he hesitate a 
 moment , but go down the garden as request . there he find a mournful 
 company . it be a bluster day , and the wind have take and break the 
 dahlia . Mrs. Honeychurch , who look cross , be tie they up , 
 while Miss Bartlett , unsuitably dress , impede she with offer of 
 assistance . at a little distance stand Minnie and the " garden - child , " a 
 minute importation , each hold either end of a long piece of bass . 

 " oh , how do you do , Mr. Beebe ? gracious what a mess everything be ! look 
 at my scarlet pompon , and the wind blow your skirt about , and the 
 ground so hard that not a prop will stick in , and then the carriage 
 have to go out , when I have count on have Powell , who - give every 
 one their due - do tie up dahlia properly . " 

 evidently Mrs. Honeychurch be shatter . 

 " how do you do ? " say Miss Bartlett , with a meaning glance , as though 
 convey that more than dahlia have be break off by the autumn 
 gale . 

 " here , Lennie , the bass , " cry Mrs. Honeychurch . the garden - child , who 
 do not know what bass be , stand rooted to the path with horror . Minnie 
 slip to her uncle and whisper that every one be very disagreeable 
 to - day , and that it be not her fault if dahlia - string would tear 
 longway instead of across . 

 " come for a walk with I , " he tell she . " you have worry they as much 
 as they can stand . Mrs. Honeychurch , I only call in aimlessly . I shall 
 take she up to tea at the Beehive Tavern , if I may . " 

 " oh , must you ? yes do . - not the scissor , thank you , Charlotte , when 
 both my hand be full already - I be perfectly certain that the orange 
 cactus will go before I can get to it . " 

 Mr. Beebe , who be an adept at relieve situation , invite Miss 
 Bartlett to accompany they to this mild festivity . 

 " yes , Charlotte , I do not   want you - do go ; there be nothing to stop about 
 for , either in the house or out of it . " 

 Miss Bartlett say that her duty lie in the dahlia bed , but when she have 
 exasperate every one , except Minnie , by a refusal , she turn round and 
 exasperate Minnie by an acceptance . as they walk up the garden , the 
 orange cactus fall , and Mr. Beebe 's last vision be of the garden - child 
 clasp it like a lover , his dark head bury in a wealth of blossom . 

 " it be terrible , this havoc among the flower , " he remark . 

 " it be always terrible when the promise of month be destroy in a 
 moment , " enunciate Miss Bartlett . 

 " perhaps we ought to send Miss Honeychurch down to her mother . or will 
 she come with we ? " 

 " I think we have well leave Lucy to herself , and to her own pursuit . " 

 " they be angry with Miss Honeychurch because she be late for 
 breakfast , " whisper Minnie , " and Floyd have go , and Mr. Vyse have 
 go , and Freddy will not   play with I . in fact , Uncle Arthur , the house be 
 not AT all what it be yesterday . " 

 " do not   be a prig , " say her Uncle Arthur . " go and put on your boot . " 

 he step into the drawing - room , where Lucy be still attentively 
 pursue the Sonatas of Mozart . she stop when he enter . 

 " how do you do ? Miss Bartlett and Minnie be come with I to tea at 
 the Beehive . would you come too ? " 

 " I do not   think I will , thank you . " 

 " no , I do not   suppose you would care to much . " 

 Lucy turn to the piano and strike a few chord . 

 " how delicate those Sonatas be ! " say Mr. Beebe , though at the bottom 
 of his heart , he think they silly little thing . 

 Lucy pass into Schumann . 

 " Miss Honeychurch ! " 

 " yes . " 

 " I meet they on the hill . your brother tell I . " 

 " oh he do ? " she sound annoyed . Mr. Beebe feel hurt , for he have 
 think that she would like he to be tell . 

 " I need not   say that it will go no far . " 

 " Mother , Charlotte , Cecil , Freddy , you , " say Lucy , play a note for 
 each person who know , and then play a sixth note . 

 " if you will let I say so , I be very glad , and I be certain that you have 
 do the right thing . " 

 " so I hop other people would think , but they do not   seem to . " 

 " I could see that Miss Bartlett think it unwise . " 

 " so do mother . mother mind dreadfully . " 

 " I be very sorry for that , " say Mr. Beebe with feeling . 

 Mrs. Honeychurch , who hat all change , do mind , but not nearly as 
 much as her daughter pretend , and only for the minute . it be really 
 a ruse of Lucy 's to justify her despondency - a ruse of which she be not 
 herself conscious , for she be march in the army of darkness . 

 " and Freddy mind . " 

 " still , Freddy never hit it off with Vyse much , do he ? I gather that 
 he dislike the engagement , and feel it might separate he from you . " 

 " boy be so odd . " 

 Minnie could be hear argue with Miss Bartlett through the floor . tea 
 at the Beehive apparently involve a complete change of apparel . Mr. 
 Beebe see that Lucy - very properly - do not wish to discuss her action , 
 so after a sincere expression of sympathy , he say , " I have have an 
 absurd letter from Miss Alan . that be really what bring I over . I 
 think it might amuse you all . " 

 " how delightful ! " say Lucy , in a dull voice . 

 for the sake of something to do , he begin to read she the letter . after 
 a few word her eye grow alert , and soon she interrupt he with 
 " go abroad ? when do they start ? " 

 " next week , I gather . " 

 " do Freddy say whether he be drive straight back ? " 

 " no , he do not . " 

 " because I do hope he will not   go gossip . " 

 so she do want to talk about her broken engagement . always complaisant , 
 he put the letter away . but she , at once exclaim in a high voice , " oh , 
 do tell I more about the Miss Alans ! how perfectly splendid of they to 
 go abroad ! " 

 " I want they to start from Venice , and go in a cargo steamer down the 
 illyrian coast ! " 

 she laugh heartily . " oh , delightful ! I wish they would take I . " 

 " Has Italy fill you with the fever of travel ? perhaps George Emerson 
 be right . he say that ' Italy be only an euphuism for Fate . ' " 

 " oh , not Italy , but Constantinople . I have always long to go to 
 Constantinople . Constantinople be practically asia , be not   it ? " 

 Mr. Beebe remind she that Constantinople be still unlikely , and that 
 the Miss Alans only aim at Athens , " with Delphi , perhaps , if the road 
 be safe . " but this make no difference to her enthusiasm . she have always 
 long to go to Greece even more , it seem . he see , to his surprise , 
 that she be apparently serious . 

 " I do not   realize that you and the Miss Alans be still such friend , 
 after Cissie Villa . " 

 " oh , that be nothing ; I assure you Cissie Villa 's nothing to I ; I would 
 give anything to go with they . " 

 " would your mother spare you again so soon ? you have scarcely be home 
 three month . " 

 " she must spare I ! " cry Lucy , in grow excitement . " I simply must 
 go away . I have to . " she run her finger hysterically through her hair . 
 " do not   you see that I have to go away ? I do not   realize at the time - and 
 of course I want to see Constantinople so particularly . " 

 " you mean that since you have break off your engagement you feel - " 

 " yes , yes . I know you would understand . " 

 Mr. Beebe do not quite understand . why could not Miss Honeychurch 
 repose in the bosom of her family ? Cecil have evidently take up the 
 dignified line , and be not go to annoy she . then it strike he that 
 her family itself might be annoying . he hint this to she , and she 
 accept the hint eagerly . 

 " yes , of course ; to go to Constantinople until they be use to the idea 
 and everything have calm down . " 

 " I be afraid it have be a bothersome business , " he say gently . 

 " no , not at all . Cecil be very kind indeed ; only - I have well tell 
 you the whole truth , since you have hear a little - it be that he be 
 so masterful . I find that he would not   let I go my own way . he would 
 improve I in place where I can not   be improve . cecil will not   let a woman 
 decide for herself - in fact , he dare not . what nonsense I do talk ! but 
 that be the kind of thing . " 

 " it be what I gather from my own observation of Mr. Vyse ; it be what I 
 gather from all that I have know of you . I do sympathize and agree 
 most profoundly . I agree so much that you must let I make one little 
 criticism : be it worth while rush off to Greece ? " 

 " but I must go somewhere ! " she cry . " I have be worry all the 
 morning , and here come the very thing . " she strike her knee with 
 clench fist , and repeat : " I must ! and the time I shall have with 
 mother , and all the money she spend on I last spring . you all think 
 much too highly of I . I wish you be not   so kind . " at this moment Miss 
 Bartlett enter , and her nervousness increase . " I must get away , ever 
 so far . I must know my own mind and where I want to go . " 

 " come along ; tea , tea , tea , " say Mr. Beebe , and bustle his guest out 
 of the front - door . he hustle they so quickly that he forget his hat . 
 when he return for it he hear , to his relief and surprise , the 
 tinkling of a Mozart Sonata . 

 " she be play again , " he say to Miss Bartlett . 

 " Lucy can always play , " be the acid reply . 

 " one be very thankful that she have such a resource . she be evidently 
 much worried , as , of course , she ought to be . I know all about it . the 
 marriage be so near that it must have be a hard struggle before she 
 could wind herself up to speak . " 

 Miss Bartlett give a kind of wriggle , and he prepare for a discussion . 
 he have never fathom Miss Bartlett . as he have put it to himself 
 at Florence , ' she might yet reveal depth of strangeness , if not of 
 meaning . " but she be so unsympathetic that she must be reliable . he 
 assume that much , and he have no hesitation in discuss Lucy with she . 
 Minnie be fortunately collect fern . 

 she open the discussion with : " we have much well let the matter 
 drop . " 

 " I wonder . " 

 " it be of the high importance that there should be no gossip in 
 Summer Street . it would be DEATH to gossip about Mr. Vyse 's dismissal at 
 the present moment . " 

 Mr. Beebe raise his eyebrow . death be a strong word - surely too 
 strong . there be no question of tragedy . he say : " of course , Miss 
 Honeychurch will make the fact public in her own way , and when she 
 choose . Freddy only tell I because he know she would not mind . " 

 " I know , " say Miss Bartlett civilly . " yet Freddy ought not to have tell 
 even you . one can not be too careful . " 

 " quite so . " 

 " I do implore absolute secrecy . a chance word to a chatter friend , 
 and - " 

 " exactly . " he be use to these nervous old maid and to the exaggerated 
 importance that they attach to word . a rector live in a web of petty 
 secret , and confidence and warning , and the wise he be the less he 
 will regard they . he will change the subject , as do Mr. Beebe , say 
 cheerfully : " have you hear from any Bertolini people lately ? I believe 
 you keep up with Miss Lavish . it be odd how we of that pension , 
 who seem such a fortuitous collection , have be work into one 
 another 's life . two , three , four , six of we - no , eight ; I have forget 
 the Emersons - have keep more or less in touch . we must really give the 
 Signora a testimonial . " 

 and , Miss Bartlett not favour the scheme , they walk up the hill in 
 a silence which be only break by the rector name some fern . on the 
 summit they pause . the sky have grow wilder since he stand there last 
 hour , give to the land a tragic greatness that be rare in Surrey . 
 Grey cloud be charge across tissue of white , which stretch and 
 shred and tear slowly , until through their final layer there gleam 
 a hint of the disappear blue . summer be retreat . the wind roar , 
 the tree groan , yet the noise seem insufficient for those vast 
 operation in heaven . the weather be break up , breaking , break , 
 and it be a sense of the fit rather than of the supernatural that equip 
 such crisis with the salvos of angelic artillery . Mr. Beebe 's eye 
 rest on Windy Corner , where Lucy sit , practise Mozart . no smile come 
 to his lip , and , change the subject again , he say : " we shall not   have 
 rain , but we shall have darkness , so let we hurry on . the darkness last 
 night be appalling . " 

 they reach the Beehive Tavern at about five o'clock . that amiable 
 hostelry possess a verandah , in which the young and the unwise do 
 dearly love to sit , while guest of more mature year seek a pleasant 
 sand room , and have tea at a table comfortably . Mr. Beebe see that 
 Miss Bartlett would be cold if she sit out , and that Minnie would be 
 dull if she sit in , so he propose a division of force . they would hand 
 the child her food through the window . thus he be incidentally enable 
 to discuss the fortune of Lucy . 

 " I have be think , Miss Bartlett , " he say , " and , unless you 
 very much object , I would like to reopen that discussion . " she bow . 
 " nothing about the past . I know little and care less about that ; I be 
 absolutely certain that it be to your cousin 's credit . she have act 
 loftily and rightly , and it be like her gentle modesty to say that we 
 think too highly of she . but the future . seriously , what do you think of 
 this greek plan ? " he pull out the letter again . " I do not   know whether 
 you overheard , but she want to join the Miss Alans in their mad career . 
 it be all - I can not   explain - it be wrong . " 

 Miss Bartlett read the letter in silence , lay it down , seem to 
 hesitate , and then read it again . 

 " I can not   see the point of it myself . " 

 to his astonishment , she reply : " there I can not agree with you . in it 
 I spy Lucy 's salvation . " 

 " really . now , why ? " 

 " she want to leave Windy Corner . " 

 " I know - but it seem so odd , so unlike she , so - I be go to 
 say - selfish . " 

 " it be natural , surely - after such painful scene - that she should 
 desire a change . " 

 here , apparently , be one of those point that the male intellect 
 miss . Mr. Beebe exclaim : " so she say herself , and since another 
 lady agree with she , I must own that I be partially convinced . perhaps 
 she must have a change . I have no sister or - and I do not   understand 
 these thing . but why need she go as far as Greece ? " 

 " you may well ask that , " reply Miss Bartlett , who be evidently 
 interested , and have almost drop her evasive manner . " why Greece ? 
  what be it , Minnie dear - jam ?   why not Tunbridge Wells ? oh , Mr. Beebe ! 
 I have a long and most unsatisfactory interview with dear Lucy this 
 morning . I can not help she . I will say no more . perhaps I have already 
 say too much . I be not to talk . I want she to spend six month with 
 I at Tunbridge Wells , and she refuse . " 

 Mr. Beebe poke at a crumb with his knife . 

 " but my feeling be of no importance . I know too well that I get on 
 Lucy 's nerve . our tour be a failure . she want to leave Florence , and 
 when we get to Rome she do not want to be in Rome , and all the time I 
 feel that I be spend her mother 's money - . " 

 " let we keep to the future , though , " interrupt Mr. Beebe . " I want your 
 advice . " 

 " very well , " say Charlotte , with a choky abruptness that be new to 
 he , though familiar to Lucy . " I for one will help she to go to Greece . 
 will you ? " 

 Mr. Beebe consider . 

 " it be absolutely necessary , " she continue , lower her veil and 
 whispering through it with a passion , an intensity , that surprise he . 
 " I know - I know . " the darkness be come on , and he feel that this odd 
 woman really do know . " she must not stop here a moment , and we must 
 keep quiet till she go . I trust that the servant know nothing . 
 afterwards - but I may have say too much already . only , Lucy and I be 
 helpless against Mrs. Honeychurch alone . if you help we may succeed . 
 otherwise - " 

 " otherwise - ? " 

 " otherwise , " she repeat as if the word hold finality . 

 " yes , I will help she , " say the clergyman , set his jaw firm . " come , 
 let we go back now , and settle the whole thing up . " 

 Miss Bartlett burst into florid gratitude . the tavern sign - a beehive 
 trim evenly with bee - creak in the wind outside as she thank 
 he . Mr. Beebe do not quite understand the situation ; but then , he do 
 not desire to understand it , nor to jump to the conclusion of " another 
 man " that would have attract a gross mind . he only feel that Miss 
 Bartlett know of some vague influence from which the girl desire to be 
 deliver , and which might well be clothe in the fleshly form . its very 
 vagueness spur he into knight - errantry . his belief in celibacy , so 
 reticent , so carefully conceal beneath his tolerance and culture , now 
 come to the surface and expand like some delicate flower . " they that 
 marry do well , but they that refrain do well . " so run his belief , 
 and he never hear that an engagement be break off but with a slight 
 feeling of pleasure . in the case of Lucy , the feeling be intensify 
 through dislike of Cecil ; and he be willing to go far - to place she 
 out of danger until she could confirm her resolution of virginity . the 
 feeling be very subtle and quite undogmatic , and he never impart it 
 to any other of the character in this entanglement . yet it exist , 
 and it alone explain his action subsequently , and his influence on the 
 action of other . the compact that he make with Miss Bartlett in the 
 tavern , be to help not only Lucy , but religion also . 

 they hurry home through a world of black and grey . he converse on 
 indifferent topic : the Emersons ' need of a housekeeper ; servant ; 
 italian servant ; novel about Italy ; novel with a purpose ; could 
 literature influence life ? Windy Corner glimmer . in the garden , Mrs. 
 Honeychurch , now help by Freddy , still wrestle with the life of her 
 flower . 

 " it get too dark , " she say hopelessly . " this come of put off . we 
 might have know the weather would break up soon ; and now Lucy want to 
 go to Greece . I do not   know what the world be come to . " 

 " Mrs. Honeychurch , " he say , " go to Greece she must . come up to the 
 house and let us talk it over . do you , in the first place , mind she 
 break with Vyse ? " 

 " Mr. Beebe , I be thankful - simply thankful . " 

 " so be I , " say Freddy . 

 " good . now come up to the house . " 

 they confer in the dining - room for half an hour . 

 Lucy would never have carry the greek scheme alone . it be expensive 
 and dramatic - both quality that her mother loathe . nor would 
 Charlotte have succeed . the honour of the day rest with Mr. Beebe . 
 by his tact and common sense , and by his influence as a clergyman - for 
 a clergyman who be not a fool influence Mrs. Honeychurch greatly - he 
 bend she to their purpose , " I do not   see why Greece be necessary , " she 
 say ; " but as you do , I suppose it be all right . it must be something I 
 can not   understand . Lucy ! let us tell she . Lucy ! " 

 " she be play the piano , " Mr. Beebe say . he open the door , and 
 hear the word of a song : 

  " look not thou on beauty 's charming . " 

 " I do not   know that Miss Honeychurch sing , too . " 

  " sit thou still when king be arm , 
  Taste not when the wine - cup glisten - " 

 " it be a song that Cecil give she . how odd girl be ! " 

 " what be that ? " call Lucy , stop short . 

 " all right , dear , " say Mrs. Honeychurch kindly . she go into the 
 drawing - room , and Mr. Beebe hear her kiss Lucy and say : " I be sorry I 
 be so cross about Greece , but it come on the top of the dahlia . " 

 rather a hard voice say : " thank you , mother ; that do not   matter a 
 bit . " 

 " and you be right , too - Greece will be all right ; you can go if the 
 Miss Alans will have you . " 

 " oh , splendid ! oh , thank you ! " 

 Mr. Beebe follow . Lucy still sit at the piano with her hand over the 
 key . she be glad , but he have expect great gladness . her mother 
 bend over she . Freddy , to whom she have be sing , recline on the 
 floor with his head against she , and an unlit pipe between his lip . 
 oddly enough , the group be beautiful . Mr. Beebe , who love the art of 
 the past , be remind of a favourite theme , the Santa Conversazione , 
 in which people who care for one another be paint chat together 
 about noble thing - a theme neither sensual nor sensational , and 
 therefore ignore by the art of to - day . why should Lucy want either to 
 marry or to travel when she have such friend at home ? 

  " Taste not when the wine - cup glisten , 
  speak not when the people listen , " 

 she continue . 

 " here be Mr. Beebe . " 

 " Mr. Beebe know my rude way . " 

 " it be a beautiful song and a wise one , " say he . " go on . " 

 " it be not   very good , " she say listlessly . " I forget why - harmony or 
 something . " 

 " I suspect it be unscholarly . it be so beautiful . " 

 " the tune 's right enough , " say Freddy , " but the word be rotten . why 
 throw up the sponge ? " 

 " how stupidly you talk ! " say his sister . the Santa Conversazione be 
 break up . after all , there be no reason that Lucy should talk about 
 Greece or thank he for persuade her mother , so he say good - bye . 

 Freddy light his bicycle lamp for he in the porch , and with his usual 
 felicity of phrase , say : " this have be a day and a half . " 

  " stop thine ear against the singer - " 

 " wait a minute ; she be finish . " 

  " from the red gold keep thy finger ; 
  vacant heart and hand and eye 
  Easy live and quiet die . " 

 " I love weather like this , " say Freddy . 

 Mr. Beebe pass into it . 

 the two main fact be clear . she have behave splendidly , and he have 
 help she . he could not expect to master the detail of so big a change 
 in a girl 's life . if here and there he be dissatisfied or puzzle , he 
 must acquiesce ; she be choose the well part . 

  " vacant heart and hand and eye - " 

 perhaps the song state " the well part " rather too strongly . he half 
 fancy that the soar accompaniment - which he do not lose in the 
 shout of the gale - really agree with Freddy , and be gently criticize 
 the word that it adorn : 

  " vacant heart and hand and eye 
  Easy live and quiet die . " 

 however , for the fourth time Windy Corner lie poise below he - now as a 
 beacon in the roar tide of darkness . 



 Chapter XIX : lie to Mr. Emerson 

 the Miss Alans be find in their beloved temperance hotel near 
 Bloomsbury - a clean , airless establishment much patronize by provincial 
 England . they always perch there before cross the great sea , 
 and for a week or two would fidget gently over clothe , guide - book , 
 mackintosh square , digestive bread , and other continental necessary . 
 that there be shop abroad , even in Athens , never occur to they , for 
 they regard travel as a species of warfare , only to be undertake 
 by those who have be fully armed at the Haymarket Stores . Miss 
 Honeychurch , they trust , would take care to equip herself duly . 
 Quinine could now be obtain in tabloid ; paper soap be a great help 
 towards freshen up one 's face in the train . Lucy promise , a little 
 depressed . 

 " but , of course , you know all about these thing , and you have Mr. Vyse 
 to help you . a gentleman be such a stand - by . " 

 Mrs. Honeychurch , who have come up to town with her daughter , begin to 
 drum nervously upon her card - case . 

 " we think it so good of Mr. Vyse to spare you , " Miss Catharine 
 continue . " it be not every young man who would be so unselfish . but 
 perhaps he will come out and join you later on . " 

 " or do his work keep he in London ? " say Miss Teresa , the more acute 
 and less kindly of the two sister . 

 " however , we shall see he when he see you off . I do so long to see 
 he . " 

 " no one will see Lucy off , " interpose Mrs. Honeychurch . " she do not 
 like it . " 

 " no , I hate seeing - off , " say Lucy . 

 " really ? how funny ! I should have think that in this case - " 

 " oh , Mrs. Honeychurch , you be not   go ? it be such a pleasure to have 
 meet you ! " 

 they escape , and Lucy say with relief : " that be all right . we just get 
 through that time . " 

 but her mother be annoy . " I should be tell , dear , that I be 
 unsympathetic . but I can not see why you do not   tell your friend about 
 Cecil and be do with it . there all the time we have to sit fencing , and 
 almost tell lie , and be see through , too , I dare say , which be most 
 unpleasant . " 

 Lucy have plenty to say in reply . she describe the Miss Alans ' 
 character : they be such gossip , and if one tell they , the news would 
 be everywhere in no time . 

 " but why should not   it be everywhere in no time ? " 

 " because I settle with Cecil not to announce it until I leave England . I 
 shall tell they then . it be much pleasanter . how wet it be ! let us turn in 
 here . " 

 " here " be the British Museum . Mrs. Honeychurch refuse . if they must 
 take shelter , let it be in a shop . Lucy feel contemptuous , for she be 
 on the tack of care for greek sculpture , and have already borrow a 
 mythical dictionary from Mr. Beebe to get up the name of the goddess 
 and god . 

 " oh , well , let it be shop , then . let us go to Mudie 's . I will buy a 
 guide - book . " 

 " you know , Lucy , you and Charlotte and Mr. Beebe all tell I I be 
 so stupid , so I suppose I be , but I shall never understand this 
 hole - and - corner work . you have   get rid of Cecil - well and good , and I be 
 thankful he be go , though I do feel angry for the minute . but why not 
 announce it ? why this hushing up and tip - toeing ? " 

 " it be only for a few day . " 

 " but why at all ? " 

 Lucy be silent . she be drift away from her mother . it be quite 
 easy to say , " because George Emerson have be bother I , and if he 
 hear I have   give up Cecil may begin again " - quite easy , and it have 
 the incidental advantage of be true . but she could not say it . she 
 dislike confidence , for they might lead to self - knowledge and to that 
 king of terror - Light . ever since that last evening at Florence she have 
 deem it unwise to reveal her soul . 

 Mrs. Honeychurch , too , be silent . she be think , " my daughter will not 
 answer I ; she would rather be with those inquisitive old maid than 
 with Freddy and I . any rag , tag , and bobtail apparently do if she 
 can leave her home . " and as in her case thought never remain unspoken 
 long , she burst out with : " you be tired of Windy Corner . " 

 this be perfectly true . Lucy have hop to return to Windy Corner when 
 she escape from Cecil , but she discover that her home exist no 
 long . it might exist for Freddy , who still live and think straight , 
 but not for one who have deliberately warp the brain . she do not 
 acknowledge that her brain be warp , for the brain itself must assist 
 in that acknowledgment , and she be disorder the very instrument of 
 life . she only feel , " I do not love George ; I break off my engagement 
 because I do not love George ; I must go to Greece because I do not 
 love George ; it be more important that I should look up god in the 
 dictionary than that I should help my mother ; every one else be behave 
 very badly . " she only feel irritable and petulant , and anxious to do 
 what she be not expect to do , and in this spirit she proceed with 
 the conversation . 

 " oh , mother , what rubbish you talk ! of course I be not tired of Windy 
 Corner . " 

 " then why not say so at once , instead of consider half an hour ? " 

 she laugh faintly , " half a minute would be near . " 

 " perhaps you would like to stay away from your home altogether ? " 

 " hush , mother ! People will hear you " ; for they have enter Mudie 's . she 
 buy Baedeker , and then continue : " of course I want to live at home ; 
 but as we be talk about it , I may as well say that I shall want to 
 be away in the future more than I have be . you see , I come into my 
 money next year . " 

 tear come into her mother 's eye . 

 drive by nameless bewilderment , by what be in old people term 
 " eccentricity , " Lucy determine to make this point clear . " I have   see the 
 world so little - I feel so out of thing in Italy . I have see so little 
 of life ; one ought to come up to London more - not a cheap ticket like 
 to - day , but to stop . I might even share a flat for a little with some 
 other girl . " 

 " and mess with typewriter and latch - key , " explode Mrs. Honeychurch . 
 " and agitate and scream , and be carry off kicking by the police . and 
 call it a Mission - when no one want you ! and call it Duty - when 
 it mean that you can not   stand your own home ! and call it work - when 
 thousand of man be starve with the competition as it be ! and then 
 to prepare yourself , find two doddering old lady , and go abroad with 
 they . " 

 " I want more independence , " say Lucy lamely ; she know that she want 
 something , and independence be a useful cry ; we can always say that we 
 have not get it . she try to remember her emotion in Florence : those 
 have be sincere and passionate , and have suggest beauty rather than 
 short skirt and latch - key . but independence be certainly her cue . 

 " very well . take your independence and be go . rush up and down and 
 round the world , and come back as thin as a lath with the bad food . 
 despise the house that your father build and the garden that he plant , 
 and our dear view - and then share a flat with another girl . " 

 Lucy screw up her mouth and say : " perhaps I speak hastily . " 

 " oh , goodness ! " her mother flash . " how you do remind I of Charlotte 
 Bartlett ! " 

 " Charlotte ! " flash Lucy in her turn , pierce at last by a vivid pain . 

 " more every moment . " 

 " I do not   know what you mean , mother ; Charlotte and I be not the very 
 least alike . " 

 " well , I see the likeness . the same eternal worrying , the same taking 
 back of word . you and Charlotte try to divide two apple among three 
 people last night might be sister . " 

 " what rubbish ! and if you dislike Charlotte so , it be rather a pity you 
 ask she to stop . I warn you about she ; I beg you , implore you 
 not to , but of course it be not listen to . " 

 " there you go . " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " 

 " Charlotte again , my dear ; that be all ; her very word . " 

 Lucy clench her tooth . " my point be that you ought not   to have 
 ask Charlotte to stop . I wish you would keep to the point . " and the 
 conversation die off into a wrangle . 

 she and her mother shop in silence , speak little in the train , little 
 again in the carriage , which meet they at Dorking Station . it have pour 
 all day and as they ascend through the deep Surrey lane shower of 
 water fall from the over - hang beech - tree and rattle on the hood . 
 Lucy complain that the hood be stuffy . lean forward , she look 
 out into the steam dusk , and watch the carriage - lamp pass like a 
 search - light over mud and leaf , and reveal nothing beautiful . " the 
 crush when Charlotte get in will be abominable , " she remark . for 
 they be to pick up Miss Bartlett at Summer Street , where she have be 
 drop as the carriage go down , to pay a call on Mr. Beebe 's old 
 mother . " we shall have to sit three a side , because the tree drop , and 
 yet it be not   rain . oh , for a little air ! " then she listen to the 
 horse 's hoof - " he have not tell - he have not tell . " that melody be 
 blur by the soft road . " can't we have the hood down ? " she demand , 
 and her mother , with sudden tenderness , say : " very well , old lady , stop 
 the horse . " and the horse be stop , and Lucy and Powell wrestle with 
 the hood , and squirt water down Mrs. Honeychurch 's neck . but now 
 that the hood be down , she do see something that she would have 
 miss - there be no light in the window of Cissie Villa , and round 
 the garden gate she fancy she see a padlock . 

 " be that house to let again , Powell ? " she call . 

 " yes , miss , " he reply . 

 " have they go ? " 

 " it be too far out of town for the young gentleman , and his father 's 
 rheumatism have come on , so he can not   stop on alone , so they be try to 
 let furnish , " be the answer . 

 " they have go , then ? " 

 " yes , miss , they have go . " 

 Lucy sink back . the carriage stop at the Rectory . she get out to call 
 for Miss Bartlett . so the Emersons have go , and all this bother about 
 Greece have be unnecessary . waste ! that word seem to sum up the whole 
 of life . waste plan , waste money , waste love , and she have wound 
 her mother . be it possible that she have muddle thing away ? quite 
 possible . other people have . when the maid open the door , she be 
 unable to speak , and star stupidly into the hall . 

 Miss Bartlett at once come forward , and after a long preamble ask 
 a great favour : might she go to church ? Mr. Beebe and his mother have 
 already go , but she have refuse to start until she obtain she 
 hostess 's full sanction , for it would mean keep the horse wait a 
 good ten minute more . 

 " certainly , " say the hostess wearily . " I forgot it be Friday . let us 
 all go . Powell can go round to the stable . " 

 " Lucy dearest - " 

 " no church for I , thank you . " 

 a sigh , and they depart . the church be invisible , but up in the 
 darkness to the left there be a hint of colour . this be a stained 
 window , through which some feeble light be shin , and when the door 
 open Lucy hear Mr. Beebe 's voice run through the litany to a 
 minute congregation . even their church , build upon the slope of the hill 
 so artfully , with its beautiful raise transept and its spire of silvery 
 shingle - even their church have lose its charm ; and the thing one never 
 talk about - religion - be fade like all the other thing . 

 she follow the maid into the Rectory . 

 would she object to sit in Mr. Beebe 's study ? there be only that 
 one fire . 

 she would not object . 

 some one be there already , for Lucy hear the word : " a lady to wait , 
 sir . " 

 Old Mr. Emerson be sit by the fire , with his foot upon a 
 gout - stool . 

 " oh , Miss Honeychurch , that you should come ! " he quaver ; and Lucy see 
 an alteration in he since last Sunday . 

 not a word would come to her lip . George she have face , and could have 
 face again , but she have forget how to treat his father . 

 " Miss Honeychurch , dear , we be so sorry ! George be so sorry ! he think 
 he have a right to try . I can not blame my boy , and yet I wish he have tell 
 I first . he ought not to have try . I know nothing about it at all . " 

 if only she could remember how to behave ! 

 he hold up his hand . " but you must not scold he . " 

 Lucy turn she back , and begin to look at Mr. Beebe 's book . 

 " I teach he , " he quaver , " to trust in love . I say : ' when love 
 come , that be reality . ' I say : ' passion do not blind . no . passion 
 be sanity , and the woman you love , she be the only person you will ever 
 really understand . ' " he sigh : " true , everlastingly true , though my day 
 be over , and though there be the result . poor boy ! he be so sorry ! 
 he say he know it be madness when you bring your cousin in ; that 
 whatever you feel you do not mean . yet " - his voice gather strength : 
 he speak out to make certain - " Miss Honeychurch , do you remember Italy ? " 

 Lucy select a book - a volume of Old Testament commentary . hold 
 it up to her eye , she say : " I have no wish to discuss Italy or any 
 subject connect with your son . " 

 " but you do remember it ? " 

 " he have misbehave himself from the first . " 

 " I only be tell that he love you last Sunday . I never could judge 
 behaviour . I - I - suppose he have . " 

 feel a little steady , she put the book back and turn round to 
 he . his face be droop and swollen , but his eye , though they be 
 sink deep , gleam with a child 's courage . 

 " why , he have behave abominably , " she say . " I be glad he be sorry . do 
 you know what he do ? " 

 " not ' abominably , ' " be the gentle correction . " he only try when he 
 should not have try . you have all you want , Miss Honeychurch : you be 
 go to marry the man you love . do not go out of George 's life say 
 he be abominable . " 

 " no , of course , " say Lucy , ashame at the reference to Cecil . 
 " ' abominable ' be much too strong . I be sorry I use it about your son . I 
 think I will go to church , after all . my mother and my cousin have go . 
 I shall not be so very late - " 

 " especially as he have go under , " he say quietly . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " go under naturally . " he beat his palm together in silence ; his head 
 fall on his chest . 

 " I do not   understand . " 

 " as his mother do . " 

 " but , Mr. Emerson - MR . EMERSON - what be you talk about ? " 

 " when I would not   have George baptize , " say he . 

 Lucy be frightened . 

 " and she agree that baptism be nothing , but he catch that fever 
 when he be twelve and she turn round . she think it a judgment . " he 
 shudder . " oh , horrible , when we have give up that sort of thing and 
 break away from her parent . oh , horrible - bad of all - bad than 
 death , when you have make a little clearing in the wilderness , plant 
 your little garden , let in your sunlight , and then the weed creep in 
 again ! a judgment ! and our boy have typhoid because no clergyman have 
 drop water on he in church ! be it possible , Miss Honeychurch ? shall 
 we slip back into the darkness for ever ? " 

 " I do not   know , " gasp Lucy . " I do not   understand this sort of thing . I 
 be not mean to understand it . " 

 " but Mr. Eager - he come when I be out , and act accord to his 
 principle . I do not   blame he or any one ... but by the time George 
 be well she be ill . he make she think about sin , and she go under 
 think about it . " 

 it be thus that Mr. Emerson have murder his wife in the sight of God . 

 " oh , how terrible ! " say Lucy , forget her own affair at last . 

 " he be not baptize , " say the old man . " I do hold firm . " and he 
 look with unwavere eye at the row of book , as if - at what 
 cost ! - he have win a victory over they . " my boy shall go back to the 
 earth untouched . " 

 she ask whether young Mr. Emerson be ill . 

 " oh - last Sunday . " he start into the present . " George last Sunday - no , 
 not ill : just go under . he be never ill . but he be his mother 's son . 
 her eye be his , and she have that forehead that I think so beautiful , 
 and he will not think it worth while to live . it be always touch and 
 go . he will live ; but he will not think it worth while to live . he will 
 never think anything worth while . you remember that church at Florence ? " 

 Lucy do remember , and how she have suggest that George should collect 
 postage stamp . 

 " after you leave Florence - horrible . then we take the house here , and he 
 go bath with your brother , and become well . you see he bath ? " 

 " I be so sorry , but it be no good discuss this affair . I be deeply 
 sorry about it . " 

 " then there come something about a novel . I do not   follow it at all ; I 
 have to hear so much , and he mind tell I ; he find I too old . ah , 
 well , one must have failure . George come down to - morrow , and take I 
 up to his London room . he can not   bear to be about here , and I must be 
 where he be . " 

 " Mr. Emerson , " cry the girl , " do not   leave at least , not on my account . 
 I be go to Greece . do not   leave your comfortable house . " 

 it be the first time her voice have be kind and he smile . " how good 
 every one be ! and look at Mr. Beebe house I - come over this morning 
 and hear I be go ! here I be so comfortable with a fire . " 

 " yes , but you will not   go back to London . it be absurd . " 

 " I must be with George ; I must make he care to live , and down here he 
 can not . he say the thought of see you and of hear about you - I be 
 not justify he : I be only say what have happen . " 

 " oh , Mr. Emerson " - she take hold of his hand - " you must not . I have   be 
 bother enough to the world by now . I can not   have you move out of your 
 house when you like it , and perhaps lose money through it - all on my 
 account . you must stop ! I be just go to Greece . " 

 " all the way to Greece ? " 

 her manner alter . 

 " to Greece ? " 

 " so you must stop . you will not   talk about this business , I know . I can 
 trust you both . " 

 " certainly you can . we either have you in our life , or leave you to the 
 life that you have choose . " 

 " I should not   want - " 

 " I suppose Mr. Vyse be very angry with George ? no , it be wrong of 
 George to try . we have push our belief too far . I fancy that we 
 deserve sorrow . " 

 she look at the book again - black , brown , and that acrid theological 
 blue . they surround the visitor on every side ; they be pile on the 
 table , they press against the very ceiling . to Lucy who could not see 
 that Mr. Emerson be profoundly religious , and differ from Mr. Beebe 
 chiefly by his acknowledgment of passion - it seem dreadful that the 
 old man should crawl into such a sanctum , when he be unhappy , and be 
 dependent on the bounty of a clergyman . 

 more certain than ever that she be tired , he offer she his chair . 

 " no , please sit still . I think I will sit in the carriage . " 

 " Miss Honeychurch , you do sound tired . " 

 " not a bit , " say Lucy , with tremble lip . 

 " but you be , and there be a look of George about you . and what be you 
 say about go abroad ? " 

 she be silent . 

 " Greece " - and she see that he be think the word over - " Greece ; but 
 you be to be marry this year , I think . " 

 " not till January , it be not , " say Lucy , clasp her hand . would she 
 tell an actual lie when it come to the point ? 

 " I suppose that Mr. Vyse be go with you . I hope - it be not   because 
 George speak that you be both go ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I hope that you will enjoy Greece with Mr. Vyse . " 

 " thank you . " 

 at that moment Mr. Beebe come back from church . his cassock be cover 
 with rain . " that be all right , " he say kindly . " I count on you two 
 keep each other company . it be pour again . the entire congregation , 
 which consist of your cousin , your mother , and my mother , stand 
 wait in the church , till the carriage fetch it . do Powell go 
 round ? " 

 " I think so ; I will see . " 

 " no - of course , I will see . how be the Miss Alans ? " 

 " very well , thank you . " 

 " do you tell Mr. Emerson about Greece ? " 

 " I - I do . " 

 " do not   you think it very plucky of she , Mr. Emerson , to undertake the 
 two Miss Alans ? now , Miss Honeychurch , go back - keep warm . I think three 
 be such a courageous number to go travel . " and he hurry off to the 
 stable . 

 " he be not go , " she say hoarsely . " I make a slip . Mr. Vyse do stop 
 behind in England . " 

 somehow it be impossible to cheat this old man . to George , to Cecil , 
 she would have lie again ; but he seem so near the end of thing , so 
 dignified in his approach to the gulf , of which he give one account , and 
 the book that surround he another , so mild to the rough path that 
 he have traverse , that the true chivalry - not the wear - out chivalry 
 of sex , but the true chivalry that all the young may show to all the 
 old - awoke in she , and , at whatever risk , she tell he that Cecil be 
 not her companion to Greece . and she speak so seriously that the risk 
 become a certainty , and he , lift his eye , say : " you be leave 
 he ? you be leave the man you love ? " 

 " I - I have to . " 

 " why , Miss Honeychurch , why ? " 

 Terror come over she , and she lie again . she make the long , convince 
 speech that she have make to Mr. Beebe , and intend to make to the world 
 when she announce that her engagement be no more . he hear she in 
 silence , and then say : " my dear , I be worried about you . it seem to 
 I " - dreamily ; she be not alarmed - " that you be in a muddle . " 

 she shake her head . 

 " take an old man 's word ; there be nothing bad than a muddle in all the 
 world . it be easy to face Death and Fate , and the thing that sound 
 so dreadful . it be on my muddle that I look back with horror - on the 
 thing that I might have avoid . we can help one another but little . I 
 use to think I could teach young people the whole of life , but I know 
 well now , and all my teaching of George have come down to this : beware 
 of muddle . do you remember in that church , when you pretend to be 
 annoy with I and be not ? do you remember before , when you refuse 
 the room with the view ? those be muddle - little , but ominous - and I 
 be fear that you be in one now . " she be silent . " do not   trust I , 
 Miss Honeychurch . though life be very glorious , it be difficult . " 
 she be still silent . " ' Life ' write a friend of mine , ' be a public 
 performance on the violin , in which you must learn the instrument as you 
 go along . ' I think he put it well . Man have to pick up the use of his 
 function as he go along - especially the function of love . " then he 
 burst out excitedly ; " that be it ; that be what I mean . you love George ! " 
 and after his long preamble , the three word burst against Lucy like 
 wave from the open sea . 

 " but you do , " he go on , not wait for contradiction . " you love the 
 boy body and soul , plainly , directly , as he love you , and no other word 
 express it . you will not   marry the other man for his sake . " 

 " how dare you ! " gasp Lucy , with the roaring of water in her ear . 
 " oh , how like a man ! - I mean , to suppose that a woman be always think 
 about a man . " 

 " but you be . " 

 she summon physical disgust . 

 " you be shocked , but I mean to shock you . it be the only hope at time . I 
 can reach you no other way . you must marry , or your life will be waste . 
 you have go too far to retreat . I have no time for the tenderness , and 
 the comradeship , and the poetry , and the thing that really matter , and 
 for which you marry . I know that , with George , you will find they , and 
 that you love he . then be his wife . he be already part of you . though 
 you fly to Greece , and never see he again , or forget his very name , 
 George will work in your thought till you die . it be not   possible to 
 love and to part . you will wish that it be . you can transmute love , 
 ignore it , muddle it , but you can never pull it out of you . I know by 
 experience that the poet be right : love be eternal . " 

 Lucy begin to cry with anger , and though her anger pass away soon , she 
 tear remain . 

 " I only wish poet would say this , too : love be of the body ; not 
 the body , but of the body . ah ! the misery that would be save if we 
 confess that ! ah ! for a little directness to liberate the soul ! your 
 soul , dear Lucy ! I hate the word now , because of all the ca not with which 
 superstition have wrap it round . but we have soul . I can not say how 
 they come nor whither they go , but we have they , and I see you ruin 
 your . I can not bear it . it be again the darkness creep in ; it 
 be hell . " then he check himself . " what nonsense I have talk - how 
 abstract and remote ! and I have make you cry ! dear girl , forgive my 
 prosiness ; marry my boy . when I think what life be , and how seldom love 
 be answer by love - marry he ; it be one of the moment for which the 
 world be make . " 

 she could not understand he ; the word be indeed remote . yet as he 
 speak the darkness be withdraw , veil after veil , and she see to the 
 bottom of her soul . 

 " then , Lucy - " 

 " you have   frighten I , " she moan . " Cecil - Mr. Beebe - the ticket 's 
 buy - everything . " she fall sob into the chair . " I be catch in 
 the tangle . I must suffer and grow old away from he . I can not break the 
 whole of life for his sake . they trust I . " 

 a carriage draw up at the front - door . 

 " give George my love - once only . tell he ' muddle . ' " then she arrange 
 her veil , while the tear pour over her cheek inside . 

 " Lucy - " 

 " no - they be in the hall - oh , please not , Mr. Emerson - they trust I - " 

 " but why should they , when you have deceive they ? " 

 Mr. Beebe open the door , say : " here be my mother . " 

 " you be not worthy of their trust . " 

 " what be that ? " say Mr. Beebe sharply . 

 " I be say , why should you trust she when she deceive you ? " 

 " one minute , mother . " he come in and shut the door . 

 " I do not   follow you , Mr. Emerson . to whom do you refer ? trust whom ? " 

 " I mean she have pretend to you that she do not love George . they have 
 love one another all along . " 

 Mr. Beebe look at the sob girl . he be very quiet , and his white 
 face , with its ruddy whisker , seem suddenly inhuman . a long black 
 column , he stand and await her reply . 

 " I shall never marry he , " quaver Lucy . 

 a look of contempt come over he , and he say , " why not ? " 

 " Mr. Beebe - I have mislead you - I have mislead myself - " 

 " oh , rubbish , Miss Honeychurch ! " 

 " it be not rubbish ! " say the old man hotly . " it be the part of people 
 that you do not   understand . " 

 Mr. Beebe lay his hand on the old man 's shoulder pleasantly . 

 " Lucy ! Lucy ! " call voice from the carriage . 

 " Mr. Beebe , could you help I ? " 

 he look amazed at the request , and say in a low , stern voice : " I 
 be more grieved than I can possibly express . it be lamentable , 
 lamentable - incredible . " 

 " what be wrong with the boy ? " fire up the other again . 

 " nothing , Mr. Emerson , except that he no long interest I . Marry 
 George , Miss Honeychurch . he will do admirably . " 

 he walk out and leave they . they hear he guide his mother 
 up - stair . 

 " Lucy ! " the voice call . 

 she turn to Mr. Emerson in despair . but his face revive she . it be 
 the face of a saint who understand . 

 " now it be all dark . now Beauty and Passion seem never to have exist . 
 I know . but remember the mountain over Florence and the view . ah , dear , 
 if I be George , and give you one kiss , it would make you brave . you 
 have to go cold into a battle that need warmth , out into the muddle 
 that you have make yourself ; and your mother and all your friend 
 will despise you , oh , my darling , and rightly , if it be ever right to 
 despise . George still dark , all the tussle and the misery without a word 
 from he . be I justify ? " into his own eye tear come . " yes , for we 
 fight for more than Love or Pleasure ; there be Truth . truth count , 
 truth do count . " 

 " you kiss I , " say the girl . " you kiss I . I will try . " 

 he give she a sense of deity reconcile , a feeling that , in gain 
 the man she love , she would gain something for the whole world . 
 throughout the squalor of her homeward drive - she speak at once - his 
 salutation remain . he have rob the body of its taint , the world 's 
 taunt of their sting ; he have show she the holiness of direct desire . 
 she " never exactly understand , " she would say in after year , " how he 
 manage to strengthen she . it be as if he have make she see the whole of 
 everything at once . " 



 chapter XX : the end of the Middle Ages 

 the Miss Alans do go to Greece , but they go by themselves . they alone 
 of this little company will double Malea and plough the water of the 
 Saronic gulf . they alone will visit Athens and Delphi , and either shrine 
 of intellectual song - that upon the Acropolis , encircle by blue sea ; 
 that under Parnassus , where the eagle build and the bronze charioteer 
 drive undismaye towards infinity . tremble , anxious , cumber with 
 much digestive bread , they do proceed to Constantinople , they do go 
 round the world . the rest of we must be content with a fair , but a 
 less arduous , goal . Italiam petimus : we return to the Pension Bertolini . 

 George say it be his old room . 

 " no , it be not , " say Lucy ; " because it be the room I have , and I have your 
 father 's room . I forget why ; Charlotte make I , for some reason . " 

 he kneel on the tile floor , and lay his face in her lap . 

 " George , you baby , get up . " 

 " why should not   I be a baby ? " murmur George . 

 unable to answer this question , she put down his sock , which she be 
 try to mend , and gaze out through the window . it be evening and 
 again the spring . 

 " oh , bother Charlotte , " she say thoughtfully . " what can such people be 
 make of ? " 

 " same stuff as parson be make of . " 

 " nonsense ! " 

 " quite right . it be nonsense . " 

 " now you get up off the cold floor , or you will be start rheumatism 
 next , and you stop laugh and be so silly . " 

 " why should not   I laugh ? " he ask , pin she with his elbow , and 
 advance his face to her . " what be there to cry at ? kiss I here . " he 
 indicate the spot where a kiss would be welcome . 

 he be a boy after all . when it come to the point , it be she who 
 remember the past , she into whose soul the iron have enter , she 
 who know whose room this have be last year . it endear he to she 
 strangely that he should be sometimes wrong . 

 " any letter ? " he ask . 

 " just a line from Freddy . " 

 " now kiss I here ; then here . " 

 then , threaten again with rheumatism , he stroll to the window , 
 open it   as the English will , and leant out . there be the parapet , 
 there the river , there to the left the beginning of the hill . the 
 cab - driver , who at once salute he with the hiss of a serpent , might 
 be that very Phaethon who have set this happiness in motion twelve 
 month ago . a passion of gratitude - all feeling grow to passion in the 
 South - come over the husband , and he bless the people and the thing 
 who have take so much trouble about a young fool . he have help himself , 
 it be true , but how stupidly ! 

 all the fighting that matter have be do by other - by Italy , by his 
 father , by his wife . 

 " Lucy , you come and look at the cypress ; and the church , whatever its 
 name be , still show . " 

 " San Miniato . I will just finish your sock . " 

 " signorino , domani faremo uno giro , " call the cabman , with engage 
 certainty . 

 George tell he that he be mistaken ; they have no money to throw away on 
 driving . 

 and the people who have not mean to help - the Miss Lavishes , the Cecils , 
 the Miss Bartletts ! ever prone to magnify Fate , George count up the 
 force that have sweep he into this contentment . 

 " anything good in Freddy 's letter ? " 

 " not yet . " 

 his own content be absolute , but hers hold bitterness : the 
 Honeychurches have not forgive they ; they be disgusted at her past 
 hypocrisy ; she have alienate Windy Corner , perhaps for ever . 

 " what do he say ? " 

 " silly boy ! he think he be be dignify . he know we should go off in 
 the spring - he have know it for six month - that if mother would not   give 
 her consent we should take the thing into our own hand . they have fair 
 warning , and now he call it an elopement . ridiculous boy - " 

 " signorino , domani faremo uno giro - " 

 " but it will all come right in the end . he have to build we both up 
 from the beginning again . I wish , though , that Cecil have not turn so 
 cynical about woman . he have , for the second time , quite alter . why 
 will man have theory about woman ? I have not   any about man . I wish , 
 too , that Mr. Beebe - " 

 " you may well wish that . " 

 " he will never forgive we - I mean , he will never be interested in we 
 again . I wish that he do not influence they so much at Windy Corner . I 
 wish he have not   - but if we act the truth , the people who really love we 
 be sure to come back to we in the long run . " 

 " perhaps . " then he say more gently : " well , I act the truth - the 
 only thing I do do - and you come back to I . so possibly you know . " he 
 turn back into the room . " nonsense with that sock . " he carry she 
 to the window , so that she , too , see all the view . they sink upon their 
 knee , invisible from the road , they hop , and begin to whisper one 
 another 's name . ah ! it be worth while ; it be the great joy that they 
 have expect , and countless little joy of which they have never dream . 
 they be silent . 

 " signorino , domani faremo - " 

 " oh , bother that man ! " 

 but Lucy remember the vendor of photograph and say , " no , do not   be 
 rude to he . " then with a catching of her breath , she murmur : " Mr. 
 Eager and Charlotte , dreadful frozen Charlotte . how cruel she would be 
 to a man like that ! " 

 " look at the light go over the bridge . " 

 " but this room remind I of Charlotte . how horrible to grow old in 
 Charlotte 's way ! to think that evening at the rectory that she should not 
 have hear your father be in the house . for she would have stop I 
 go in , and he be the only person alive who could have make I see 
 sense . you could not   have make I . when I be very happy " - she kiss 
 he - " I remember on how little it all hang . if Charlotte have only 
 know , she would have stop I go in , and I should have go to 
 silly Greece , and become different for ever . " 

 " but she do know , " say George ; ' she do see my father , surely . he say 
 so . " 

 " oh , no , she do not   see he . she be upstairs with old Mrs. Beebe , do not 
 you remember , and then go straight to the church . she say so . " 

 George be obstinate again . " my father , " say he , ' see she , and I prefer 
 his word . he be doze by the study fire , and he open his eye , 
 and there be Miss Bartlett . a few minute before you come in . she be 
 turn to go as he wake up . he do not   speak to she . " 

 then they speak of other thing - the desultory talk of those who have 
 be fight to reach one another , and whose reward be to rest quietly 
 in each other 's arm . it be long ere they return to Miss Bartlett , 
 but when they do her behaviour seem more interesting . George , who 
 dislike any darkness , say : " it be clear that she know . then , why 
 do she risk the meeting ? she know he be there , and yet she go to 
 church . " 

 they try to piece the thing together . 

 as they talk , an incredible solution come into Lucy 's mind . she 
 reject it , and say : " how like Charlotte to undo her work by a feeble 
 muddle at the last moment . " but something in the die evening , in the 
 roar of the river , in their very embrace warn they that her word fall 
 short of life , and George whisper : " or do she mean it ? " 

 " mean what ? " 

 " signorino , domani faremo uno giro - " 

 Lucy bend forward and say with gentleness : " Lascia , prego , lascia . 
 Siamo sposati . " 

 " Scusi tanto , signora , " he reply in tone as gentle and whip up his 
 horse . 

 " Buona sera - e grazie . " 

 " Niente . " 

 the cabman drive away singing . 

 " mean what , George ? " 

 he whisper : " be it this ? be this possible ? I will put a marvel to you . 
 that your cousin have always hop . that from the very first moment we 
 meet , she hop , far down in her mind , that we should be like this - of 
 course , very far down . that she fight we on the surface , and yet she 
 hop . I can not   explain she any other way . can you ? look how she keep I 
 alive in you all the summer ; how she give you no peace ; how month after 
 month she become more eccentric and unreliable . the sight of we haunt 
 she - or she could not   have describe we as she do to her friend . there 
 be detail - it burn . I read the book afterwards . she be not frozen , 
 Lucy , she be not wither up all through . she tear we apart twice , but 
 in the rectory that evening she be give one more chance to make we 
 happy . we can never make friend with she or thank she . but I do believe 
 that , far down in her heart , far below all speech and behaviour , she be 
 glad . " 

 " it be impossible , " murmur Lucy , and then , remember the experience 
 of her own heart , she say : " no - it be just possible . " 

 Youth enwrap they ; the song of Phaethon announce passion requite , 
 love attain . but they be conscious of a love more mysterious than 
 this . the song die away ; they hear the river , bear down the snow 
 of winter into the Mediterranean . 


