over the River 

 John Galsworthy 

 Book III of   end of the chapter 

 to Rudolf and Viola Sauter 

 chapter 1 

 Clare , who for seventeen month have be the wife of Sir Gerald Corven of the Colonial Service , stand on the boat deck of an Orient liner in the River Thames , wait for it to dock . it be ten o clock of a mild day in October , but she wear a thick tweed coat , for the voyage have be hot . she look pale    indeed , a little sallow    but her clear brown eye be fix eagerly on the land and her slightly touch - up lip be part , so that her face have the vividness to which it be accustom . she stand alone , until a voice say : 
  oh ! here you be !   and a young man , appear from behind a boat , stand beside she . without turn , she say : 
  absolutely perfect day ! it ought to be lovely at home . 
  I think you d be stay in Town for a night at least ; and we could have have a dinner and theatre . Won t you ? 
  my dear young man , I shall be meet . 
  perfectly damnable , thing come to an end ! 
  often more damnable , thing begin . 
 he give she a long look , and say suddenly : 
  Clare , you realise , of course , that I love you ? 
 she nod .   yes . 
  but you don t love I ? 
  wholly without prejudice . 
  I wish    I wish you could catch fire for a moment . 
  I be a respectable married woman , Tony . 
  come back to England because   
  of the climate of Ceylon . 
 he kick at the rail .   just as it s get perfect . I ve not say anything , but I know that your    that Corven   
 Clare lift her eyebrow , and he be silent ; then both look at the shore , become momentarily more and more a consideration . 
 when two young people have be nearly three week together on board a ship , they do not know each other half so well as they think they do . in the abide inanity of a life when everything have stop except the engine , the water slip along the ship s side , and the curving of the sun in the sky , their daily chair - to - chair intimacy gather a queer momentum and a sort of lazy warmth . they know that they be get talk about , and do not care . after all , they can not get off the ship , and there be nothing else to do . they dance together , and the sway of the ship , however slight , favour the closeness of their contact . after ten day or so they settle down to a life together , more continuous than that of marriage , except that they still spend their night apart . and then , all of a sudden , the ship stop , and they stop , and there be a feeling , at least on one side , perhaps on both , that stocktaking have be leave till too late . a hurried vex excitement , not unpleasurable , because suspend animation be at an end , invade their faculty ; they be face with the real equation of land animal who have be at sea . 
 Clare break the silence . 
  you ve never tell I why you re call Tony when your name be James . 
  that be why . I wish you d be serious , Clare ; we haven t much time before the darn ship dock . I simply can t bear the thought of not see you every day . 
 Clare give he a swift look , and withdraw her eye to the shore again .   how clean !   she be think . he have , indeed , a clean oval - shape brown face , determine , but liable to good humour , with dark grey eye incline to narrow with his thought , and darkish hair ; and he be thin and active . 
 he take hold of a button of her coat . 
  you haven t say a word about yourself out there , but you aren t happy , I know . 
  I dislike people who talk about their private life . 
  look !   he put a card into her hand :   that club always find I . 
 she read : 
 MR . JAMES BERNARD CROOM , 
 the Coffee House , 
 St. James   Street . 
  Isn t the Coffee House very out of date ? 
  yes , but it s still rather   the thing .   my Dad put I down when I be bear . 
  I have an uncle by marriage who belong    Sir Lawrence Mont , tall and twisty and thin ; you ll know he by a tortoiseshell - rim eyeglass . 
  I ll look out for he . 
  what be you go to do with yourself in England ? 
  Hunt a job . that s more than one man s work , it seem . 
  what sort of job ? 
  anything except schoolmastere and sell thing on commission . 
  but do anybody ever get anything else nowadays ? 
  no . it s a bad look - out . what I d like would be an estate agency , or something to do with horse . 
  estate and horse be both die out . 
  I know one or two race man rather well . but I expect I shall end as a chauffeur . where be you go to stay ? 
  with my people . at first , anyway . if you still want to see I when you ve be home a week , Condaford Grange , Oxfordshire , will find I . 
  why do I ever meet you ?   say the young man , with sudden gloom . 
  thank you . 
  oh ! you know what I mean . God ! she s cast anchor . here s the tender ! oh ! Clare ! 
  Sir ? 
  Hasn t it mean anything to you ? 
 Clare look at he steadily before answer . 
  yes . but I don t know if it will ever mean any more . if it doesn t , thank you for help I over a bad three week . 
 the young man stand silent , as only those can be silent whose feeling be rag for expression . . . . 
 the beginning and ending of all human undertaking be untidy : the building of a house , the writing of a novel , the demolition of a bridge , and , eminently , the finish of a voyage . Clare land from the tender in the usual hurly - burly , and , still attend by young Croom , come to rest in the arm of her sister . 
  Dinny ! how sweet of you to face this bally - hooley ! my sister , Dinny Cherrell    Tony Croom . I shall be all right now , Tony . go and look after your own thing . 
  I ve get Fleur s car ,   say Dinny .   what about your trunk ? 
  they re book through to Condaford . 
  then we can go straight off . 
 the young man , go with they to the car , say   good - bye   with a jauntiness which deceive no one ; and the car slide away from the dock . 
 side by side the sister look at each other , a long and affectionate scrutiny ; and their hand lay , squeeze together , on the rug . 
  well , ducky !   say Dinny , at last .   lovely to see you ! be I wrong to read between the line ? 
  no . I m not go back to he , Dinny . 
  no , never , non ? 
  no , never , non ! 
  oh ! dear ! poor darling ! 
  I win t go into it , but it become impossible .   Clare be silent , then add suddenly , with a toss back of her head :   quite impossible ! 
  do he consent to your coming ? 
 Clare shake her head .   I slip off . he be away . I wirelesse he , and write from Suez . 
 there be another silence . then Dinny squeeze her hand and say : 
  I be always afraid of it . 
  the bad of it be I haven t a penny . be there anything in hat now , Dinny ? 
   all british   hat    I wonder . 
  or , perhaps , I could breed dog    bull terrier ; what d you think ? 
  I don t at present . we ll enquire . 
  how be thing at Condaford ? 
  we rub on . Jean have go out to Hubert again , but the baby s there    just a year old now . Cuthbert Conway Cherrell . I suppose we shall call he   cuff .   he s rather a duck . 
  thank God I haven t that complication ! certain thing have their advantage .   her face have the hardness of a face on a coin . 
  have you have any word from he ? 
  no , but I shall , when he realise that I mean it . 
  be there another woman ? 
 Clare shrug . 
 again Dinny s hand close on her . 
  I m not go to make a song of my affair , Dinny . 
  be he likely to come home about it ? 
  I don t know . I win t see he if he do . 
  but , darling , you ll be hopelessly hang up . 
  oh ! don t let s bother about I . how have you be ?   and she look critically at her sister :   you look more Botticellian than ever . 
  I ve become an adept at skimp . also , I ve go in for bee . 
  do they pay ? 
  not at present . but on a ton of honey we could make about seventy pound . 
  how much honey do you have this year ? 
  about two hundredweight . 
  be there any horse still ? 
  yes , we ve save the horse , so far . I ve get a scheme for a Condaford Grange bakery . the home farm be grow wheat at double what we sell it at . I want to mill and bake our own and supply the neighbourhood . the old mill could be set go for a few pound , and there s a building for the bakery . it want about three hundred to start it . we ve nearly decide to cut enough timber . 
  the local trader will rage furiously . 
  they will . 
  can it really pay ? 
  at a ton of wheat to the acre    vide Whitaker    we reckon thirty acre of our wheat , plus as much canadian to make good light bread , would bring we in more than eight hundred and fifty pound , less , say , five hundred , cost of mill and bake . it would mean bake one hundred and sixty two - pound loaf a day and sell about 56,000 loaf a year . we should need to supply eighty household , but that s only the village , more or less . and we d make the good and bright bread . 
  three hundred and fifty a year profit ,   say Clare .   I wonder . 
  so do I ,   say Dinny .   experience doesn t tell I that every estimate of profit should be halve , because I haven t have any , but I suspect it . but even half would just tip the beam the right way for we , and we could extend operation gradually . we could plough a lot of grass in time . 
  it s a scheme ,   say Clare ,   but would the village back you ? 
  so far as I ve sound they    yes . 
  you d want somebody to run it . 
  m yes . it would have to be someone who didn t mind what he do . of course he d have the future , if it go . 
  I wonder ,   say Clare , again , and wrinkle her brow . 
  who ,   ask Dinny suddenly ,   be that young man ? 
  Tony Croom ? oh ! he be on a tea plantation , but they close down .   and she look her sister full in the face . 
  Pleasant ? 
  yes , rather a dear . he want a job , by the way . 
  so do about three million other . 
  include I . 
  you haven t come back to a very cheery England , darling . 
  I gather we fall off the gold standard or something while I be in the Red Sea . what be the gold standard ? 
  it s what you want to be on when you re off , and to be off when you re on . 
  I see . 
  the trouble , apparently , be that our export and carrying - trade profit and interest from investment abroad don t any long pay for our import ; so we re live beyond our income . Michael say anybody could have see that come ; but we think   it would be all right on the night .   and it isn t. Hence the National Government and the election . 
  can they do anything if they remain in ? 
  Michael say   yes ; but he s notably hopeful . Uncle Lawrence say they can put a drag on panic , prevent money go out of the country , keep the pound fairly steady , and stop profiteer ; but that nothing under a wide and definite reconstruction that will take twenty year will do the trick ; and during that time we shall all be poor . unfortunately no Government , he say , can prevent we like play well than work , hoard to pay these awful taxis , or prefer the present to the future . he also say that if we think people will work as they do in the war to save the country , we re wrong ; because , instead of be one people against an outside enemy , we re two people against the inside enemy of ourselves , with quite opposite view as to how our salvation be to come . 
  do he think the socialist have a cure ? 
  no ; he say they ve forget that no one will give they food if they can neither produce it nor pay for it . he say that communism or free trade socialism only have a chance in a country which feed itself . you see , I ve be learn it up . they all use the word Nemesis a good deal . 
  Phew ! where be we go now , Dinny ? 
  I think you d like lunch at Fleur s ; afterwards we can take the three - fifty to Condaford . 
 then there be silence , during which each think seriously about the other , and neither be happy . for Clare be feel in her eld sister the subtle change which follow in one whose spring have be break and mend to go on with . and Dinny be think :   poor child ! now we ve both be in the war . what will she do ? and how can I help she ? 
 chapter 2 

  what a nice lunch !   say Clare , eat the sugar at the bottom of her coffee cup :   the first meal on shore be lovely ! when you get on board a ship and read the first menu , you think :   my goodness ! what an enchanting lot of thing !   and then you come down to cold ham at nearly every meal . do you know that steal disappointment ? 
  Don t I ?   say Fleur .   the curry use to be good , though . 
  not on the return voyage . I never want to see a curry again . how s the Round Table Conference go ? 
  plod on . be Ceylon interested in India ? 
  not very . be Michael ? 
  we both be . 
 Clare s brow go up with delightful suddenness . 
  but you can t know anything about it . 
  I be in India , you know , and at one time I see a lot of indian student . 
  oh ! yes , student . that s the trouble . they re so advanced and the people be so backward . 
  if Clare s to see Kit and Kat before we start ,   say Dinny ,   we ought to go up , Fleur . 
 the visit to the nursery over , the sister resume their seat in the car . 
  Fleur always strike I ,   say Clare ,   as know so exactly what she want . 
  she get it , as a rule ; but there ve be exception . I ve always doubt whether she really want Michael . 
  D you mean a love affair go wrong ? 
 Dinny nod . Clare look out of the window . 
  well , she s not remarkable in that . 
 her sister do not answer . 
  train ,   Dinny say , in their empty third - class compartment ,   always have great open space now . 
  I rather dread see Mother and Dad , Dinny , have make such an almighty bloomer . I really must get something to do . 
  yes , you win t be happy at Condaford for long . 
  it isn t that . I want to prove that I m not the complete idiot . I wonder if I could run an hotel . english hotel be still pretty backward . 
  good idea . it s strenuous , and you d see lot of people . 
  be that caustic ? 
  no , darling , just common sense ; you never like be bury . 
  how do one go to work to get such a thing ? 
  you have I there . but now s the time if ever , nobody s go to be able to travel . but I m afraid there s a technical side to manage hotel that have to be learn . your title might help . 
  I shouldn t use his name . I should call myself Mrs. Clare . 
  I see . be you sure it wouldn t be wise to tell I more about thing ? 
 Clare sit silent for a little , then say suddenly :   he s a sadist . 
 look at her flushed face , Dinny say :   I ve never understand exactly what that mean . 
  seek sensation , and get more sensation when you hurt the person you get it from . a wife be most convenient . 
  oh ! darling ! 
  there be a lot first , my rid whip be only the last straw . 
  you don t mean   !   cry Dinny , horrify . 
  oh ! yes . 
 Dinny come over to her side and put her arm round she . 
  but , Clare , you must get free ! 
  and how ? my word against his . besides , who would make a show of beastliness ? you re the only person I could ever ever speak to of it . 
 Dinny get up and let down the window . her face be as flush as her sister s. she hear Clare say dully : 
  I come away the first moment I could . it s none of it fit for publication . you see , ordinary passion pall after a bit , and it s a hot climate . 
  oh ! heaven !   say Dinny , and sit down again opposite . 
  my own fault . I always know it be thin ice , and I ve pop through , that s all . 
  but , darling , at twenty - four you simply can t stay married and not married . 
  I don t see why not ; mariage manqué be very steadying to the blood . all I m worry about be get a job . I m not go to be a drag on Dad . be his head above water , Dinny ? 
  not quite . we be break even , but this last taxation will just duck we . the trouble be how to get on without reduce staff . everyone s in the same boat . I always feel that we and the village be one . we ve get to sink or swim together , and somehow or other we re go to swim . hence my bakery scheme . 
  if I haven t get another job , could I do the delivering ? I suppose we ve still get the old car . 
  Darling , you can help any way you like . but it all have to be start . that ll take till after Christmas . in the meantime there s the election . 
  who be our candidate ? 
  his name be Dornford    a new man , quite decent . 
  will he want canvasser ? 
  rather ! 
  all right . that ll be something to do for a start . be this National Government any use ? 
  they talk of   complete their work ; but at present they don t tell we how . 
  I suppose they ll quarrel among themselves the moment a constructive scheme be put up to they . it s all beyond I . but I can go round say   Vote for Dornford .   how s Aunt Em ? 
  she s come to stay tomorrow . she suddenly write that she hadn t see the baby ; say she s feel romantic    want to have the priest s room , and will I see that   no one bother to do she up behind , and that .   she s exactly the same . 
  I often think about she ,   say Clare .   extraordinarily restful . 
 after that there be a long silence , Dinny think about Clare and Clare think about herself . presently , she grow tired of that and look across at her sister . have Dinny really get over that affair of hers with Wilfrid Desert of which Hubert have write with such concern when it be on , and such relief when it be off ? she have ask that her affair should never be speak of , Hubert have say , but that be over a year ago . could one venture , or would she curl up like a hedgehog ?   Poor Dinny !   she think :   I m twenty - four , so she s twenty - seven !   and she sit very still look at her sister s profile . it be charming , the more so for that slight tip - tilt of the nose which give to the face a touch of adventurousness . her eye be as pretty as ever    that cornflower blue wear well ; and their fringing be unexpectedly dark with such chestnut hair . still , the face be thin , and have lose what Uncle Lawrence use to call its   bubble and squeak .    I should fall in love with she if I be a man ,   think Clare ,   she s good . but it s rather a sad face , now , except when she s talk .   and Clare droop her lid , spy through her lash : no ! one could not ask ! the face she spy on have a sort of hard - win privacy that it would be unpardonable to disturb . 
  Darling ,   say Dinny ,   would you like your old room ? I m afraid the fantail have multiply exceedingly    they coo a lot just under it . 
  I shan t mind that . 
  and what do you do about breakfast ? will you have it in your room ? 
  my dear , don t bother about I in any way . if anybody do , I shall feel dreadful . England again on a day like this ! grass be really lovely stuff , and the elm tree , and that blue look ! 
  just one thing , Clare . would you like I to tell Dad and Mother , or would you rather I say nothing ? 
 Clare s lip tighten . 
  I suppose they ll have to know that I m not go back . 
  yes ; and something of the reason . 
  just general impossibility , then . 
 Dinny nod .   I don t want they to think you in the wrong . we ll let other people think that you re home for your health . 
  Aunt Em ?   say Clare . 
  I ll see to she . she ll be absorb in the baby , anyway . here we be , very nearly . 
 Condaford Church come into view , and the little group of house , mostly thatch , which form the nucleus of that scatter parish . the home - farm building could be see , but not the Grange , for , situate on the lowly level dear to ancestor , it be wrap from the sight in tree . 
 Clare , flatten her nose against the window , say : 
  it give you a thrill . be you as fond of home as ever , Dinny ? 
  Fonder . 
  it s funny . I love it , but I can t live in it . 
  very English    hence America and the Dominions . take your dressing - case , and I ll take the suitcase . 
 the drive up through the lane , where the elm be fleck by little golden patch of turn leaf , be short and sweet in the lowered sunlight , and end with the usual rush of dog from the dark hall . 
  this one s new ,   say Clare , of the black spaniel sniff at her stocking . 
  yes , Foch . Scaramouch and he have sign the Kellogg Pact , so they don t observe it . I m a sort of Manchuria .   and Dinny throw open the drawing - room door . 
  here she be , Mother . 
 advance towards her mother , who stand smile , pale and tremulous , Clare feel choky for the first time . to have to come back like this and disturb their peace ! 
  well , Mother darling ,   she say ,   here s your bad penny ! you look just the same , bless you ! 
 emerge from that warm embrace , Lady Cherrell look at her daughter shyly and say : 
  Dad s in his study . 
  I ll fetch he ,   say Dinny . 
 in that barren abode , which still have its military and austere air , the General be fidget with a gadget he have design to save time in the putting on of rid boot and breech . 
  well ?   he say . 
  she s all right , dear , but it be a split , and I m afraid complete . 
  that s bad !   say the General , frown . 
 Dinny take his lapel in her hand . 
  it s not her fault . but I wouldn t ask she any question , Dad . let s take it that she s just on a visit ; and make it as nice for she as we can . 
  what s the fellow be do ? 
  oh ! his nature . I know there be a streak of cruelty in he . 
  how d you mean    know it , Dinny ? 
  the way he smile    his lip . 
 the General utter a sound of intense discomfort . 
  come along !   he say :   tell I later . 
 with Clare he be perhaps rather elaborately genial and open , ask no question except about the Red Sea and the scenery of Ceylon , his knowledge of which be confine to its spicy offshore scent and a stroll in the Cinnamon Gardens at Colombo . Clare , still emotional from the meeting with her mother ; be grateful for his reticence . she escape rather quickly to her room , where her bag have already be unpacked . 
 at its dormer window she stand listen to the coorooing of the fantail and the sudden flutter and flip - flap of their wing climb the air from the yew - hedge garden . the sun , very low , be still shin through an elm tree . there be no wind , and her nerve suck up repose in that pigeon - haunt stillness , scent so differently from Ceylon . native air , deliciously sane , fresh and homespun , with a faint tang of burn leaf . she could see the thread blue smoke from where the gardener have light a small bonfire in the orchard . and almost at once she light a cigarette . the whole of Clare be in that simple action . she could never quite rest and be still , must always move on to that fuller savour which for such nature ever recede . a fantail on the gutter of the slop stone roof watch she with a soft dark little eye , preen itself slightly . beautifully white it be , and have a pride of body ; so too have that small round mulberry tree which have drop a ring of leaf , with their under uppermost , spangle the grass . the last of the sunlight be stir in what yellowish - green foliage be leave , so that the tree have an enchanted look . seventeen month since she have stand at this window and look down over that mulberry tree at the field and the rise covert ! seventeen month of foreign sky and tree , foreign scent and sound and water . all new and rather exciting , tantalising , unsatisfying . no rest ! certainly none in the white house with the wide verandah she have occupy at Kandy . at first she have enjoy , then she have wonder if she enjoy , then she have know she be not enjoy , lastly she have hat it . and now it be all over and she be back ! she flip the ash off her cigarette and stretch herself , and the fantail rise with a fluster . 
 chapter 3 

 Dinny be   see to   Aunt Em . it be no mean process . with ordinary people one have question and answer and the thing be over . but with Lady Mont word be not consecutive like that . she stand with a verbena sachet in her hand , sniff , while Dinny unpacked for she . 
  this be delicious , Dinny . Clare look rather yellow . it isn t a baby , be it ? 
  no , dear . 
  Pity ! when we be in Ceylon everyone be havin   baby . the baby elephant    so enticin ! in this room    we always play a game of feedin   the catholic priest with a basket from the roof . your father use to be on the roof , and I be the priest . there be never anythin   worth eatin   in the basket . your Aunt Wilmet be station in a tree to call   Cooee   in case of Protestants . 
   Cooee   be a bit premature , Aunt Em . Australia wasn t discover under Elizabeth . 
  no . Lawrence say the Protestants at that time be devil . so be the Catholics . so be the Mohammedans . 
 Dinny wince and veil her face with a corset belt . 
  where shall I put these undie ? 
  so long as I see where . Don t stoop too much ! they be all devil then . animal be treat terribly . do Clare enjoy Ceylon ? 
 Dinny stand up with an armful of underthing . 
  not much . 
  why not ? liver ? 
  Auntie , you win t say anything , except to Uncle Lawrence and Michael , if I tell you ? there s be a split . 
 Lady Mont bury her nose in the verbena bag . 
  oh !   she say :   his mother look it . d you believe in   like mother like son ? 
  not too much . 
  I always think seventeen year   difference too much , Dinny . Lawrence say people say :   oh ! Jerry Corven !   and then don t say . so , what be it ? 
 Dinny bend over a drawer and arrange the thing . 
  I can t go into it , but he seem to be quite a beast . 
 Lady Mont tip the bag into the drawer , murmur :   poor dear Clare ! 
  so , Auntie , she s just to be home for her health . 
 Lady Mont put her nose into a bowl of flower .   Boswell and Johnson call they   God - eat - yer .   they don t smell . what disease could Clare have    nerve ? 
  Climate , Auntie . 
  so many Anglo - Indians go back and back , Dinny . 
  I know , but for the present . something s bind to happen . so not even to Fleur , please . 
  Fleur will know whether I tell she or not . she s like that . have Clare a young man ? 
  oh ! no !   and Dinny lift a puce - coloured wrapper , recall the expression of the young man when he be say good - bye . 
  on board ship ,   murmur her Aunt dubiously . 
 Dinny change the subject . 
  be Uncle Lawrence very political just now ? 
  yes , so borin . thing always sound so when you talk about they . be your candidate here safe , like Michael ? 
  he s new , but he ll get in . 
  marry ? 
  no . 
 Lady Mont incline her head slightly to one side and scrutinise her niece from under half - droop lid . 
 Dinny take the last thing out of the trunk . it be a pot of antiphlogistine . 
  that s not british , Auntie . 
  for the chest . Delia put it in . I ve have it , year . have you talk to your candidate in private ? 
  I have . 
  how old be he ? 
  rather under forty , I should say . 
  do he do anything besides ? 
  he s a K.C. 
  what s his name ? 
  Dornford . 
  there be dornford when I be a girl . where be that ? ah ! algecira ! he be a Colonel at Gibraltar . 
  that would be his father , I expect . 
  then he hasn t any money . 
  only what he make at the Bar . 
  but they don t    under forty . 
  he do , I think . 
  Energetic ? 
  very . 
  Fair ? 
  no , darkish . he win the Bar point - to - point this year . now , darling , will you have a fire at once , or last till dress time ? 
  last . I want to see the baby . 
  all right , he ought to be just in from his pram . your bathroom s at the foot of these stair , and I ll wait for you in the nursery . 
 the nursery be the same mullion - windowe , low - pitch room as that wherein Dinny and Aunt Em herself have receive their first impression of that jigsaw puzzle call life ; and in it the baby be practise his totter . whether he would be a Charwell or a Tasburgh when he grow up seem as yet uncertain . his nurse , his aunt and his great - aunt stand , in triangular admiration , for he to fall alternatively into their outstretche hand . 
  he doesn t crow ,   say Dinny . 
  he do in the morning , Miss. 
  down he go !   say Lady Mont. 
  Don t cry , darling ! 
  he never cry , Miss. 
  that s Jean . Clare and I cry a lot till we be about seven . 
  I cry till I be fifteen ,   say Lady Mont ,   and I begin again when I be forty - five . do you cry , Nurse ? 
  we be too large a family , my lady . there wasn t room like . 
  Nanny have a lovely mother    five sister as good as gold . 
 the nurse s fresh cheek grow fresher ; she droop her chin , smile , shy as a little girl . 
  take care of bow leg !   say Lady Mont :   that s enough totterin . 
 the nurse , retrieve the still persistent baby , place he in his cot , whence he frown solemnly at Dinny , who say : 
  Mother s devoted to he . she think he ll be like Hubert . 
 Lady Mont make the sound suppose to attract baby . 
  when do Jean come home again ? 
  not till Hubert s next long leave . 
 Lady Mont s gaze rest on her niece . 
  the rector say Alan have another year on the China station . 
 Dinny , dangle a bead chain over the baby , pay no attention . never since the summer evening last year , when she come back home after Wilfrid s flight , have she make or suffer any allusion to her feeling . no one , perhaps not even she herself , know whether she be heart - whole once more . it be , indeed , as if she have no heart . so long , so earnestly have she resist its aching , that it have slink away into the shadow of her inmost being , where even she could hardly feel it beat . 
  what would you like to do now , Auntie ? he have to go to sleep . 
  take I round the garden . 
 they go down and out on to the terrace . 
  oh !   say Dinny , with dismay ,   Glover have go and beat the leaf off the little mulberry . they be so lovely , shiver on the tree and come off in a ring on the grass . really gardener have no sense of beauty . 
  they don t like sweepin . where s the cedar I plant when I be five ? 
 they come on it round the corner of an old wall , a spread youngster of nearly sixty , with flattening bough gild by the level sunlight . 
  I should like to be bury under it , Dinny . only I suppose they win t. there ll be something stuffy . 
  I mean to be burn and scatter . look at they plough in that field . I do love horse move slowly against a skyline of tree . 
   the lowin   kine ,    say Lady Mont irrelevantly . 
 a faint clink come from a sheepfold to the East . 
  Listen , Auntie ! 
 Lady Mont thrust her arm within her niece s. 
  I ve often think ,   she say ,   that I should like to be a goat . 
  not in England , tie to a stake and graze in a mangy little circle . 
  no , with a bell on a mountain . a he - goat , I think , so as not to be milk . 
  come and see our new cutting bed , Auntie . there s nothing now , of course , but dahlia , godetia , chrysanthemum , Michaelmas daisy , and a few pentstemon and cosmia . 
  Dinny ,   say Lady Mont , from among the dahlia ,   about Clare ? they say divorce be very easy now . 
  until you try for it , I expect . 
  there s desertion and that . 
  but you have to be desert . 
  well , you say he make she . 
  it s not the same thing , dear . 
  lawyer be so fussy about the law . there be that magistrate with the long nose in Hubert s extradition . 
  oh ! but he turn out quite human . 
  how be that ? 
  tell the Home Secretary that Hubert be speak the truth . 
  a dreadful business ,   murmur Lady Mont ,   but nice to remember . 
  it have a happy ending ,   say Dinny quickly . 
 Lady Mont stand , ruefully regard she . 
 and Dinny , star at the flower , say suddenly :   Aunt Em , somehow there must be a happy ending for Clare . 
 chapter 4 

 the custom know as canvass , more peculiar even than its name , be in full blast round Condaford . every villager have be invite to observe how appropriate it would be if they vote for Dornford , and how equally appropriate it would be if they vote for Stringer . they have be exhort publicly and vociferously , by lady in car , by lady out of car , and in the privacy of their home by voice speak out of trumpet . by newspaper and by leaflet they have be urge to perceive that they alone could save the country . they have be ask to vote early , and only just not ask to vote often . to their attention have be bring the startling dilemma that whichever way they vote the country would be save . they have be exhort by people who know everything , it seem , except how it would be save . neither the candidate nor their lady , neither the mysterious disembodied voice , nor the still more incorporeal print , have make the faint attempt to tell they that . it be well not ; for , in the first place , no one know . and , in the second place , why mention the particular when the general would serve ? why draw attention , even , to the fact that the general be make up of the particular ; or to the political certainty that promise be never performance ? well , far well , to make large loose assertion , abuse the other side , and call the elector the sane and sound body of people in the world . 
 Dinny be not canvass . she be   no good at it ,   she say ; and , perhaps , secretly she perceive the peculiarity of the custom . Clare , if she notice any irony about the business , be too anxious to be do something to abstain . she be greatly help by the way everybody take it . they have always be   canvass ,   and they always would be . it be a harmless enough diversion to their ear , rather like the buzzing of gnat that do not bite . as to their vote , they would record they for quite other reason    because their father have vote this or that before they , because of something connect with their occupation , because of their landlord , their church , or their trade union ; because they want a change , while not expect anything much from it ; and not a few because of their common sense . 
 Clare , dread question , patter as little as possible and come quickly to their baby or their health . she generally end by ask what time they would like to be fetch . note the hour in a little book , she would come out not much the wiser . be a Charwell    that be to say , no   foreigner    she be take as a matter of course ; and though not , like Dinny , personally know to they all , she be part of an institution , Condaford without Charwells be still almost inconceivable . 
 she be drive back from this dutiful pastime towards the Grange about four o clock on the Saturday before the election , when a voice from an overtaking two - seater call her name , and she see young Tony Croom . 
  what on earth be you do here , Tony ? 
  I couldn t go any long without a glimpse of you . 
  but , my dear boy , to come down here be too terribly point . 
  I know , but I ve see you . 
  you weren t go to call , be you ? 
  if I didn t see you otherwise . Clare , you look so lovely ! 
  that , if true , be not a reason for queer my pitch at home . 
  the last thing I want to do ; but I ve get to see you now and then , otherwise I shall go batty . 
 his face be so earnest and his voice so move , that Clare feel for the first time stir in that hackneye region , the heart . 
  that s bad ,   she say ;   because I ve get to find my foot , and I can t have complication . 
  let I kiss you just once . then I should go back happy . 
 still more stir , Clare thrust forward her cheek . 
  well , quick !   she say . 
 he glue his lip to her cheek , but when he try to reach her lip she draw back . 
  no . now Tony , you must go . if you re to see I , it must be in Town . but what be the good of see I ? it ll only make we unhappy . 
  bless you for that   we .  
 Clare s brown eye smile ; their colour be like that of a glass of Malaga wine hold up to the light . 
  have you find a job ? 
  there be none . 
  it ll be well when the election s over . I m think of try to get with a milliner . 
  you ! 
  I must do something . my people here be as hard press as everybody else . now , Tony , you say you d go . 
  promise to let I know the first day you come up . 
 Clare nod , and re - start her engine . as the car slide forward gently , she turn her face and give he another smile . 
 he continue to stand with his hand to his head till the car round a bend and she be go . 
 turn the car into the stable yard , she be think   poor boy !   and feel the well for it . whatever her position in the eye of the law , or accord to morality , a young and pretty woman breathe more easily when inhale the incense of devotion . she may have strict intention , but she have also a sense of what be due to she , and a dislike of waste . Clare look the pretty and feel the happy all that evening . but the night be ride by the moon ; nearly full , it soar up in front of her window , discourage sleep . she get up and part the curtain . huddle into her fur coat , she stand at the window . there be evidently a frost , and a ground mist stretch like fleece over the field . the tall elm , rag - edge , seem to be sail slowly along over the white vapour . the earth out there be unknown by she , as if it have drop from that moon . she shiver . it might be beautiful , but it be cold , uncanny ; a frozen glamour . she think of the night in the Red Sea , when she lie with bedclothe throw off , and the very moon seem hot . on board that ship people have   talk   about she and Tony    she have see many sign of it , and hadn t care . why should she ? he have not even kiss she all those day . not even the evening he come to her state - room and she have show he photograph , and they have talk . a nice boy , modest and a gentleman ! and if he be in love , now , she couldn t help it    she hadn t try to   vamp   he . as to what would happen , life always trip one up , it seem , whatever one do ! thing must take care of themselves . to make resolution , plan , lie down what be call   a line of conduct ,   be not the slight use ! she have try that with Jerry . she shiver , then laugh , then go rigid with a sort of fury . no ! if Tony expect she to rush into his arm he be very much mistaken . sensual love ! she know it inside out . no , thank you ! as that moonlight , now , she be cold ! impossible to speak of it even to her Mother , whatever she and Dad might be think . 
 Dinny must have tell they something , for they have be most awfully decent . but even Dinny didn t know . nobody should ever know ! if only she have money it wouldn t matter .   ruin life ,   of course , and all that , be just old - fashioned tosh . life could always be amusing if one make it so . she be not go to skulk and mope . far from that ! but money she must somehow make . she shiver even in her fur coat . the moonlight seem to creep into one s bone . these old house    no central heating , because they couldn t afford to put it in ! the moment the election be over she would go up to London and scout round . Fleur might know of something . if there be no future in hat , one might get a political secretaryship . she could type , she know French well , people could read her handwriting . she could drive a car with anybody , or school a horse . she know all about country house life , manner , and precedence . there must be lot of Members who want somebody like she , who could tell they how to dress , and how to decline this and that without anybody mind , and generally do their crossword puzzle for they . she d have quite a lot of experience with dog , and some with flower , especially the arrangement of they in bowl and vas . and if it be a question of know anything about politic , she could soon mug that up . so , in that illusory cold moonshine , Clare could not see how they could fail to need she . with a salary and her own two hundred a year she could get along quite well ! the moon , behind an elm tree now , no long have its devastating impersonality , but rather an air of bright intrigue , peep through those still thick bough with a conspire eye . she hug herself , dance a few step to warm her foot , and slip back into her bed . . . . 
 Young Croom , in his borrow two - seater , have return to Town at an unobtrusive sixty mile an hour . his first kiss on Clare s cold but glow cheek have give he slight delirium . it be an immense step forward . he be not a vicious young man . that Clare be married be to he no advantage . but whether , if she have not be marry , his feeling towards she would have be of quite the same brand , be a question he leave unexamine . the subtle difference which creep into the charm of a woman who have know physical love , and the sting which the knowledge of that implant in a man s sens    such be food for a psychologist rather than for a straightforward young man really in love for the first time . he want she , as his wife if possible ; if that be not possible , in any other way that be . he have be in Ceylon three year , hard - worked , see few white woman , and none that he have care for . his passion have , hitherto , be for polo , and his meeting with Clare have come just as he have lose both job and polo . Clare fill for he a yawn gap . as with Clare , so with he in the matter of money , only more so . 
 he have some two hundred pound save , and would then be   bang up against it   unless he get a job . have return the two - seater to his friend s garage , he consider where he could dine most cheaply , and decide on his club . he be practically live there , except for a bedroom in Ryder Street , where he sleep and breakfast on tea and boil egg . a simple room it be , on the ground floor , with a bed and a dress cupboard , look out on the tall back of another building , the sort of room that his father , come on the Town in the   ninety , have sleep and breakfast in for half the money . 
 on Saturday night the Coffee House be desert , save for a certain number of   old buffer   accustom to week - ending in St. James s Street . Young Croom order the three - course dinner and eat it to the last crumb . he drink Bass , and go down to the smoking - room for a pipe . about to sink into an armchair , he notice stand before the fire a tallish thin man with twist dark eyebrow and a little white moustache , who be examine he through a tortoiseshell - rim monocle . act on the impulse of a lover craving connection with his lady , he say : 
  excuse I , sir , but aren t you Sir Lawrence Mont ? 
  that have be my lifelong conviction . 
 Young Croom smile . 
  then , sir , I meet your niece , Lady Corven , come home from Ceylon . she say you be a member here . my name s Croom . 
  ah !   say Sir Lawrence , drop his eyeglass :   I probably know your father    he be always here , before the war . 
  yes , he put I down at birth . I believe I m about the young in the Club . 
 Sir Lawrence nod .   so you meet Clare . how be she ? 
  all right , I think , sir . 
  let s sit down and talk about Ceylon . Cigar ? 
  thank you , sir , I have my pipe . 
  Coffee , anyway ? Waiter , two coffee . my wife be down at Condaford stay with Clare s people . an attractive young woman . 
 note those dark eye , rather like a snipe s , fix on he , young Croom regret his impulse . he have go red , but he say bravely : 
  yes , sir , I think she delightful . 
  do you know Corven ? 
  no ,   say young Croom shortly . 
  clever fellow . do you like Ceylon ? 
  oh ! yes . but it s give I up . 
  not go back ? 
  Afraid not . 
  it s a long time since I be there . India have rather smother it . be in India ? 
  no , sir . 
  difficult to know how far the people of India really want to cut the painter . seventy per cent peasant ! peasant want stable condition and a quiet life . I remember in Egypt before the war there be a strong nationalist agitation , but the fellaheen be all for Kitchener and stable british rule . we take Kitchener away and give they unstable condition in the war , and so they go on the other tack . what be you do in Ceylon ? 
  run a tea plantation . but they take up economy , amalgamate three plantation , and I wasn t want any more . do you think there s go to be a recovery , sir ? I can t understand economic . 
  nobody can . there be dozen of cause of the present state of thing , and people be always try to tie it to one . take England : there s the knock - out of russian trade , the comparative independence of european country , the great shrinkage of indian and chinese trade ; the high standard of british living since the war ; the increase of national expenditure from two hundred - odd million to eight hundred million , which mean nearly six hundred million a year less to employ labour with . when they talk of over - production be the cause , it certainly doesn t apply to we . we haven t produce so little for a long time past . then there s dumping , and shock bad organisation , and bad marketing of what little food we produce . and there s our habit of think it ll be   all right on the night ,   and general spoil - child attitude . well , those be all special english cause , except that the too high standard of living and the spoil - child attitude be american too . 
  and the other american cause , sir ? 
  the Americans certainly have over - produce and over - speculate . and they ve be live so high that they ve mortgage their future    instalment system and all that . then they re sit on gold , and gold doesn t hatch out . and , more than all , they don t realise yet that the money they lend to Europe during the war be practically money they d make out of the war . when they agree to general cancellation of debt they ll be agree to general recovery , include their own . 
  but will they ever agree ? 
  you never know what the Americans will do , they re looser - jointed than we of the old world . they re capable of the big thing , even in their own interest . be you out of a job ? 
  very much so . 
  what s your record ? 
  I be at Wellington and at Cambridge for two year . then this tea thing come along , and I take it like a bird . 
  what age be you ? 
  twenty - six . 
  any notion of what you want to do ? 
 Young Croom sit forward . 
  really , sir , I d have a shot at anything . but I m pretty good with horse . I think possibly I might get into a training stable ; or with a breeder ; or get a riding mastership . 
  quite an idea . it s queer about the horse    he s come in as he go out . I ll talk to my cousin Jack Muskham    he breed bloodstock . and he s get a bee in his bonnet about the re - introduction of arab blood into the english thoroughbred . in fact he s get some arab mare come over . just possibly he might want someone . 
 Young Croom flush and smile . 
  that would be frightfully kind of you , sir . it sound ideal . I ve have arab polo pony . 
  well ,   murmur Sir Lawrence thoughtfully ,   I don t know that anything excite my sympathy more than a man who really want a job and can t find one . we must get this election over first , though . unless the socialist be rout horse - breeder will have to turn their stock into potted meat . imagine have the dam of a Derby winner between brown bread and butter for your tea    real   Gentleman s Relish !  
 he get up . 
  I ll say good - night , now . my cigar will just last I home . 
 Young Croom rise too , and remain stand till that spare and active figure have vanish . 
  frightfully nice old boy !   he think , and in the depth of his armchair he resign himself to hope and to Clare s face wreathe by the fume of his pipe . 
 chapter 5 

 on that cold and misty evening , which all the newspaper have agree be to   make history ,   the Charwells sit in the drawing - room at Condaford round the portable wireless , a present from Fleur . would the voice breathe o er Eden , or would it be the striking of Fate s clock ? not one of those five but be solemnly convinced that the future of Great Britain hang in the balance ; convinced , too , that their conviction be detach from class or party . patriotism divorce from thought of vested interest govern , as they suppose , their mood . and if they make a mistake in so thinking , quite a number of other Britons be make it too . across Dinny s mind , indeed , do flit the thought :   do anyone know what will save the country and what win t ?   but , even by she , time and tide , incalculably roll , sway and mould the life of nation , be ungauge . newspaper and politician have do their work and stamp the moment for she as a turning point . in a sea - green dress , she sit , close to the   present from Fleur ,   wait to turn it on at ten o clock , and regulate its stridency . Aunt Em be work at a new piece of french tapestry , her slight aquilinity emphasise by tortoise - shell spectacle . the General nervously turn and re - turn the Times and keep take out his watch . Lady Charwell sit still and a little forward , like a child in Sunday School before she have become convinced that she be go to be bore . and Clare lie on the sofa , with the dog Foch on her foot . 
  Time , Dinny ,   say the General ;   turn the thing on . 
 Dinny finger a screw , and   the thing   burst into music .    ring on our finger and bell on our toe ,    she murmur ,    we have get music wherever we go .  
 the music stop , and the voice speak : 
  this be the first election result : Hornsey . . . conservative , no change . 
 the General add :   H m !   and the music begin again . 
 Aunt Em , look at the portable , say :   coax it , Dinny . that burrin ! 
  it always have that , Auntie . 
  Blore do something to ours with a penny . where be Hornsey    Isle of Wight ? 
  Middlesex , darling . 
  oh ! yes ! I be thinkin   of Southsea . there he go again . 
  these be some more election result . . . . conservative , gain from Labour . . . . conservative , no change . . . . conservative , gain from Labour . 
 the General add :   ha !   and the music begin again . 
  what nice large majority !   say Lady Mont :   Gratifyin ! 
 Clare get off the sofa and squat on a footstool against her mother s knee . the General have drop the Times . the   voice   speak again : 
   . . . Liberal National , gain from Labour . . . . conservative , no change . . . . conservative , gain from Labour . 
 again and again the music spurt up and die away ; and the voice speak . 
 Clare s face grow more and more vivid , and above her Lady Charwell s pale and gentle face wear one long smile . from time to time the General say :   by George !   and   this be something like ! 
 and Dinny think :   Poor Labour ! 
 on and on and on the voice breathe o er Eden . 
  Crushin ,   say Lady Mont :   I m gettin   sleepy . 
  go to bed , Auntie . I ll put a slip under your door when I come up . 
 Lady Charwell , too , get up . when they be go , Clare go back to the sofa and seem to fall asleep . the General sit on , hypnotise by the chant of victory . Dinny , with knee cross and eye close , be think :   will it really make a difference ; and , if it do , shall I care ? where be he ? listen as we be ? where ? where ?   not so often now , but quite often enough , that sense of groping for Wilfrid return to she . in all these sixteen month since he leave she she have find no mean of hearing of he . for all she know he might be dead . once    only once    she have break her resolve never to speak of her disaster , and have ask Michael . Compson Grice , his publisher , have , it seem receive a letter from he write in Bangkok , which say he be well and have begin to write . that be nine month ago . the veil , so little lift , have drop again . heartache    well , she be use to it . 
  Dad , it s two o clock . it ll be like this all the time now . Clare s asleep . 
  I m not ,   say Clare . 
  you ought to be . I ll let Foch out for his run , and we ll all go up . 
 the General rise . 
  Enough s as good as a feast . I suppose we d well . 
 Dinny open the french window and watch the dog Foch trot out in semblance of enthusiasm . it be cold , with a ground mist , and she shut the window . if she didn t he would neglect his ritual and with more than the semblance of enthusiasm trot in again . have kiss her father and Clare , she turn out the light and wait in the hall . the wood fire have almost die . she stand with her foot on the stone hearth , think . Clare have speak of try to get a secretaryship to some new Member of Parliament . judge by the return that be come in , there would be plenty of they . why not to their own new member ? he have din with they , and she have sit next he . a nice man , well read , not bigote . he even sympathise with Labour , but do not think they know their way about as yet . in fact he be rather notably what the drunken youth in the play call :   a Tory Socialist .   he have open out to she and be very frank and pleasant . an attractive man , with his crisp dark hair , brown complexion , little dark moustache and rather high soft voice ; a good sort , energetic and upright - looking . but probably he already have a secretary . however , if Clare be in earnest , one could ask . she cross the hall to the garden door . there be a seat in the porch outside , and under it Foch would be crouch , wait to be let in . sure enough , he emerge , flutter his tail , and pad towards the dog   communal water - bowl . how cold and silent ! nothing on the road ; even the owl quiet ; the garden and the field freeze , moonlit , still , away up to that long line of covert ! England silver and indifferent to her fate , disbelieve in the Voice o er Eden ; old and permanent and beautiful , even though the pound have go off gold . Dinny gaze at the unfeverish night . man and their policy    how little they matter , how soon they pass , a dissolve dew on the crystal immensity of God s toy ! how queer    the passionate intensity of one s heart , and the incalculable cold callousness of Time and Space ! to join , to reconcile ? . . . 
 she shiver and shut the door . 
 at breakfast the next morning she say to Clare : 
  shall we strike while the iron s hot , and go and see Mr. Dornford ? 
  why ? 
  in case he want a secretary , now he s in . 
  oh ! be he in ? 
  very much so . 
 Dinny read the figure . the usual rather formidable liberal opposition have be replace by a mere five thousand labour vote . 
  the word   national   be win this election ,   say Clare .   where I go canvass in the town they be all Liberals . I just use the word   national ,   and they fall . 
 hear that the new Member would be at his headquarters all the morning , the sister start about eleven o clock . there be so much come and go round the door that they do not like to enter . 
  I do hate ask for thing ,   say Clare . 
 Dinny , who hat it quite as much , answer : 
  wait here and I ll just go in and congratulate he . I might have a chance of put in a word . he s see you , of course . 
  oh ! yes , he s see I all right . 
 Eustace Dornford , K.C. , new member elect , be sit in a room that seem all open door , run his eye over the list his agent be put on the table before he . from one of those door Dinny could see his rid boot under the table , and his bowler hat , glove and rid whip upon it . now that she be nearly in the presence it seem impossible to intrude at such a moment , and she be just slip away when he look up . 
  excuse I a moment , Minns . Miss Cherrell ! 
 she stop and turn . he be smile and look pleased . 
  anything I can do for you ? 
 she put out her hand . 
  I m awfully glad you ve win . my sister and I just want to congratulate you . 
 he squeeze her hand , and Dinny think :   oh ! dear ! this be the last moment to ask he ,   but she say : 
  it s perfectly splendid , there s never be such a majority here . 
  and never will be again . that s my luck . where s your sister ? 
  in the car . 
  I d like to thank she for canvass . 
  oh !   say Dinny ,   she enjoy it ;   and , suddenly feel that it be now or never , add :   she s at a loose end , you know , badly want something to do . Mr. Dornford , you don t think    this be too bad    but I suppose she wouldn t be of any use to you as a secretary , would she ? there , it s out ! she do know the county pretty well ; she can type , and speak French , and German a little , if that s any use .   it have come with a rush , and she stand look at he ruefully . but his eager expression have not change . 
  let s go and see she ,   he say . 
 Dinny think :   gracious ! I hope he hasn t fall in love with she !   and she glance at he sidelong . still smile , his face look shrewd now . Clare be stand beside the car .   I wish ,   think Dinny ,   I have her coolness .   then she stand still and watch . all this triumphal business , these people come and go , those two talk so readily and quickly ; the clear and sparkling morning ! he come back to she . 
  thank you most awfully , Miss Cherrell . it ll do admirably . I do want someone , and your sister be very modest . 
  I think you d never forgive I for ask at such a moment . 
  always delighted for you to ask anything at any moment . I must go back now , but I ll hope to see you again very soon . 
 gaze after he as he re - enter the building , she think :   he have very nicely cut rid breech !   and she get into the car . 
  Dinny ,   say Clare , with a laugh ,   he s in love with you . 
  what ! 
  I ask for two hundred , and he make it two hundred and fifty at once . how do you do it in one evening ? 
  I didn t. it s you he s in love with , I m afraid . 
  no , no , my dear . I have eye , and I know it s you ; just as you know that Tony Croom be in love with I . 
  I could see that . 
  and I could see this . 
 Dinny say quietly :   that s absurd . when do you begin ? 
  he s go back to Town today . he live in the Temple    Harcourt Buildings . I shall go up this afternoon and start in the day after tomorrow . 
  where shall you live ? 
  I think I shall take an unfurnished room or a small studio , and decorate and furnish it gradually myself . it ll be fun . 
  Aunt Em be go back this afternoon . she would put you up till you find it . 
  well ,   say Clare , ponder ;   perhaps . 
 just before they reach home Dinny say : 
  what about Ceylon , Clare ? have you think any more ? 
  what s the good of thinking ? I suppose he ll do something , but I don t know what , and I don t care . 
  Haven t you have a letter ? 
  no . 
  well , darling , be careful . 
 Clare shrug :   oh ! I ll be careful . 
  could he get leave if he want ? 
  I expect so . 
  you ll keep in touch with I , win t you ? 
 Clare lean sideways from the wheel and give her cheek a kiss . 

 chapter 6 

 three day after their meeting at the Coffee House , young Croom receive a letter from Sir Lawrence Mont , say that his cousin Muskham be not expect the arab mare till the spring . in the meantime he would make a note of Mr. Croom and a point of see he soon . do Mr. Croom know any vernacular Arabic ? 
  no ,   think young Croom ,   but I know Stapylton . 
 Stapylton , of the Lancers , who have be his senior at Wellington , be home from India on leave . a noted polo player , he would be sure to know the horse jargon of the East ; but , have break his thigh - bone schooling a steeplechaser , he would keep ; the business of find an immediate   job of work   would not . Young Croom continue his research . everyone say :   wait till the election s over ! 
 on the morning after the election , therefore , he issue from Ryder Street with the great expectation , and , on the evening after , return to the Coffee House , with the less , think :   I might just as well have go to Newmarket and see the Cambridgeshire . 
 the porter hand he a note , and his heart begin to thump . seek a corner , he read : 
  DEAR TONY 
  I have get the job of secretary to our new member , Eustace Dornford , who s a K.C. in the Temple . so I ve come up to Town . till I find a tent of my own , I shall be at my Aunt Lady Mont s in Mount Street . I hope you ve be as lucky . I promise to let you know when I come up ; but I adjure you to sense and not sensibility , and to due regard for pride and prejudice . 
  your shipmate and well - wisher , 
  clare CORVEN . 
  the darling !   he think .   what luck !   he read the note again , place it beneath the cigarette case in his left - hand waistcoat pocket , and go into the smoking - room . there , on a sheet of paper stamp with the Club s immemorial design , he pour out an ingenuous heart : 
  DARLING CLARE  
  your note have perk I up no end . that you will be in Town be magnificent news . your uncle have be very kind to I , and I shall simply have to call and thank he . so do look out for I about six o clock tomorrow . I spend all my time hunt a job , and be begin to realise what it mean to poor devil to be turn down day after day . when my pouch be empty , and that s not far away , it ll be even bad for I . no dole for this child , unfortunately . I hope the pundit you re go to take in hand be a decent sort . I always think of M.P. s as a bit on the wooden side . and somehow I can t see you among Bills and petition and letter about public - house licence and so forth . however , I think you re splendid to want to be independent . what a thump majority ! if they can t do thing with that behind they , they can t do thing at all . it s quite impossible for I not to be in love with you , you know , and to long to be with you all day and all night , too . but I m go to be as good as I can , because the very last thing I want be to cause you uneasiness of any sort . I think of you all the time , even when I m search the marble countenance of some fish - face blighter to see if my piteous tale be weaken his judgment . the fact be I love you terribly . to - morrow , Thursday , about six !   good - night , dear and lovely one , 
  your TONY . 
 have look up Sir Lawrence s number in Mount Street , he address the note , lick the envelope with passion , and go out to post it himself . then , suddenly , he do not feel inclined to return to the Coffee House . the place have a grudge against his state of mind . club be so damned male , and their whole attitude to woman so after - dinnerish    half contempt , half lechery ! funk - hole they be , anyway , full of comfort , secure against woman , immune from writ ; and man all have the same armchair look once they get inside . the Coffee House , too , about the old of all club , be stuff with regular buffer , man you couldn t imagine outside a club .   no !   he think .   I ll have a chop somewhere , and go to that thing at Drury Lane . 
 he get a seat rather far back in the upper box , but , his sight be very good , he see quite well . he be soon absorb . he have be out of England long enough to have some sentiment about she . this pictorial pageant of her history for the last thirty year move he more than he would have confess to anyone sit beside he . boer war , death of the Queen , sink of the titanic , Great War , Armistice , health to 1931    if anyone ask he afterwards , he would probably say :   marvellous ! but give I the pip rather !   while sit there it seem more than the   pip ; the heartache of a lover , who want happiness with his mistress and can not reach it ; the feeling of one who try to stand upright and firm and be for ever be sway this way and that . the last word rang in his ear as he go out :   Greatness and dignity and peace .   move and damn ironical ! he take a cigarette from his case and light it . the night be dry and he walk , thread his way through the stream of traffic , with the melancholy howling of street - singer in his ear . sky - sign and garbage ! People roll home in their car , and homeless night - bird !   greatness and dignity and peace ! 
  I must absolutely have a drink ,   he think . the Club seem possible again now , even invite , and he make towards it .    Farewell , Piccadilly ! good - bye , Leicester Square !    marvellous that scene , where those tommie march up in a spiral through the dark mist , whistle ; while in the lighted front of the stage three paint girl rattle out :    we don t want to lose you , but we think you ought to go .    and from the box on the stage at the side people look down and clap ! the whole thing there ! the gaiety on those girl   paint face get more and more put - on and heart - breaking ! he must go again with Clare ! would it move she ? and suddenly he perceive that he didn t know . what do one know about anyone , even the woman one love ? his cigarette be scorch his lip , and he spit out the butt . that scene with the honeymoon couple lean over the side of the Titantic , everything before they , and nothing before they but the cold deep sea ! do that couple know anything except that they desire each other ? life be damn queer , when you think about it ! he turn up the Coffee House step , feel as if he have live long since he go down they . . . . 
 it be just six o clock when he ring the bell at Mount Street on the following day . 
 a butler , with slightly raise eyebrow , open the door . 
  be Sir Lawrence Mont at home ? 
  no , sir . Lady Mont be in , sir . 
  I m afraid I don t know Lady Mont. I wonder if I could see Lady Corven for a moment ? 
 one of the butler s eyebrow rise still higher .   ah !   he seem to be think . 
  if you ll give I your name , sir . 
 Young Croom produce a card . 
   Mr. James Bernard Croom ,    chant the butler . 
  Mr. Tony Croom , tell she , please . 
  quite ! if you ll wait in here a moment . oh ! here be Lady Corven . 
 a voice from the stair say : 
  Tony ? what punctuality ! come up and meet my Aunt . 
 she be lean over the stair - rail , and the butler have disappear . 
  put your hat down . how can you go about without a coat ? I shiver all the time . 
 Young Croom come close below she . 
  Darling !   he murmur . 
 she place one finger to her lip , then stretch it down to he , so that he could just reach it with his own . 
  come along !   she have open a door when he reach the top , and be say :   this be a shipmate , Aunt Em . he s come to see Uncle Lawrence . Mr. Croom , my Aunt , Lady Mont. 
 Young Croom be aware of a presence slightly sway towards he . a voice say :   ah ! ship ! of course ! how d you do ? 
 Young Croom , aware that he have be   place ,   see Clare regard he with a slightly mock smile . if only they could be alone five minute , he would kiss that smile off her face ! he would   ! 
  tell I about Ceylon , Mr. Craven . 
  Croom , Auntie . Tony Croom . well call he Tony . it isn t his name , but everybody do . 
  Tony ! always hero . I don t know why . 
  this Tony be quite ordinary . 
  Ceylon . do you know she there , Mr.    Tony ? 
  no . we only meet on the ship . 
  ah ! Lawrence and I use to sleep on deck . that be in the   naughty ninety .   the river here use to be full of punt , I remember . 
  it still be , Aunt Em . 
 Young Croom have a sudden vision of Clare and himself in a punt up a quiet backwater . he rouse himself and say : 
  I go to Cavalcade last night . great ! 
  ah !   say Lady Mont.   that remind I .   she leave the room . 
 Young Croom spring up . 
  Tony ! Behave ! 
  but surely that s what she go for ! 
  Aunt Em be extraordinarily kind , and I m not go to abuse her kindness . 
  but , Clare , you don t know what   
  yes , I do . sit down again . 
 Young Croom obey . 
  now listen , Tony ! I ve have enough physiology to last I a long time . if you and I be go to be pal , it s get to be platonic . 
  oh , God !   say young Croom . 
  but it s get to ; or else    we simply aren t go to see each other . 
 Young Croom sit very still with his eye fix on her , and there pass through her the thought :   it s go to torture he . he look too nice for that . I don t believe we ought to see each other . 
  look !   she say , gently ,   you want to help I , don t you ? there s lot of time , you know . some day    perhaps . 
 Young Croom grasp the arm of his chair . his eye have a look of pain . 
  very well ,   he say slowly ,   anything so long as I can see you . I ll wait till it mean something more than physiology to you . 
 Clare sit examine the glacé toe of she slowly wiggle shoe ; suddenly she look straight into his brood eye . 
  if ,   she say ,   I have not be marry , you would wait cheerfully and it wouldn t hurt you . think of I like that . 
  unfortunately I can t. who could ? 
  I see . I be fruit , not blossom    taint by physiology . 
  Don t ! oh ! Clare , I will be anything you want to you . and if I m not always as cheery as a bird , forgive I . 
 she look at he through her eyelash and say :   good ! 
 then come silence , during which she be conscious that he be fix she in his mind from her shingled dark head to her glacé kid toe . she have not live with Jerry Corven without have be make conscious of every detail of her body . she could not help its grace or its provocation . she do not want to torture he , but she could not find it unpleasant that she do . Queer how one could be sorry and yet please , and , withal , sceptical and a little bitter . give yourself , and after a few month how much would he want you ! she say abruptly : 
  well , I ve find room    a quaint little hole    use to be an antique shop , in a disuse mew . 
 he say eagerly :   sound jolly . when be you go in ? 
  next week . 
  can I help ? 
  if you can distemper wall . 
  rather ! I do all my bungalow in Ceylon , two or three time over . 
  we should have to work in the evening , because of my job . 
  what about your boss ? be he decent ? 
  very , and in love with my sister . at least , I think so . 
  oh !   say young Croom dubiously . 
 Clare smile . he be so obviously think :   could a man be that when he see you every day ? 
  when can I come first ? 
  to - morrow evening , if you like . it s 2 , Melton Mews , off Malmesbury Square . I ll get the stuff in the morning , and we ll begin upstairs . say six - thirty . 
  Splendid ! 
  only , Tony    no importunity .   Life be real , life be earnest .  
 grinning ruefully , he put his hand on his heart . 
  and you must go now . I ll take you down and see if my Uncle s come in . 
 Young Croom stand up . 
  what be happen about Ceylon ?   he say , abruptly .   be you be worry ? 
 Clare shrug .   nothing be happen so far . 
  that can t possibly last . have you think thing out ? 
  thinking win t help I . it s quite likely he ll do nothing . 
  I can t bear your being     he stop . 
  come along ,   say Clare , and lead the way downstairs . 
  I don t think I ll try to see your Uncle ,   say young Croom .   to - morrow at half - past six , then .   he raise her hand to his lip , and march to the door . there he turn . she be stand with her head a little on one side , smile . he go out , distract . 
 a young man , suddenly awaken amid the dove of Cytherea , conscious for the first time of the mysterious magnetism which radiate from what the vulgar call   a grass widow ,   and withhold from she by scruple or convention , be to be pity . he have not seek his fate . it come on he by stealth , bereave he ruthlessly of all other interest in life . it be an obsession replace normal taste with a rapturous aching . maxim such as   Thou shalt not commit adultery ,    Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour s wife ,    Blessed be the pure in heart ,   become singularly academic . Young Croom have be bring up to the tinkling of the school bell :   play the game !   he now perceive its strange inadequacy . what be the game ? here be she , young and lovely , flee from a partner seventeen year old than herself , because he be a brute ; she hadn t say so , but of course he must be ! here be himself , desperately in love with she , and like by she    not in the same way , but still as much as could be expect ! and nothing to come of it but tea together ! there be a kind of sacrilege in such waste . 
 thus preoccupy he pass a man of middle height and alert bearing , whose rather cat - like eye and thin lip be set into a brown face with the claw of many little wrinkle , and who turn to look after he with a slight contraction of the mouth which might have be a smile . 
 chapter 7 

 after young Croom have go Clare stand for a moment in the hall recollect the last time she have go out of that front door , in a fawn - colour suit and a little brown hat , between row of people say :   good luck !   and   Good - bye , darling !   and   give my love to Paris !   eighteen month ago , and so much in between ! her lip curl , and she go into her Uncle s study . 
  oh ! Uncle Lawrence , you be in ! Tony Croom s be here to see you . 
  that rather pleasant young man without occupation ? 
  yes . he want to thank you . 
  for nothing , I m afraid .   and Sir Lawrence s quick dark eye , like a snipe s or woodcock s , rove sceptically over his pretty niece . she be not , like Dinny , a special favourite , but she be undoubtedly attractive . it be early day to have mess up her marriage ; Em have tell he and say that it wasn t to be mention . well , Jerry Corven ! People have always shrug and hint . too bad ! but no real business of his . 
 a subdued voice from the door say : 
  Sir Gerald Corven have call , Sir Lawrence . 
 involuntarily Sir Lawrence put his finger to his lip . the butler subdue his voice still far . 
  I put he in the little room and say I would see if Lady Corven be in . 
 Sir Lawrence note Clare s hand hard press down on the back of the chair behind which she be stand . 
  be you in , Clare ? 
 she do not answer , but her face be hard and pale as stone . 
  a minute , Blore . come back when I ring . 
 the butler withdraw . 
  now , my dear ? 
  he must have take the next boat . Uncle , I don t want to see he . 
  if we only say you re out , he ll probably come again . 
 Clare throw back her head .   well , I ll see he ! 
 Sir Lawrence feel a little thrill . 
  if you d tell I what to say , I d see he for you . 
  thank you , Uncle , but I don t see why you should do my dirty work . 
 Sir Lawrence think :   thank God ! 
  I ll be handy in case you want I . good luck , my dear !   and he go out . 
 Clare move over to the fire ; she want the bell within reach . she have the feeling , well know to she , of settle herself in the saddle for a formidable jump .   he shan t touch I , anyway ,   she think . she hear Blore s voice say : 
  Sir Gerald Corven , my lady .   quaint ! announce a husband to his wife ! but staff know everything ! 
 without look she see perfectly well where he be stand . a surge of sham anger stain her cheek . he have fascinate she ; he have use she as every kind of playthe . he have   ! 
 his voice , cuttingly control , say : 
  well , my dear , you be very sudden .   neat and trim , as ever , and like a cat , with that thin - lipped smile and those dare despoil eye ! 
  what do you want ? 
  only yourself . 
  you can t have I . 
  Absurd ! 
 he make the quick kind of movement and seize she in his arm . Clare bend her head back and put her finger on the bell . 
  move back , or I ring !   and she put her other hand between his face and her .   stand over there and I ll talk to you , otherwise you must go . 
  very well ! but it s ridiculous . 
  oh ! do you think I should have go if I hadn t be in earnest ? 
  I think you be just rile , and I don t wonder . I m sorry . 
  it s no good discuss what happen . I know you , and I m not come back to you . 
  my dear , you have my apology , and I give you my word against anything of the sort again . 
  how good of you ! 
  it be only an experiment . some woman adore it , if not at the time . 
  you be a beast . 
  and beauty marry I . Come , Clare , don t be silly , and make we a laugh - stock ! you can fix your own condition . 
  and trust you to keep they ! besides , that s not my idea of a life . I m only twenty - four . 
 the smile leave his lip . 
  I see . I notice a young man come out of this house . name and estate ? 
  Tony Croom . well ? 
 he walk over to the window , and after a moment s contemplation of the street , turn and say : 
  you have the misfortune to be my wife . 
  so I be think . 
  quite seriously , Clare , come back to I . 
  quite seriously , no . 
  I have an official position , and I can t play about with it . look at I !   he come close .   I may be all you think I , but I m neither a humbug nor old - fashioned . I don t trade on my position , or on the sanctity of marriage , or any of that stuff . but they still pay attention to that sort of thing in the Service , and I can t afford to let you divorce I . 
  I didn t expect it . 
  what then ? 
  I know nothing except that I m not come back . 
  just because of   ? 
  and a great deal else .   the cat - like smile have come back and prevent she from read what he be think . 
  do you want I to divorce you ? 
 Clare shrug .   you have no reason . 
  so you would naturally say . 
  and mean . 
  now look here , Clare , this be all absurd , and quite unworthy of anyone with your sense and knowledge of thing . you can t be a perpetual grass widow . you didn t dislike the life out there . 
  there be some thing that can t be do to I , and you have do they . 
  I ve say that they shan t be do again . 
  and I ve say that I can t trust you . 
  this be go round the mulberry bush . be you go to live on your people ? 
  no . I ve get a job . 
  oh ! what ? 
  Secretary to our new Member . 
  you ll be sick of that in no time . 
  I don t think so . 
 he stand star at she without his smile . for a moment she could read his thought , for his face have the expression which prelude sex . suddenly he say :   I win t stand for another man have you . 
 it be a comfort to have see for once the bottom of his mind . she do not answer . 
  do you hear I ? 
  yes . 
  I mean it . 
  I could see that . 
  you re a stony little devil . 
  I wish I have be . 
 he take a turn up and down the room , and come to a stand dead in front of she . 
  look at I ! I m not go back without you . I m stay at the Bristol . be sensible , there s a darling , and come to I there . we ll start again . I ll be ever so nice to you . 
 her control give way , and she cry out :   oh , for God s sake , understand ! you kill all the feeling I have for you . 
 his eye dilate and then narrow , his lip become a line . he look like a horse - breaker . 
  and understand I ,   he say , very low ,   you either come back to I or I divorce you . I win t leave you here , to kick your heel . 
  I m sure you ll have the approval of every judicious husband . 
 the smile reappear on his lip . 
  for that ,   he say ,   I m go to have a kiss .   and before she could stop he he have fasten his lip on her . she tear herself away and press the bell . he go quickly to the door . 
  Au revoir !   he say , and go out . 
 Clare wipe her lip . she feel bewildered and exhaust , and quite ignorant whether to he or to she the day have go . 
 she stand lean her forehead on her hand over the fire , and become aware that Sir Lawrence have come back and be considerately say nothing . 
  awfully sorry , Uncle ; I shall be in my dig next week . 
  have a cigarette , my dear . 
 Clare take the cigarette , and inhale its comfort . her uncle have seat himself and she be conscious of the quizzical expression of his eyebrow . 
  Conference have its usual success ? 
 Clare nod . 
  the elusive formula . the fact be , human being be never satisfied with what they don t want , however cleverly it s put . be it to be continue in our next ? 
  not so far as I m concern . 
  Pity there be always two party to a conference . 
  Uncle Lawrence ,   she say suddenly ,   what be the law of divorce now ? 
 the baronet uncross his long thin leg . 
  I ve never have any particular truck with it . I believe it s less old - fashioned than it be , but see Whitaker .   he reach for the red - back volume .   Page 258    here you be , my dear . 
 Clare read in silence , while he gaze at she ruefully . she look up and say . 
  then , if I want he to divorce I , I ve get to commit adultery . 
  that be , I believe , the elegant way they put it . in the good circle , however , the man do the dirty work . 
  yes , but he win t. he want I back . besides , he s get his position to consider . 
  there be that , of course ,   say Sir Lawrence , thoughtfully ;   a career in this country be a tender plant . 
 Clare close the Whitaker . 
  if it weren t for my people ,   she say ,   I d give he cause tomorrow and have do with it . 
  you don t think a well way would be to give partnership another trial ? 
 Clare shake her head . 
  I simply couldn t. 
  that s that , then ,   say Sir Lawrence ,   and it s an awkward   that .   what do Dinny say ? 
  I haven t discuss it with she . she doesn t know he s here . 
  at present , then , you ve no one to advise you ? 
  no . Dinny know why I leave , that s all . 
  I should doubt if Jerry Corven be a very patient man . 
 Clare laugh . 
  we re neither of we long - suffering . 
  do you know where he be stay ? 
  at the Bristol . 
  it might ,   say Sir Lawrence slowly ,   be worth while to keep an eye on he . 
 Clare shiver .   it s rather degrading ; besides , Uncle , I don t want to hurt his career . he s very able , you know . 
 Sir Lawrence shrug .   to I ,   he say ,   and to all your kin , his career be nothing to your good name . how long have he get over here ? 
  not long , I should think . 
  would you like I to see he , and try to arrange that you go your own way ? 
 Clare be silent , and Sir Lawrence , watch she , think :   attractive , but a lot of naughty temper . any amount of spirit , and no patience at all .   then she say : 
  it be all my fault , nobody want I to marry he . I hate to bother you . besides , he wouldn t consent . 
  you never know ,   murmur Sir Lawrence .   if I get a natural chance , shall I ? 
  it would be lovely of you , only   
  all right , then . in the meantime young man without job    be they wise ? 
 Clare laugh .   oh , I ve   larn   he . well , thank you frightfully , Uncle Lawrence . you re a great comfort . I be an awful fool ; but Jerry have a sort of power , you know ; and I ve always like take risk . I don t see how I can be my mother s daughter , she hat they ; and Dinny only take they on principle .   she sigh .   I win t bear you any more now .   and , blow a kiss , she go out . 
 Sir Lawrence stay in his armchair think :   put my oar in ! a nasty mess , and go to be nasty ! still , at her age something s get to be do . I must talk to Dinny . 
 chapter 8 

 from Condaford the hot air of election time have clear away , and the succeed atmosphere be crystallise in the General s say : 
  well , those fellow get their desert . 
  Doesn t it make you tremble , Dad , to think what these fellow   desert will be if they don t succeed in put it over now ? 
 the General smile . 
   sufficient unto the day ,   Dinny . have Clare settle down ? 
  she s in her digging . her work so far seem to have be write letter of thank to people who do the dirty work at the cross - road . 
  car ? do she like Dornford ? 
  she say he s quite amazingly considerate . 
  his father be a good soldier . I be in his brigade in the Boer War for a bit .   he look at his daughter keenly , and add :   any news of Corven ? 
  yes , he s over here . 
  oh ! I wish I wasn t keep so in the dark . parent have to stand on the mat nowadays , and trust to what they can hear through the keyhole . 
 Dinny draw his arm within her . 
  one have to be so careful of their feeling . sensitive plant , aren t you , Dad ? 
  well , it seem to your mother and I an extraordinarily bad look - out . we wish to goodness the thing could be patch up . 
  not at the expense of Clare s happiness , surely ? 
  no ,   say the General , dubiously ,   no ; but there you be at once in all these matrimonial thing . what be and will be her happiness ? she doesn t know , and you don t , and I don t. as a rule in try to get out of a hole you promptly step into another . 
  therefore don t try ? stay in your hole ? that s rather what Labour want to do , isn t it ? 
  I ought to see he ,   say the General , pass over the simile ,   but I can t go blunder in the dark . what do you advise , Dinny ? 
  let the sleep dog lie until it get up to bite you . 
  you think it will ? 
  I do . 
  Bad !   mutter the General .   Clare s too young . 
 that be Dinny s own perpetual thought . what at the first blush she have say to her sister :   you must get free ,   remain her conviction . but how be she to get free ? knowledge of divorce have be no part of Dinny s education . she know that the process be by no means uncommon , and she have as little feeling against it as most of her generation . to her father and mother it would probably seem lamentable , doubly so if Clare be divorce instead of divorce    that would be a stigma on she to be avoid at almost all cost . since her soul - rack experience with Wilfrid , Dinny have be very little in London . every street , and above all the park , seem to remind she of he and the desolation he have leave in she . it be now , however , obvious to she that Clare could not be leave unsupported in whatever crisis be befall . 
  I think I ought to go up , Dad , and find out what s happen . 
  I wish to God you would . if it s at all possible to patch thing up , they ought to be . 
 Dinny shake her head . 
  I don t believe it be , and I don t believe you d wish it if Clare have tell you what she tell I . 
 the General star .   there it be , you see . in the dark . 
  yes , dear , but till she tell you herself I can t say more . 
  then the soon you go up the well . 
 free from the scent of horse , Melton Mews be somewhat strikingly impregnate with the odour of petrol . this bricke alley have become , indeed , the haunt of car . to right and to leave of she , enter late that afternoon , the door of garage gap or confront she with more or less new paint . a cat or two stole by , and the hinder part of an overalle chauffeur bend over a carburettor could be see in one opening ; otherwise life be at a discount , and the word   mew   no long justify by manure . 
 no . 2 have the peacock - green door of its former proprietress , whom , with so many other luxury trader , the slump have squeeze out of business . Dinny pull a chase bell - handle , and a faint tinkle sound , as from some errant sheep . there be a pause , then a spot of light show for a moment on a level with her face , be obscure , and the door be open . Clare , in a jade - green overall , say : 
  come in , my dear . this be the lioness in her den ,   the Douglas in her hall !  
 Dinny enter a small , almost empty room hang with the green japanese silk of the antique dealer and carpet with matting . a narrow spiral staircase worm into it at the far corner , and a subdue light radiate from a single green - paper - shade bulb hang in the centre . a brass electric heater diffuse no heat . 
  nothing do here so far ,   say Clare .   come upstairs . 
 Dinny make the tortuous ascent , and step into a rather small sitting - room . it have two curtain window look over the mew , a couch with cushion , a little old bureau , three chair , six japanese print , which Clare have evidently just be hang , an old persian rug over the matted floor , an almost empty bookcase , and some photograph of the family stand on it . the wall be distemper a pale grey , and a gas fire be burn . 
  Fleur give I the print and the rug , and Aunt Em stump up the bureau . I take the other thing over . 
  where do you sleep ? 
  on that couch    quite comfy . I ve get a little bath - dressing - room next door , with a geyser , and a what - d ye - call - it , and a cupboard for clothe . 
  Mother tell I to ask what you want . 
  I could do with our old Primus stove , some blanket and a few knife and fork and spoon , and a small tea - set , if there s one to spare , and any spare book . 
  right !   say Dinny .   now , darling , how be you ? 
  bodily fine , mentally rather worried . I tell you he be over . 
  do he know of this place ? 
  not so far . you and Fleur and Aunt Em    oh ! and Tony Croom    be the only people who know of it . my official address be Mount Street . but he s bind to find out if he want to . 
  you see he ? 
  yes , and tell he I wasn t come back ; and I m not , Dinny ; that s flat , to save breath . have some tea ? I can make it in a brown pot . 
  no , thank you , I have it on the train .   she be sit on one of the take - over chair , in a bottle - green suit that go beautifully with her beech - leaf - colour hair . 
  how jolly you look , sit there !   say Clare , curl up on the sofa .   Gasper ? 
 Dinny be think the same about her sister . graceful creature , one of those people who couldn t look ungraceful ; with her dark short hair , and dark , alive eye , and ivory pale face , and not too brighten lip hold the cigarette , she look    well ,   desirable .   and , in all the circumstance , the word appear to Dinny an awkward one . Clare have always be vivid and attractive , but without question marriage have subtly round , deepen , and in some sort bedevil that attraction . she say suddenly : 
  Tony Croom , you say ? 
  he help I distemper these wall ; in fact , he practically do they , while I do the bathroom    these be well . 
 Dinny s eye take in the wall with apparent interest . 
  quite neat . Mother and Father be nervous , darling . 
  they would be . 
  naturally , don t you think ? 
 Clare s brow draw down . Dinny suddenly remember how strenuously they have once debate the question of whether eyebrow should be pluck . thank heaven ! Clare never have yet . 
  I can t help it , Dinny . I don t know what Jerry s go to do . 
  I suppose he can t stay long , without give up his job ? 
  probably not . but I m not go to bother . what will be will . 
  how quickly could a divorce be get ? I mean against he ? 
 Clare shake her head , and a dark curl fall over her forehead , remind Dinny of she as a child . 
  to have he watch would be pretty revolting . and I m not go into court to describe be brutalise . it s only my word against his . man be safe enough . 
 Dinny get up and sit down beside she on the couch . 
  I could kill he !   she say . 
 Clare laugh . 
  he wasn t so bad in many way . only I simply win t go back . if you ve once be skin , you can t. 
 Dinny sit , silent , with closed eye . 
  tell I ,   she say , at last ,   how you stand with Tony Croom . 
  he s on probation . so long as he behave I like to see he . 
  if ,   say Dinny slowly ,   he be know to come here , it would be all that would be want , wouldn t it ? 
 Clare laugh again . 
  quite enough for man of the world , I should think ; I believe jury can never withstand be call that . but you see , Dinny , if I begin to look at thing from a jury s point of view , I might as well be dead . and , as a matter of fact , I feel very much alive . so I m go straight ahead . Tony know I ve have enough physiology to last I a long time . 
  be he in love with you ? 
 their eye , brown and blue , meet . 
  yes . 
  be you in love with he ? 
  I like he    quite a lot . beyond that I ve no feeling at present . 
  Don t you think that while Jerry be here   ? 
  no . I think I m safe while he s here than when he go . if I don t go back with he he ll probably have I watch . that s one thing about he    he do what he say he ll do . 
  I wonder if that s an advantage . come out and have some dinner . 
 Clare stretch herself . 
  can t , darling . I m din with Tony in a little grubby restaurant suit to our joint mean . this live on next to nothing be rather fun . 
 Dinny get up and begin to straighten the japanese print . Clare s recklessness be nothing new . to come the eld sister ! to be a wet blanket ! impossible ! she say : 
  these be good , my dear . Fleur have very jolly thing . 
  d you mind if I change ?   say Clare , and vanish into the bathroom . 
 leave alone with her sister s problem , Dinny have the feeling of helplessness which come to all but such as constitutionally   know well .   she go dejectedly to the window and draw aside the curtain . all be darkish and dingy . a car have draw out of a neighbouring garage and stand wait for its driver . 
  Imagine try to sell antique here !   she think . she see a man come round the corner close by and stop , look at the number . he move along the opposite side , then come back and stand still just in front of no . 2 . she note the assurance and strength in that trim over - coat figure . 
  Good heavens !   she think :   Jerry !   she drop the curtain and cross quickly to the bathroom door . as she open it she hear the desolate tinkling of the sheep - bell instal by the antique dealer . 
 Clare be stand in her underthing under the single bulb , examine her lip with a hand - glass . Dinny fill the remain of the four foot by two of standing room . 
  Clare ,   she say ,   it s HIM ! 
 Clare turn . the gleam of her pale arm , the shimmer of her silk garment , the startled light in her dark eye , make she even to her sister something of a vision . 
  Jerry ? 
 Dinny nod . 
  well , I win t see he .   she look at the watch on her wrist .   and I m due at seven . damn ! 
 Dinny , who have not the faint desire that she should keep her rash appointment , say , to her own surprise : 
  shall I go ? he must have see the light . 
  could you take he away with you , Dinny ? 
  I can try . 
  then do , darling . it d be ever so sweet of you . I wonder how he s find out . Hell ! it s go to be a persecution . 
 Dinny step back into the sitting - room , turn out the light there , and go down the twisting stair . the sheep - bell tinkle again above she as she go . cross that little empty room to the door , she think :   it open inward , I must pull it to behind I .   her heart beat fast , she take a deep breath , open the door swiftly , step out and pull it to with a slam . she be chest to chest with her brother - inlaw , and she start back with an admirably impromptu :   who be it ? 
 he raise his hat , and they stand look at each other . 
  Dinny ! be Clare in ? 
  yes ; but she can t see anyone . 
  you mean she WON T see I ? 
  if you like to put it that way . 
 he stand look intently at she with his daring eye . 
  another day will do . which way be you go ? 
  to Mount Street . 
  I ll come with you , if I may . 
  do . 
 she move along at his side , think :   be careful !   for in his company she do not feel towards he quite as in his absence . as everybody say , Jerry Corven have charm ! 
  Clare s be give I bad mark , I suppose ? 
  we win t discuss it , please ; whatever she feel , I do too . 
  naturally . your loyalty s proverbial . but consider , Dinny , how provocative she be .   his eye smile round at she . that vision    of neck , and curve , and shimmer , dark hair and eye ! sex appeal    horrible expression !   you ve no idea how tantalise . besides , I be always an experimentalist . 
 Dinny stand still suddenly :   this be my sister , you know . 
  you re sure , I suppose ? it seem queer when one look at you both . 
 Dinny walk on , and do not answer . 
  now listen , Dinny ,   begin that pleasant voice .   I m a sensualist , if you like , but what do it matter ? sex be naturally aberrational . if anyone tell you it isn t , don t believe they . these thing work themselves out , and anyway they re not important . if Clare come back to I , in two year   time she win t even remember . she like the sort of life , and I m not fussy . marriage be very much a go - as - you - please affair . 
  you mean that by that time you ll be experiment with someone else ? 
 he shrug , look round at she , and smile . 
  almost embarrass this conversation , isn t it ? what I want you to grasp be that I m two man . one , and it s the one that matter , have his work to do and mean to do it . Clare should stick to that man , because he ll give she a life in which she win t rust ; she ll be in the thick of affair and people who matter ; she ll have stir and movement    and she love both . she ll have a certain power , and she s not averse from that . the other man    well , he want his fling , he take it , if you like ; but the bad be over so far as she s concerned    at least , it will be when we ve settle down again . you see , I m honest , or shameless if you like it well . 
  I don t see , in all this ,   say Dinny drily ,   where love come in . 
  perhaps it doesn t. Marriage be compose of mutual interest and desire . the first increase with the year , the latter fade . that ought to be exactly what she want . 
  I can t speak for Clare , but I don t see it that way . 
  you haven t try yourself out , my dear . 
  no ,   say Dinny ,   and on those line I trust I never may . I should dislike alternation between commerce and vice . 
 he laugh . 
  I like your bluntness . but seriously , Dinny , you ought to influence she . she s make a great mistake . 
 a sudden fury seize on Dinny . 
  I think ,   she say , between her tooth ,   it be you who make the great mistake . if you do certain thing to certain horse you re never on term with they again . 
 he be silent at that . 
  you don t want a divorce in the family ,   he say at last , and look round at she steadily .   I ve tell Clare that I can t let she divorce I . I m sorry , but I mean that . far , if she win t come back to I , she can t go as she please . 
  you mean ,   say Dinny , between her tooth ,   that if she do come back to you she can ? 
  that s what it would come to , I daresay . 
  I see . I think I ll say good - night . 
  as you please . you think I cynical . that s as may be . I shall do my good to get Clare back . if she win t come she must watch out . 
 they have stop under a lamp - post and with an effort Dinny force her eye to his . he be as formidable , shameless , and mesmerically implacable as a cat , with that thin smile and unflinche stare . she say , quietly :   I quite understand . Goodnight ! 
  good - night , Dinny ! I m sorry , but it s good to know where we stand . shake hand ? 
 rather to her surprise she let he take her hand , then turn the corner into Mount Street . 
 chapter 9 

 she enter her Aunt s house with all her passionate loyalty to her own breed rouse , yet understand well what have make Clare take Jerry Corven for husband . there be mesmerism about he , and a clear shameless daring which have its fascination . one could see what a power he might be among native people , how ruthlessly , yet smoothly , he would have his way with they ; and how he might lay a spell over his associate . she could see , too , how difficult he might be to refuse physically , until he have outrage all personal pride . 
 her Aunt s voice break her painful absorption with the word :   here she be , Adrian . 
 at the top of the stair her Uncle Adrian s goatee - bearded face be look over his sister s shoulder . 
  your thing have come , my dear . where have you be ? 
  with Clare , Auntie . 
  Dinny ,   say Adrian ,   I haven t see you for nearly a year . 
  this be where we kiss , Uncle . be all well in Bloomsbury , or have the slump affect bone ? 
  bone in esse be all right ; in posse they look dicky    no money for expedition . the origin of Homo sapiens be more abstruse than ever . 
  Dinny , we needn t dress . Adrian s stoppin   for dinner . Lawrence will be so relieved . you can pow - wow while I loosen my belt , or do you want to tighten your ? 
  no , thank you , Auntie . 
  then go in there . 
 Dinny enter the drawing - room and sit down beside her Uncle . Grave and thin and bearded , wrinkle , and brown even in November , with long leg cross and a look of interest in she , he seem as ever the ideal pillar - box for confidence . 
  hear about Clare , Uncle ? 
  the bare fact , no why s or wherefore . 
  they re not   nice .   do you ever know a sadist ? 
  once    at Margate . my private school . I didn t know at the time , of course , but I ve gather it since . do you mean that Corven be one ? 
  so Clare say . I walk here with he from her room . he s a very queer person . 
  not mentally abnormal ?   say Adrian , with a shudder . 
  Saner than you or I , dear ; he want his own way regardless of other people ; and when he can t get it he bite . could Clare get a divorce from he without publicly go into their life together ? 
  only by get evidence of a definite act of misconduct . 
  would that have to be over here ? 
  well , to get it over there would be very expensive , and doubtful at that . 
  Clare doesn t want to have he watch at present . 
  it s certainly an unclean process ,   say Adrian . 
  I know , Uncle ; but if she win t , what chance be there ? 
  none . 
  at present she s in the mood that they should leave each other severely alone ; but if she win t go back with he , he say she must   look out for herself .  
  be there anybody else involve , then , Dinny ? 
  there s a young man in love with she , but she say it s quite all right . 
  H m !   Youth s a stuff     as Shakespeare say . nice young man ? 
  I ve only see he for a few minute ; he look quite nice , I think . 
  that cut both way . 
  I trust Clare completely . 
  you know she well than I do , my dear ; but I should say she might get very impatient . how long can Corven stay over here ? 
  not more than a month at most , she think ; he s be here a week already . 
  he s see she ? 
  once . he try to again today . I draw he off . she dread see he , I know . 
  as thing be he have every right to see she , you know . 
  yes ,   say Dinny , and sigh . 
  can t your member that she s with suggest a way out ? he s a lawyer . 
  I wouldn t like to tell he . it s so private . besides , people don t like be involve in matrimonial squabble . 
  be he marry ? 
  no . 
 she see he look at she intently , and remember Clare s laugh and word :   Dinny , he s in love with you . 
  you ll see he here tomorrow night ,   Adrian go on .   Em s ask he to dinner , I gather ; Clare too , I believe . quite candidly , Dinny , I don t see anything to be do . Clare may change her mind and go back , or Corven may change his and let she stay without bother about she . 
 Dinny shake her head .   they re neither of they like that . I must go and wash , Uncle . 
 Adrian reflect upon the undeniable proposition that everyone have his trouble . his own at the moment be confine to the fact that his step - child , Sheila and Ronald Ferse , have measle , so that he be something of a pariah in his own house , the sanctity attach to an infectious disease have cast his wife into purdah . he be not vastly interested in Clare . she have always be to he one of those young woman who take the bit between their tooth and be bind to fetch up now and again with broken knee . Dinny , to he , be worth three of she . but if Dinny be go to be worried out of her life by her sister s trouble , then , indeed , they become important to Adrian . she seem to have the knack of bear vicarious burden : Hubert s , his own , Wilfrid Desert s , and now Clare s. 
 and he say to his sister s parakeet :   not fair , Polly , be it ? 
 the parakeet , who be use to he , come out of its open cage on to his shoulder and tweak his ear . 
  you don t approve , do you ? 
 the green bird emit a faint chattering sound and clutch its way on to his waistcoat . Adrian scratch its poll . 
  who s go to scratch her poll ? poor Dinny ! 
 his sister s voice startle he : 
  I can t have Dinny scratch again . 
  em ,   say Adrian ,   do any of US worry about the other ? 
  in large family you don t. I be the near    gettin   Lionel marry , and now he s a judge    depressin . Dornford    have you see he ? 
  never . 
  he s get a face like a portrait . they say he win the long jump at Oxford . be that any good ? 
  it s what you call desirable . 
  very well make ,   say Lady Mont.   I look he over at Condaford . 
  my dear em ! 
  for Dinny , of course . what do you do with a gardener who will roll the stone terrace ? 
  tell he not to . 
  whenever I look out at Lippin hall , he s at it , takin   the roller somewhere else . there s the gong , and here s Dinny ; we ll go in . 
 Sir Lawrence be at the sideboard in the dining - room , extract a crumble cork . 
  Lafite   65 . Goodness know what it ll be like . decant it very gently , Blore . what do you say , adrian , warm it a little or no ? 
  I should say no , if it s that age . 
  I agree . 
 Dinner begin in silence . Adrian be think of Dinny , Dinny of Clare , and Sir Lawrence of the claret . 
  french art ,   say Lady Mont. 
  Ah !   say Sir Lawrence :   that remind I , Em ; some of old Forsyte s picture be go to be lend . consider he die save they , they owe it to he . 
 Dinny look up . 
  Fleur s father ? be he a nice man , Uncle ? 
  Nice ?   repeat Sir Lawrence :   it s not the word . straight , yes : careful , yes    too careful for these time . he get a picture on his head , you know , in the fire    poor old chap . he know something about french art , though . this exhibition that s come would have please he . 
  there ll be nothing in it to touch   the Birth of Venus ,    say Adrian . 
 Dinny give he a pleased look . 
  that be divine ,   she say . 
 Sir Lawrence cock his eyebrow . 
  I ve often think of go into the question : why a nation cease to be poetic . the old Italians    and look at they now ! 
  isn t poetry an effervescence , Uncle ? Doesn t it mean youth , or at least enthusiasm ? 
  the Italians be never young , and they re enthusiastic enough now . when we be in Italy last May you should have see the trouble they take over our passport . 
  touchin !   agree Lady Mont. 
  it s only a question ,   say Adrian ,   of the mean of expression . in the fourteenth century the Italians be express themselves in dagger and verse , in the fifteenth and sixteenth in poison , sculpture and painting , in the seventeenth in music , in the eighteenth in intrigue , in the nineteenth in rebellion , and in the twentieth their poetry be spell in wireless and rule . 
  I do get so tired ,   murmur Lady Mont ,   of seein   rule I couldn t read . 
  you be fortunate , my dear ; I could . 
  there s one thing about the Italians ,   continue Adrian ;   century by century they throw up really great man of one sort or another . be that climate , blood , or scenery , Lawrence ? 
 Sir Lawrence shrug .   what do you think of the claret ? put your nose to it , Dinny . sixty year ago , you two young woman wouldn t be here , and Adrian and I would be soppy about it . it s as near perfect as make no matter . 
 Adrian sip and nod . 
  absolutely prime ! 
  well , Dinny ? 
  I m sure it s perfect , dear    waste on I . 
  Old Forsyte would have appreciate this ; he have wonderful sherry . do you get the bouquet , Em ? 
 Lady Mont , who be hold her glass with her elbow on the table , move her nostril delicately . 
  such nonsense ,   she murmur ,   almost any flower beat it . 
 the remark cause complete silence . 
 Dinny s eye be the first to come to the level . 
  how be Boswell and Johnson , Auntie ? 
  I be tellin   Adrian : Boswell s take to rollin   the stone terrace , and Johnson s lose his wife    poor thing . he s a different man . whistle all the time . his tune ought to be collect . 
  survival of old England ? 
  no , modern    he just wander . 
  talk of survival ,   say Sir Lawrence ,   do you ever read Ask Mamma , Dinny ? 
  No ; who write it ? 
  surtee . you should . it s a corrective . 
  of what , Uncle ? 
  modernity . 
 Lady Mont lower her glass ; it be empty . 
  so wise of they to be stoppin   this picture exhibition at 1900 . d you remember , Lawrence    in Paris , all those wiggly thing we see , and so much yellow and light blue    scroll and blob and face upside - down ? Dinny , we d well go up . 
 and when presently Blore bring the message    would Miss Dinny go down to the study ? she murmur : 
  it s about Jerry Corven . Don t encourage your Uncle    he think he can do good , but he can t.   . . . 
  well , Dinny ?   say Sir Lawrence :   I always like talk to Adrian ; he s a well - temper fellow with a mind of his own . I tell Clare I would see Corven , but it s no good see he without know what one want to say . and not much then , I m afraid . what do you think ? 
 Dinny , who have seat herself on the edge of her chair , set she elbow on her knee . it be an attitude from which Sir Lawrence augur ill . 
  judge from what he say to I today , Uncle Lawrence , his mind s make up . either Clare must go back to he or he ll try to divorce she . 
  how will your people feel about that ? 
  very badly . 
  you know there s a young man hang round ? 
  yes . 
  he hasn t a bean . 
 Dinny smile .   we re use to that . 
  I know , but no bean when you re out of bound be serious . Corven might claim damage , he look a vindictive sort of chap . 
  d you really think he would ? it s very bad form , nowadays , isn t it ? 
  form matter very little when a man s monkey be up . I suppose you couldn t get Clare to apply the closure to young Croom ? 
  I m afraid Clare will refuse to be dictate to about whom she see . she think the break - up be entirely Jerry s fault . 
  I ,   say Sir Lawrence , emit a slow puff ,   be in favour of have Corven watch while he s over here , and collect a shot , if possible , to fire across his bow , but she doesn t like the idea of that . 
  she believe in his career , and doesn t want to spoil it . besides , it s so revolt . 
 Sir Lawrence shrug . 
  what would you ? the law s the law . he belong to Burton s. shall I waylay he there and appeal to he to leave she here quietly , and see if absence will make her heart grow fond again ? 
 Dinny wrinkle her brow . 
  it might be worth try , but I don t believe he ll budge . 
  what line be you go to take yourself ? 
  Back Clare in whatever she do or doesn t do . 
 Sir Lawrence nod , have receive the answer he expect . 
 chapter 10 

 the quality which from time immemorial have make the public man of England what they be , tempt so many lawyer into Parliament , cause so many divine to put up with be bishop , float so many financier , save so many politician from take thought for the morrow , and so many judge from the pang of remorse , be present in Eustace Dornford to no small degree . put more shortly , he have an excellent digestion ; could eat and drink at all time without know anything about it afterwards . he be an indefatigably hard worker even at play ; and there be in he just that add fund of nervous energy which differentiate the man who win the long jump from the man who lose it . and now , though his practice be go up by leap and bound since , two year ago , he have take silk , he have stand for Parliament . and yet he be the last sort of man to incur the epithet   go - getter .   his pale - brown , hazel - eye , well - feature face have a considerate , even a sensitive look , and a pleasant smile . he have keep a little fine dark moustache , and his wig have not yet deplete his natural hair , which be dark and of rather curly texture . after Oxford he have eat dinner and go into the Chambers of a well - know Common Law Junior . be a subaltern in the Shropshire Yeomanry when the war break out , he have pass into the Cavalry , and not long after into the trench , where he have know well luck than most people . his rise at the Bar after the war have be rapid . solicitor like he . he never fall foul of judge , and as a cross - examiner stand out , because he almost seem to regret the point he score . he be a roman Catholic , from breed rather than observance . finally , he be fastidious in matter of sex , and his presence at a dinner - table on circuit have , if not a silencing , at least a moderate effect on tongue . 
 he occupy in Harcourt Buildings a commodious set of chamber design for life as well as learn . early every morning , wet or fine , he go for a ride in the row , have already do at least two hour   work on his case . by ten o clock , bath , breakfast , and acquaint with the morning s news , he be ready for the Courts . when at four those court rise , he be busy again till half - past six on his case . the evening , hitherto free , would now be spend at the House : and since it would be seldom that he could go to bed without work an hour or so on some case or other , his sleep be likely to be curtail from six hour to five , or even four . 
 the arrangement come to with Clare be simple . she arrive at a quarter to ten , open his correspondence , and take his instruction from ten to a quarter past . she remain to do what be necessary , and come again at six o clock , ready for anything fresh or leave over . 
 on the evening after that last describe , at the hour of eight - fifteen , he enter the drawing - room in Mount Street , be greet , and introduce to Adrian , who have again be bid . discuss the state of the pound and other grave matter , they wait , till Lady Mont say suddenly :   Soup . what have you do with Clare , Mr. Dornford ? 
 his eye , which have hitherto take in little but Dinny , regard his hostess with a faint surprise . 
  she leave the Temple at half - past six , say we should meet again . 
  then ,   say Lady Mont ,   we ll go down . 
 there follow one of those discomfortable hour well known to well - breed people , when four of they be anxious upon a subject which they must not broach to the fifth , and the fifth become aware of this anxiety . 
 they be , indeed , too few for the occasion , for all that each one of they say could be hear by the other . it be impossible for Eustace Dornford to be confidential with either of his neighbour ; and since he instinctively feel that without a preliminary confidence he would only put his foot into it , he be careful to be public - minded and keep to such topic as the Premier , the undiscovered identity of certain poisoner , the ventilation of the House of Commons , the difficulty of know exactly what to do with one s hat there , and other subject of general interest . but , by the end of dinner he be so acutely aware that they be burn to say thing he mustn t hear , that he invent a professional telephone call , and be take out of the room by Blore . 
 the moment he have go Dinny say : 
  she must have be waylay , Auntie . could I be excuse and go and see ? 
 Sir Lawrence answer : 
  well wait till we break , Dinny ; a few minute can t matter now . 
  Don t you think ,   say Adrian ,   that Dornford ought to know how thing stand ? she go to he every day . 
  I ll tell he ,   say Sir Lawrence . 
  no ,   say Lady Mont.   Dinny must tell he . wait for he here , Dinny . we ll go up . 
 thus it be that , return to the dining - room after his trunk - call to someone whom he know to be away from home , Dornford find Dinny wait . she hand he the cigar and say : 
  forgive we , Mr. Dornford . it s about my sister . please light up , and here s coffee . Blore , would you mind get I a taxi ? 
 when they have drink their coffee , and be stand together by the fire , she turn her face to it and go on hurriedly : 
  you see , Clare have split from her husband , and he s just come over to take she back . she win t go , and it s rather a difficult time for she . 
 Dornford make a considerate sound . 
  I m very glad you tell I . I ve be feel unhappy all dinner . 
  I must go now , I m afraid , and find out what s happen . 
  could I come with you ? 
  oh ! thank you , but   
  it would be a real pleasure . 
 Dinny stand hesitate . he look like a present help in trouble ; but she say :   thank you , but perhaps my sister wouldn t like it . 
  I see . any time I can help , please let I know . 
  your taxi s at the door , Miss. 
  some day ,   she say ,   I d like to ask you about divorce . 
 in the taxi she wonder what she would do if she could not get in ; and then what she would do if she could get in and Corven be there . she stop the cab at the corner of the Mews . 
  stay here , please , I ll let you know in a minute if I want you again . 
 Dark and private loom that little backwater . 
  like one s life ,   think Dinny , and pull at the ornamental bell . it tinkle all forlorn , and nothing happen . again and again she ring , then move backward to look up at the window . the curtain    she remember they be heavy    have be draw close ; she could not decide whether or no there be light behind they . once more she ring and use the knocker , hold her breath to listen . no sound at all ! at last , baffled and disquiet , she go back to the cab . Clare have say Corven be stay at the Bristol , and she give that address . there might be a dozen explanation ; only why , in a town of telephone , have Clare not let they know ? half - past ten ! perhaps she have by now ! 
 the cab draw up at the hotel .   wait , please !   enter its discreetly gild hall , she stand for a moment at a loss . the setting seem unsuitable for private trouble . 
  yes , madam ?   say a page - boy s voice . 
  could you find out for I , please , if my brother - inlaw , Sir Gerald Corven , be in the hotel ? 
 what should she say if they bring he to she ? her figure in its evening cloak be reflect in a mirror , and that it be straight fill she with a sort of surprise    she feel so as if she be curl and creep this way and that . but they do not bring he to she . he be not in his room , nor in any of the public room . she go out again to her cab . 
  back to Mount Street , please . 
 Dornford and Adrian be go , her Aunt and Uncle playing piquet . 
  well , Dinny ? 
  I couldn t get into her room , and he be not in his hotel . 
  you go there ? 
  it be all I could think of to do . 
 Sir Lawrence rise .   I ll telephone to Burton s.   Dinny sit down beside her Aunt . 
  I feel she s in trouble , Auntie . Clare s never rude . 
  kidnap or lock up ,   say Lady Mont.   there be a case when I be young . Thompson , or Watson    a great fuss . Habeas corpus , or something    husband can t now . well , Lawrence ? 
  he hasn t be in the Club since five o clock . we must just wait till the morning . she may have forget , you know ; or get the evening mix . 
  but she tell Mr. Dornford that they would meet again . 
  so they will , tomorrow morning . no good worrying , Dinny . 
 Dinny go up , but do not undress . have she do all she could ? the night be clear and fine and warm for November . only a quarter of a mile or so away , be that backwater of Mews    should she slip out and go over there again ? 
 she throw off her evening frock , put on a day dress , hat and fur coat , and steal downstairs . it be dark in the hall . quietly draw back the bolt , she let herself out , and take to the street . when she enter the Mews    where a couple of car be be put away for the night    she see light come from the upper window of no . 2 . they have be open and the curtain draw aside . she ring the bell . 
 after a moment Clare , in her dressing - gown , open the door . 
  be it you who come before , Dinny ? 
  yes . 
  sorry I couldn t let you in . come up ! 
 she lead the way up the spiral stair , and Dinny follow . 
 Upstairs it be warm and light , the door into the tiny bathroom open , and the couch in disorder . Clare look at her sister with a sort of unhappy defiance . 
  yes , I ve have Jerry here , he s not be go ten minute . 
 a horrified shiver go down Dinny s spine . 
  after all , he s come a long way ,   say Clare ;   good of you to worry , Dinny . 
  oh ! darling ! 
  he be outside here when I get back from the Temple . I be an idiot to let he in . after that    oh ! well , it doesn t matter ! I ll take care it doesn t happen again . 
  would you like I to stay ? 
  oh ! no . but have some tea . I ve just make it . I don t want anyone to know of this . 
  of course not . I ll say you have a bad headache and couldn t get out to telephone . 
 when they be drink the tea Dinny say : 
  this hasn t alter your plan ? 
  God ! no ! 
  Dornford be there to - night . we think it well to tell he you be have a difficult time . 
 Clare nod . 
  it must all seem very funny to you . 
  it seem to I tragic . 
 Clare shrug , then stand up and throw her arm round her sister . after that silent embrace , Dinny go out into the Mews , now dark and deserted . at the corner lead into the Square she almost walk into a young man . 
  Mr. Croom , isn t it ? 
  Miss Cherrell ? have you be at Lady Corven s ? 
  yes . 
  be she all right ? 
 his face be worried , and his voice anxious . Dinny take a deep breath before answer : 
  oh ! yes . why not ? 
  she be say last night that man be over here . it worry I terribly . 
 through Dinny shoot the thought :   if he d meet   that man !   but she say , quietly : 
  walk with I as far as Mount Street . 
  I don t mind your knowing ,   he say ,   I m over head and ear in love with she . who wouldn t be ? Miss Cherrell , I don t think she ought to be in that place alone . she tell I he come yesterday while you be there . 
  yes . I take he away with I , as I m take you . I think my sister should be leave to herself . 
 he seem to hunch himself together . 
  have you ever be in love ? 
  yes . 
  well , then you know . 
 yes , she know ! 
  it s absolute torture not to be with she , able to see that she s all right . she take it all lightly , but I can t. 
 take it all lightly ! Clare s face look at she ! she do not answer . 
  the fact be ,   say young Croom , with incoherence ,   people can say and think what they like , but if they feel as I feel , they simply couldn t. I win t bother she , I really win t ; but I can t stand she be in danger from that man . 
 Dinny control herself to say quietly :   I don t think Clare s in any danger . but she might be if it be know that you     he meet her eye squarely . 
  I m glad she s get you . for God s sake look after she , Miss Cherrell . 
 they have reach the corner of Mount Street , and she hold out her hand . 
  you may be certain that whatever Clare do I shall stick by she . good - night ! and cheer up ! 
 he wring her hand , and go off as if the devil be after he . Dinny go in , and slide the bolt quietly . 
 on what thin ice ! she could hardly drag one foot before the other as she go upstairs , and sink down on her bed exhaust . 
 chapter 11 

 when Sir Lawrence Mont reach Burton s Club the follow afternoon he be feel , in common with many who undertake to interfere in the affair of other , an uneasy self - importance couple with a desire to be somewhere else . he do not know what the deuce he be go to say to Corven , or why the deuce he should say it , since , in his opinion , by far the good solution would be for Clare to give her marriage another trial . have discover from the porter that Sir Gerald be in the Club , he poke his nose gingerly into three room before locate the back of his quarry seat in the corner of an apartment too small to be devoted to anything but writing . he sit down at a table close to the door , so that he could simulate surprise when Corven come up to leave the room . the fellow be an unconscionable time . note a copy of the British Statesman s vade - mecum beside he , he begin idly look up the figure of british import . he find potato : consumption sixty - six million five hundred thousand ton , production eight million eight hundred and seventy - four thousand ton ! somebody the other day have write to say that we import forty million pound   worth of bacon every year . take a sheet of paper he write :   prohibition and protection , in regard to food that we can produce here . annual import : Pigs ,   40,000,000 ; Poultry say ,   12,000,000 ; potato    God know how much ! all this bacon , all these egg , and half these potato could be produce here . why not a five - year plan ? by prohibition lessen the import of bacon and egg one - fifth every year , and the import of potato by one - tenth every year , increase home production gradually to replace they . at the end of five year our bacon and egg and half our potato would be all - british . we should save eighty million on our Imports Bill and our trade would practically be balance . 
 take another sheet of paper , he write : 
  to the Editor of the Times . 
  the Three P. Plan . 
  SIR 
  a simple plan for the balancing of our trade would seem to merit the attention of all those not wed to the long way round . there be three article of food on import which we expend annually some      pound , but which could be produce in our own country without , I venture to think , cause the price of live to rise to any material extent if we take the simple precaution of hang a profiteer at the beginning . these article be Pigs , Poultry , Potatoes . there would be no need to put on duty , for all that be require be   
 but at this moment , become aware that Corven be pass from the room , he say : 
  Hallo ! 
 Corven turn and come towards he . 
 hop that he show as little sign of embarrassment as his nephew twice remove by marriage , Sir Lawrence rise . 
  sorry I didn t see you when you call the other day . have you get long leave ? 
  another week only , and then I shall have to fly the Mediterranean probably . 
  not a good month for fly . what do you think of this adverse balance of trade ? 
 Jerry Corven shrug . 
  something to keep they busy for a bit . they never see two inch before their nose . 
   Tiens ! Une montagne !   remember the Caran d Ache cartoon of Buller in front of Ladysmith ? no , you wouldn t. it s thirty - two year ago . national character doesn t change much , do it ? how s Ceylon ? not in love with India , I hope ? 
  nor with we particularly , but we jog on . 
  the climate doesn t suit Clare , apparently . 
 Corven s expression remain watchful and slightly smile . 
  the hot weather didn t , but that s over . 
  be you take she back with you ? 
  yes . 
  I wonder if that s wise . 
  to leave she would be less so . one s either married or not . 
 Sir Lawrence , watch his eye , think :   Shan t go far . it s hopeless . besides , he s probably right . only I would bet   
  forgive I ,   say Corven ,   I must get these letter off .   he turn and move away , trim and assure . 
  H m !   think Sir Lawrence ,   not exactly what you d call fruitful .   and he sit down again to his letter to the Times . 
  I must get precise figure ,   he mutter .   I ll turn Michael on to it   . . . and his thought go back to Corven . impossible , in such case , to know where the blame really lay . after all , a misfit be a misfit , no amount of pious endeavour , or even worldly wisdom , would cure it .   I ought to have be a judge ,   he think ,   then I could have express my view . Mr. Justice Mont in the course of his judgment say :   it be time to warn the people of this country against marriage . that tie , which be all very well under Victoria , should now only be contract in case where there be full evidence to show that neither party have any individuality to speak of   . . . I think I ll go home to Em .   he blot the perfectly dry letter to the Times , put it into his pocket , and seek the darkening , placidity of Pall Mall . he have stop to look in at the window of his wine merchant s in St. James s Street , and consider once more where the extra ten per cent on his surtax be to come from , when a voice say : 
  good evening , Sir Lawrence !   it be the young man call Croom . 
 they cross the street together . 
  I want to thank you , sir , for speak to Mr. Muskham . I ve see he today . 
  how do you find he ? 
  oh ! very affable . of course I agree it be a bee in his bonnet about introduce that cross of arab blood into our racehorse . 
  do you show he you think so ? 
 Young Croom smile :   hardly ! but the arab horse be so much small . 
  there s something in it , all the same . Jack s only wrong in expect quick result . it s like politic , people win t lie down for the future . if a thing doesn t work within five year , we think it s no good . do Jack say he d take you on ? 
  he ll give I a trial . I m to go down for a week , so that he can see I with horse . but the mare be not go to Royston . he s get a place for they above Oxford near Bablock Hythe . I should be there if I pass muster . it s not till the spring , though . 
  Jack s a formalist ,   say Sir Lawrence , as they enter the Coffee House ;   you ll have to mind your p s and q s. 
 Young Croom smile . 
  you bet . everything s simply perfect at his stud farm . luckily I really be frightfully keen about horse . I didn t feel at sea with Mr. Muskham . it s an immense relief to have a chance again ; and there s nothing I d like well . 
 Sir Lawrence smile    enthusiasm be always pleasant . 
  you must know my son ,   he say ,   he s an enthusiast too , though he must be thirty - seven by now . you ll be in his constituency    no , just out of it . you ll be in Dornford s , I expect . by the way , you know my niece be act secretary for he ? 
 Young Croom nod . 
  I don t know ,   murmur Sir Lawrence ,   whether that ll go on now Corven s over .   and he watch the young man s expression . 
 it have perceptibly darken .   oh ! it will . she win t go back to Ceylon . 
 it be say with frown suddenness , and Sir Lawrence think :   this be where I weigh myself .   Young Croom follow he to the weigh machine , as if he do not know how not to . he be very red . 
  what make you sure of that ?   say Sir Lawrence , look up from the historic chair . Young Croom go even red . 
  one doesn t come away just to go back . 
  or one do . if Life be a racehorse it d be always up before the steward for run in and out . 
  I happen to know Lady Corven win t , sir . 
 it be clear to Sir Lawrence that he have light on a moment when feeling get the well of discretion . so the young man be in love with she ! be this a chance to warn he off the course ? or be it more graceful to take no notice ? 
  just eleven stone ,   he say ;   do you go up or down , Mr. Croom ? 
  I keep about ten twelve . 
 Sir Lawrence scrutinise his lean figure . 
  well , you look very fit . extraordinary what a shadow can be cast on life by the abdomen . however , you win t have to worry till you re fifty . 
  surely , sir , you ve never have any bother there ? 
  not to speak of ; but I ve watch it darken so many door . and now I must be get on . good - night to you ! 
  good - night , sir . I really be awfully grateful . 
  not at all . my cousin Jack doesn t bet , and if you take my advice , you win t either . 
 Young Croom say heartily :   I certainly shan t , sir . 
 they shake hand and Sir Lawrence resume his progress up St. James s Street . 
  that young man ,   he be think ,   impress I favourably , and I can t think why    he appear to be go to be a nuisance . what I ought to have say to he be :   thou shalt not covet thy neighbour s wife .   but God so make the world that one doesn t say what one ought !   the young be very interesting ; one hear of they be disrespectful to Age and all that , but really he couldn t see it . they seem to he fully as well - mannered as he himself have be at their age , and easy to talk to . one never know what they be think , of course ; but that might be as well . after all , one use to think that the old    and Sir Lawrence wince on the kerbstone of Piccadilly    be only fit to be measure for their coffin .   Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis ; but be that true ? no more really than the difference in the pronunciation of Latin since one s youth . youth would always be Youth and Age would be Age , with the same real divergence and distrust between they , and the same queer hanker by Age to feel as Youth be feel and think as Youth be think ; the same pretence that it wouldn t so feel and think for the world , and , at the back of all , the instinct that , really give the chance , Age wouldn t have its life over again . merciful    that ! with stealthy quietude life , as it wear one out , supply the adjustment of a suitable lethargy . at each stage of existence the z for living be tailor to what man have before he and no more . that fellow Goethe have attain immortality to the tune of Gounod by fan a die spark into a fullblown flame .   rat !   think Sir Lawrence :   and very german rat ! would I choose the sighing and the sobbing , the fugitive rapture and the linger starvation in front of that young man , if I could ? I would not ! sufficient unto the old buffer be the bufferism thereof . be that policeman never go to stop this blame traffic ?   no , there be no real change ! man drive car now to the same tick as the old horse - bus and hansom - cab driver have drive their slip , slide , clatter gee . young man and woman experience the same legal or illegal urge towards each other . the pavement be different , and the lingo in which those youthful hankering be express . but    Lord Almighty !    the rule of the road , the collision and slip and general miraculous avoidance , the triumph , mortification , and fulfilment for well for bad , be all the same as ever .   no ,   he think ;   the Police may make rule , Divines write to the paper , Judges express themselves as they like , but human nature will find its own way about as it do when I be cut my wisdom tooth . 
 the policeman reverse his sleeve , and Sir Lawrence cross , pursue his way to Berkeley Square . here be change enough ! the house of the great be go fast . piecemeal , without expressed aim , almost shamefacedly , in true english fashion , London be be rebuild . the dynastic age be go , with its appendage , feudalism , and the Church . even war would now be fight for people and their market . no more dynastic or religious war . well , that be something !   we re get more like insect daily ,   think Sir Lawrence . and how interesting ! religion be nearly dead because there be no long real belief in future life ; but something be struggle to take its place    service    social service    the ant   creed , the bee   creed ! Communism have formulate it and be whip it into the people from the top . so characteristic ! they be always whip something into somebody in Russia . the quick way , no doubt , but the sure way ? no ! the voluntary system remain the good , because when once it get hold it last    only it be so darned slow ! yes , and darn ironical ! so far the sense of social service be almost the perquisite of the old family , who have somehow get hold of the notion that they must do something useful to pay for their position . now that they be die out would the sense of service persist ? how be the   people   to pick it up ?   well ,   think Sir Lawrence ,   after all , there s the bus conductor ; and the fellow in the shop , who ll take infinite trouble to match the colour of your sock ; and the woman who ll look after her neighbour s baby , or collect for the waif and stray ; and the motorist who ll stop and watch you tinker at your car ; and the postman who s grateful for a tip ; and the almost anybody who ll try and pull you out of a pond if he can really see you re in it . what s want be the slogan :   fresh air and exercise for good instinct .   one might have it on all the bus , instead of :   Canon s Colossal Crime ,   or   Strange Sweepstake Swindle .   and that remind I to ask Dinny what she know about Clare and that young man . 
 so think , he pause before his house door , and insert his key in its latch . 
 chapter 12 

 in spite of Sir Gerald Corven s assurance , the course before a husband wish to resume the society of his wife be not noticeably simple , especially if he have but a week wherein to encompass his desire . the experience of that evening have make Clare wary . on leave the Temple at lunch - time the day after , a Saturday , she take train for Condaford , where she carefully refrain from say that she have seek asylum . on Sunday morning she lie long in bed , with the window wide open , watch the sky beyond the tall denude elm . the sun shine in upon she , the air be mild and alive with sound surprise into life , the twittering once more of bird , the lowing of a cow , the occasional caw of a rook , the continual cooing of the fantail . there be but little poetry in Clare , but for a moment to her easeful stretch - out be come a certain perception of the symphony which be this world . the lacing of the naked bough and those few leaf against the soft , gold - bright , move sky ; that rook balance there ; the green and fallow upland , the far line of tree ; and all those sound , and the pure unscented air on her face ; the twitter quietude and perfect freedom of each separate thing , and yet the long composure of design    all this for a moment draw she out of herself into a glimpse of the universal . 
 the vision pass ; she think instead of Thursday night , and Tony Croom , and the dirty little boy outside the restaurant in Soho , who have say in such endearing tone :   remember the poor old guy , lady ; remember the poor old guy .   if Tony have see she the next night ! how irrelevant be event to feel , how ignorant be even the close of each other ! she utter a little discomfited laugh . where ignorance be bliss , indeed ! 
 the village church bell begin ring now . marvellous how her father and mother continue to go every Sunday , hop    she suppose    for the good ; or be it because if they didn t the village wouldn t , and the church would fall into disuse , or at least behind the chapel ? it be nice to lie here in one s own old room , feel safe , and warm , and idle , with a dog on one s foot ! till next Saturday she be at bay , like a chased vixen taking advantage of every cover ; and Clare draw taut her lip , as a vixen do at sight of hound . go back he must    he have say    with she or without . well , it would be without ! 
 her sense of asylum be rudely shake about four o clock , when , return from a walk with the dog , she see a car outside and be meet by her mother in the hall . 
  Jerry s with your father . 
  oh ! 
  come up to my room , dear . 
 in that first - floor room adjoin her bedroom Lady Charwell s personality have always more scope than in the rest of the old , tortuous , wear - down house , so full of relic and the past tense . this room s verbena - scented , powder - blue scheme have a distinct if fade elegance . it have be design ; the rest of the house have grow , emerge here and there into small oasis of modernity , but for the most part a wilderness strew with the débris of Time . 
 Clare turn and turn a china figure , in front of the wood fire . she have not foresee this visit . now be conjoin the force of creed , convention , and comfort , and against they be only a defence that it be hateful to lay bare . she wait for her mother to speak . 
  you see , darling , you haven t tell we anything . 
 but how tell one who look and speak like that ? she flush , go pale , and say :   I can only say there s a beast in he . I know it doesn t show ; but there be , Mother , there be ! 
 Lady Charwell , too , have flush . it do not suit she , be over fifty . 
  your father and I will help you all we can , dear ; only , of course , it be so important to take a right decision now . 
  and I , have make a wrong one already , can only be trust to make another ? you ve get to take my word , Mother ; I simply can t talk about it , and I simply win t go back with he . 
 Lady Charwell have sit down , a furrow between her grey - blue eye which seem fix on nothing . she turn they on her daughter , and say , hesitate : 
  you re sure it s not just the beast that be in nearly all man ? 
 Clare laugh . 
  oh ! no . I m not easily upset . 
 Lady Charwell sigh . 
  Don t worry , Mother dear ; it ll be all right once we ve get this over . nothing really matter nowadays . 
  so they say , but one have the bad habit still of believe that it do . 
 at this near approach to irony Clare say quickly :   it matter that one should keep one s self - respect . really , with he I couldn t. 
  we ll say no more then . your father will want to see you . you d well take your thing off . 
 Clare kiss she and go out . there be no sound from below , and she go on up to her room . she feel her will - power stiffening . the day when man dispose of their woman folk be long over , and    whatever Jerry and her father be concoct    she would not budge ! when the summon come , she go to the encounter , blade - sharp , and hard as stone . 
 they be stand in the General s office - like study , and she feel at once that they be in agreement . nod to her husband , she go over to her father . 
  well ? 
 but Corven speak first . 
  I leave it to you , sir . 
 the General s lined face look mournful and irritated . he brace himself .   we ve be go into this , Clare . Jerry admit that you ve get much on your side , but he s give I his word that he win t offend you again . I want to appeal to you to try and see his point of view . he say , I think rightly , that it s more to your interest even than to his . the old idea about marriage may have go , but , after all , you both take certain vow    but leave that aside   
  yes ,   say Clare . 
 the General twirl his little moustache , and thrust the other hand deep into his pocket . 
  well , what on earth be go to happen to you both ? you can t have a divorce    there s your name , and his position , and    after only eighteen month . what be you go to do ? live apart ? that s not fair to you , or to he . 
  Fairer to both of we than live together will be . 
 the General glance at her harden face .   so you say now ; but we ve both of we have more experience than you . 
  that be bind to be say soon or later . you want I to go back with he ? 
 the General look acutely unhappy . 
  you know , my dear , that I only want what s good for you . 
  and Jerry have convince you that be the good . well , it s the bad . I m not go , Dad , and there s an end of it . 
 the General look at her face , look at the face of his son - inlaw , shrug his shoulder , and begin fill his pipe . 
 Jerry Corven s eye , which have be pass from face to face , narrow and come to rest on Clare s. that look last a long time , and neither flinch . 
  very well ,   he say , at last ,   I will make other arrangement . good - bye , sir ; good - bye , Clare !   and turn on his heel , he go out . 
 in the silence that follow , the sound of his car crunch away on the drive could be hear distinctly . the General , smoke glumly , keep his glance avert ; Clare go to the window . it be grow dark outside , and now that the crisis be over she feel unstrung . 
  I wish to God ,   say her father s voice ,   that I could understand this business . 
 Clare do not move from the window :   do he tell you he d use my rid whip on I ? 
  what !   say the General . 
 Clare turn round . 
  yes . 
  on you ? 
  yes . that be not my real reason , but it put the finishing touch . sorry to hurt you , Dad ! 
  by God ! 
 Clare have a moment of illumination . concrete fact ! give a man a fact ! 
  the ruffian !   say the General :   the ruffian ! he tell I he spend the evening with you the other day ; be that true ? 
 a slow flush have burn up in her cheek . 
  he practically force himself in . 
  the ruffian !   say the General once more . 
 when she be alone again , she meditate wryly on the sudden difference that little fact about the whip have make in her father s feeling . he have take it as a personal affront , an insult to his own flesh and blood . she feel that he could have stand it with equanimity of someone else s daughter ; she remember that he have even sympathise with her brother s flogging of the muleteer , which have bring such a peck of trouble on they all . how little detach , how delightfully personal , people be ! feel and criticise in term of their own prejudice ! well ! she be over the bad now , for her people be on her side , and she would make certain of not see Jerry alone again . she think of the long look he have give she . he be a good loser , because for he the game be never at an end . life itself    not each item of life    absorb he . he ride Life , take a toss , get up , ride on ; meet an obstacle , ride over it , ride through it , take the scratch as all in the day s work . he have fascinate she , ride through and over she ; the fascination be go , and she wonder that it have ever be . what be he go to do now ? well ! one thing be certain : somehow , he would cut his loss ! 
 chapter 13 

 one who gaze at the Temple s smooth green turf , fine tree , stone - sille building , and pouter pigeon , feel dithyrambic , till on he intrude the vision of countless bundle of paper tie round with pink tape , unende clerk in little outer chamber suck thumb and wait for solicitor , calf - bind tome store with report of innumerable case so closely argue that the light - minded sigh at sight of they and think of the Café Royal . who shall deny that the Temple harbour the human mind in excelsis , the human body in chair ; who shall gainsay that the human spirit be take off at its entrance and leave outside like the shoe of those who enter a mosque ? not even to its Grand Nights be the human spirit admit , for the legal mind must not   slop over ,   and warning be give by the word   decoration   on the invitation card . on those few autumn morning when the sun shin , the inhabitant of the Temple who face East may possibly feel in his midriff as a man feel on a hilltop , or after hear a Brahms symphony , or even when see first daffodil in spring ; if so , he will hastily remember where he be , and turn to : Collister v. Daverday : Popdick intervene . 
 and yet , strangely , Eustace Dornford , verge on middle age , be continually be visit , whether the sun shine or not , by the feeling of one who sit on a low wall in the first spring warmth , see life as a botticellian figure advance towards he through an orchard of orange tree and spring flower . at less expenditure of word , he be   in love   with Dinny . each morning when he see Clare he be visit by a longing not to dictate on parliamentary subject , but rather to lead she to talk about her sister . self - control , however , and with a sense of humour , he bow to his professional inhibition , merely ask Clare whether she and her sister would dine with he ,   on Saturday    here , or at the Café Royal ? 
  here would be more original . 
  would you care to ask a man to make a fourth ? 
  but win t you , Mr. Dornford ? 
  you might like someone special . 
  well , there s young Tony Croom , who be on the boat with I . he s a nice boy . 
  good ! Saturday , then . and you ll ask your sister ? 
 Clare do not say :   she s probably on the doorstep ,   for , as a fact , she be . every evening that week she be come at half - past six to accompany Clare back to Melton Mews . there be still chance , and the sister be not take they . 
 on hearing of the invitation Dinny say :   when I leave you late that night I run into Tony Croom , and we walk back to Mount Street together . 
  you didn t tell he about Jerry s visit to I ? 
  of course not ! 
  it s hard on he , as it be . he really be a nice boy , Dinny . 
  so I see . and I wish he weren t in London . 
 Clare smile .   well , he win t be for long ; he s to take charge of some arab mare for Mr. Muskham down at Bablock Hythe . 
  Jack Muskham live at Royston . 
  the mare be to have a separate establishment in a milder climate . 
 Dinny rouse herself from memory with an effort . 
  well , darling , shall we strap - hang on the Tube , or go a bust in a taxi ? 
  I want air . be you up to walk ? 
  rather ! we ll go by the Embankment and the Parks . 
 they walk quickly , for it be cold . lamplit and star - cover , that broad free segment of the Town have a memorable dark beauty ; even on the building , their daylight feature abolish , be stamp a certain grandeur . 
 Dinny murmur :   London at night be beautiful . 
  yes , you go to bed with a beauty and wake up with a barmaid . and , what s it all for ? a clotted mass of energy like an ant - heap . 
   so fatiguin ,   as Aunt Em would say . 
  but what be it all for , Dinny ? 
  a workshop try to turn out perfect specimen ; a million failure to each success . 
  be that worth while ? 
  why not ? 
  well , what be there to BELIEVE in ? 
  Character . 
  how do you mean ? 
  Character s our way of show the desire for perfection . nurse the good that s in one . 
  Hum !   say Clare .   who s to decide what s good within one ? 
  you have I , my dear . 
  well , I m too young for it , anyway . 
 Dinny hook her arm within her sister s. 
  you re old than I be , Clare . 
  no , I ve have more experience perhaps , but I haven t commune with my own spirit and be still . I feel in my bone that Jerry s hang round the Mews . 
  come into Mount Street , and we ll go to a film . 
 in the hall Blore hand Dinny a note . 
  Sir Gerald Corven call , Miss , and leave this for you . 
 Dinny open it . 
  DEAR DINNY  
  I m leave England tomorrow instead of Saturday . if Clare will change her mind I shall be very happy to take she . if not , she must not expect I to be long - suffering . I have leave a note to this effect at her lodging , but as I do not know where she be , I write to you also , so as to be sure that she know . she or a message from she will find I at the Bristol up to three o clock tomorrow , Thursday . after that     la guerre comme    la guerre . 
  with many regret that thing be so criss - cross and good wish to yourself , 
  I be , 
  very sincerely your , 
  GERALD CORVEN . 
 Dinny bite her lip . 
  read this ! 
 Clare read the note . 
  I shan t go , and he can do what he like . 
 while they be titivate themselves in Dinny s room , Lady Mont come in . 
  ah !   she say :   now I can say my piece . your Uncle have see Jerry Corven again . what be you goin   to do about he , Clare ? 
 as Clare swivel round from the mirror , the light fall full on cheek and lip whose toilet she have not quite complete . 
  I m never go back to he , Aunt Em . 
  may I sit on your bed , Dinny ?   never   be a long time , and    er    that Mr. Craven . I m sure you have principle , Clare , but you re too pretty . 
 Clare put down her lipstick . 
  Sweet of you , Aunt Em ; but really I know what I m about . 
  so comfortin ! when I say that myself , I m sure to make a gaffe . 
  if Clare promise , she ll perform , Auntie . 
 Lady Mont sigh .   I promise my father not to marry for a year . seven month    and then your uncle . it s always somebody . 
 Clare raise her hand to the little curl on her neck . 
  I ll promise not to   kick over   for a year . I ought to know my own mind by then ; if I don t , I can t have get one . 
 Lady Mont smooth the eiderdown . 
  cross your heart . 
  I don t think you should ,   say Dinny quickly . 
 Clare cross her finger on her breast . 
  I ll cross where it ought to be . 
 Lady Mont rise . 
  she ought to stay here to - night , don t you think , Dinny ? 
  yes . 
  I ll tell they , then . Sea - green be your colour , Dinny . Lawrence say I haven t one . 
  black and white , dear . 
  Magpies and the Duke of Portland . I haven t be to Ascot since Michael go to Winchester    savin   our penny . Hilary and May be comin   to dinner . they win t be dress . 
  oh !   say Clare suddenly :   do Uncle Hilary know about I ? 
  broad - minded ,   murmur Lady Mont.   I can t help bein   sorry , you know . 
 Clare stand up . 
  believe I , Aunt Em , Jerry s not the sort of man who ll let it hurt he long . 
  stand back to back , you two ; I think so    Dinny by an inch . 
  I m five foot five ,   say Clare ,   without shoe . 
  very well . when you re tidy , come down . 
 so say , Lady Mont sway to the door , say to herself :   Solomon s seal    remind Boswell ,   and go out . 
 Dinny return to the fire , and resume her stare at the flame . 
 Clare s voice , close behind she , say :   I feel inclined to sing , Dinny . a whole year s holiday from everything . I m glad Aunt Em make I promise . but isn t she a scream ? 
  emphatically not . she s the wise member of our family . take life seriously and you re nowhere . she doesn t. she may want to , but she can t. 
  but she hasn t any real worry . 
  only a husband , three child , several grandchild , two household , three dog , some congenital gardener , not enough money , and two passion    one for get other people marry , and one for french tapestry ; besides try hard not to get fat on it all . 
  oh ! she s a duck all right . what d you advise about these   tendril ,   Dinny ? they re an awful plague . shall I shingle again ? 
  let they grow at present , we don t know what s come ; it might be ringlet . 
  do you believe that woman get themselves up to please man ? 
  certainly not . 
  to excite and annoy each other , then ? 
  fashion mostly ; woman be sheep about appearance . 
  and moral ? 
  have we any ? man - make , anyway . by nature we ve only get feeling . 
  I ve none now . 
  sure ? 
 Clare laugh .   oh ! well , in hand , anyhow .   she put on her dress , and Dinny take her place at the mirror . . . . 
 the slum parson do not dine out to observe human nature . he eat . Hilary Charwell , have spend the good part of his day , include meal - time , listen to the difficulty of parishioner who have lay up no store for the morrow because they have never have store enough for today , absorb the good food set before he with perceptible enjoyment . if he be aware that the young woman whom he have marry to Jerry Corven have burst her bond , he give no sign of it . though seat next to she , he never once allude to her domestic existence , converse freely on the election , french art , the timber wolf at Whipsnade Zoo , and a new system of build school with roof that could be use or not as the weather dictate . over his face , long , wrinkle , purposeful , and shrewdly kind , flit an occasional smile , as if he be sum something up ; but he give no indication of what that something be , except that he look across at Dinny , as though say :   you and I be go to have a talk presently . 
 no such talk occur , for he be summon by telephone to a death - bed before he have finish his glass of port . Mrs. Hilary go with he . 
 the two sister settle down to bridge with their Uncle and Aunt , and at eleven o clock go up to bed . 
  Armistice day ,   say Clare , turn into her bedroom .   do you realise ? 
  yes . 
  I be in a bus at eleven o clock . I notice two or three people look funny . how can one be expect to feel anything ? I be only ten when the war stop . 
  I remember the Armistice ,   say Dinny ,   because Mother cry . Uncle Hilary be with we at Condaford . he preach on :   they also serve who only stand and wait .  
  who serve except for what he can get from it ? 
  lot of people do hard job all their life for mighty little return . 
  well , yes . 
  why do they ? 
  Dinny , I sometimes feel as if you might end up religious . unless you marry , you will . 
   get thee to a nunnery , go !  
  seriously , ducky , I wish I could see more of   the old Eve   in you . in my opinion you ought to be a mother . 
  when doctor find a way without preliminary . 
  you re waste yourself , my dear . at any moment that you like to crook your little finger , old man Dornford would fall on his knee to you . Don t you like he ? 
  as nice a man as I ve see for a long time . 
   murmur she coldly , turn towards the door .   give I a kiss . 
  Darling ,   say Dinny ,   I do hope thing be go to be all right . I shan t pray for you , in spite of my look of decline ; but I ll dream that your ship come home . 
 chapter 14 

 young croom s second visit to England s past at Drury Lane be the first visit of the other three member of Dornford s little dinner party , and by some fatality , not unconnected with he who take the ticket , they be seat two by two ; young Croom with Clare in the middle of the tenth row , Dornford and Dinny in return stall at the end of the third . . . . 
  Penny for your thought , Miss Cherrell ? 
  I be think how the english face have change since 1900 . 
  it s the hair . face in picture a hundred to a hundred and fifty year ago be much more like our . 
  droop moustache and chignon do hide expression , but be there the expression ? 
  you don t think the Victorians have as much character ? 
  probably more , but surely they suppress it ; even in their dress , always more stuff than be need ; frock - coat , high collar , cravat , bustle , button boot . 
  the leg be on their nerve , but the neck wasn t. 
  I give you the woman s neck . but look at their furniture : tassel , fringe , antimacassar , chandelier , enormous sideboard . they do play hide - and - seek with the soul , Mr. Dornford . 
  and every now and then it pop out , like little Edward after unclothe himself under his mother s dining - table at Windsor . 
  he never do anything quite so perfect again . 
  I don t know . he be another Restoration in a mild way . big opening of floodgate under he .   . . . 
  he have sail , hasn t he , Clare ? 
  yes , he s sail all right . look at Dornford ! he s fall for Dinny completely . I wish she d take to he . 
  why shouldn t she ? 
  my dear young man , Dinny s be in very deep water . she s in they even now . 
  I don t know anyone I d like well for a sister - inlaw . 
  Don t you wish you may get she ? 
  God ! yes ! Don t I ! 
  what do you think of Dornford , Tony ? 
  awfully decent , not a bit dry . 
  if he be a doctor he d have a wonderful bedside manner . he s a Catholic . 
  Wasn t that against he in the election ? 
  it would have be , but his opponent be an atheist , so they cry quit . 
  terrible humbug , politic . 
  but rather fun . 
  still , Dornford win that Bar point - to - point    he must have gut . 
  lot . I should say he d face anything in his quiet way . I m quite fond of he . 
  oh ! 
  no intention to incite you , Tony . 
  this be like be on board ship , sit side by side , and    stymie . come out for a cigarette . 
  People be come back . prepare yourself to point I the moral of the next act . at present I don t see any . 
  Wait !   . . . 
 Dinny draw in her breath . 
  that s terrible . I can just remember the Titanic . Awful , the waste in the world ! 
  you re right . 
  Waste of life , and waste of love . 
  have you come up against much waste ? 
  yes . 
  you don t care to talk about it ? 
  no . 
  I don t believe that your sister s go to be waste . she s too vivid . 
  yes , but her head s in chancery . 
  she ll duck from under . 
  I can t bear to think of her life be spoil . isn t there some legal dodge , Mr. Dornford ; without publicity , I mean ? 
  if he would give cause , there need be very little of that . 
  he win t. he s feel vindictive . 
  I see . then I m afraid there s nothing for it but to wait . these thing generally disentangle themselves . catholic be not suppose to believe in divorce . but if you feel this be a case for one   
  Clare s only twenty - four . she can t live alone the rest of her life . 
  be you think of do that ? 
  I ! that s different . 
  yes , you re very unlike , but to have you waste would be far bad . just as much bad as waste a lovely day in winter be than waste one in summer . 
  the curtain s go up .   . . . 
  I wonder ,   muttered Clare :   it didn t look to I as if their love would have last long . they be eat each other like sugar . 
  my God , if you and I on that boat have be   
  you re very young , Tony . 
  two year old than you . 
  and about ten year young . 
  Don t you really believe in love last , Clare ? 
  not passion . and after that generally the deluge . only with those two on the titanic it come too soon . a cold sea ! Ugh ! 
  let I pull your cloak up . 
  I don t believe I like this show too frightfully , Tony . it dig into you , and I don t want to be dig into . 
  I like it well the first time , certainly . 
  thank you ! 
  it s be close to you , and not close enough . but the war part of the play s the good . 
  the whole thing make I feel I don t want to be alive . 
  that s   the satire .  
  one half of he be mock the other . it give I the fidget . too like oneself . 
  I wish we d go to a movie , I could have hold your hand . 
  Dornford s look at Dinny as if she be the Madonna of the future that he want to make a Madonna of the past . 
  so he do , you say . 
  he really have a nice face . I wonder what he ll think of the war part .   Weigh - hey ! up she rise !    . . . 
 Dinny sit with closed eye , acutely feel the remain of moisture on her cheek . 
  but she never would have do that ,   she say , huskily ,   not wave a flag and cheer . never ! she might have mix in the crowd , but never that ! 
  no , that s a stage touch . pity ! but a jolly good act . really good ! 
  those poor gay raddled singing girl , get more and more wretched and raddle , and that   Tipperary   whistle ! the war must have be AWFUL ! 
  one get sort of exalted . 
  do that feeling last ? 
  in a way . do that seem rather horrible to you ? 
  I never can judge what people ought to feel . I ve hear my brother say something of the kind . 
  it wasn t the   Into Battle   feel either    I m not the fight man . it s a cliché to say it be the big thing that will ever be in one s life . 
  you still feel that ? 
  it have be up to now . but   ! I must tell you while I ve a chance    I m in love with you , Dinny . I know nothing about you , you know nothing about I . that doesn t make any difference . I fall in love with you at once ; it s be get deep ever since . I don t expect you to say anything , but you might think about it now and then . . . . 
 Clare shrug her shoulder . 
  do people really go on like that at the Armistice ? Tony ! do people   ? 
  what ? 
  really go on like that ? 
  I don t know . 
  where be you ? 
  at Wellington , my first term . my father be kill in the war . 
  oh ! I suppose mine might have be , and my brother . but even then ! Dinny say my mother cry when the Armistice come . 
  so do mine , I believe . 
  the bit I like well be that between the son and the girl . but the whole thing make you feel too much . take I out , I want a cigarette . no , we d well not . one always meet people . 
  damn ! 
  come here with you be the limit . I ve promise solemnly not to give offence for a whole year . oh ! cheer up ! you ll see lot of I . . . . 
   Greatness , and dignity , and peace ,    murmur Dinny , stand up ,   and the great of these be   dignity .  
  the hard to come by , anyway . 
  that girl sing in the night club , and the jazzed sky ! thank you awfully , Mr. Dornford . I shan t forget this play easily . 
  nor what I say to you ? 
  it be very sweet of you , but the aloe only bloom once in a hundred year . 
  I can wait . it s be a wonderful evening for I . 
  those two ! 
  we ll pick they up in the hall . 
  do you think England ever have greatness and dignity and peace ? 
  no . 
  but   there s a green hill far away , without a city wall .   thank you    I ve have this cloak three year . 
  Charming it be ! 
  I suppose most of these people will go on to night club now . 
  not five per cent . 
  I should like a sniff of home air to - night , and a long look at the star . . . . 
 Clare turn her head . 
  Don t , Tony ! 
  how then ? 
  you ve be with I all the evening . 
  if only I could take you home ! 
  you can t , my dear . squeeze my little finger , and pull yourself together . 
  Clare ! 
  look ! they re just in front    now vanish ! get a good long drink at the Club and dream of horse . there ! be that close enough ? good - night , dear Tony ! 
  God ! good - night ! 
 chapter 15 

 Time have be compare with a stream , but it differ    you can not cross it , grey and even - flow , wide as the world itself , have neither ford nor bridge ; and though , accord to philosopher , it may flow both up and down , the calendar as yet follow it but one way . 
 November , then , become December , but December do not become November . except for a cold snap or two the weather remain mild . unemployment decrease ; the adverse balance of trade increase ; seven fox escape for every one kill ; the paper flutter from the storm in their tea - cup ; a great deal of income tax be pay ; still more be not ; the question :   why have prosperity go to pot ?   continue to bewilder every mind ; the pound go up , the pound go down . in short , time flow , but the conundrum of existence remain unsolved . 
 at Condaford the bakery scheme be drop . every penny that could be raise be to be put into pig , poultry and potato . Sir Lawrence and Michael be now deep in the   Three P. Plan ,   and Dinny have become infected . she and the General spend all their day prepare for the millennium which would follow its adoption . Eustace Dornford have express his adherence to the proposition . figure have be prepare to show that in ten year one hundred million a year could be knock off Britain s purchasing bill by graduated prohibition of the import of these three article of food , without increase the cost of living . with a little organisation , a fractional change in the nature of the Briton , and the increase of wheat offal , the thing be as good as do . in the meantime , the General borrow slightly on his life assurance policy and pay his taxis . 
 the new Member , visit his constituency , spend Christmas at Condaford , talk almost exclusively of pig , instinct tell he that they be just then the sure line of approach to Dinny s heart . Clare , too , spend Christmas at home . how , apart from secretarial duty , she have spend the intervene time , be tacitly assume . no letter have come from Jerry Corven , but it be know from the paper that he be back in Ceylon . during the day between Christmas and the New Year the habitable part of the old house be full : Hilary , his wife , and their daughter Monica ; Adrian and Diana , with Sheila and Ronald , now recover from the measle    no such family gathering have be hold for year . even Sir Lionel and Lady Alison drive down for lunch on New Year s Eve . with such an overwhelming conservative majority it be feel that 1932 would be important . Dinny be run off her leg . she give no sign of it , but have less an air of live in the past . so much be she the party s life and soul that no one could have tell she have any of her own . Dornford gaze at she in speculation . what be behind that untire cheerful selflessness ? he go so far as to ask of Adrian , who seem to be her favourite . 
  this house wouldn t work without your niece , Mr. Cherrell . 
  it wouldn t. Dinny s a wonder . 
  Doesn t she ever think of herself ? 
 Adrian look at he sideways . the pale - brown , rather hollow - cheeked face , with its dark hair , and hazel eye , be sympathetic ; for a lawyer and a politician , he look sensitive . inclined , however , to a sheepdog attitude where Dinny be concern , he answer with caution : 
  why no , no more than reason ; indeed , not so much . 
  she look to I sometimes as if she d be through something pretty bad . 
 Adrian shrug .   she s twenty - seven . 
  would you mind awfully tell I what it be ? this isn t curiosity . I m    well , I m in love with she , and terrify of butt in and hurt she through ignorance . 
 Adrian take a long gurgle pull at his pipe . 
  if you re in dead earnest   
  absolutely dead earnest . 
  it might save she a pang or two . she be terribly in love , the year before last , and it come to a tragic end . 
  death ? 
  no . I can t tell you the exact story , but the man have do something that place he , in a sense    or at all event he think so    outside the pale ; and he put an end to their engagement rather than involve Dinny , and go off to the Far East . it be a complete cut . Dinny have never speak of it since , but I m afraid she ll never forget . 
  I see . thank you very much . you ve do I a great service . 
  sorry if it s hurt ,   murmur Adrian ;   but well , perhaps , to have one s eye open . 
  Much . 
 resume the tune on his pipe , Adrian steal several glance at his silent neighbour . that avert face wear an expression not exactly dash or sad , but as if contend deeply with the future .   he s the near approach ,   he think ,   to what I should like for her    sensitive , quiet , and plucky . but thing be always so damnably perverse ! 
  she s very different from her sister ,   he say at last . 
 Dornford smile . 
  ancient and modern . 
  Clare s a pretty creature , though . 
  oh , yes , and lot of quality . 
  they ve both get grit . how do she do her work ? 
  very well ; quick in the uptak , good memory , heap of savoir - faire . 
  Pity she s in such a position . I don t know why thing go wrong , and I don t see how they can come right . 
  I ve never meet Corven . 
  quite nice to meet ; but , by the look of he , a streak of cruelty . 
  Dinny say he s vindictive . 
 Adrian nod .   I should think so . and that s bad when it come to divorce . but I hope it win t    always a dirty business , and probably the wrong person tar . I don t remember a divorce in our family . 
  nor in mine , but we re catholic . 
  judge by your experience in the Courts , should you say english morality be go downhill ? 
  no . on the upgrade , if anything . 
  but surely the standard be slacker ? 
  People be franker , not quite the same thing . 
  you lawyer and judge , at all event ,   say Adrian ,   be exceptionally moral man . 
  oh ! where do you get that from ? 
  the paper . 
 Dornford laugh . 
  well !   say Adrian , rise .   let s have a game of billiard . . . . 
 on the Monday after New Year s Day the party break up . in the afternoon Dinny lie down on her bed and go to sleep . the grey light fail and darkness fill her room . she dream she be on the bank of a river . Wilfrid be hold her hand , point to the far side , and say :    one more river , one more river to cross !    Hand in hand they go down the bank . in the water all become dark ! she lose touch of his hand and cry out in terror . lose her foothold , she drift , reach her hand this way and that , and his voice , far and far away ,    one more river    one more river ,    die to a sigh . she awake agonised . through the window opposite be the dark sky , the elm tree brush at the star    no sound , no scent , no colour . and she lie quite still , draw deep breath to get the well of her anguish . it be long since she have feel Wilfrid so close to she , or be so poignantly bereave once more . 
 she get up , and , have bath her face in cold water , stand at her window look into the starry dark , still shudder a little from the vivid misery of her dream .   one more river ! 
 someone tap on the door . 
  yes ? 
  it s old Mrs. Purdy , Miss Dinny . they say she s go fast . the doctor s there , but   
  Betty ! do Mother know ? 
  yes , miss , she s go over . 
  no ! I ll go . stop she , Annie ! 
  yes , miss . it s a seizure    nurse send over to say they can t do nothing . will you have the light on , miss ? 
  yes , turn it up . 
 thank God they have manage to put the electric light in , at last ! 
  get I this little flask fill with brandy , and put my rubber boot in the hall . I shan t be two minute come down . 
  yes , miss . 
 slip on a jersey and cap , and catch up her mole - skin fur coat , she run downstairs , stop for a second at her mother s door to say she be go . put on her rubber boot in the hall , and take the fill flask , she go out . it be grope dark , but not cold for January . the lane be slithery under foot , and , since she have no torch , the half mile take she nearly a quarter of an hour . the doctor s car , with its light on , stand outside the cottage . unlatche the door , Dinny go into the ground - floor room . there be a fire burning , and one candle alight , but the crowded homely space be desert by all but the goldfinch in its large cage . she open the thin door that shut the stair off , and go up . push the feeble top door gently , she stand look . a lamp be burn on the window - sill opposite , and the low , sagging - ceilinge room have a shadowy radiance . at the foot of the double bed be the doctor and village nurse , talk in low tone . in the window corner Dinny could see the little old husband crouch on a chair , with his hand on his knee and his crumpled , cherry - cheek face tremble and jerk slightly . the old cottage woman lie hump in the old bed ; her face be waxen , and seem to Dinny to have lose already almost all its wrinkle . a faint stertorous breathing come from her lip . the eye be not quite closed , but surely be not see . 
 the doctor cross to the door . 
  Opiate ,   he say .   I don t think she ll recover consciousness . just as well for the poor old soul ! if she do , nurse have another to give she at once . there s nothing to be do but ease the end . 
  I shall stay ,   say Dinny . 
 the doctor take her hand . 
  happy release . Don t fret , my dear . 
  poor old Benjy !   whisper Dinny . 
 the doctor press her hand , and go down the stair . 
 Dinny enter the room ; the air be close , and she leave the door ajar . 
  I ll watch , nurse , if you want to get anything . 
 the nurse nod . in her neat dark blue dress and bonnet she look , but for a little frown , almost inhumanly impassive . they stand side by side gaze at the old woman s waxen face . 
  not many like she ,   whisper the nurse suddenly .   I m go to get some thing I ll want    back under the half - hour . sit down , Miss Cherrell , don t tire yourself . 
 when she have go Dinny turn and go up to the old husband in the corner . 
  Benjy . 
 he wobble his pippin head , rub his hand on his knee . word of comfort refuse to come to Dinny . just touch his shoulder , she go back to the bed and draw up the one hard wooden chair . she sit , silently watch old Betty s lip , whence issue that faintly stertorous breathing . it seem to she as if the spirit of a far - off age be die . there might be other people as old still alive in the village , but they weren t like old Betty , with her simple sense and thrifty order , her Bible - reading and love of gentry , her pride in her eighty - three year , in the tooth that she ought long since to have part from , and in her record ; with her shrewdness and her way of treat her old husband as if he be her rather difficult son . poor old Benjy    he be not she equal by any manner of mean , but what he would do alone one couldn t think . perhaps one of his granddaughter would find room for he . those two have bring up seven child in the old day when a shilling fortunately go as far as three now , and the village be full of their progeny ; but how would they like little old Benjy , still argumentative and fond of a grumble and a glass , ensconce by their more modern hearth ? well , a nook would turn up for he somewhere . he could never live on here , alone . two old age pension for two old people make just the difference as against one for one . 
  how I wish I have money !   she think . he would not want the goldfinch , anyway . she would take that , and free and feed it in the old greenhouse till it get use to its wing , and then let it go . 
 the old man clear his throat in his dim corner . Dinny start and lean forward . absorb in her thought , she have not notice how faint the breathing have become . the pale lip of the old woman be nearly close now , the wrinkle lid almost fast over the unseee eye . no noise be come from the bed . for a few minute she sit look , listen ; then pass round to the side and lean over . 
 go ? as if in answer the eyelid flicker ; the faint imaginable smile appear on the lip , and then , suddenly as a blow - out flame be dark , all be lifeless . Dinny hold her breath . it be the first human death she have see . her eye , glue to the old waxen face , see it settle into its mask of release , watch it be embalm in that still dignity which mark death off from life . with her finger she smooth the eyelid . 
 death ! at its quiet and least harrowing , but yet    death ! the old , the universal anodyne ; the common lot ! in this bed where she have lain nightly for over fifty year under the low , sag ceiling , a great little old lady have pass . of what be call   birth ,   of position , wealth , and power , she have none . no plumbing have come her way , no learning , and no fashion . she have bear child , nurse , fed , and wash they , sew , cooked , and sweep , eat little , travel not at all in all her year , suffer much pain , never know the ease of superfluity ; but her back have be straight , her way straight , her eye quiet , and her manner gentle . if she be not the   great lady ,   who be ? 
 Dinny stand , with her head bow , feel this to the very marrow of her soul . Old Benjy in that dim corner clear his throat again . she start , and , tremble a little , go over to he . 
  go and look at she , Benjy ; she s asleep . 
 she put her hand under his elbow to help the action of his stiffen knee . at his full height he be only up to her shoulder , a little dry - up pippin of a man . she keep at his side , move across the room . 
 together they look down at the forehead and cheek , slowly uncrease in the queer beauty of death . the little old husband s face go crimson and puffy , like that of a child who have lose its doll ; he say in a sort of angered squeak : 
  eh ! she m not asleep . she m go . she win t never speak agen . look ! she an t Mother no more ! where s that nurse ? she didn   ought to   ave leave   er   
  H ssh ! Benjy ! 
  but she m dead . what ll I do ? 
 he turn his withered apple face up to Dinny , and there come from he an unwashed odour , as of grief and snuff and old potato . 
  can t stop   ere ,   he say ,   with Mother like that .   Tain t nateral . 
  no ; go downstairs and smoke your pipe , and tell nurse when she come . 
  tell   er ; I ll tell   er    shoulden never   ave leave   er . oh , dear ! oh , dear ! oh , dear ! 
 put her hand on his shoulder , Dinny guide he to the stairway , and watch he stumble and grope and grieve his way down . then she go back to the bed . the smooth - out face have an uncanny attraction for she . with every minute that pass it seem the more to proclaim superiority . almost triumphant it be , as she gaze , in its slow , sweet relaxation after age and pain ; character reveal in the mould of that brief interval between torture life and corrupt death .   good as gold !   those be the word they should grave on the humble stone they would put over she . wherever she be now , or whether , indeed , she be anywhere , do not matter . she have do she bit . Betty ! 
 she be still stand there gaze when the nurse come back . 
 chapter 16 

 since her husband s departure Clare have meet young Croom constantly , but always at the stipulated arm s - length . Love have make he unsociable , and to be conspicuously in his company be unwise , so she do not make he known to her friend ; they meet where they could eat cheaply , see film , or simply walk . to her room she have not invite he again , nor have he ask to come . his behaviour , indeed , be exemplary , except when he fall into tense and painful silence , or gaze at she till her hand itch to shake he . he seem to have pay several visit to Jack Muskham s stud farm , and to be spend hour over book which debate whether the excellence of   Eclipse   be due to the Lister Turk , rather than to the Darley Arabian , and whether it be preferable to breed - in to Blacklock with St. Simon on Speculum or with Speculum on St. Simon . 
 when she return from Condaford after the New Year , she have not hear from he for five consecutive day , so that he be bulk more largely in her thought . 
  DEAR TONY ,   she write to he at the Coffee House : 
  where and how be you ? I be back . very happy New Year ! 
  your always , 
  CLARE . 
 the answer do not come for three day , during which she feel at first huffy , then anxious , and finally a little scared . it be indite from the inn at Bablock Hythe : 
  DARLING CLARE  
  I be ever so relieved to get your note , because I d determine not to write until I hear from you . nothing s far from my thought than to bore you with myself , and sometimes I don t know whether I be or not . so far as a person can be who be not see you , I m all right ; I m overlook the fitting up of the box for those mare . they   the box   will be prime . the difficulty be go to be acclimatisation ; it s suppose to be mild here , and the pasture look as if it would be tip - top . this part of the world be quite pretty , especially the river . thank God the inn s cheap , and I can live indefinitely on egg and bacon . Jack Muskham have be brick enough to start my salary from the New Year , so I m think of lay out my remain sixty - odd pound on Stapylton s old two - seater . he s just off back to India . once I m down here it ll be vital to have a car if I m to see anything of you , without which life win t be worth live . I hope you have a splendid time at Condaford . do you know I haven t see you for sixteen day , and be absolutely starve . I ll be up on Saturday afternoon . where can I meet you ? 
  your ever devote 
  TONY . 
 Clare read this letter on the sofa in her room , frown a little as she open , smile a little as she finish it . 
 poor dear Tony ! grab a telegraph form , she write : 
  come to tea Melton Mews .    C. 
 and despatch it on her way to the Temple . 
 the importance attach to the meeting of two young people depend on the importance which other attach to their not meeting . Tony Croom approach Melton Mews without think of anyone but Clare , and fail to observe a shortish man in horn - rim spectacle , black boot , and a claret - colour tie , who look like the secretary of a learn society . Unobtrusive and unobserved , this individual have already travel with he from Bablock Hythe to Paddington , from Paddington to the   Coffee House ,   from the   Coffee House   to the corner of Melton Mews ; have watch he enter no . 2 , make an entry in a pocket - book , and with an evening paper in his hand be now wait for he to come out again . with touch fidelity he read no news , keep his prominent glance on that peacock - blue door , prepare at any moment to close himself like an umbrella and vanish into the street - scape . and while he wait   which be his normal occupation   he think , like other citizen , of the price of living , of the cup of tea which he would like , of his small daughter and her collection of foreign stamp , and of whether he would now have to pay income tax . his imagination dwell , also , on the curve of a young woman at the tobacconist s where he obtain his   gasper . 
 his name be Chayne , and he make his living out of a remarkable memory for face , inexhaustible patience , careful entry in his pocket - book , the faculty of self - obliteration , and that fortunate resemblance to the secretary of learn society . he be , indeed , employ by the Polteed Agency , who make their living by know more than be good for those about whom they know it . have receive his instruction on the day Clare return to London , he have already be five day   on the job ,   and no one know it except his employer and himself . spy on other people be , accord to the book he read , the chief occupation of the people of these island , it have never occur to he to look down on a profession conscientiously pursue for seventeen year . he take a pride in his work , and know himself for a capable   sleuth .   though somewhat increasingly troubled in the bronchial region owe to the draught he have so often to stand in , he could not by now imagine any other way of pass his time , or any , on the whole , more knowing method of gain a livelihood . Young Croom s address he have obtain by the simple expedient of wait behind Clare while she send her telegram ; but , have just fail to read the message itself , he have start at once for Bablock Hythe , since when until now he have experience no difficulty . shift his position from time to time at the end of the street , he enter the Mews itself when it become dark . at half - past five the peacock door be open and the two young people emerge . they walk , and Mr. Chayne walk behind they . they walk fast , and Mr. Chayne , with an acquire sense of rhythm , at exactly the same pace . he soon perceive that they be merely go to where he have twice follow Lady Corven already    the Temple . and this give he a sense of comfort , because of the cup of tea he pin for . pick his way in and out among the back of people large enough to screen he , he watch they enter Middle Temple Lane , and part at Harcourt Buildings . have note that Lady Corven go in , and that the young man begin parade slowly between the entrance and the Embankment , he look at his watch , double back into the Strand , and bolt into an A.B.C. with the word   Cup of tea and bath bun , miss , please .   while wait for these he make a prolonged entry in his pocket - book . then , blow on his tea , he drink it from the saucer , eat half the bun , conceal the other half in his hand , pay , and re - enter the Strand . he have just finish the bun when he regain the entrance to the Lane . the young man be still parade slowly . Mr. Chayne wait for his back view , and , assume the air of a belate solicitor s clerk , bolt down past the entrance to Harcourt Buildings into the Inner Temple . there , in a doorway , he scrutinise name until Clare come out . rejoin by young Croom , she walk up towards the Strand , and Mr. Chayne walk too . when , shortly , they take ticket for a cinema , he also take a ticket and enter the row behind . accustomed to the shadowing of people on their guard , the open innocence they be display excited in he a slightly amused if not contemptuous compassion .   regular babe in the wood   they seem to he . he could not tell whether their foot be touching , and pass behind to note the position of their hand . it seem satisfactory , and he take an empty seat nearer to the gangway . sure of they now for a couple of hour , he settle down to smoke , feel warm , and enjoy the film . it be one of sport and travel in Africa , where the two principal be always in position of danger , record by the camera of someone who must surely have be in a position of still great danger . Mr. Chayne listen to their manly american voice say to each other :   Gee ! he s on we !   with an interest which never prevent his knowing that his two young people be listen too . when the light go up he could see their profile .   we re all young at time ,   he think , and his imagination dwell more intensively on the young lady at his tobacconist s. they look so settle - in that he take the opportunity to slip out for a moment . it might not occur again for a long time . in his opinion one of the chief defect in detective story    for he be give to busman s holiday    be that author make their   sleuth   like unto the angel , watch for day without , so to speak , take their eye off the ball . it be not so in real life . 
 he return to a seat almost behind his young couple on the other side just before the light go down . one of his favourite star be now to be feature , and , sure that she would be place in situation which would enable he to enjoy she to the full , he put a peppermint lozenge in his mouth and lean back with a sigh . he have not have an evening watch so pleasant for a long time . it be not always   beer and skittle   at this season of the year ; a   proper chilly job sometimes    no error . 
 after ten minute , during which his star have barely get into her evening clothe , his couple rise . 
  can t stand any more of her voice ,   he hear Lady Corven say ; and the young man answer :   ghastly ! 
 wound and surprised , Mr. Chayne wait for they to pass through the curtain before , with a profound sigh , he follow . in the Strand they stand debate , then walk again , but only into a restaurant across the street . here , buy himself another paper at the door , he see they go up the stair . would it be a private room ? he ascend the stair cautiously . no , it be the gallery ! there they be , nicely screen by the pillar , four table in ! 
 descend to the lavatory , Mr. Chayne change his horn spectacle to pince - nez and his claret - colour tie to a rather floppy bow of black and white . this be a device which have often serve he in good stead . you put on a tie of conspicuous colour , then change it to a quieter one of a different shape . a conspicuous tie have the special faculty of distract attention from a face . you become   that man with the awful tie !   and when you no long wear the tie , you be to all intent someone else . go up again to a table which command a view , he order himself a mixed grill and pint of stout . they be likely to be some two hour over their meal , so he assume a literary air , take out a pouch to roll himself a cigarette and invite the waiter to give he a light for it . have in this way establish a claim to a life of his own , he read his paper like any gentleman at large and examine the mural painting . they be warm and glowing ; large landscape with blue sky , sea , palm , and villas , suggestive of pleasure in a way that appeal to he strongly . he have never be furth than Boulogne , and , so far as he could see , never would . five hundred pound , a lady , a suite in the sun , and gaming table handy , be not unnaturally his idea of heaven ; but , alas , as unattainable . he make no song about it , but , when confront with allurement like these on the wall , he could not help hanker . it have often strike he as ironical that the people he watch into the Divorce Court so often go to Paradise and stay there until their case have blow over and they could marry and come to earth again . live in Finchley , with the sun once a fortnight and an income average perhaps five hundred a year , the vein of poetry in he be damn almost at source ; and it be in some sort a relief to let his imagination play around the life of those whom he watch . that young couple over there ,   good - looker   both of they , would go back together in a taxi as likely as not he d have to wait hour for the young man to come away . the mixed grill be put before he , and he add a little red pepper in view of his probable future . this bit of watch , however , and perhaps another one or two , ought to do the trick ; and on the whole   easy money .   slowly savour each mouthful so that it might nourish he , and blow the froth off his stout with the skill of a connoisseur , he watch they bend forward to talk across the table . what they be eat he could not see . to have follow their meal in detail would have give he some indication of their state of mind . food and love ! after this grill he would have cheese and coffee , and put they down to   expense . 
 he have eat every crumb , extract all the information from his paper , exhaust his imagination on the mural painting ,   place   the scattered diner , pay his bill , and smoke three   gasper   before his quarry rise . he be into his overcoat and outside the entrance before they have even reach the stair . note three taxi within hail , he bend his attention on the hoarding of an adjoining theatre ; till he see the porter beckon one of they , then , walk into the middle of the Strand , he take the one behind it . 
  wait till that cab start and follow it ,   he say to the driver ,   not too close when it stop . 
 take his seat , he look at his watch and make an entry in his pocket - book . have before now follow a wrong cab at some expense , he keep his eye glue on the taxi s number , which he have note in his book . the traffic be but thin at this hour before the theatre rise , and the procession simplicity itself . the followed cab stop at the corner of the Mews . Mr. Chayne tap the glass and fall back on the seat . through the window he see they get out and the young man pay . they walk down the Mews . Mr. Chayne also pay and follow to the corner . they have reach the peacock door and stand there , talk . then Lady Corven put her key into the lock and open the door ; the young man , glance this way and that , follow she in . Mr. Chayne experience a sensation as mix as his grill . it be , of course , exactly what he have hop for and expect . at the same time it mean loiter about in the cold for goodness know how long . he turn up his coat collar and look for a convenient doorway . a thousand pity that he could not wait , say half an hour , and just walk in . the Courts be very particular nowadays about conclusive evidence . he have something of the feeling that a   sportsman   have , see a fox go to ground and not a spade within five mile . he stand for a few minute , read over the entry in his pocket - book under the lamp , and make a final note ; then walk to the doorway he have select and stand there . in half an hour or so the car would be come back from the theatre , and he would have to be on the move to escape attention . there be a light in the upstairs window , but in itself , of course , that be not evidence . too bad ! twelve shilling the return ticket , ten and six the night down there , cab seven and six ; cinema three and six , dinner six bob    he wouldn t charge the tea    thirty - nine and six    say two pound ! Mr. Chayne shake his head , put a peppermint lozenge in his mouth , and change his foot . that corn of his be begin to shoot a bit . he think of pleasant thing : broadstair , his small daughter s back hair , oyster patty , his favourite   star   in little but a corset belt , and his own nightcap of hot whisky and lemon . all to small purpose ; for he be wait and wait on foot that ache , and without any confidence that he be collect anything of real value . the Courts , indeed , have get into such a habit of expect the party to be   call with a cup of tea   that anything short of it be look upon as suspect . he take out his watch again . he have be here over half an hour . and here come the first car ! he must get out of the Mews ! he withdraw to its far end . and then almost before he have time to turn his back there come the young man with his hand thrust deep into his pocket , and his shoulder hunch , hurry away . heave a sigh of relief , Mr. Chayne note in his pocket - book :   Mr. C. leave at 11.40 p.m. ; and walk towards his Finchley bus . 
 chapter 17 

 though Dinny have no expert knowledge of picture , she have , with Wilfrid , make an intensive examination of such as be on permanent show in London . she have also enjoy extremely the italian Exhibition of 1930 . it be , therefore , natural to accept her Uncle Adrian s invitation to accompany he to the french Exhibition of 1932 . after a syncopated lunch in Piccadilly they pass through the turnstile at one o clock on January the 22nd , and take stand before the Primitives . quite a number of people be emulate their attempt to avoid the crowd , so that their progress be slow , and it be an hour before they have reach the Watteaus . 
   gille ,    say Adrian , rest one leg ;   that strike I as about the good picture yet , Dinny . it s queer    when a genre painter of the decorative school get hold of a subject or a type that grip he , how thoroughly he ll stir you up . look at the pierrot s face    what a brooding , fateful , hiding - up expression ! there s the public performer , with the private life , incarnate ! 
 Dinny remain silent . 
  well , young woman ? 
  I be wonder whether art be so conscious . Don t you think he just want to paint that white dress , and his model do the rest ? it s a marvellous expression , but perhaps he have it . People do . 
 Adrian note her face with the tail of his eye . yes ! People do . paint she in repose , render she when she wasn t aware of how she be look , of keep she end up , or whatever you might call it , and wouldn t you have a face that stir you with all that lie behind it ? art be unsatisfactory . when it give you the spirit , distil the essence , it didn t seem real ; and when it give you the gross , cross - currented , contradictory surface , it didn t seem worth while . attitude , fleeting expression , trick of light    all by way of be   real ,   and nothing reveal ! he say suddenly : 
  great book and portrait be so dash rare , because artist win t high - light the essential , or if they do , they overdo it . 
  I don t see how that apply to this picture , Uncle . it s not a portrait , it s a dramatic moment and a white dress . 
  perhaps ! all the same , if I could paint you , Dinny , as you truly be , people would say you weren t real . 
  how fortunate ! 
  Most people can t even imagine you . 
  forgive imperence , Uncle , but    can you ? 
 Adrian wrinkle up his goatee . 
  I like to think so . 
  oh , look ! there s the Boucher Pompadour ! 
 after two minute in front of its expanse Adrian continue : 
  well , for a man who prefer it nude , he could paint what cover the female body pretty well , couldn t he ? 
  Maintenon and Pompadour . I always get they mixed . 
  the Maintenon wear blue stocking , and minister to Louis the xivth . 
  oh , yes ! let s go straight from here to the Manets , Uncle . 
  why ? 
  I don t think I shall last much long . 
 Adrian , glancing round , suddenly see why . in front of the Gilles be stand Clare and a young man whom he do not know . he put his arm through Dinny s and they pass into the next room but one . 
  I notice your discretion ,   he murmur , in front of the   boy blow Bubbles .    be that young man a snake in the grass , or a worm in the bud , or   ? 
  a very nice boy . 
  what s his name ? 
  Tony Croom . 
  oh ! the young man on the ship ? do Clare see much of he ? 
  I don t ask she , Uncle . she be guarantee to behave for a year ; and , at the cock of Adrian s eyebrow , add :   she promise Aunt Em . 
  and after the year ? 
  I don t know , nor do she . Aren t these Manets good ? 
 they pass slowly through the room and come to the last . 
  to think that Gauguin strike I as the cream of eccentricity in 1910 ,   murmur Adrian ;   it show how thing move . I go to that post - impressionist exhibition straight from look at the chinese picture in the B. M. Cézanne , Matisse , Gauguin , Van Gogh    the last word then , hoary now . Gauguin certainly be a colourist . but give I the Chinese still . I fear I m fundamentally of the old order , Dinny . 
  I can see these be good    most of they ; but I couldn t live with they . 
  the French have their us ; no other country can show you the transition of art so dearly . from the Primitives to Clouet , from Clouet to Poussin and Claude , from they to Watteau and his school , thence to Boucher and Greuze , on to Ingres and Delacroix , to the Barbizon lot , to the Impressionists , to the Post - Impressionists ; and always some bloke    Chardin , Lépicié , Fragonard , Manet , Degas , Monet , Cezanne    break away or break through towards the next . 
  have there ever before be such a violent break as just lately ? 
  there s never before be such a violent break in the way people look at life ; nor such complete confusion in the mind of artist as to what they exist for . 
  and what do they exist for , Uncle ? 
  to give pleasure or reveal truth , or both . 
  I can t imagine myself enjoy what they enjoy , and    what be truth ? 
 Adrian turn up his thumb . 
  Dinny , I m tired as a dog . let s slip out . 
 Dinny see her sister and young Croom pass through the archway . she be not sure whether Clare have notice they , and young Croom be clearly notice nothing but Clare . she follow Adrian out , in her turn admire his discretion . but neither of they would admit uneasiness . with whom one go about be now so entirely one s own business . 
 they have walk up the Burlington Arcade , when Adrian be suddenly startle by the pallor of her face . 
  what s the matter , Dinny ? you look like a ghost ! 
  if you don t mind , Uncle , I d like a cup of coffee . 
  there s a place in Bond Street .   scar by the bloodlessness of her smile lip , he hold her arm firmly till they be seat at a little table round the corner . 
  two coffee    extra strong ,   say Adrian , and with that instinctive consideration which cause woman and child to confide in he , he make no attempt to gain her confidence . 
  nothing so tiring as picture - gazing . I m sorry to emulate Em and suspect you of not eat enough , my dear . that sort of sparrow - pecking we do before go in doesn t really count .   but colour have come back to her lip . 
  I m very tough , Uncle ; but food be rather a bore . 
  you and I must go a little tour in France . their grub can move one s sens if their picture can t move one s spirit . 
  do you feel that ? 
  compare with the italian    emphatically . it s all so beautifully think out . they make their picture like watch . perfectly art - conscious and thorough workman . unreasonable to ask for more , and yet    perhaps fundamentally unpoetic . and that remind I , Dinny , I do hope Clare can be keep out of the Divorce Court , for of all unpoetic place that be it . 
 Dinny shake her head . 
  I d rather she get it over . I even think she be wrong to promise . she s not go to change her mind about Jerry . she ll be like a bird with one leg . besides , who think the bad of you nowadays ! 
 Adrian move uncomfortably . 
  I dislike the thought of those hard - boil fellow play battledore with my kith and kin . if they be like Dornford    but they aren t. see anything more of he ? 
  he be down with we for one night when he have to speak . 
 he notice that she speak without   bat an eyelid ,   as the young man call it nowadays . and , soon after , they part , Dinny assure he that she have   come over quite well again . 
 he have say that she look like a ghost ; he might well have say she look as if she have see one . for , come out of that Arcade , all her past in Cork Street have come flutter like some lonely magpie towards she , beat wing in her face and swerve away . and now , alone , she turn and walk back there . resolutely she go to the door , climb the stair to Wilfrid s room , and ring the bell . lean against the window - sill on the landing , she wait with elapse hand , think :   I wish I have a muff !   her hand feel so cold . in old picture they stand with veil down and their hand in muff ; but   the old order changeth ,   and she have none . she be just go away when the door be open . stack ! in slipper ! his glance , dark and prominent as ever , fall to those slipper and his demeanour seem to stammer . 
  pardon I , miss , I be just go to change   em . 
 Dinny hold out her hand , and he take it with his old air , as if about to   confess   she . 
  I be pass , and think I d like to ask how you be . 
  Fine , thank you , miss ! hope you ve be keep well , and the dog ? 
  quite well , both of we . Foch like the country . 
  ah ! Mr. Desert always think he be a country dog . 
  have you any news ? 
  not to say news , miss . I understand from his bank that he s still in Siam . they forward his letter to their branch in Bangkok . his lordship be here not long ago , and I understand he to say that Mr. Desert be up a river somewhere . 
  a river ! 
  the name escape I , something with a   Yi   in it , and a   sing    be it ? I believe it s very   ot there . if I may say so , miss , you haven t much colour consider the country . I be down home in Barnstaple at Christmas , and it do I a power of good . 
 Dinny take his hand again . 
  I m very glad to have see you , Stack . 
  come in , miss . you ll see I keep the room just as it be . 
 Dinny follow to the doorway of the sitting - room . 
  exactly the same , Stack ; he might almost be there . 
  I like to think so , miss . 
  perhaps he be ,   say Dinny .   they say we have astral body . thank you .   she touch his arm , pass he , and go down the stair . her face quiver and be still , and she walk rapidly away . 
 a river ! her dream !   one more river ! 
 in Bond Street a voice say :   Dinny !   and she turn to see Fleur . 
  Whither away , my dear ? haven t see you for an age . I ve just be to the french picture . Aren t they divine ? I see Clare there with a young man in tow . who be he ? 
  a shipmate    Tony Croom . 
  More to come ? 
 Dinny shrug , and , look at her trim companion , think :   I wish Fleur didn t always go so straight to the point . 
  any money ? 
  no . he s get a job , but it s very slender    Mr. Muskham s arab mare . 
  oh ! three hundred a year    five at the outside . that s no good at all . you know , really , she s make a great mistake . Jerry Corven will go far . 
 Dinny say drily :   far than Clare , anyway . 
  you mean it s a complete breach ? 
 Dinny nod . she have never be so near dislike Fleur . 
  well , Clare s not like you . she belong to the new order , or disorder . that s why it s a mistake . she d have a much well time if she stick to Jerry , nominally at least . I can t see her poor . 
  she doesn t care about money ,   say Dinny coldly . 
  oh , nonsense ! money s only be able to do what you want to do . Clare certainly care about that . 
 Dinny , who know that this be true , say , still more coldly : 
  it s no good to try and explain . 
  my dear , there s nothing to explain . he s hurt she in some way , as , of course , he would . that s no reason in the long run . that perfectly lovely Renoir    the man and woman in the box ! those people live life of their own    together . why shouldn t Clare ? 
  would you ? 
 Fleur give a little shrug of her beautifully fit shoulder . 
  if Michael wasn t such a dear . besides    child .   again she give that little shrug . 
 Dinny thaw .   you re a fraud , Fleur . you don t practise what you preach . 
  my dear , my case be exceptional . 
  so be everybody s. 
  Well , don t let s squabble . Michael say your new Member , Dornford , be after his own heart . they re work together on pig , poultry , and potato . a great stunt , and the right end of the stick , for once . 
  yes , we re go all out for pig at Condaford . be Uncle Lawrence do anything at Lippinghall ? 
  no . he invent the plan , so he think he s do his bit . Michael will make he do more when he s get time . Em be screamingly funny about it . how do you like Dornford ? 
 ask this question twice in one morning , Dinny look her cousin by marriage full in the face . 
  he seem to I almost a paragon . 
 she feel Fleur s hand slip suddenly under her arm . 
  I wish you d marry he , Dinny dear . one doesn t marry paragon , but I fancy one could   fault   he if one try . 
 it be Dinny s turn to give a little shrug , look straight before she . 
 chapter 18 

 the third of February be a day so bland and of such spring - like texture that the quickened blood demand adventure . 
 this be why Tony Croom send an early wire and set out at noon from Bablock Hythe in his old but newly - acquire two - seater . the car be not his   dream ,   but it could do fifty at the pinch he like to give it . he take the near bridge , run for Abingdon , and on past Benson to Henley . there he stop to snatch a sandwich and   fill up ,   and again on the bridge for a glimpse at the sunlit river softly naked below the bare wood . from there on he travel by the dock , time himself to reach Melton Mews at two o clock . 
 Clare be not ready , have only just come in . he sit in the downstairs room , now furnish with three chair , a small table , of quaint design , cheap owe to the slump in antique , and an amethyst - colour chase decanter contain sloe gin . nearly half an hour he sit there before she come down the spiral stair in fawn - colour tweed and hat , with a calfskin fur coat over her arm . 
  well , my dear ! sorry to have keep you . where be we go ? 
  I think you might care to have a look at Bablock Hythe . then we might come back through Oxford , have high tea there , wander about a bit among the college , and be back here before eleven . that do ? 
  perfect . and where will you sleep ? 
  I ? oh ! tool along home again . I d be there by one . 
  Poor Tony ! a hard day ! 
  oh ! not two hundred and fifty mile . you win t want your fur on yet , the car doesn t open    bad luck . 
 they pass out at the westward mouth of the mew , narrowly miss a motor cyclist , and slide on towards the Park . 
  she go well , Tony . 
  yes , she s an easy old thing , but I always feel she might bust at any moment . Stapylton give she a terrible doing . and I don t like a light - colour car . 
 Clare lean back , by the smile on her lip she be enjoy herself . 
 there be little conversation on that , the first long drive they have take together . both have the youthful love of speed , and young Croom get every ounce out of the car that the traffic would permit . they reach the last crossing of the river under two hour . 
  here s the inn where I dig ,   he say presently .   would you like tea ? 
  not wise , my dear . when I ve see the box and paddock , we ll get out of here to where you re not know . 
  I must just show you the river . 
 through its poplar and willow tree the white way of the river gleam , faintly goldene by the sunken sun . they get out to look . the lamb s tail on the hazel be very forward . 
 Clare twist off a spray . 
  false spring . there s a lot to come before the real spring yet . 
 a current of chilly air come steal down the river , and mist could be see rise on the meadow beyond . 
  only a ferry here , then , Tony ? 
  yes , and a short cut into Oxford the other side , about five mile . I ve walk it once or twice : rather nice . 
  when the blossom and meadow flower come , it ll be jolly . come along ! just show I where the paddock lie , and we ll get on to Oxford . 
 they get back into the car . 
  Won t you see the box ? 
 she shake her head . 
  I ll wait till the mare be here . there s a subtle distinction between your bring I to look at box and my come to look at mare . be they really from Nejd ? 
  so Muskham swear . I shall believe or not when I ve see the syce in charge of they . 
  what colour ? 
  two bay and a chestnut . 
 the three paddock slop slightly towards the river and be shelter by a long spinney . 
  ideal drainage and all the sun there be . the box be round that corner under the spinney . there s a good deal to do still ; we re put in a heater . 
  it s very quiet here . 
  practically no car on this road ; motor cycle now and then    there s one now . 
 a cycle come sputter towards they , stop , wrench round , and go sputter back . 
  noisy brute !   murmur young Croom .   however , the mare will have have their baptism by the time they get here . 
  what a change for they , poor dear ! 
  they re all to be golden something : Golden Sand , Golden Houri , and Golden Hind , these three . 
  I didn t know Jack Muskham be a poet . 
  it stop at horse , I think . 
  really marvellous , the stillness , Tony ! 
  Past five . the man have stop work on my cottage    they re convert . 
  how many room ? 
  Four . bedroom , sitting - room , kitchen , bathroom . but one could build on . 
 he look at she intently . but her face be avert . 
  well ,   he say abruptly ,   all aboard . we ll get to Oxford before dark . 
 Oxford    between light , like all town , at its bad    seem to say :   doom to villadom , car , and modernity , I be beyond your aid . 
 to those two , hungry and connect with Cambridge , it offer little attraction till they be seat in the Mitre before anchovy sandwich , boil egg , toast , muffin , scone , jam , and a large pot of tea . with every mouthful the romance of Oxford become apparent . this old inn , where they alone be eat , the shin fire , red curtain be draw , the unexpected cosy solitude , prepare they to find it   marvellous   when they should set forth . a motor cyclist in leather overall look in and go away . three undergraduate chirp in the doorway , select a table for dinner , and pass on . now and again a waitress renew their toast or fiddle at some table . they be deliciously alone . not till past seven do they rise . 
  let s scout ,   say Clare .   we ve lot of time . 
 the Oxford world be dining , and the street be almost empty . they wander at random , choose the narrow way and come suddenly on college and long old wall . nothing seem modern now . the Past have they by the throat . dark tower , and old half - light stone - work ; winding , build in , glimpsy passage ; the sudden spacious half - light gloom of a chance - on quadrangle ; chime of clock , and the feeling of a dark and old and empty town that be yet brim with hidden modern life and light , keep they almost speechless ; and , since they have never know their way , they be at once lose . 
 Young Croom have entwine her arm in his , and keep his step in time to her . neither of they be romantic , but both just then have a feeling as if they have wander into the maze of history . 
  I rather wish ,   say Clare ,   that I d be up here or at Cambridge . 
  one never get a nooky feeling like this at Cambridge . in the dark this be much more mediæval . there the college be together in a line . the   back   lie over anything they ve get here , but the old atmosphere here be far strong . 
  I believe I could have enjoy the past . palfrey and buff jerkin . you d have look divine , Tony , in a buff jerkin , and one of those cap with a long green feather . 
  the present with you be good enough for I . this be the long time we ve ever spend together without a break . 
  Don t get soppy . we re here to look at Oxford . which way shall we go now ? 
  all the same to I ,   say his remote voice . 
  Hurt ? that s a big college ! let s go in . 
  they ll be come out of hall . past eight ; we d well stick to the street . 
 they wander up the Cornmarket to the Broad , stand before the statue on the right , then turn into a dim square with a circular building in the centre , a church at the end , and college for its side wall . 
  this must be the heart ,   say Clare .   Oxford certainly have its point . whatever they do to the outside , I don t see how they can spoil all this . 
 with mysterious suddenness the town have come to life ; youth be pass with short gown over their arm , flap free , or wound round their neck . of one of they young Croom ask where they be . 
  that s the Radcliffe . this be Brasenose , and the High s down there . 
  and the Mitre ? 
  to your right . 
  thank . 
  not at all . 
 he bend his uncapped head towards Clare and flap on . 
  well , Tony ? 
  let s go in and have cocktail . 
 a motorist , well capped and leathered , stand by his cycle , look after they intently as they go into the hotel . 
 after cocktail and biscuit , they come out feeling , as young Croom say :   bright and early . we ll go back over Magdalen Bridge , through Benson , Dorchester , and Henley . 
  stop on the bridge , Tony . I want to see my name - sake . 
 the bridge light throw splash on the Cherwell s inky stream , the loom of Magdalen lie solid on the dark , and away towards the Christchurch meadow , a few lamp shine . whence they have come the broad , half - light strip of street run between glimpsed grey frontage and doorway . and the little river over which they be at a standstill seem to flow with secrecy . 
  the   Char   they call it , don t they ? 
  in the summer I shall have a punt , Clare . the upper river s even well than this . 
  will you teach I to punt ? 
  Won t I ! 
  nearly ten ! well , I ve enjoy that , Tony . 
 he give she a long side - glance and start the engine . it seem as if he must always be   move on   with she . would there never be a long and perfect stop ? 
  Sleepy , Clare ? 
  not really . that be a mighty strong cocktail . if you re tired I could drive . 
  tire ? gracious , no ! I be only think that every mile take I that much away from you . 
 in the dark a road seem long than by day , and so different . a hundred unremembered thing appear    hedge , stack , tree , house , turning . even the village seem different . in Dorchester they stop to make sure of the right turning ; a motor cyclist pass they , and young Croom call out :   to Henley ? 
  straight on ! 
 they come to another village . 
  this ,   say young Croom ,   must be Nettlebed . nothing till Henley now , and then it s thirty - five mile . we shall be up by twelve . 
  poor dear , and you ve get to do all this back again . 
  I shall drive like Jehu . it s a good anodyne . 
 Clare touch his coat cuff , and there be another silence . 
 they have reach a wood when he slacken suddenly .   my light have go ! 
 a motor cyclist skid past , call :   your light be out , sir ! 
 Young Croom stop the engine . 
  that s tear it . the battery must be use up . 
 Clare laugh . he get out and move round , examine the car .   I remember this wood . it s a good five mile to Henley . we must creep on and trust to luck . 
  shall I get out and walk ahead ? 
  no , it s so pitch dark . I might run over you . 
 after a hundred yard or so he stop again . 
  I m off the road . I ve never drive in darkness like this . 
 Clare laugh again . 
  an adventure , my dear . 
  I ve get no torch . this wood go on for a mile or two , if I remember . 
  let s try again . 
 a car whiz past , and the driver shout at they . 
  follow his light , Tony !   but before he could start the engine the car have dip or turn and be go . they creep on slowly . 
  damn !   say young Croom , suddenly ,   off the road again ! 
  pull she right in off the road then , and let s think . isn t there anything at all before Henley ? 
  not a thing . besides , recharge a battery can t be do just anywhere ; but I expect it s a wire go . 
  shall we leave the car and walk in ? she ll be all right here in the wood . 
  and then ?   mutter young Croom .   I must be back with she by daylight . I ll tell you what ; I ll walk you in to the hotel , borrow a torch and come back to she . with a torch I could get she down , or stay with she till daylight , and then come down and pick you up at the Bridge . 
  ten mile walk for you ! why not both stay with she and see the sun rise ? I ve always want to spend a night in a car . 
 in young Croom a struggle take place . a whole night with she    alone ! 
  d you mean you d trust I ? 
  Don t be old - fashioned , Tony . it s much the good thing to do , and rather a lark . if a car come into we , or we be run in for drive without light , that would be awkward if you like . 
  there s never a moon when you want one ,   mutter young Croom .   you really mean it ? 
 Clare touch his arm . 
  pull she far in , among the tree . very slow . look out ! stop ! 
 there be a slight bump . Clare say : 
  we re up against a tree , and our tail s to the road . I ll get out and see if anyone can see we . 
 Young Croom wait , arrange the cushion and rug for she . he be think :   she can t really love I , or she d never take it so coolly !   quiver at the thought of this long dark night with she , he yet know it be go to be torture . her voice say : 
  all right . I should say no one could see the car . you go and have a look . I ll get in . 
 he have to feel his way with his foot . the quality of the ground show he when he have reach the road . it be less densely dark , but he could see no star . the car be completely invisible . he wait , then turn to feel his way back . so lose be the car that he have to whistle and wait for her answer whistle to find it . dark , indeed ! he get in . 
  Window down or up ? 
  half - way down , I should say . I m very comfy , Tony . 
  thank God for that ! d you mind my pipe ? 
  of course not . give I a cigarette . this be almost perfect . 
  almost ,   he say in a small voice . 
  I should like to see Aunt Em s face . be you warm ? 
  nothing go through leather . be you ? 
  Lovely !   there be a silence ; then she say :   Tony ! forgive I , win t you ? I do promise . 
  it s quite all right ,   say young Croom . 
  I can just see your nose by your pipe s glow . 
 by the light of her cigarette he , in turn , could see her tooth , her smile lip , her face last just to the eye , and fade out . 
  take off your hat , Clare . and any time you like , here s my shoulder . 
  Don t let I snore . 
  you snore ! 
  everyone snore on occasion . this will be it . 
 they talk for a little . but all seem unreal , except just be beside she in the dark . he could hear now and again a car pass ; other noise of the night there be none ; too dark even for the owl . his pipe go out , and he put it away . she lie back beside he so close that he could feel her arm against his . he hold his breath . have she drop off ? oh ! he be in for a sleepless night , with this faint perfume from she egg on his sens and the warmth of her arm tingle into his . even if this be all , it would be sheer waste to sleep . drowsily she say : 
  if you really don t mind , I will put my head on your shoulder , Tony . 
  Mind ! 
 her head snuggle down on to his scarf ; and the faint perfume , which carry with it reminder of a sunny pine wood , increase . be it credible that she be there against his shoulder , and would be for another six or seven hour ? and he shudder . so still and matter - of - fact ! no sign in she of passion or disturbance ; he might have be her brother . with the force of revelation he perceive that this night would be a test that he must pass ; for if he do not she would recoil and drop away from he . she be asleep . oh ! yes . you couldn t counterfeit that little regular cluck , as of the tiny chicken    a perfect little sound , faintly comic , infinitely precious ! whatever happen to he now , he would have pass a night with she ! he sit    still as a mouse , if mouse be still . her head grow heavy and more confide with the deepening of her slumber . and , while he sit and listen , his feeling for she deepen too , become almost a passion of protection and of service . and the night , cold , dark , still    no car be pass now    keep he company ; like some huge , dark , enveloping , just breathe creature , it be awake . the night do not sleep ! for the first time in his life he realise that . night be wakeful as the day . unlighte and withdraw , it have its sentience    neither speak nor move , just watch , and breathe . with star and moon , or , as to - night , lampless and shutter , it be a great companion . 
 his arm grow stiff , and , as if that reach her consciousness , she withdraw her head but do not wake . he rub his shoulder just in time , for almost at once her head loll back again . screw round till his lip just touch her hair , he hear again , chicklike and bland , that faint rhythmic cluck . it cease and become the deep breathing of far - down slumber . then drowsiness creep on he too ; he sleep . 
 chapter 19 

 Young Croom awake , stiff and unconscious of where he be . a voice say : 
  it s just get light , Tony , but I can t see to read the hymn . 
 he sit up .   Heavens ! have I be asleep ? 
  yes , poor dear . I ve have a perfect night , just a little achy in the leg . what s the time ? 
 Young Croom look at his watch s illumine hand . 
  nearly half - past six . pin and needle . wow ! 
  let s get out and stretch . 
 his voice , far away , even from himself , answer :   and so it s over . 
  be it so terrible ? 
 he put his hand to his head , and do not answer . the thought that next night and all the night to come he would be apart from she again be like a blow over the heart . 
 she open the door . 
  I m go to stamp my foot a bit . then we might have a stroll to warm ourselves . we shan t get breakfast anywhere till eight . 
 he start the engine to warm the car . light be creep into the wood ; he could see the beech - tree against whose trunk they have pass the night . then he , too , get out and walk towards the road . still grey - dark and misty , the wood on either side of its dim open streak look mournful and mysterious . no wind , no sound ! he feel as Adam might have feel , drag towards the Park Gates of Eden without have earn the right to be expel . Adam ! that quaint , amiable , white , bearded creature . man before he   fall ,   a nonconformist preacher in a state of nature , with a pet snake , a prize apple , and a female secretary coy and unshingle as Lady Godiva ! his blood begin to flow again , and he return to the car . 
 Clare be kneel and attend to her hair with a pocket comb and mirror . 
  how be you feel , Tony ? 
  pretty rotten . I think we ll shove along and have breakfast at Maidenhead or Slough . 
  why not at home ? we could be there by eight . I make very good coffee . 
  Fine !   say young Croom .   I ll do fifty all the way . 
 on that very fast drive they speak little . both be too hungry . 
  while I m get breakfast , Tony , you can shave and have a bath . you ll save time and feel comfy drive back . I ll have mine later . 
  I think ,   say young Croom , at the Marble Arch ,   I d well park the car . you go on in alone ; it s too conspicuous drive up at this time in the morning ; the chauffeur be sure to be work . I ll slip along in ten minute . 
 when , at eight o clock , he reach the Mews , she be in a blue wrapper , the little table in the downstair room be set for breakfast , and there be already a scent of coffee . 
  I ve turn the bath on , Tony , and you ll find a razor . 
  Darling !   say young Croom .   Shan t be ten minute . 
 he be back again in twelve , and sit down opposite to she . there be boil egg , toast , quince jam from Condaford , and real coffee . it be the most delicious meal he have ever eat , because it be so exactly as if they be marry . 
  Aren t you tired , darling ? 
  not a bit . I feel thoroughly chirp up . all the same , I don t think we must do it again    too near the hambone altogether . 
  well , we didn t mean to . 
  no , and you be an angel . still , it s not exactly what I promise Aunt Em . to the pure all thing be not pure . 
  no    blast they ! God ! how shall I live till I see you again ! 
 Clare stretch her hand across the little table and give his a squeeze . 
  now I think you d well slip off . just let I look out and see that the coast s clear . 
 when she have do this he kiss her hand , get back to his car , and by eleven o clock be stand alongside a plumber in a horse box at Bablock Hythe . . . . 
 Clare lie in a very hot bath . it be of the geyser type and not long enough , but it provide a good soak . she feel as when , a little girl , she have do something unpleasing to her governess , without discovery . but poor dear Tony ! a pity man be so impatient . they have as little like for cool philandering as for shopping . they rush into shop , say :   have you such and such ? no ?   and rush out again . they hat try on , be pat here and there , turn their head to look at their back view . to savour what be fitting be to they anathema . Tony be a child . she feel herself much old by nature and experience . though much in request before her marriage , Clare have never come into close contact with those who , centre in London and themselves , be devoid of belief in anything but mockery , motion and enough money to have from day to day a   good   time . at country house she have meet they , of course , but withdraw from their proper atmosphere into the air of sport . essentially an open - air person , of the quick and wiry , rather than the hefty , type , she observe unconsciously the shibboleth of sport . transplant to Ceylon , she have keep her taste , and spend her time in the saddle or on the tennis ground . read many novel , she profess , indeed , to keep abreast of the current , with all its impatience of restraint ; but , lie in her bath , she be uneasy . it have not be fair to put Tony to such strain as that of last night . the close she allow he to come to she , short of the contact of love , the more she would be torture he . dry herself , she make good resolution , and only with a rush do she reach the Temple by ten o clock . she might just as well have stay on soak in her bath , for Dornford be busy on an important case . she finish what job there be , look idly out over the Temple lawn , whence fine - weather mist be vanish , and sunlight , brighten to winter brilliance , slant on to her cheek . and she think of Ceylon , where the sun be never coolly comforting . Jerry ! how , in that horrible , common phrase , be he   keep ? and what do about she ? all very well to determine that she would not torture Tony , would keep away from he and spare his sens , but without he    she would be dull and lonely . he have become a habit . a bad habit perhaps    but bad habit be the only one it be painful to do without . 
  I m naturally a light weight ,   she think .   so be Tony ; all the same he would never let one down ! 
 and the grass of the Temple lawn seem suddenly the sea , and this window - sill the ship s bulwark , and he and she lean there watch the fly fish spring up from the foam and flitter away above the green - blue water . warmth and colour ! airy shin grace ! and she feel melancholy . 
  a good long ride be what I want ,   she think .   I ll go down to Condaford tomorrow , and on Saturday be out all day . I ll make Dinny come out with I ; she ought to ride more . 
 the clerk enter and say :   Mr. Dornford s go straight from the Courts to the   House   this afternoon . 
  ah ! do you ever feel hippe , George ? 
 the clerk , whose face always amuse she because it so clearly should have have mutton - chop whisker on its rosy roundness , reply in his cushiony voice : 
  what I miss here be a dog . with my old Toby I never feel lonely . 
  what be he , George ? 
  bull terrier . but I can t bring he here , Mrs. Calder d miss he ; besides , if he bite a solicitor   
  but how perfect ! 
 George wheeze . 
  ah ! you can t have high spirit in the Temple . 
  I should have like a dog , George , but when I m out there s no one in . 
  I don t fancy Mr. Dornford ll be residential here much long . 
  why ? 
  he s look for a house . I ve an idea he d like to marry . 
  oh ! whom ? 
 George close an eye . 
  you mean my sister ? 
  ah ! 
  yes . but I don t see how you know . 
 George close the other eye . 
  a little bird , Lady Corven . 
  he might do bad , certainly . not that I m a great believer in marriage . 
  we don t see the right side of marriage in the Law . but Mr. Dornford would make a woman happy    in my opinion . 
  in mine , too , George . 
  he s a very quiet man , but a fund of energy , and considerate . solicitor like he ; judge like he . 
  and wife will like he . 
  of course he s a Catholic . 
  we all have to be something . 
  Mrs. Calder and I ve be anglican ever since my old dad die . he be a Plymouth Brother    very stiff . express an opinion of your own , and he d jump down your throat . many s the time I ve have he threaten I with fire and slaughter . all for my good , you understand . a fine religious old feller . and couldn t bear other not to be . good red Zummerzet blood , and never forget it , though he do live in Peckham . 
  well , George , if Mr. Dornford want I again after all , would you telephone I at five o clock ? I ll look in at my room in case . 
 Clare walk . the day be even more springlike than yesterday . she go by the Embankment and St. James s Park . alongside the water , cluster of daffodil spike be push up , and tree - shoot swell into bud . the gentle , warm sunlight fall on her back . it couldn t last ! there would be a throwback to winter , for sure ! she walk fast out under the chariot , whose horse , not too natural , worried but exhilarate she , pass the Artillery Memorial without a glance , and enter Hyde Park . warm up now , she swing out along the row . riding be something of a passion with she , so that it always make she restive to see someone else rid a good horse . queer animal , horse , so fiery and alive at one moment , so dull and ruminative the next ! 
 two or three hat be raise to she . a long man on a good - look mare rein up after he have pass and come back . 
  I think it be you . Lawrence tell I you be over . remember I    Jack Muskham ? 
 clare    think :   lovely seat for a tall man !    murmur :   of course !   and be suddenly on her guard . 
  an acquaintance of yours be go to look after my arab mare . 
  oh ! yes , Tony Croom . 
  nice young chap , but I don t know if he know enough . still , he s keen as mustard . how s your sister ? 
  very well . 
  you ought to bring her racing , Lady Corven . 
  I don t think Dinny care much for horse . 
  I could soon make she . I remember     he break off , frown . in spite of his languid pose , his face seem to clare purposeful , brown , line , ironic about the lip . she wonder how he would take the news that she have spend last night with Tony in a car . 
  when do the mare come , Mr. Muskham ? 
  they re in Egypt now . we ll ship they in April . I might go over for it ; possibly take young Croom . 
  I d love to see they ,   say Clare ;   I ride an Arab in Ceylon . 
  we must get you down . 
  somewhere near Oxford , isn t it ? 
  about six mile ; nice country . I ll remember . good - bye !   he raise his hat , touch the mare with his heel , and canter off . 
  my perfect innocence !   she think .   Hope I didn t overdo it . I wouldn t like to   get wrong   with he . he look as if he know his mind terribly well . lovely boot ! he didn t ask after Jerry ! 
 her nerve feel a little shaken , and she strike away from the row towards the Serpentine . 
 the sunlit water have no boat on it , but a few duck on the far side . do she mind what people think ? Miller of Dee ! only , do he really care for nobody ? or be he just a philosopher ? she sit down on a bench in the full sunlight , and suddenly feel sleepy . a night in a car , after all , be not quite the same as a night out of a car . cross her arm on her breast , she close her eye . almost at once she be asleep . 
 quite a number of people straggle past between she and the bright water , surprised to see one in such nice clothe asleep before lunch . two little boy carry toy aeroplane stop dead , examine her dark eyelash rest on her cream - colour cheek , and the little twitching of she just touch - up lip . have a french governess , they be   well - breed   little boy without prospect of stick pin into she or utter a sudden whoop . but she seem to have no hand , her foot be cross and tuck under her chair , and her attitude be such that she have abnormally long thigh . it be interesting ; and after they have pass one of they keep turn his head to see more of she . 
 thus , for a full hour of elusive spring , Clare sleep the sleep of one who have spend a night in a car . 
 chapter 20 

 and three week pass , during which Clare see young Croom but four time in all . she be pack for the evening train to Condaford , when the sheep bell summon she down the spiral stairway . 
 Outside be a shortish man in horn spectacle , who give she a vague impression of be connect with learning . he raise his hat . 
  Lady Corven ? 
  yes . 
  pardon I , I have this for you .   produce from his blue overcoat a longish document , he put it into her hand . 
 Clare read the word : 
  in the High Court of Justice 
 Probate Divorce and Admiralty Division . 
 the twenty - sixth day of February , 1932 . 
 in the matter of the Petition of Sir Gerald Corven . 
 a weak feeling run down the back of her leg , and she raise her eye to the level of those behind the horn - rim spectacle . 
  oh !   she say . 
 the shortish man make she a little bow . she have a feeling that he be sorry for she , and promptly close the door in his face . she go up the spiral stair , sit down on the sofa , and light a cigarette . then she spread the document on her lap . her first thought be :   but it s monstrous    I ve do nothing !   her second :   I suppose I must read the foul thing ! 
 she have not read more than :   the humble petition of Gerald Corven , K.C.B. ,   when she have her fourth thought :   but this be exactly what I want . I shall be free ! 
 more calmly she read on till she come to the word :   that your Petitioner claim from the say James Bernard Croom as damage in respect of his say adultery so commit the sum of two thousand pound . 
 Tony ! if he have two thousand shilling , it be all ! beast ! revengeful brute ! this sudden reduction of the issue to term of hard cash not only rasp her feeling but bring she a sort of panic . Tony must not , should not be ruin through she ! she must see he ! have they    but of course they have serve it on he too . 
 she finish read the petition , take a long draw at her cigarette and get up . 
 she go to the telephone , ask for a trunk call and give the number of his inn . 
  can I speak to Mr. Croom ?    go up to London ?    in his car ?    when ? 
 an hour ago ! that could only mean that he be come to see she ! 
 a little soothe , she make a rapid calculation . she could not now catch the train to Condaford ; and she get another trunk call through to the Grange . 
  Dinny ? this be Clare . I can t possibly get down to - night    tomorrow morning instead . . . . no ! I m all right ; a little worried . good - bye ! 
 a little worried ! she sit down again , and once more read the   foul thing   through . they seem to know everything , except the truth . and neither she nor Tony have ever see a sign that they be be watch . that man with the horn   spec ,   for instance , evidently know she , but she d never see he before ! she go into the bathroom and wash her face in cold water . Miller of Dee ! the part have become extremely difficult . 
  he ll have have nothing to eat ,   she think . 
 she set the table downstairs with what she have , make some coffee , and sit down to smoke and wait . Condaford and the face of her people come before she ; the face too , of Aunt Em ; and of Jack Muskham ; above all the face of her husband , with its faint , hard - bite , cat - like smile . be she to take this lie down ? apart from the damage , be she to let he triumph without a fight ? she wish now she have take her father s and Sir Lawrence s advice and   clap a detective on to he .   too late now    he would be take no risk till the case be over . 
 she be still brood by the electric fire when she hear a car stop outside , and the bell ring . 
 Young Croom look chilled and pale . he stand as if so doubtful of his welcome that she seize both his hand . 
  well , Tony , this be a pleasure ! 
  oh ! darling ! 
  you look frozen . have some brandy ! 
 while he be drink , she say : 
  Don t let s talk of what we ought to have do ; only of what we re go to do . 
 he groan . 
  they must have think we terribly green . I never dream   
  nor I. but why shouldn t we have do exactly what we have do ? there s no law against innocence . 
 he sit down and lean his forehead on his hand .   God know this be just what I want ; to get you free of he ; but I have no business to let you run the risk . it would be all different if you feel for I what I feel for you . 
 Clare look down at he with a little smile . 
  now , Tony , be grow - up ! it s no good talk about our feeling . and I win t have any nonsense about its be your fault . the point be we re innocent . what be we go to do about it ? 
  of course I shall do whatever you want . 
  I have a feeling ,   say Clare , slowly ,   that I shall have to do what my people want I to . 
  God !   say young Croom , get up :   to think that if we defend and win , you ll still be tie to he ! 
  and to think ,   murmur Clare ,   that if we don t defend and win , you ll be ruin . 
  oh ! damn that    they can only make I bankrupt . 
  and your job ? 
  I don t see    I don t know why   
  I see Jack Muskham the other day . he look to I as if he wouldn t like a co - respondent who hadn t give notice of his intention to the petitioner . you see I ve get the jargon . 
  if we had be lover , I would have , at once . 
  would you ? 
  of course ! 
  even if I d say   Don t ? 
  you wouldn t have . 
  I don t know that . 
  well , anyway , it doesn t arise . 
  except that if we don t defend , you ll feel a cad . 
  God ! what a coil ! 
  sit down and let s eat . there s only this ham , but there s nothing like ham when you feel sick . 
 they sit down and make motion with their fork . 
  your people don t know , Clare ? 
  I only know myself an hour ago . do they bring you this same lovely document ? 
  yes . 
  another slice ? 
 they eat in silence for a minute or two . then young Croom get up . 
  I really can t eat any more . 
  all right . smoke ! 
 she take a cigarette from he , and say : 
  listen . I m go down to Condaford tomorrow , and I think you d well come over . they must see you , because whatever s do must be do with open eye . have you a solicitor ? 
  no . 
  nor I. I suppose we shall have to have one . 
  I ll see to all that . if only I have money ! 
 Clare wince . 
  I apologise for a husband capable of ask for damage . 
 Young Croom seize her hand .   darling , I be only think of solicitor . 
  do you remember my answer you on the boat :   often more damnable , thing begin .  
  I ll never admit that . 
  I be think of my marriage , not of you . 
  Clare , wouldn t it be far well , really , not to defend    just let it go ? then you d be free . and after    if you want I , I d be there , and if you didn t , I wouldn t. 
  Sweet of you , Tony ; but I must tell my people . besides    oh ! a lot of thing . 
 he begin walk up and down . 
  d you suppose they ll believe we if we do defend ? I don t. 
  we shall be tell the exact truth . 
  People never believe the exact truth . what train be you go down by ? 
  ten - fifty . 
  shall I come too , or in the afternoon from Bablock Hythe ? 
  that s good . I ll have break it to they . 
  will they mind frightfully ? 
  they win t like it . 
  be your sister there ? 
  yes . 
  that s something . 
  my people be not exactly old - fashion , Tony , but they re not modern . very few people be when they re personally involve . the lawyer and the judge and jury win t be , anyway . you d well go now ; and promise I not to drive like Jehu . 
  may I kiss you ? 
  it ll mean one more piece of exact truth , and there ve be three already . kiss my hand    that doesn t count . 
 he kiss it , mutter :   God bless you !   and , grab his hat , go out . 
 Clare turn a chair to the unwinking warmth of the electric fire , and sit brooding . the dry heat burn her eye till they feel as if they have no lid and no capacity for moisture ; slowly and definitely she grow angry . all the feeling she have experience , before she make up her mind that morning in Ceylon to cut adrift , come back to she with redoubled fury . how dare he treat she as if she have be a   light of love ?    bad than if she have be one    a light of love would never have stand it . how dare he touch she with that whip ? and now how dare he have she watch , and bring this case ? she would not lie down under this ! 
 she begin methodically to wash up and put the thing away . she open the door wide and let the wind come in . a nasty night , little whirlwind travel up and down the narrow Mews ! 
  inside I , too ,   she think . slamming - to the door , she take out her little mirror . her face seem so natural and undefended that it give she a shock . she powder it and touch her lip with salve . then , draw deep breath , she shrug her shoulder , light a cigarette , and go upstairs . a hot bath ! 
 chapter 21 

 the atmosphere at Condaford into which she step next day be guard . her word , or the tone of her voice on the telephone , seem to have seep into the family consciousness , and she be aware at once that sprightliness would deceive no one . it be a horrible day , too , dank and cold , and she have to hold on to her courage with both hand . 
 she choose the drawing - room after lunch for disclosure . take the document from her bag , she hand it to her father with the word : 
  I ve have this , Dad . 
 she hear his startled exclamation , and be conscious of Dinny and her mother go over to he . 
 at last he say :   well ? tell we the truth . 
 she take her foot off the fender and face they . 
  that isn t the truth . we ve do nothing . 
  who be this man ? 
  Tony Croom ? I meet he on the boat come home . he s twenty - six , be on a tea plantation out there , and be take charge of Jack Muskham s arab mare at Bablock Hythe . he have no money . I tell he to come here this afternoon . 
  be you in love with he ? 
  no . I like he . 
  be he in love with you ? 
  yes . 
  you say there s be nothing ? 
  he s kiss my cheek twice , I think    that s all . 
  then what do they mean by this    that you spend the night of the third with he ? 
  I go down in his car to see his place , and come back the light fail in a wood about five mile from Henley    pitch dark . I suggest we should stay where we be till it be light . we just sleep and go on up when it be light . 
 she hear her mother give a faint gasp , and a queer noise from her father s throat . 
  and on the boat ? and in your room ? you say there be nothing , though he s in love with you ? 
  nothing . 
  be that absolutely the truth ? 
  yes . 
  of course ,   say Dinny ,   it s the truth . 
  of course ,   say the General .   and who s go to believe it ? 
  we didn t know we be be watch . 
  what time will he be here ? 
  any time now . 
  you ve see he since you have this ? 
  yesterday evening . 
  what do he say ? 
  he say he ll do whatever I wish . 
  that , of course . do he think you ll be believe ? 
  no . 
 the General take the document over to the window , as if the well to see into it . Lady Charwell sit down , her face very white . Dinny come over to Clare and take her arm . 
  when he come ,   say the General suddenly , return from the window ,   I ll see he alone . nobody before I , please . 
  witness out of court ,   murmur Clare . 
 the General hand she the document . his face look draw and tired . 
  I m terribly sorry , Dad . I suppose we be fool . Virtue be not its own reward . 
  Wisdom be ,   say the General . he touch her shoulder and march off to the door , follow by Dinny . 
  do he believe I , Mother ? 
  yes , but only because you re his daughter . he feel he oughtn t to . 
  do you feel like that , Mother ? 
  I believe you because I know you . 
 Clare bend over and kiss her cheek . 
  very pretty , Mother dear ; but not cheer . 
  you say you like this young man . do you know he out there ? 
  I never see he till the boat . and , Mother , I may as well tell you that I ve not be in the mood for passion . I don t know when I shall be again . perhaps never ! 
  why not ? 
 Clare shake her head .   I win t go into my life with Jerry , not even now , when he s be such a cad as to ask for damage . I m really much more upset about that than I be about myself . 
  I suppose this young man would have go away with you , at any moment ? 
  yes ; but I haven t want to . besides , I give Aunt em a promise . I sort of swear to behave for a year . and I have    so far . it s terribly tempting not to defend , and be free . 
 Lady Charwell be silent . 
  well , Mother ? 
  your father be bind to think of this as it affect your name and the family s. 
  six of one and half - a - dozen of the other , so far as that go . if we don t defend , it will just go through and hardly be notice . if we do , it will make a sensation .   night in a car ,   and all that , even if we re believe . can t you see the paper , Mummy ? they ll be all over it . 
  I think ,   say Lady Charwell slowly ,   it will come back in the end to the feeling your father have about that whip . I ve never know he so angry as he be over that . I think he will feel you must defend . 
  I should never mention the whip in court . it s too easily deny , for one thing ; and I have some pride , Mother . . . 
 Dinny have follow to the study , or barrack - room , as it be sometimes call . 
  you know this young man , Dinny ?   burst out the General . 
  yes , and I like he . he be deeply in love with Clare . 
  what business have he to be ? 
  be human , dear ! 
  you believe she about the car ? 
  yes . I hear she solemnly promise Aunt Em to behave for a year . 
  Queer sort of thing to have to promise ! 
  a mistake , if you ask I . 
  what ! 
  the only thing that really matter be that Clare should get free . 
 the General stand with head bent , as if he have find food for thought ; a slow flush have colour his cheek - bone . 
  she tell you ,   he say suddenly ,   what she tell I , about that fellow have use a whip on she ? 
 Dinny nod . 
  in old day I could and would have call he out for that . I agree that she must get free , but    not this way . 
  then you do believe she ? 
  she wouldn t tell a lie to we like that . 
  Good , Dad ! but who else will believe they ? would you , on a jury ? 
  I don t know ,   say the General , glumly . 
 Dinny shake her head .   you wouldn t. 
  Lawyers be damn clever . I suppose Dornford wouldn t take up a case like this ? 
  he doesn t practise in the Divorce Court . besides , she s his secretary . 
  I must get to hear what Kingsons say . Lawrence believe in they . Fleur s father be a member there . 
  then     Dinny have begin , when the door be open . 
  Mr. Croom , sir . 
  you needn t go , Dinny . 
 Young Croom come in . after a glance at Dinny , he move towards the General . 
  Clare tell I to come over , sir . 
 the General nod . his narrow eye be fix steadily on his daughter s would - be lover . the young man face that scrutiny as if on parade , his eye reply to the General s without defiance . 
  I win t beat about the bush ,   say the General suddenly .   you seem to have get my daughter into a mess . 
  yes , sir . 
  kindly give I your account of it . 
 Young Croom put his hat down on the table , and , square his shoulder , say : 
  whatever she have tell you be true , sir . 
 Dinny see with relief her father s lip twitch as if with a smile . 
  very correct , Mr. Croom ; but not what I want . she have tell I her version ; I should be glad to hear your . 
 she see the young man moisten his lip , make a curious jerk motion of his head . 
  I m in love with she , sir : have be ever since I first see she on the boat . we ve be go about rather in London    cinema , theatre , picture gallery , and that ; and I ve be to her room three    no , five time altogether . on February the third I drive she down to Bablock Hythe for she to see where I m go to have my job ; and come back    I expect she tell you    my light fail , and we be hang up in a pitch - dark wood some mile short of Henley . well    we    we think we d well just stay there until it be light again , instead of risk thing . I d get off the road twice . it really be pitch - dark , and I have no torch . and so    well , we wait in the car till about half - past six , and then come up , and get to her place about eight .   he pause and moisten his lip , then straighten himself again and say with a rush :   whether you believe I or not , sir , I swear there be nothing whatever between we in the car ; and    and there never have be , except    except that she s let I kiss her cheek two or three time . 
 the General , who have never drop his eye , say :   that s substantially what she tell we . anything else ? 
  after I have that paper , sir , I motor up to see she at once    that be yesterday . of course I ll do anything she want . 
  you didn t put your head together as to what you would say to we ? 
 Dinny see the young man stiffen . 
  of course not , sir ! 
  then I may take it that you re ready to swear there s be nothing , and defend the action ? 
  certainly , if you think there s any chance of our be believe . 
 the General shrug .   what s your financial position ? 
  four hundred a year from my job .   a faint smile curl his lip :   otherwise none , sir . 
  do you know my daughter s husband ? 
  no . 
  never meet he ? 
  no , sir . 
  when do you first meet Clare ? 
  on the second day of the voyage home . 
  what be you do out there ? 
  tea - planting ; but they amalgamate my plantation with some other , for economy . 
  I see . where be you at school ? 
  Wellington , and then at Cambridge . 
  you ve get a job with Jack Muskham ? 
  yes , sir , his arab mare . they re due in the spring . 
  you know about horse , then ? 
  yes . I m terribly fond of they . 
 Dinny see the narrow gaze withdraw from the young man s face , and come to rest on her . 
  you know my daughter Dinny , I think ? 
  yes . 
  I ll leave you to she now . I want to think this over . 
 the young man bow slightly , turn to Dinny , and then , turn back , say with a certain dignity : 
  I m awfully sorry , sir , about this ; but I can t say I m sorry that I m in love with Clare . it wouldn t be true . I love she terribly . 
 he be move towards the door , when the General say : 
  one moment . what do you mean by love ? 
 involuntarily Dinny clasp her hand : an appalling question ! Young Croom turn round . his face be motionless . 
  I know what you mean , sir ,   he say huskily :   Desire and that , or more ? well ! More , or I couldn t have stand that night in the car .   he turn again to the door . 
 Dinny move and hold it open for he . she follow he into the hall , where he be frown and take deep breath . she slip her hand through his arm and move he across to the wood fire . they stand , look down into the flame , till she say : 
  I m afraid that be rather dreadful . but soldier like to have thing straight out , you know . anyway    I know my father    you make what s call a good impression . 
  I feel a ghastly kind of wooden idiot . where be Clare ? here ? 
  yes . 
  can I see she , Miss Cherrell ? 
  try call I Dinny . you can see she ; but I think you d well see my mother too . let s go to the drawing - room . 
 he give her hand a squeeze . 
  I ve always feel you be a brick . 
 Dinny grimace .   even brick yield to a certain pressure . 
  oh ! sorry ! I m always forget my ghastly grip . Clare dread it . how be she ? 
 with a faint shrug and smile , Dinny say : 
  do as well as can be expect . 
 Tony Croom clutch his head . 
  yes , I feel exactly like that , only worse ; in those case there s something to look forward to and    here ? d you think she ll ever really love I ? 
  I hope so . 
  your people don t think that I pursue she    I mean , you know what I mean , just to have a good time ? 
  they win t after today . you be what I be once call    transparent . 
  you ? I never quite know what you re think . 
  that be a long time ago . come ! 
 chapter 22 

 when young Croom have withdraw into the sleet and wind of that discomforting day , he leave behind he a marked gloom . Clare go to her room say her head be bad and she be go to lie down . the other three sit among the tea - thing , speak only to the dog , sure sign of mental disturbance . 
 at last Dinny get up :   well , my dear , gloom doesn t help . let s look on the bright side . they might have be scarlet instead of white as snow . 
 the General say , more to himself than in reply : 
  they must defend . that fellow can t have it all his own way . 
  but , Dad , to have Clare free , with a perfectly clear conscience , would be nice and ironic , and ever so much less fuss ! 
  lie down under an accusation of that sort ? 
  her name will go even if she win . no one can spend a night in a car with a young man with impunity . can they , Mother ? 
 Lady Charwell smile faintly . 
  I agree with your father , Dinny . it seem to I revolt that Clare should be divorce when she s do nothing except be a little foolish . besides , it would be cheat the law , wouldn t it ? 
  I shouldn t think the law would care , dear . however   !   and Dinny be silent , scrutinise their rueful face , aware that they set some mysterious store by marriage and divorce which she do not , and that nothing she could say would alter it . 
  the young man ,   say the General ,   seem a decent fellow , I think . he ll have to come up and see the lawyer when we do . 
  I d well go up with Clare tomorrow evening , Dad , and get Uncle Lawrence to arrange you a meeting with the lawyer for after lunch on Monday . I ll telephone you and Tony Croom from Mount Street in the morning . 
 the General nod and get up .   Beast of a day !   he say , and put his hand on his wife s shoulder :   Don t let this worry you , Liz . they can but tell the truth . I ll go to the study and have another shot at that new pigsty . you might look in later , Dinny . . . 
 at all critical time Dinny feel more at home in Mount Street than she do at Condaford . Sir Lawrence s mind be so much more lively than her father s ; Aunt Em s inconsequence at once more bracing and more soothing than her mother s quiet and sensible sympathy . when a crisis be over , or if it have not begin , Condaford be perfect , but it be too quiet for nerve storm or crucial action . as country house go , it be , indeed , old - fashioned , inhabit by the only county family who have be in the district for more than three or four generation . the Grange have an almost institutional repute .   Condaford Grange   and   the Cherrells of Condaford   be speak of as curiosity . the week - end or purely sport existence of the big   place   be feel to be alien to they . the many family in the small   place   round seem to make country life into a sort of cult , organise tennis and bridge party , village entertainment , and the look of each other up ; get their day s shooting here and there , support the near golf course , attend meet , hunt a bit , and so forth . the Charwells , with their much deep root , yet seem to be less in evidence than almost anyone . they would have be curiously miss , but , except to the villager , they hardly seem real . 
 in spite of she always active life at Condaford Dinny often feel there , as one do wake in the still hour of the night , nervous from the very quietude ; and in such trouble as Hubert s , three year before , her own crisis of two year ago , or this of Clare s , she crave at once to be more in the swim of life . 
 have drop Clare at her Mews , she go on in the taxi , and arrive at Mount Street before dinner . 
 Michael and Fleur be there , and the conversation turn and turn from literature to politic . Michael be of opinion that the paper be begin to pat the country s back too soon , and that the Government might go to sleep . Sir Lawrence be glad to hear that they be still awake . 
 Lady Mont say suddenly :   the baby , Dinny ? 
  frightfully well , thank you , Aunt Em . he walk . 
  I be countin   up the pedigree , and he make the twenty - fourth Cherrell of Condaford ; and before that they be french . be Jean havin   any more ? 
  you bet ,   say Fleur .   I never see a young woman more like it . 
  there ll be nothin   for they . 
  oh , she ll wangle their future all right . 
  such a singular word ,   say Lady Mont. 
  Dinny , how s Clare ? 
  all right . 
  any development ?   and Fleur s clear eye seem to slide into her brain . 
  yes , but   
 Michael s voice break the silence . 
  Dornford have a very neat idea , Dad ; he think   
 the neat idea of Dornford be lose on Dinny , wonder whether or not to take Fleur into her confidence . she know no one of quick brain , or of a judgment on social matter more cynically sound . far , she could keep a secret . but it be Clare s secret , and she decide to speak to Sir Lawrence first . 
 late that night she do so . he receive the news with his eyebrow . 
  all night in a car , Dinny ? that s a bit steep . I ll get on to the lawyer at ten o clock tomorrow .   very young   Roger Forsyte , Fleur s cousin , be there now ; I ll get hold of he , he s likely to have more credulity than the hoary member . you and I will go along too , to prove our faith . 
  I ve never be in the City . 
  curious place ; build upon the end of the earth . romance and the bank rate . prepare for a mild shock . 
  do you think they ought to defend ? 
 Sir Lawrence s lively eye come to rest on her face . 
  if you ask I whether I think they ll be believe    no . but at least we can divide opinion on the question . 
  you do believe they yourself , don t you ? 
  I plank on you there , Dinny . Clare wouldn t try to take you in . 
 think back to her sister s face , and to young Croom s , Dinny have a revulsion of feeling .   they be tell the truth , and they look like it . it would be wicked not to believe they . 
  no end to that sort of wickedness in this wicked world . you look tired , my dear ; well go to bed . 
 in that bedroom , where she have spend so many night at the time of her own trouble , Dinny have again that half - wake nightmare , the sense of be close to Wilfrid and unable to reach he , and the refrain :   one more river , one more river to cross ,   keep run in her tired head . . . . 
 in that quiet and yellow backwater , the Old Jewry , the office of Kingson Cuthcott and Forsyte be tribally invade at four o clock next day . 
  what s become of old Gradman , Mr. Forsyte ?   Dinny hear her uncle say .   still here ? 
  very young   Roger Forsyte , who be forty - two , answer , in a voice which seem to contradict his jaw :   I believe he s still live at Pinner , or Highgate , or wherever it be . 
  I should be glad to think so ,   murmur Sir Lawrence .   Old for    er , your cousin think a lot of he . a regular victorian piece . 
  very young   Roger smile .   Won t you all sit down ? 
 Dinny , who have never yet be in a lawyer s office , look at the law book along the wall , the bundle of paper , the yellowish blind , the repellent black fireplace with its little coal fire that seem to warm nothing , the map of an estate hang unroll behind the door , the low wicker basket on the table , the pen and sealing - wax , and   very young   Roger , and thought of an album of seaweed , compile by her first governess . she see her father rise and place a document in the solicitor s hand . 
  we ve come about this . 
  very young   Roger glance at the heading of the paper and over it at Clare . 
  how do he know which of we it be ?   think Dinny . 
  there s no truth in the allegation ,   say the General . 
  very young   Roger caress his jaw and begin read . 
 Dinny , from the side , could see that a sharp and rather bird - like look have come on his face . 
 notice that Dinny could see he , he lower the paper and say :   they seem in a hurry . the petitioner sign the affidavit in Egypt , I see . he must have come over there to save time . Mr. Croom ? 
  yes . 
  you wish we to represent you as well ? 
  yes . 
  then Lady Corven and you . later , perhaps , Sir Conway , you d come in again . 
  do you mind if my sister stay ?   say Clare . 
 Dinny meet the solicitor s eye .   not at all .   she do not know if he mean it . 
 the General and Sir Lawrence go out , and there be silence .   very young   Roger lean against the fireplace , and most unexpectedly take a pinch of snuff . Dinny see that he be lean and rather tall , and that his jaw jut . there be a faintly sandy tinge in his hair , and in the ruddiness of his hollowed cheek . 
  your father , Lady Corven , say there be no truth in these    er    allegation . 
  the fact be as state , the inference be wrong . there s be nothing between Mr. Croom and myself , except three kiss on my cheek . 
  I see . about this night in the car , now ? 
  nothing ,   say Clare :   not even one of those kiss . 
  nothing ,   repeat young Croom ;   absolutely nothing . 
  very young   Roger pass his tongue over his lip . 
  if you don t mind , I think I should like to understand your feeling for each other    if any . 
  we be speak ,   say Clare , in a clear voice ,   the absolute truth , as we ve tell it to my people ; that s why I ask my sister to stay . Tony ? 
  very young   Roger s mouth twitch . to Dinny he do not seem to be take it quite as a lawyer should ; something in his dress , indeed , be a little unexpected    his waistcoat be it , or his tie ? that snuff , too    as if a dash of the artist have be suppress in he . he say : 
  yes , Mr. Croom ? 
 Young Croom , who have go very red , look at Clare almost angrily . 
  I m in love with she . 
  quite !   say   very young   Roger , reopen the snuff - box .   and you , Lady Corven , regard he as a friend ? 
 Clare nod    a faint surprise on her face . 
 Dinny feel a sudden gratitude towards the questioner , who be apply a bandana to his nose . 
  the car be an accident ,   add Clare quickly ;   it be pitch dark in the wood , our light have fail , and we didn t want to run any risk of people see we together so late at night . 
  exactly ! excuse my asking , but you re both prepare to go into Court and swear there be absolutely nothing that night or on the other occasion , except    do you say    three kiss ? 
  on my cheek ,   say Clare ;   one out of door , when I be in a car and he wasn t , and the other    when be the other , Tony ? 
 Young Croom say between his clench tooth :   in your room when I hadn t see you for over a fortnight . 
  you neither of you know you be be    er    shadow ? 
  I know my husband have threaten it , but we d neither of we notice anything . 
  about leave your husband , Lady Corven ; any reason you d care to give I ? 
 Clare shake her head . 
  I m not go into my life with he , either here or anywhere . and I m not go back to he . 
  Incompatibility , or bad ? 
  I think bad . 
  but no definite charge . you realise the importance ? 
  yes . but I m not go into it , even privately . 
 Young Croom burst out :   he be a brute to she , of course . 
  you know he , Mr. Croom ? 
  never see he in my life . 
  then   
  he just think it because I leave Jerry suddenly . he know nothing . 
 Dinny see   very young   Roger s eye rest on herself .   but you do ,   they seem to say ; and she think :   he s no fool ! 
 he have return from the fireplace , walk with a slight limp ; sit down again , he take up the document , narrow his eye , and say : 
  this isn t the sort of evidence the Court like ; in fact I m not sure it s evidence at all . all the same it s not a very bright prospect . if you could show strong cause for leave your husband , and we could get over that night in the car     he look , bird - like , first at Clare and then at young Croom .   still , you can t let damage and cost like that go by default , when    er    you ve do nothing .   his eye fall ; and Dinny think : 
  not conspicuous    his credulity ! 
  very young   Roger lift a paper - knife . 
  we might possibly get the damage agree at a comparatively nominal sum , if you put in a defence and then didn t appear . may I ask your monetary position , Mr. Croom ? 
  I haven t a bean , but that doesn t matter . 
  what exactly will   defend   mean ?   ask Clare . 
  you d both go into the box and deny the charge . you d be cross - examined , and we should cross - examine the petitioner and the enquiry agent . candidly , unless you can give good reason for have leave your husband , you re almost bound to have the judge against you . and ,   he add , in a somewhat human manner ,   a night be a night , especially to the divorce court , even in a car ; though , as I say , it s not the sort of evidence generally require . 
  my Uncle think ,   say Dinny quietly ,   that some of the jury , at all event , might believe they , and that the damage , in any case , would be reduce . 
  very young   Roger nod . 
  we ll see what Mr. Kingson say . I should like to see your father and Sir Lawrence again . 
 Dinny go to the door and hold it open for her sister and young Croom . glance back she see   very young   Roger s face . it be as if someone have ask he not to be a realist . he catch her eye , give a funny little cock of his head , and take out his snuff - box . she shut the door and go up to he . 
  you ll make a mistake if you don t believe they . they re speak the absolute truth . 
  why do she leave her husband , Miss Cherrell ? 
  if she win t tell you , I can t. but I m sure she be right . 
 he consider she for a moment with that sharp glance . 
  somehow ,   he say suddenly ,   I wish it be you .   and , take snuff , he turn to the General and Sir Lawrence . 
  well ?   say the General . 
  very young   Roger look suddenly more sandy . 
  if she have good reason for leave her husband   
  she have . 
  Father ! 
  it appear she isn t prepare to speak of it . 
  nor should I be ,   say Dinny quietly . 
  very young   Roger murmur :   it might make all the difference , though . 
  serious thing for young Croom , Mr. Forsyte ,   put in Sir Lawrence . 
  serious , whether they defend or not , Sir Lawrence . I d well see they both separately . then I ll get Mr. Kingson s view , and let you know tomorrow . will that do , General ? 
  it revolt I ,   say the General ,   to think of that fellow Corven ! 
  quite !   say   very young   Roger , and Dinny think she have never hear a more doubtful sound . 
 chapter 23 

 Dinny sit in the little bare waiting - room turn over the Times . Young Croom stand at the window . 
  Dinny ,   he say , turn ,   can you think of any way in which I can make this less beastly for she ? it s all my fault in a sense , but I have try to keep myself in hand . 
 Dinny look at his troubled face .   I can t ; except by stick to the exact truth . 
  do you believe in that chap in there ? 
  I rather do . I like his taking snuff . 
  I don t believe in defend . why should she be rag in the witness - box for nothing ? what do it matter if they bankrupt I ? 
  we must prevent that somehow . 
  d you think I d let   
  we win t discuss it , Tony . sufficient unto the day ! isn t this a dingy place ? dentist try much hard    Marcus Stone on the wall , all the old Bystanders , and you can bring a dog . 
  could we smoke ? 
  surely . 
  these be only stinker . 
 Dinny take one , and they puff for a minute in silence . 
  it s too foul !   he say , suddenly .   that fellow will have to come over , win t he ? he never can really have care a scrap for she . 
  oh ! yes , he do .   Souvent homme varie , folle est qui s y fie !  
  well ,   say young Croom grimly ,   I d well be keep from he .   he go back to the window and stand look out . Dinny sit thinking of that scene , when two man have not be keep apart , so pitifully like a dog fight and rend to she in its sequel . 
 then Clare come in . there be spot of red in her pale cheek .   your turn , Tony . 
 Young Croom come from the window , look hard into her face , and pass into the lawyer s room . Dinny feel very sorry for he . 
  Ugh !   say Clare :   let s get out of this ! 
 on the pavement , she go on : 
  I wish now we have be lover , Dinny , instead of in this mock - pretty state that no one believe in . 
  we do believe . 
  oh ! you and Dad . but that snuffy rabbit doesn t , and no one else will . still , I shall go through with it . I win t let Tony down , and I win t give Jerry an inch that I can help give . 
  let s have tea ,   say Dinny .   there must be tea somewhere in the City . 
 in a crowded thoroughfare they soon see an A.B.C. 
  then you didn t like   very young   Roger ?   ask Dinny from across the small round table . 
  oh ! he s all right    rather decent , really . I suppose lawyer simply can t believe . but nothing will shake I , Dinny , about not go into my married life . I will not , and that s flat . 
  I see his point . you start with the battle half win against you . 
  I win t allow the lawyer to work it in . we employ they , and they must do what we want . I m go straight from here to the Temple , by the bye , and perhaps on to the House . 
  excuse my revert for a moment ; but what be you go to do about Tony Croom till this come on ? 
  go on just as we be , except for night in car . though what the difference between day and night    in a car , or anywhere else    be , I don t know . 
  I suppose they go by human nature as a whole .   and Dinny lean back . so many girl , so many young man , snatch their tea and roll and bun and cocoa ; chatter and silence and a stale effluvium , little table , and the attendant spirit . what be human nature as a whole ? Didn t they say that it have to be change ? the stuffy past wipe out ! and yet this A.B.C. be just like the A.B.C. she go into with her mother before the war , and think so thrilling because the bread be aerate . and the Divorce Court    into which she have never be yet    be that any different ? 
  have you finish , old thing ?   say Clare . 
  yes . I ll come with you as far as the Temple . 
 as they pause to part at Middle Temple Lane , a rather high and pleasant voice say : 
  what luck !   and a light momentary grip be lay on her arm . 
  if you re go straight to the House ,   say Clare ,   I ll run on and get my thing and join you here . 
  Tactful ,   say Dornford .   let s stand against this   portal .   when I don t see you for so long , Dinny , I feel lost . Jacob serve for Rachel fourteen year    longevity be not what it be , so every month I serve be equal to one of his year . 
  Rachel and he be walk out . 
  I know . well , I must just wait and hope . I just have to wait . 
 lean against the yellow   portal   she look at he . his face be quiver . suddenly sorry , she say : 
  some day , perhaps , I shall come to life again . I win t wait any more now . good - bye , and thank you ! . . . 
 this sudden intrusion of herself be no comfort to she in her home bus . the sight of his quivering face make her restless and uneasy . she do not want to cause he unhappiness    a nice man , considerate to Clare , a pleasant voice , an attractive face ; and in range of interest near to she than Wilfrid have ever be . only , where be that wild , sweet yearning , transmute every value , turn the world into a single being , the one long - for , dreamed - of mate ? she sit very still in the bus , look over the head of the woman on the opposite side , who , with finger crisp on the satchel in her lap , wear the expression of a sportsman about to try a new field or spinney . the light be come up in Regent Street of a cold , just not snowy evening . there use to be the low curve roof - line , the rather nice , bilious yellow of the Quadrant . she remember how on the top of a bus she have differ from the girl Millicent Pole about old Regent Street . change , change , everything change ! and before she suddenly closed eye come Wilfrid s face , with its lip draw back , as she have see it last pass she in the Green Park . 
 someone trod on her toe . she open her eye , and say :   I beg your pardon . 
  grant , I m sure . 
 very polite ! People be more polite every year ! 
 the bus have stop . Dinny hurry from it . she go down Conduit Street , pass her father s tailor . poor darling , he never go there now . clothe be so dear ; and , of course , he loathe new clothe ! she come to Bond Street . 
 the traffic stagger to a standstill , the whole street seem one long line of hold - up car . and England ruin ! she cross into Bruton Street . and then , in front of she , she see a familiar figure , walk slowly with his head down ! she come up with he . 
  Stack ! 
 he raise his head ; tear be trickle down his cheek . he blink his large dark prominent eye , and pass his hand over his face . 
  you miss ? I be just come to you .   and he hold out a telegram . 
 hold it up in the dim light , she read : 
  Henry Stack , 50a Cork Street , London . very sorry to inform you Honourable Wilfrid Desert drown on expedition up - country some week ago . body recover and bury on spot . report only just come in . no possible doubt . condolence . British Consulate , Bangkok . 
 Stonily she stand , see nothing . stack s finger come up and detach the telegram . 
  yes ,   she say .   thank you . show it to Mr. Mont , Stack . Don t grieve . 
  oh , miss ! 
 Dinny lay her finger on his sleeve , give it a little pull , and walk swiftly on . 
 Don t grieve ! sleet be fall now . she raise her face to feel the tingle touch of those small flake . no more dead to she than he have already be . but    dead ! away over there    utterly far ! lie in the earth by the river that have drown he , in forest silence , where no one would ever see his grave . every memory she have of he come to life with an intensity that seem to take all strength from her limb , so that she nearly collapse in the snowy street . she stand for a minute with her gloved hand on the railing of a house . an evening postman stop and look round at she . perhaps some tiny flame of hope    that some day he would come back    have flicker deep down within she ; perhaps only the snowy cold be creep into her bone ; but she feel deadly cold and numb . 
 she reach Mount Street at last and let herself in . and there a sudden horror of betray that anything have happen to awaken pity for she , interest in she , any sort of feeling , beset she , and she flee to her room . what be it to anyone but she ? and pride so move within she that even her heart feel cold as stone . 
 a hot bath revive she a little . she dress for dinner early and go down . 
 the evening be one of silence more tolerable than the spasmodic spurt of conversation . Dinny feel ill . when she go up to bed her Aunt come to her room . 
  Dinny , you look like a ghost . 
  I get chill , Auntie . 
  lawyer !    they do . I ve bring you a posset . 
  ah ! I ve always long to know what a posset be . 
  well , drink it . 
 Dinny drank , and gasp . 
  frightfully strong . 
  yes . your Uncle make it . Michael ring up .   and take the glass , Lady Mont bend forward and kiss her cheek .   that s all ,   she say .   now go to bed , or you ll be ill . 
 Dinny smile .   I m not go to be ill , Aunt Em . 
 in pursuance of that resolve she go down to breakfast next morning . 
 the oracle , it seem , have speak in a typewritten letter sign Kingson , Cuthcott and Forsyte . it recommend put in a defence , and have so advise Lady Corven and Mr. Croom . when it have take the necessary proceeding it would advise far . 
 and that coldness in the pit of the stomach which follow the receipt of lawyer   letter be feel even by Dinny , the pit of whose stomach be already deadly cold . 
 she go back to Condaford with her father by the morning train , repeat to her Aunt the formula :   I m not go to be ill . 
 chapter 24 

 but she be ill , and for a month in her conventual room at Condaford often wish she be dead and do with . she might , indeed , quite easily have die if such belief as she have in a future life have grow instead of decline as her strength ebb . to rejoin Wilfrid , where this world s pain and judgment be not , have a fatal attraction . to fade out into the sleep of nothingness be not hard , but have no active enticement ; and , as the tide of health turn back within she , seem less and less natural . the solicitude of people have a subtle , pervasive healing influence . the village require a daily bulletin , her mother have be write or   phone almost daily to a dozen people . Clare have be down every week - end , bring flower from Dornford . Aunt Em have be send twice a week the product of Boswell and Johnson ; Fleur bombard she with the product of Piccadilly . Adrian have come down three time without warn . Hilary begin send funny little note the moment she have turn the corner . 
 on March the thirtieth , spring visit her room with southwest air , a small bowl of the first spring flower , some pussy willow and a sprig of gorse . she be pick up rapidly now , and three day later be out of door . for everything in nature she feel a z such as she have not know for a long time . crocus , daffodil clump , swell bud , sun on the fantail   wing , shape and colour of the cloud , scent of the wind , all affect she with an almost painful emotion . yet she have no desire to do anything or see anybody . in this queer apathy she accept an invitation from Adrian to go abroad with he on his short holiday . 
 the memorable thing about their fortnight s stay at Argelès in the Pyrenees , be the walk they take , the flower they pick , the pyrenean sheep - dog , the almond blossom they see , the conversation they hold . they be out all day , take lunch with they , and the opportunity for talk be unlimited . Adrian become eloquent on mountain . he have never get over his climbing day . Dinny suspect he of try to rouse she from the lethargy in which she be sink . 
  when I go up   the little Sinner   in the Dolomites with Hilary before the war ,   he say one day ,   I get as near to God as I ever shall . nineteen year ago    dash it ! what s the near to God you ever get , Dinny ? 
 she do not answer . 
  look here , my dear , what be you now    twenty - seven ? 
  nearly twenty - eight . 
  on the threshold still . I suppose talk it out wouldn t help ? 
  you ought to know , Uncle , that talk one s heart out be not in the family . 
  true ! the more we re hurt the silenter we get . but one mustn t inbreed to sorrow , Dinny . 
 Dinny say suddenly :   I understand perfectly how woman go into convent , or give themselves up to good work . I always use to think it show a lack of humour . 
  it can show a lack of courage , or too much courage , of the sort fanatical . 
  or broken spring . 
 Adrian look at she . 
  your be not break , Dinny    badly bent , not break . 
  let s hope so , Uncle ; but they ought to be straighten by now . 
  you re begin to look fine . 
  yes , I m eat enough even for Aunt Em . it s take interest in oneself that s the trouble . 
  I agree . I wonder if   
  not iron , darling . it sew I up inside . 
 Adrian smile .   I be think more of child . 
  they re not synthetic , yet . I m all right , and very lucky , as thing go . do I tell you old Betty die ? 
  good old soul ! she use to give I bull -eye . 
  she be the real thing . we read too many book , Uncle . 
  indubitably . walk more , read less ! let s have our lunch . 
 on the way back to England they stay two night in Paris at a little hotel over a restaurant near the Gare St. Lazare . they have wood fire , and their bed be comfortable . 
  only the French know what a bed should be ,   say Adrian . 
 the cooking down below be intend for race man and such as go where they can appreciate food . the waiter , who wear apron , look , as Adrian express it ,   like monk do a spot of work ,   pour the wine and mix the salad with reverence . he and Dinny be the only foreigner in either hotel or restaurant , not far from be the only foreigner in Paris . 
  marvellous town , Dinny . except for car in place of fiacre and the Eiffel Tower , I don t see any real change by daylight since I be first here in   88 , when your grandfather be Minister at Copenhagen . there s the same tang of coffee and wood smoke in the air ; people have the same breadth of back , the same red button in their coat ; there be the same table outside the same cafés , the same affiche , the same funny little stall for sell book , the same violently miraculous driving , the same pervade french grey , even in the sky ; and the same rather ill - temper look of not give a damn for anything outside Paris . Paris lead fashion , and yet it s the most conservative place in the world . they say the advanced literary crowd here regard the world as have begin in 1914 at early , have scrap everything that come before the war , despise anything that last , be mostly Jews , Poles and Irishmen , and yet have choose this changeless town to function in . the same with the painter and musician , and every other extremist . here they gather and chatter and experiment themselves to death . and good old Paris laugh and carry on , as concern with reality and flavour and the past as it ever be . Paris produce anarchy exactly as stout produce froth . 
 Dinny press his arm . 
  that be a good effort , Uncle . I must say I feel more alive here than I have for age . 
  ah ! Paris pet the sens . let s go in here    too cold to sit out . what ll you have , tea or    absinthe ? 
  Absinthe . 
  you win t like it . 
  all right    tea with lemon . 
 wait for her tea in the quiet hurly - burly of the Café de la Paix , Dinny watch her Uncle s thin , bearded form , and think that he look quite   in his plate ,   but with a queer , interested contentment that identify he with the life around . 
 to be interested in life and not pet oneself ! and she look about she . her neighbour be neither remarkable nor demonstrative , but they give an impression of do what they like , not of be on the way to somewhere else . 
  they dig into the moment , don t they ?   say Adrian suddenly . 
  yes , I be think that . 
  the French make an art of living . we hope for the future or regret the past . precious little   present   about the English ! 
  why be these so different ? 
  less northern blood , more wine and oil ; their head be rounder than our , their body more stocky , and their eye be mainly brown . 
  those be thing we can t alter , anyway . 
  the French be essentially the medium people . they ve bring equilibrium to a high point . their sens and intellect balance . 
  but they get fat , Uncle . 
  yes , but all over ; they don t jut , and they hold themselves up . I d rather be English , of course ; but if I weren t , I d rather be french . 
  Isn t there anything in have an itch for something well than you ve get ? 
  ah ! ever notice , Dinny , that when we say   be good !   they say   Soyez sage ! ? there s a lot in that . I ve hear Frenchmen put our unease down to the Puritan tradition . but that s to mistake effect for cause , symptom for root . I admit we ve get an urge towards the promise land , but Puritanism be part of that urge , so s our wanderlust and colonise quality ; so s our Protestantism , scandinavian blood , the sea and the climate . none of that help we in the art of living . look at our industrialism , our old maid , crank , humanitarianism , poetry ! we jut in every direction . we ve get one or two highly mediumising institution    the public school ,   cricket   in its various form    but as a people we re chock - full of extremism . the average Briton be naturally exceptional , and underneath his dread of be conspicuous , he s really proud of it . where , on earth , will you see more diverse bone formation than in England , and all of it peculiar ? we do our level good to be average , but , by George , we jut ! 
  you re inspire , Uncle . 
  well , you look about you when you get home . 
  I will ,   say Dinny . 
 they have a good crossing the next day , and Adrian drop she at Mount Street . 
 in kiss he good - bye , she squeeze his little finger . 
  you ve do I a tremendous amount of good , Uncle . 
 during those six week she have scarcely think at all about Clare s trouble , and she ask at once for the late news . a defence have be deliver and issue join ; the case would probably be on in a few week . 
  I ve not see either Clare or young Croom ,   say Sir Lawrence ,   but I gather from Dornford that they go about as before .   very young   Roger still harp on the need for get she to speak about her life out there . lawyer seem to regard the Courts as confessional box in which to confess the sin of your opponent . 
  well , aren t they ? 
  judge by the paper , yes . 
  well , Clare can t and win t. they ll make a great mistake if they try to force she . have anything be hear of Jerry ? 
  he must have start , if he s to be here in time . 
  suppose they lose , what be to be do about Tony Croom ? 
  put yourself in his place , Dinny . whatever happen , he ll probably come in for a slating from the judge . he win t be in a mood to accept favour . if he can t pay up I don t quite know what they can do to he ; something unpleasant , no doubt . and there s the question of Jack Muskham s attitude    he s queer . 
  yes ,   say Dinny under her breath . 
 Sir Lawrence drop his monocle . 
  your Aunt suggest that young Croom should go gold - dig , come back rich , and marry Clare . 
  but Clare ? 
  Isn t she in love with he ? 
 Dinny shake her head .   she might be if he s ruin . 
  H m ! and how be YOU , my dear ? really yourself again ? 
  oh , yes ! 
  Michael would like to see you some time . 
  I ll go round tomorrow . 
 and that , mean much , be all that be say about the news that have cause her illness . 
 chapter 25 

 Dinny make the effort need to go round to South Square next morning . except with Clare on her arrival from Ceylon , she have not be there since the day of Wilfrid s departure to Siam . 
  up in his workroom , miss . 
  thank you , Coaker , I ll go up . 
 Michael do not hear she come in , and she stand for a moment look at the caricature - cover wall . it always seem to she so odd that Michael , incline to over - estimate human virtue , should surround himself with the effort of those who live by exaggerate human defect . 
  be I interrupt , Michael ? 
  Dinny ! you re look a treat ! you give we a bad turn , old thing . sit down ! I be only look into potato    their figure be so puzzling . 
 they talk for some time , and then , the knowledge of what she have come for invade both , fall silent . 
  you ve something to give or tell I , Michael . 
 he go to a drawer , and take out a little packet . Dinny unwrap it in her lap . there be a letter , a little photograph , a badge . 
  it s his passport photo , and D.S.O. ribbon . in the letter there s something for you ; in fact , the whole letter be really for you . they re all for you . excuse I , I have to see Fleur before she go out . 
 Dinny sit motionless , look at the photograph . yellow with damp and heat , it have the uncompromising reality that characterise passport photograph .   Wilfrid Desert   be write across it , and he look straight at she out of the pasteboard . she turn it face down on her lap , and smooth the ribbon , which be stain and crush . then , nerve herself , she open the letter . from it drop a fold sheet , which she set apart . the letter be to Michael . 
  New Year s day . 
  DEAR OLD M. M.  
  greeting to you and Fleur , and many good year ! I m far up north in a very wild part of this country with an objective that I may reach or not    the habitation of a tribe quite definitely pre - siamese and non - mongolian . Adrian Charwell would be interested . I ve often mean to let you know my news , but , when it come to writing , didn t    partly because if you don t know this part of the world description s no use , and partly because it s difficult for I to believe that anybody can be interested . I m write now really to ask you to tell Dinny that I be at peace with myself at last . I don t know whether it s the strength and remoteness of the atmosphere out here , or whether I ve gain some of the eastern conviction that the world of other man do not matter ; one s alone from birth to death , except for that fine old companion , the Universe    of which one be the microcosm . it s a kind of queer peace , and I often wonder how I could have be so torn and torture . Dinny , I think , will be glad to know this ; just as I would be truly glad to know that she , too , be at peace . 
  I ve write a little , and , if I come back from this business , shall try and produce some account of it . in three day from now we reach the river , cross it , and follow up a western tributary towards the Himalayas . 
  faint echo of the crisis you ve be have trickle out here . poor old England ! I don t suppose I shall ever see she again ; but she s a game old bird when put to it , and I can t see she be beat ; in fact , properly moult , I expect she to fly well than ever . 
  good - bye , old man , my love to you both ; and to Dinny my special love . 
  WILFRID . 
 Peace ! and she ? she rewrappe the ribbon , photograph , and letter and thrust they into her bag . make no noise , she open the door , go down the stair , and out into the sunshine . 
 alone by the river , she unfold the sheet she have take from the letter , and , under a plane tree as yet bare of leaf , read these verse : 
  lie still ! 
  the sun , who bring all earth to bloom , 
 Corrupts and make corruption flower , 
 be just a flame that thro   the gloom 
 of heaven burn a little hour ; 
 and , figure on the chart of night  
 a somewhat negligible star  
 be but a pinpricked point of light 
 as million - million other be ; 
 and , though it be the all in all 
 of my existence and decay , 
 it have as simple rise and fall 
 as I have , and as short a day . 
 but that no unction to my heart 
 will lay ; the small germ in I 
 play just as passionate a part 
 as I do , in eternity . 
 the germ and I and sun , we rise , 
 Fulfil our little life , and die ; 
 and to all question God reply : 
  lie still ! I can not tell you why !  
 lie still ! the Embankment be nearly empty of people and of traffic . she walk on , cross the main line of the traffic , and come to Kensington Gardens . there on the Round Pond be many small boat , and many child interested in their vagary . a bright - haired little boy , something like Kit Mont , be guide his boat with a stick to a fresh attempt to cross the pond . what blissful unconsciousness of all else ! be that the secret of happiness ? to be lose in the moment    to be out of oneself , like a child ! he say suddenly : 
  it s go ! look ! 
 the sail fill , the little boat float away . the small boy stand with arm akimbo , and , quickly look up at she , say : 
  ha ! I must run ! 
 Dinny watch he stop now and again with a jerk to calculate the landing of his boat . 
 so one run through life , watch each venture come to shore , and at the end lie still ! like bird who utter their song , hunt for worm , preen their feather , fly without seem cause , unless for joy ; mat , build nest and feed their young , and when all be over become little stiffen bundle of feather , and pass into corruption , and dust . 
 she follow slowly round the pond , see he again guide the boat with his stick , and say :   what do you call your boat ? 
  a cutter . I have a schooner , but our dog eat the rigging . 
  yes ,   say Dinny ,   dog like rig    very succulent . 
  very what ? 
  like asparagus . 
  I m not allow asparagus , it s too expensive . 
  but you ve taste it ? 
  yes . see , the wind s catch it again ! 
 off go the boat , and off go the small bright - haired boy . 
 Adrian s word come into her head .   I be think more of child . 
 she walk into what in old day would have be call a glade . the ground be cover with crocus , yellow , violet , white , and with daffodil ; the tree have eagerness in every twig , stretch their bud upward to the sun s warmth ; the blackbird be in song . and as she walk she think :   peace ! there be no peace . there be life , and there be death ! 
 and those who see she thought :   nice - look girl !    these little hat !    where s she goin , I wonder , with her head in the air ?   or , again , just :   Coo !   she cross the road and come to the Hudson Memorial . it be suppose to be a home for bird ; but beyond a sparrow or two and a fat pigeon , there be none ; nor be more than three people look at it . she , who have see it with Wilfrid , glance at it for a moment and walk on . 
  Poor Hudson ! Poor Rima !   he have say . 
 she go down to the Serpentine and walk along it ; the sun be bright on the water , and beyond it the grass be springy and dry . the paper be already talk of drought ! the sound current from north and south and west join in a mild continuous roaring . where he be lie it would be silent ; strange bird and little creature would be the only visitor , and odd - shaped leaf would drop on his grave . there come into her mind the pastoral scene in some film picture of the Normandy home of Briand , that she have see at Argelès .   a pity we have to leave all this !   she have say . 
 an aeroplane drone its way over to the north , a high , silvery , small , noisy shape . he have hat they ever since the war .   disturber of whatever Gods there be ! 
 brave new world ! God no long in his heaven ! 
 she turn a little north to avoid the place where she use to meet he . the roofless tabernacle of oratory close to the Marble Arch be desert . she leave the Park and go towards Melton Mews . it be over ! with a queer little smile on her lip she turn into the Mews and stop at her sister s door . 
 chapter 26 

 she find Clare in . for the first few minute they avoid each other s trouble , then Dinny say :   well ? 
  not at all well . I ve split with Tony    my nerve be in rag and his in tatter . 
  but do you mean that he   ? 
  no . only I ve tell he I can t go on see he till this be over . we meet meaning not to talk about the thing ; then it crop up , and we get all anyhow . 
  he must be awfully unhappy . 
  he be . but it s only for another three or four week . 
  and then ? 
 Clare laugh    no joyful sound . 
  but seriously , Clare ? 
  we shan t win , and then nothing will matter . if Tony want I I suppose I shall let he . he ll be ruin , so I shall owe he that . 
  I think ,   say Dinny slowly ,   that I wouldn t let the result affect I . 
 Clare star up at she from the sofa . 
  that sound almost too sensible . 
  it wasn t worth while to plead innocence unless you mean to carry it through , however the case go . if you win , wait till you can divorce Jerry . if you don t win , wait till you re divorced . it win t do Tony any real harm to wait ; and it ll certainly do you no harm to know for certain how you feel . 
  Jerry be quite clever enough to prevent my ever get evidence against he , if he set his mind to it . 
  then we must hope you ll lose . your friend will still believe in you . 
 Clare shrug .   will they ? 
  I ll see to that ,   say Dinny . 
  Dornford have advise tell Jack Muskham before the case come on . what do you say ? 
  I should like to see Tony Croom first . 
  well , if you come round again this evening , you ll see he . he come and star up at I at seven o clock on Saturday and Sunday evening . quaint ! 
  no . very natural . what be you do this afternoon ? 
  rid with Dornford in Richmond Park . I ride with he in the row early every morning now . I wish you d come , Dinny . 
  no thing , and no muscle . 
  Darling ,   say Clare , spring up ,   it really be awful while you be ill . we feel ever so bad . Dornford be quite potty . you look well now than you do before . 
  yes , I m more pneumatic . 
  oh ! you ve read that book ? 
 Dinny nod .   I ll come round this evening . good - bye ; bless you !   . . . 
 it be almost seven when she slip out of Mount Street and walk rapidly towards the Mews . a full moon be up with the evening star in a not yet darken sky . come to the west corner of the desert Mews , she at once see young Croom stand below no . 2 . wait till he begin to move away , she run down the Mews and round the far corner to catch he . 
  Dinny ! how wonderful ! 
  I be tell I should catch you look at the Queen . 
  yes , that s what the cat have come to . 
  it might be bad . 
  be you all right again ? you must have get a chill in the City that foul day . 
  let s walk as far as the Park . I want to ask you about Jack Muskham . 
  I funk tell he . 
  shall I do it for you ? 
  but why ? 
 Dinny take his arm . 
  he s a connection , through Uncle Lawrence . besides , I ve have occasion to know he . Mr. Dornford be perfectly right ; it will depend very much on when and what he s tell . let I ! 
  I don t know really    I really don t know . 
  I want to see he again , anyway . 
 Young Croom look at she . 
  somehow I don t believe that . 
  Honest Injun . 
  it s terribly sweet of you ; of course you can do it much well than I , but   
  that s enough then . 
 they have reach the Park , and be walk along the rail towards Mount Street . 
  have you be see the lawyer much ? 
  yes , our evidence be all tap out . it s the cross - examination . 
  I think I might enjoy that , if I be go to tell the truth . 
  they twist and turn what you say so , and their tone of voice   ! I go into that court and listen one day . Dornford tell Clare he wouldn t practice in that court for all the gold in France . he s a sound fellow , Dinny . 
  yes ,   say Dinny , look round at his ingenuous face . 
  I don t think our lawyer care about the job either . it s not in their line .   very young   Roger be a bit of a sportsman . he believe we re tell the truth , because he realise I m sorry we be . that s your turning . I shall go and bat round the Park , or I shan t sleep . wonderful moon ! 
 Dinny press his hand . 
 when she reach her door , he be still stand there , and raise his hat to she    or to the moon , she could not be quite sure which . . . 
 accord to Sir Lawrence , Jack Muskham would be up in Town over the week - end ; he now have room in Ryder Street . she have not think twice about go all the way to Royston to see he concern Wilfrid ; but he might well think twice about she go to see he in Ryder Street concern young Croom . she telephone , therefore , to Burton s Club at lunch - time the next day . 
 his voice bring back the shock of the last time she have hear it , close to the York Column . 
  Dinny Cherrell . could I see you some time today ? 
 the answer come slowly . 
  er    of course . when ? 
  any time that suit you . 
  be you at Mount Street ? 
  yes , but I would rather come to you . 
  well    er    would   ? how about tea at my room in Ryder Street ? you know the number ? 
  yes , thank you . five o clock ? 
 approach those room she need all her pluck . she have last see he reel in the thick of that fight with Wilfrid . besides , he symbolise to she the rock on which her love for Wilfrid have go aground . she only do not hate he , because she could not help remember that his bitterness towards Wilfrid have be due to his queer appreciation of herself . only by fast walking , and slow thinking , do she arrive . 
 the door be open to she by one who obviously better his decline day by let room to such as he have valet in the past . he take she up to the second floor . 
  Miss    er    Cherwell , sir . 
 tall , lean , languid , neatly dress as ever , Jack Muskham be stand by the open window of a not unpleasant room .   Tea , please , Rodney .   he come towards she , hold out his hand . 
  like a slow - motion picture ,   think Dinny . however surprised at her want to see he , he be show no sign of it . 
  be race at all since I see you at Blenheim s Derby ? 
  no . 
  you back he , I remember . Clearest case of beginner s luck I ever know .   his smile bring out all the wrinkle on his brown face , and Dinny perceive that there be plenty of they . 
  do sit down . here s tea . will you make it ? 
 she give he his cup , take her own and say : 
  be the arab mare over yet , Mr. Muskham ? 
  I expect they the end of next month . 
  you have young Tony Croom to look after they . 
  oh ! do you know he ? 
  through my sister . 
  nice boy . 
  he be ,   say Dinny .   it s about he I ve come . 
  oh ! 
 the thought   he owe I too much ,   dart through she . he could not refuse she this ! lean back and cross her knee , she look he full in the face . 
  I want to tell you , in confidence , that Jerry Corven be bring a divorce suit against my sister , and Tony Croom be cite as the co - respondent . 
 Jack Muskham move the hand that hold his cup . 
  he be in love with she , and they have be go about together , but there be no truth in the charge . 
  I see ,   say Muskham . 
  the case be come on quite soon . I persuade Tony Croom to let I tell you of it ; it would be so awkward for he to talk about himself . 
 Muskham be look at she with unmoved face . 
  but ,   he say ,   I know Jerry Corven . I didn t realise your sister have leave he . 
  we keep it to ourselves . 
  be she leave he young Croom s do ? 
  no . they only meet on the boat come over . Clare leave Jerry for quite another reason . she and Tony Croom have be indiscreet , of course ; they ve be watch and see together in what be know , I believe , as   compromise circumstance .  
  how do you mean exactly ? 
  drive back from Oxford late one evening their light fail and they spend the rest of the night in the car together . 
 Jack Muskham raise his shoulder slightly . Dinny lean forward with her eye on his . 
  I tell you there be no truth in the charge ; there be none . 
  but , my dear Miss Cherrell , a man never admit   
  that be why I come to you instead of Tony . my sister would not tell I a lie . 
 again Muskham make the slight movement of his shoulder . 
  I don t quite see     he begin . 
  what it have to do with you ? this : I don t suppose they ll be believe . 
  you mean if I just read the case it would put I off young Croom ? 
  yes , I think you would feel he have not   play the game .    she could not quite keep irony out of her voice . 
  well ,   he say ,   have he ? 
  I think so . he s deeply in love with my sister , and yet he s keep himself in hand . one can t help fall in love , you know .   with those word all the feeling of the past rise up within she , and she look down so as not to see that impassive face and the provocative set of its lip . suddenly , by a sort of inspiration , she say : 
  my brother - inlaw have ask for damage . 
  oh !   say Jack Muskham ,   I didn t know that be do now . 
  two thousand , and Tony Croom have nothing . he profess not to care , but if they lose , of course , it s ruin . 
 after that there be silence . Jack Muskham go back to the window . he sit on the sill and say : 
  well , I don t know what I can do ? 
  you needn t take his job from he    that s all . 
  the man be in Ceylon and his wife here . it s not   
 Dinny rise , take two step towards he and stand very still . 
  have it ever strike you , Mr. Muskham , that you owe I anything ? do you ever remember that you take my lover from I ? do you know that he be dead out there , where he go because of you ? 
  of I ? 
  you and what you stand for make he give I up . I ask you now , however this case go , not to sack Tony Croom ! goodbye !   and before he could answer she be go . 
 she almost run towards the Green Park . how far from what she have intend ! how fatal    perhaps ! but her feeling have be too strong    the old revolt against the dead wall of form and those impalpable inexorable force of tradition which have wreck her love life ! it could not have be otherwise . the sight of his long , dandified figure , the sound of his voice , have bring it all back too strongly . ah , well ! it be a relief ; an escape of old bitterness pen within her spirit ! the next morning she receive this note : 
  Ryder Street . 
  Sunday . 
  dear MISS CHARWELL  
  you may rely on I in that matter . with sincere regard , 
  your very faithfully , 
  JOHN MUSKHAM . 
 chapter 27 

 with that promise to her credit she go back to Condaford the follow day and give herself to mitigation of the atmosphere she find there . her father and mother , live their ordinary life , be obviously haunt and harass . her mother , sensitive and seclude , be just shrink from publicity discreditable to Clare . her father seem to feel that , however the case go , most people would think his daughter a light woman and a liar ; young Croom would be excuse more or less , but a woman who allow circumstance to take such turn would find no one to excuse she . he be clearly feel , too , a vindictive anger against Jerry Corven , and a determination that the fellow should not be successful if he could help it . faintly amuse at an attitude so male , Dinny feel a sort of admiration at the painful integrity with which he be grasp the shadow and let the substance go . to her father s generation divorce still seem the outward and visible sign of inner and spiritual disgrace . to herself love be love and , when it become aversion , cease to justify sexual relationship . she have , in fact , be more shock by Clare s yield to Jerry Corven in her room than by she leave he in Ceylon . the divorce suit she have occasionally follow in the paper have do nothing to help she believe that marriage be make in heaven . but she recognise the feeling of those bring up in an old atmosphere , and avoid add to the confusion and trouble in her people s mind . the line she take be more practical : the thing would soon be over one way or the other , and probably the other ! People pay very little attention to other people s affair nowadays ! 
  what !   say the General sardonically .    night in a car    it s the perfect headline . set everybody think at once how they themselves would have behave . 
 she have no answer , but :   they ll make a symposium of it , darling : the Home Secretary , the Dean of St. Paul s , the Princess Elizabeth . 
 she be disturb when tell that Dornford have be ask to Condaford for Easter . 
  I hope you don t mind , Dinny ; we didn t know whether you d be here or not . 
  I can t use the expression   I m agreeable   even to you , Mother . 
  well , darling , one of these day you must go down into the battle again . 
 Dinny bite her lip and do not answer . it be true , and the more disquieting . come from her gentle and unmanage mother , the word sting . 
 Battle ! life , then , be like the war . it strike you down into hospital , turn you out therefrom into the rank again . her mother and father would hate   to lose she ,   but they clearly want she   to go .   and this with Clare s failure write on the wall ! 
 Easter come with a wind   fresh to strong .   Clare arrive by train on the Saturday morning , Dornford by car in the afternoon . he greet Dinny as if doubtful of his welcome . 
 he have find himself a house . it be on Campden Hill . he have be terribly anxious to know Clare s opinion of it , and she have spend a Sunday afternoon go over it with he . 
   eminently desirable ,   Dinny .   South aspect ; garage and stable for two horse ; good garden ; all the usual office , centrally heat ,   and otherwise well - breed . he think of go in towards the end of May . it have an old tile roof , so I put he on to french grey for shutter . really , it s rather nice , and roomy . 
  it sound   marvellous .   I suppose you ll be go there instead of to the Temple ? 
  yes , he s move into Pump Court , or Brick Buildings    I can t remember . when you think of it , Dinny , why shouldn t he have be make co - respondent instead of Tony ? I see much more of he . 
 otherwise allusion to   the case   be foregone . it would be one of the first after the undefended suit be dispose of , and calm before the storm be reign . 
 Dornford , indeed , refer to it after lunch on Sunday . 
  shall you be in court during your sister s case , Dinny ? 
  I must . 
  I m afraid it may make you very wild . they ve brief Brough , and he s particularly exasperating when he like with a simple denial like this ; that s what they ll rely on . Clare must try and keep cool . 
 Dinny remember   very young   Roger s wish it have be herself and not Clare . 
  I hope you ll tell she that . 
  I ll take she through her evidence , and cross - examine she on it . but one can t tell the line Brough will take . 
  shall you be in court yourself ? 
  if I can , but the odd be I shan t be free . 
  how long will it last ? 
  More than a day , I m afraid . 
 Dinny sigh . 
  Poor Dad ! have Clare get a good man ? 
  yes    Instone , very much hamper by her refusal to talk about Ceylon . 
  that s definite , you know . she win t. 
  I like she for it , but I m afraid it s fatal . 
  so be it !   say Dinny :   I want she free . the person most to be pity be Tony Croom . 
  why ? 
  he s the only one of the three in love . 
  I see ,   say Dornford , and be silent . Dinny feel sorry . 
  would you care for a walk ? 
  simply love it ! 
  we ll go up through the wood , and I ll show you where the Cherrell kill the boar and win the de Campfort    our heraldic myth . have you any family legend in Shropshire ? 
  yes , but the place have go    sell when my father die ; six of we and no money . 
  oh !   say Dinny ,   horrible when family be uproot . 
 Dornford smile . 
  live donkey be well than dead lion . 
 while they be go up through the covert he talk about his new house , subtly   pump   she for expression of her taste . 
 they come out into a sunken roadway lead on to a thorn - bush - cover down . 
  here s the place . Virgin forest then , no doubt . we use to picnic here as child . 
 Dornford take a deep breath .   real english view    nothing spectacular , but no end good . 
  lovable . 
  that s the word . 
 he spread his raincoat on the bank .   sit down and let s have a smoke . 
 Dinny sit down . 
  come on part of it yourself , the ground s not too dry . 
 while he sit there , with his hand hug his knee and his pipe fume gently , she think :   the most self - control man I ever come across , and the gentle , except Uncle Adrian . 
  if only a boar would come along ,   he say ,   it would be prime ! 
  Member of Parliament kill boar on spur of Chilterns ,   murmur Dinny , but do not add :   Wins lady . 
  wind s off the gorse . another three week and it ll be green down there . pick of the year    this , or the indian summer , I never know . and your , Dinny ? 
  Blossom time . 
  um ; and harvest . this ought to be glorious then    quite a lot of cornland . 
  it be just ripe when the war break out . we come up picnic two day before , and stay till the moon rise . how much do you think people really fight for England , Mr. Dornford ? 
  practically all    for some nook or other of it ; many just for the street , and bus , and smell of fried fish . I fight mainly , I think , for Shrewsbury and Oxford . but Eustace be my name . 
  I ll remember . we d well go down now , or we shall be late for tea . 
 and , all the way home , they contend with bird   song and the name of plant . 
  thank for my treat ,   he say . 
  I ve enjoy it , too . 
 that walk have , indeed , a curiously soothe effect on Dinny . so , she could talk with he without question of love - making . 
 Bank holiday be sou -westerly . Dornford spend a quiet hour with Clare over her evidence , and then go rid with she in the rain . Dinny s morning go in arrange for spring cleaning and the chintzing of the furniture while the family be up in town . her mother and father be to stay at Mount Street , she and Clare with Fleur . in the afternoon she potter with the General round the new pigsty , progress as slowly as a local builder , anxious to keep his man in work , could make they . she be not alone again with Dornford until after tea . 
  well ,   he say ,   I think your sister will do , if she keep her temper . 
  Clare can be very cutting . 
  yes , and there s an underlying sentiment among lawyer against be cut up by outsider in each other s presence ; even judge have it . 
  they win t find she a   butterfly on the wheel .  
  it s no good get up against institution , you know ; they carry too many gun . 
  oh ! well ,   say Dinny , with a sigh ,   it s on the knee of the god . 
  which be deuce slippery . could I have a photograph of you , preferably as a little girl ? 
  I ll see what we ve get    I m afraid only snap ; but I think there s one where my nose doesn t turn up too much . 
 she go to a cabinet , take a drawer out bodily , and put it on the cover billiard table . 
  the family snap - hoard    choose ! 
 he stand at her side and they turn they over . 
  I take most of they , so there aren t many of I . 
  be that your brother ? 
  yes , and this    just before he go to the war . this be Clare the week before she be marry . here s one of I , with some hair . Dad take that when he come home , the spring after the war . 
  when you be thirteen ? 
  fourteen nearly . it s suppose to be like Joan of Arc be take in by voice . 
  it s lovely . I shall get it enlarge . 
 he hold it to the light . the figure be turn three quarter , and the face lift to the branch of a fruit tree in blossom . the whole of the little picture be very much alive ; the sun have fall on the blossom and on Dinny s hair , which hang to her waist . 
  mark the rapt look ,   she say ;   there must have be a cat up the tree . 
 he put it into his pocket and return to the table . 
  and this ?   he say :   could I have this too ? 
 the snap be one of she a little old , but still with her hair uncut , full face , hand clasp in front , head a little down and eye look up . 
  no , I m sorry . I didn t know it be there .   it be the counterpart of one she have send to Wilfrid . 
 Dornford nod ; and she realise that in some uncanny way he know why . seize with compunction , she say : 
  oh ! yes , you can . it doesn t matter , now .   and she put it into his hand . . . . 
 after Dornford and Clare have leave on Tuesday morning , Dinny study a map , take the car and set out for Bablock Hythe . she do not care for driving , but she be move by the thought of Tony Croom deprive of his week - end glimpse of Clare . the twenty - five mile take she well over an hour . at the inn she be tell that he would be at his cottage , and , leave the car , she walk over . he be in shirt - sleeve distemper the wall of the low , timbere sitting - room . from the doorway she could see the pipe wobble in his mouth . 
  anything wrong with Clare ?   he say at once . 
  nothing whatever . I just think I d like to have a look at your habitat . 
  how terribly nice of you ! I m do a job of work . 
  clearly . 
  Clare like duck s - egg green ; this be the near I can get to it . 
  it go splendidly with the beam . 
 Young Croom say , look straight before he ,   I can t believe I ll ever get she here , but I can t help pretend ; otherwise the sand would be clean out of my dolly . 
 Dinny put her hand on his sleeve . 
  you re not go to lose your job . I ve see Jack Muskham . 
  already ? you re marvellous . I ll just wash off and get my coat on , and show you round . 
 Dinny wait in the doorway where a streak of sunlight fall . the two cottage , knock into one , still have their rambler , wistaria , and thatch roof . it would be very pretty . 
  now ,   say young Croom .   the box be all finish , and the paddock have get their water . in fact , we only want the animal ; but they re not to be here till May . take no risk . well , I d rather have this case over first . you ve come from Condaford ? 
  yes . Clare go back this morning . she would have send her love , but she didn t know I be come . 
  why do you come ?   say young Croom bluntly . 
  fellow feeling . 
 he thrust his arm within her . 
  yes . so sorry ! do you find ,   he add suddenly ,   that thinking of other people suffer help ? 
  not much . 
  no . want someone be like tooth or ear ache . you can t get away from it . 
 Dinny nod . 
  this time of year , too ,   say young Croom , with a laugh .   the difference between be   fond of   and   love ! I m get desperate , Dinny . I don t see how Clare can ever change . if she be ever go to love I , she would by now . if she s not go to love I , I couldn t stick it here . I d have to get away to Kenya or somewhere . 
 look at his eye , ingenuously hang on her answer , her nerve go . it be her own sister ; but what do she know of she , when it come to the depth ? 
  you never know . I wouldn t give up . 
 Young Croom press her arm . 
  sorry to be talk of my mania . only , when one long day and night   
  I know . 
  I must buy a goat or two . horse don t like donkey ; and as a rule they shy at goat ; but I want to make these paddock feel homy . I ve get two cat for the box . what do you think ? 
  I only know about dog , and    pig theoretically . 
  come and have lunch . they ve get a rather good ham . 
 he do not again speak of Clare ; and , after partake together of the rather good ham , he put Dinny into her car and drive she the first five mile of the way home , say that he want a walk . 
  I think no end of you for come ,   he say , squeeze her hand hard :   it be most frightfully sport . give my love to Clare ,   and he go off , wave his hand , as he turn into a field - path . 
 she be absent - minded during the rest of the drive . the day , though still south - westerly , have gleam of sunlight , and sharp shower of hail . put the car away she get the spaniel Foch and go out to the new pigsty . her father be there , brood over their construction like the Lieutenant - General he be , very neat , resourceful , faddy . doubtful whether they would ever contain pig , Dinny slip her arm through his . 
  how s the battle of Pigsville ? 
  one of the bricklayer be run down yesterday , and that carpenter there have cut his thumb . I ve be talk to old Bellows , but    dash it !    you can t blame he for want to keep his man in work . I sympathise with a chap who stick by his own man , and win t have union labour . he say he ll be finish by the end of next month , but he win t. 
  No ,   say Dinny ,   he s already say that twice . 
  where have you be ? 
  over to see Tony Croom . 
  any development ? 
  no . I just want to tell he that I ve see Mr. Muskham , and he win t lose his job . 
  Glad of that . he s get grit , that boy . pity he didn t go into the army . 
  I m very sorry for he , Dad ; he really be in love . 
  still a common complaint ,   say the General drily :   do you see they ve more than balance the Budget ? it s an hysterical age , with these european crisis for breakfast every other morning . 
  that s the paper . the french paper , where the print be so much small , don t excite one half so much . I couldn t get the wind up at all when I be read they . 
  paper , and wireless ; everything know before it happen ; and headline twice the size of the event . you d think , to judge from the speech and the   leader ,   that the world have never be in a hole before . the world s always in a hole , only in old day people didn t make a song about it . 
  but without the song would they have balance the Budget , dear ? 
  no , it s the way we do thing nowadays . but it s not English . 
  do we know what s English and what isn t , Dad ? 
 the General wrinkle up his weather face , and a smile creep about the wrinkle . he point at the pigsty . 
  those be . do in the end , but not before they must be . 
  do you like that ? 
  no ; but I like this hysterical way of try to cure it even less . you d think we d never be short of money before . why , Edward the Third owe money all over Europe . the Stuarts be always bankrupt . and after Napoleon we have year to which these last year have be nothing , but they didn t have it for breakfast every morning . 
  when ignorance be bliss ! 
  well , I dislike the mixture of hysteria and bluff we ve get now . 
  would you suppress the voice that breathe o er Eden ? 
  Wireless ?   the old order changeth , yield place to new . and God fulfil himself in many way ,    quote the General ,    lest one good custom should corrupt the world .   I remember a sermon of old Butler s at Harrow on that text    one of his good , too . I m not hidebound , Dinny , at least I hope not . only I think everything s talk out too much . it s talk out so much that it s not feel . 
  I believe in the Age , Dad . it s drop its superfluous clothe . look at those old picture in the Times lately . you smell dogma and flannel petticoat . 
  not flannel ,   say the General ,   in my day . 
  you should know , dear . 
  as a matter of fact , Dinny , I believe mine be the really revolutionary generation . you see that play about Browning ? there you have it ; but that be all go before I go to Sandhurst . we think as we like , and we act as we think , but we still didn t talk . now they talk before they think , and when it come to action , they act much as we do , if they act at all . in fact , the chief difference between now and fifty year ago be the freedom of expression ; it s so free now , that it take the salt out of thing . 
  that s profound , Dad . 
  but not new ; I ve read it a dozen time . 
   you don t think the war have any great influence , then , sir ?   they always ask that in interview . 
  the war ? it s influence be pretty well over by now . besides , the people of my generation be already too set . the next generation be wipe or knock out   
  not the female . 
  no , they run riot a bit , but they weren t really in the thing . as for your generation , the war s a word . 
  well , thank you , dear ,   say Dinny .   it s be very instructive , but it s go to hail . come along , Foch ! 
 the General turn up the collar of his coat and cross over to the carpenter who have cut his thumb . Dinny see he examine the bandage . she see the carpenter smile , and her father pat he on the shoulder . 
  his man must have like he ,   she think .   he may be an old buffer , but he s a nice one . 
 chapter 28 

 if art be long , Law be long . the word Corven v. Corven and Croom reward no eye scan the Cause List in the Times newspaper . undefended suit in vast number occupy the attention of Mr. Justice Covell . at Dornford s invitation Dinny and Clare come to the entrance of his court , and stand for five minute just inside , as member of a cricket team will go and inspect a pitch before play in a match . the judge sit so low that little but his face could be see ; but Dinny notice that above Clare s head in the witness - box would be a sort of canopy , or protection from rain . 
  if ,   say Dornford , as they come out ,   you stand well back , Clare , your face will be hardly visible . but your voice you should pitch so that it always carry to the judge . he get grumpy if he can t hear . 
 it be on the day after this that Dinny receive a note deliver by hand at South Square . 
  Burton s Club : 13.iv.32 . 
  DEAR DINNY 
  I should be very glad if I could see you for a few minute . name your own time and place and I will be there . needless to say it concern Clare . 
  sincerely your , 
  GERALD CORVEN . 
 Michael be out , but she consult Fleur . 
  I should certainly see he , Dinny . it may be a death - bed repentance . let he come here when you know Clare will be out . 
  I don t think I ll risk his see she . I d rather meet he somewhere in the open . 
  well , there s the Achilles , or the Rima . 
  the Rima ,   say Dinny .   we can walk away from it . 
 she appoint the follow afternoon at three o clock , and continue to wonder what he want . 
 the day be an oasis of warmth in that bleak April . arrive at the Rima , she see he at once , lean against the railing with his back to that work of art . he be smoke a cigarette through a short well - colour holder in meerschaum , and look so exactly as when she have see he last that , for no reason , she receive a sort of shock . 
 he do not offer to take her hand . 
  very good of you to come , Dinny . shall we stroll and talk as we go ? 
 they walk towards the Serpentine . 
  about this case ,   say Corven , suddenly ,   I don t want to bring it a bit , you know . 
 she steal a look at he . 
  why do you , then ? the charge be not true . 
  I m advise that they be . 
  the premise may be ; the conclusion , no . 
  if I withdraw the thing , will Clare come back to I , on her own term ? 
  I can ask she , but I don t think so . I shouldn t myself . 
  what an implacable family ! 
 Dinny do not answer . 
  be she in love with this young Croom ? 
  I can t discuss their feeling , if they have any . 
  can t we speak frankly , Dinny ? there s no one to hear we except those duck . 
  claim damage have not improve our feeling towards you . 
  oh ! that ! I m willing to withdraw everything , and risk she have kick over , if she ll come back . 
  in other word ,   say Dinny , gaze straight before she ,   the case you have frame    I believe that be the word    be a sort of blackmail device . 
 he look at she through narrow eye . 
  ingenious notion . it didn t occur to I . no , the fact be , know Clare well than my solicitor and the enquiry agent , I m not too convinced that the evidence mean what it seem to . 
  thank you . 
  yes , but I tell you before , or Clare anyway , that I can t and win t go on with nothing settle , one way or the other . if she ll come back I ll wipe the whole thing out . if she win t , it must take its chance . that s not wholly unreasonable , and it s not blackmail . 
  and suppose she win , will you be any far on ? 
  no . 
  you could free yourself and she at any time , if you like . 
  at a price I don t choose to pay . besides , that sound extremely like collusion    another awkward word , Dinny . 
 Dinny stand still . 
  well , I know what you want , and I ll ask Clare . and now I ll say good - bye . I don t see that talk far will do any good . 
 he stand look at she , and she be move by the expression on his face . pain and puzzlement be peer through its hardwood brown mask . 
  I m sorry thing be as they be ,   she say , impulsively . 
  one s nature be a hell of a thing , Dinny , and one s never free from it . well , good - bye and good luck ! 
 she put out her hand . he give it a squeeze , turn and walk off . 
 Dinny stand for some unhappy moment beside a little birch tree whose bud leaf seem to tremble up towards the sunshine . Queer ! to be sorry for he , for Clare , for young Croom , and be able to do nothing to help ! 
 she walk back to South Square as fast as she could . 
 Fleur meet she with :   well ? 
  I m afraid I can only talk to Clare about it . 
  I suppose it s an offer to drop it if Clare will go back . if she s wise she will . 
 Dinny close her lip resolutely . 
 she wait till bed - time , and then go to Clare s room . her sister have just get into bed , on the foot of which Dinny sit down , and begin at once : 
  Jerry ask I to see he . we meet in Hyde Park . he say he ll drop the case if you ll go back    on your own term . 
 Clare raise her knee and clasp they with her hand . 
  oh ! and what do you say ? 
  that I d ask you . 
  do you gather why ? 
  partly , I think he really want you ; partly , he doesn t much believe in the evidence . 
  ah !   say Clare , drily :   nor do I. but I m not go back . 
  I tell he I didn t think you would . he say we be   implacable .  
 Clare utter a little laugh . 
  no , Dinny . I ve be through all the horror of this case . I feel quite stony , don t care whether we lose or win . in fact , I believe I d rather we lose . 
 Dinny grasp one of her sister s foot through the bedclothe . she be in two mind whether to speak of the feeling Corven s face have rouse in she . 
 Clare say uncannily : 
  I m always amuse when people think they know how husband and wife ought to behave towards each other . Fleur be tell I about her father and his first wife ; she seem to think the woman make a great fuss for nothing much . all I can say be that to think you can judge anybody else s case be just self - righteous idiocy . there s never any evidence to judge from , and until cine - camera be instal in bedroom ,   she add ,   there never will be . you might let he know , Dinny , that there s nothing do . 
 Dinny get up . 
  I will . if only the thing be over ! 
  yes ,   say Clare , toss back her hair ,   if only   ! but whether we shall be any far on , when it be , I don t know . God bless the Courts of Law . 
 that bitter invocation go up daily from Dinny , too , during the next fortnight , while the undefended cause , of which her sister s might have be one , be softly and almost silently vanish away . her note to Corven say simply that her sister have answer :   no .   no reply come to it . 
 at Dornford s request she go with Clare to see his new house on Campden Hill . to know that he have take it with the view of have a home for she , if she would consent to share it , keep she expressionless , except to say that it be all very nice , and to recommend a bird shelter in the garden . it be roomy , seclude , airy , and the garden slop towards the south . distressed at be so colourless , she be glad to come away ; but the dash and baffled look on his face when she say :   good - bye   hurt she . in their bus , go home , Clare say : 
  the more I see of Dornford , Dinny , the more I believe you could put up with he . he s get very light hand ; he let your mouth alone . he really be a bit of an angel . 
  I m sure he be .   and through Dinny s mind , in the jaunting bus , pass and pass four line of verse : 
  the bank be steep and wide the river flow  
 be there fair pasture on the far shore ? 
 and shall the halting kine adventure those 
 or wander barren pasture evermore ? 
 but on her face be that withdraw expression which Clare know well than to try and penetrate . 
 wait for an event , even when it primarily concern other , be a process little desirable . for Dinny it have the advantage of take her thought off her own existence and concentrate they on her people s. the family name , for the first time in her experience , be confront with a really besmirching publicity , and she the chief recipient of her clan s reaction . she feel thankful that Hubert be not in England . he would have be so impatient and upset . in the publicity attendant on his own trouble , four year ago , there have be much more danger of disaster , but much less danger of disgrace . for however one might say that divorce be nothing in these day , a traditional stigma still clung to it in a country far from be as modern as it suppose itself to be . the Charwells of Condaford , at all event , have their pride and their prejudice , above all they loathe publicity . 
 when Dinny , for instance , go to lunch at St. Augustine s - inthe - Meads , she find a very peculiar atmosphere . it be as if her Uncle and Aunt have say to each other :   this thing have to be , we suppose , but we can t pretend either to understand or to approve of it .   with no bluff matter - of - fact condemnation , nor anything churchy or shock about their attitude , they convey to Dinny the thought that Clare might have be well occupy than in get into such a position . 
 walk away with Hilary to see a party of youth off to Canada from Euston Station , Dinny be ill at ease , for she have true affection and regard for her overwork unparsonical Uncle . of all the member of her duty - bind family , he most embody the principle of uncomplaine service , and however she might doubt whether the people he work for be not happy than he be himself , she instinctively believe that he live a real life in a world where not very much be   real .   alone with she he voice his feeling more precisely . 
  what I don t like , Dinny , about this business of Clare s be the way it will reduce she in the public eye to the level of the idle young woman who have nothing well to do than to get into matrimonial scrape . honestly , I d prefer she passionately in love and fling her cap over the windmill . 
  cheer up , Uncle ,   murmur Dinny ,   and give her time . that may yet come . 
 Hilary smile . 
  well ! well ! but you see what I mean . the public eye be a mean , cold , parroty thing ; it love to see the bad of everything . where there s real love I can accept most thing ; but I don t like mess about with sex . it s unpleasant . 
  I don t think you re be just to Clare ,   say Dinny with a sigh ;   she cut loose for real reason ; and you ought to know , Uncle , that attractive young woman can t remain entirely unfollowed . 
  well ,   say Hilary shrewdly ,   I perceive that you re sit on a tale you could unfold . here we be . if you know the bother I ve have to get these youth to consent to go , and the authority to consent to take they , you d realise why I wish I be a mushroom , spring up over - night and be eat fresh for breakfast . 
 Whereon , they enter the station , and proceed towards the Liverpool train . a little party of seven youth in cloth cap , half in and half out of a third - class carriage , be keep up their spirit in truly english fashion , by pass remark on each other s appearance and say at interval :   be we daown- earte ? Naoo ! 
 they greet Hilary with the word : 
   Ello , Padre ! . . . zero hour ! over the top ! . . .   Ave a fag , sir ? 
 Hilary take the   fag .   and Dinny , who stand a little apart , admire the way in which he become at once an integral part of the group . 
  wish you be comin   too , sir ! 
  Wish I be , Jack . 
  Leavin   old England for ever ! 
  good old England ! 
  Sir ? 
  yes , Tommy ? 
 she lose the next remark , slightly embarrassed by the obvious interest she be arouse . 
  Dinny ! 
 she move up to the carriage . 
  shake hand with these young man . my niece . 
 in the midst of a queer hush she shake the seven hand of the seven capless youth , and seven time say :   good luck ! 
 there be a rush to get into the carriage , a burst of noise from uncouth mouth , a ragged cheer , and the train move . she stand by Hilary s side , with a slight choke in her throat , wave her hand to the cap and face stretch through the window . 
  they ll all be seasick to - night ,   mutter Hilary ,   that s one comfort . nothing like it to prevent you from think of the future or the past . 
 she go into Adrian s after leave he , and be rather disconcert to find her Uncle Lionel there . they stop dead in their discussion . then the Judge say : 
  perhaps you can tell we , Dinny : be there any chance at all of mediating between those two before this unpleasant business come on ? 
  none , Uncle . 
  oh ! then see as I do rather much of the law , I should suggest Clare s not appear and let the thing go undefended . if there s no chance of their come together again , what be the use of prolong a state of stalemate ? 
  that s what I think , Uncle Lionel ; but , of course , you know the charge aren t true . 
 the Judge grimace . 
  I m speak as a man , Dinny . the publicity will be lamentable for Clare , win or lose ; whereas , if she and this young man didn t defend , there d be very little . Adrian say she would refuse any support from Corven , so that element doesn t come in . what be all the trouble about ? you know , of course . 
  very vaguely , and in confidence . 
  great pity !   say the Judge :   if they know as much as I do , people would never fight these thing . 
  there be that claim for damage . 
  yes , Adrian be tell I    pretty medieval , that . 
  be revenge medieval , Uncle Lionel ? 
  not altogether ,   say the Judge , with his wry smile ;   but I shouldn t have think a man in Corven s position could afford such luxury . to put his wife into the scale ! thoroughly unpleasant . 
 Adrian put his arm round Dinny s shoulder . 
  nobody feel that more than Dinny . 
  I suppose ,   murmur the Judge ,   Corven will at least have they settle on she . 
  Clare wouldn t take they . but , why shouldn t they win ? I think the law exist to administer justice , Uncle Lionel . 
  I don t like jury ,   say the Judge abruptly . 
 Dinny look at he with curiosity    surprisingly frank ! he add : 
  tell Clare to keep her voice up and her answer short . and don t let she try to be clever . any laughter in court should be raise by the judge . 
 so say , he again smile wryly , shake her hand , and take himself away . 
  be Uncle Lionel a good judge ? 
  impartial and polite , they say . I ve never see he in court , but from what I know of he as a brother , he d be conscientious and thorough ; a bit sarcastic at time . he s quite right about this case , Dinny . 
  I ve feel that all along . it s Father , and that claim for damage . 
  I expect they regret that claim now . his lawyer must be bungler . angle for position ! 
  Isn t that what lawyer be for ? 
 Adrian laugh . 
  here s tea ! let s drown our sorrow , and go and see a film . there s a german thing they say be really magnanimous . real magnanimity on the screen , Dinny , think of it ! 
 chapter 29 

 over be the shuffling of seat and paper , which mark the succession of one human drama by another , and   very young   Roger say : 
  we ll go into the well of the court . 
 there , with her sister and her father , Dinny sit down , bastione from Jerry Corven by   very young   Roger and his rival in the law . 
  be this ,   she whisper ,   the well at the bottom of which truth lie , or lie ? 
 unable to see the rise   body   of the court behind she , she know by instinct and the sense of hear that it be fill up . the public s unerre sense of value have scent out a fight , if not a title . the Judge , too , seem to have smell something , for he be shroud in a large bandana handkerchief . Dinny gaze upward . impressively high , and vaguely Gothic , the court seem . above where the Judge sit red curtain be draw across , surprisingly beyond the reach of man . her eye fall to the jury file into their two - rank   box .   the foreman fascinate she at once by his egg - shape face and head , little hair of any sort , red cheek , light eye , and an expression so subtly blend between that of a codfish and a sheep that it remind she of neither . his face recall rather one of the two gentleman of South Molton Street , and she feel almost sure that he be a jeweller . three woman sit at the end of the front row , no one of whom , surely , could ever have spend a night in a car . the first be stout and have the pleasant flattish face of a superior housekeeper . the second , thin , dark , and rather gaunt , be perhaps a writer . the third s bird - like look be disguise in an obvious cold . the other eight male member of the jury tired her eye , so diverse and difficult to place . a voice say : 
  Corven versus Corven and Croom    husband s petition ,   and she give Clare s arm a convulsive squeeze . 
  if your Lordship please   
 out of the tail of her eye she could see a handsome , small - whisker visage , winy under it s wig . 
 the Judge s face , fold and far away , as of a priest or of a tortoise , be poke forward suddenly . his gaze , know and impersonal , seem take she in , and she feel curiously small . he draw his head back , as suddenly . 
 the slow rich voice behind she begin retail the name and position of the   party ,   the place of their marriage and cohabitation ; it pause a moment and then go on : 
  in the middle of September of last year , while the petitioner be up - country in discharge of official duty , the respondent , without a word of warning , leave her home and sail for England . on board the ship be the co - respondent . it be say by the defence , I believe , that these two have not meet before . I shall suggest that they have meet , or at all event have have every opportunity of so meeting . 
 Dinny see her sister s little disdainful shrug .   however that may be ,   proceed the slow voice ,   there be no question that they be always together on the ship , and I shall show that towards the end of the voyage the co - respondent be see come out of the respondent s stateroom .   on and on the voice drool till it reach the word :   I will not dwell , member of the jury , on the detail of the watch keep on the respondent s and co - respondent s movement ; you will have these from the mouth of expert and reputable witness . Sir Gerald Corven . 
 when Dinny raise her eye he be already in the box , his face carve out of an even hard wood than she have think . she be conscious of the resentment on her father s face , of the Judge take up his pen , of Clare clench her hand on her lap ; of   very young   Roger s narrow eye ; of the foreman s slightly open mouth , and the third jurywoman s smothered sneeze ; conscious of the brownness in this place    it ooze brownness as if design to dinge all that be rose , blue , silver , gold , or even green in human life . 
 the slow voice begin its questioning , cease its questioning ; the personable owner of it close , as it be , black wing ; and a different voice behind she say : 
  you think it your duty , sir , to institute these proceeding ? 
  yes . 
  no animus ? 
  none . 
  this claim for damage    not very usual , be it , nowadays among man of honour ? 
  they will be settle on my wife . 
  have your wife indicate in any way that she wish you to support she ? 
  no . 
  would it surprise you to hear that she would not take a penny from you , whether it come from the co - respondent or not ? 
 Dinny see the cat - like smile beneath the cut moustache . 
  nothing would surprise I . 
  it do not even surprise you that she leave you ? 
 she look round at the questioner . so this be Instone , whom Dornford have say be   very handicapped ! he seem to she to have one of those face , with dominant nose , that nothing could handicap . 
  yes , that do surprise I . 
  now , why ? . . . perhaps you would translate that movement into word , sir ? 
  do wife generally leave their husband without reason give ? 
  not unless the reason be too obvious to require statement . be that the case ? 
  no . 
  what should you say , then , be the reason ? you be the person well able to form an opinion . 
  I don t think so . 
  who then ? 
  my wife herself . 
  still you must have some suspicion . would you mind say what it be ? 
  I should . 
  now , sir , you be on your oath . do you or do you not ill - treat your wife in anyway ? 
  I admit one incident which I regret and for which I have apologise . 
  what be that incident ? 
 Dinny , sit taut between her father and her sister , feel in her whole be the vibration of their pride and her own , hear the slow rich voice strike in behind she . 
  my Lord , I submit that my friend be not entitle to ask that question . 
  my Lord   
  I must stop you , Mr. Instone . 
  I bow to your Lordship s ruling . . . . be you a hot - temper man , sir ? 
  no . 
  there would be a certain deliberation about your action , at all time ? 
  I hope so . 
  even when those action be not    shall we say    benevolent ? 
  yes . 
  I see ; and I be sure the jury also do . now , sir , let I take you to another point . you suggest that your wife and Mr. Croom have meet in Ceylon ? 
  I have no idea whether they have or not . 
  have you any personal knowledge that they do ? 
  no . 
  we have be tell by my friend that he will bring evidence to show that they have meet   
 the slow rich voice interpose : 
  that they have have opportunity of meeting . 
  we will take it at that . be you aware , sir , that they have enjoy such opportunity ? 
  I be not . 
  have you ever see or hear of Mr. Croom in Ceylon ? 
  no . 
  when do you first know of the existence of this gentleman ? 
  I see he in London in November last , come out of a house where my wife be stay , and I ask she his name . 
  do she make any concealment of it ? 
  none . 
  be that the only time you have see this gentleman ? 
  yes . 
  what make you pitch on he as a possible mean of secure a divorce from your wife ? 
  I object to that way of put it . 
  very well . what draw your attention to this gentleman as a possible co - respondent ? 
  what I hear on the ship by which I return from Port Said to Ceylon in November . it be the same ship as that in which my wife and the co - respondent come to England . 
  and what do you hear ? 
  that they be always together . 
  not unusual on board ship , be it ? 
  in reason    no . 
  even in your own experience ? 
  perhaps not . 
  what else , if anything , do you hear to make you so suspicious ? 
  a stewardess tell I that she have see he come out of my wife s stateroom . 
  at what time of day or night be that ? 
  shortly before dinner . 
  you have travel by sea a good deal , I suppose , in the course of your professional duty ? 
  a great deal . 
  and have you notice that people frequently go to each other s stateroom ? 
  yes , quite a lot . 
  do it always arouse your suspicion ? 
  no . 
  may I go far and suggest that it never do before ? 
  you may not . 
  be you naturally a suspicious man ? 
  I don t think so . 
  not what would be call jealous ? 
  I should say not . 
  your wife be a good deal young than yourself ? 
  seventeen year . 
  still , you be not so old as to be unable to appreciate the fact that young man and woman in these day treat each other with very little ceremony and consciousness of sex ? 
  if you want my age , I be forty - one . 
  practically post - war . 
  I be through the war . 
  then you know that much which before the war might have be regard as suspicious have long lose that character ? 
  I know that thing be all very free and easy . 
  thank you . have you ever , before she leave you , have occasion to be suspicious of your wife ? 
 Dinny look up . 
  never . 
  but this little incident of his come out of her cabin be enough to cause you to have she watch ? 
  that , and the fact that they be always together on the ship , and my have see he come out of the house in London . 
  when you be in London you tell she that she must come back to you or take the consequence ? 
  I don t think I use those word . 
  what word do you use ? 
  I think I say she have the misfortune to be my wife , and that she couldn t be a perpetual grass widow . 
  not a very elegant expression , be it ? 
  perhaps not . 
  you be , in fact , eager to seize on anybody or anything to free yourself ? 
  no , I be eager for she to come back . 
  in spite of your suspicion ? 
  I have no suspicion in London . 
  I suggest that you have ill - treat she , and wish to be free of an association that hurt your pride . 
 the slow rich voice say : 
  my Lord , I object . 
  my Lord , the petitioner have admit   
  yes , but most husband , Mr. Instone , have do something for which they have be glad to apologise . 
  as your Lordship please . . . . in any case , you give instruction to have your wife watch . when exactly do you do that ? 
  when I get back to Ceylon . 
  immediately ? 
  almost . 
  that do not show great eagerness to have she back , do it ? 
  my view be entirely change by what I be tell on the ship . 
  on the ship . not very nice , be it , listen to gossip about your wife ? 
  no , but she have refuse to come back , and I have to make up my mind . 
  within two month of she leave your house ? 
  More than two month . 
  well , not three . I suggest , you know , that you practically force she to leave you ; and then take the early opportunity open to you to ensure that she shouldn t come back ? 
  no . 
  so you say . very well ! these enquiry agent you employ    have you see they before you leave England to return to Ceylon ? 
  no . 
  will you swear that ? 
  yes . 
  how do you come to hit upon they ? 
  I leave it to my solicitor . 
  oh ! then you have see your solicitor before you leave ? 
  yes . 
  in spite of your have no suspicion ? 
  a man go so far away naturally see his solicitor before he start . 
  you see they in relation to your wife ? 
  and other matter . 
  what do you say to they about your wife ? 
 again Dinny look up . in she be grow the distaste of one see even an opponent badger . 
  I think I simply say that she be stay behind with her people . 
  only that ? 
  I probably say that thing be difficult . 
  only that ? 
  I remember say :   I don t quite know what s go to happen .  
  will you swear you do not say :   I may be want you to have she watch ? 
  I will . 
  will you swear that you say nothing which convey to they the idea that you have a divorce in your mind ? 
  I can t tell you what be convey to they by what I say . 
  Don t quibble , sir . be the word divorce mention ? 
  I don t remember it . 
  you don t remember it ? do you or do you not leave they with the impression that you might be want to take proceeding ? 
  I don t know . I tell they that thing be difficult . 
  so you have say before . that be not an answer to my question . 
 Dinny see the Judge s head poke forward . 
  the petitioner have say , Mr. Instone , that he do not know the impression leave on his lawyer   mind . what be you drive at ? 
  my Lord , the essence of my case    and I be glad to have this opportunity of state it succinctly    be that from the moment the petitioner have act in such a way    whatever it be    as cause his wife to leave he , he be determined to divorce she , and ready to snatch at anything that come along to secure that divorce . 
  well , you can call his solicitor . 
  my Lord ! 
 those simple word be like a shrug of the shoulder put into sound . 
  well , go on ! 
 with a sigh of relief Dinny catch the sound of finality in the voice of the   handicapped   Instone . 
  you wish to suggest to the jury that although you institute these proceeding on the first and only gossip you hear , and although you add a claim for damage against a man you have never speak to    that in spite of all this you be a forbearing and judicious husband , whose only desire be that his wife should come back to he ? 
 her eye go for the last time to the face up there , more hide by its mask than ever . 
  I wish to suggest nothing to the jury . 
  very well ! 
 there be a rustling of silk behind she . 
  my Lord ,   the slow , rich voice intone ,   since my friend have make so much of the point , I will call the petitioner s solicitor . 
  very young   Roger , lean across , say : 
  Dornford want you all to lunch with he . . . 
 Dinny could eat practically nothing , afflict by a sort of nausea . though more alarmed and distraught during Hubert s case , and at the inquest on ferse , she have not feel like this . it be her first experience of the virulence inherent in the conduct of action between private individual . the continual suggestion that the opponent be mean , malicious and untruthful , which underlay every cross - examining question , have affect her nerve . 
 on their way back to the court , Dornford say : 
  I know what you re feel . but remember , it s a sort of game ; both side play accord to the same rule , and the Judge be there to discount exaggeration . when I try to see how it could be work otherwise , I can t. 
  it make one feel nothing s ever quite clean . 
  I wonder if anything ever be . 
  the Cheshire cat s grin do fade at last ,   she murmur . 
  it never do in the Law Courts , Dinny . they should have it grave over the door . 
 whether owe to that short conversation , or because she be get use to it , she do not feel so sick during the afternoon session , devote to examination and cross - examination of the stewardess and enquiry agent . at four o clock the petitioner s case be closed , and   very young   Roger cock his eye at she , as who should say :   the Court will now rise , and I shall be able to take snuff . 
 chapter 30 

 in the taxi , on the way back to South Square , Clare be silent , till , opposite Big Ben , she say suddenly : 
  imagine his peering in at we in the car when we be asleep ! or do he just invent that , Dinny ? 
  if he d invent it , he would surely have make it more convincing still . 
  of course , my head be on Tony s shoulder . and why not ? you try sleep in a two - seater . 
  I wonder the man s torch didn t wake you . 
  I daresay it do ; I wake a lot of time with cramp . no ; the stupid thing I do , Dinny , be ask Tony in for a drink that night after we go to the film and din . we be extraordinarily green not to realise we be be shadow . be there a frightful lot of people in Court ? 
  yes , and there ll be more tomorrow . 
  do you see Tony ? 
  just a glimpse . 
  I wish I d take your advice and let it go . if only I be really in love with he ! 
 Dinny do not answer . 
 Aunt Em be in Fleur s   parlour .   she come towards Clare , open her mouth , seem to remember that she shouldn t , scrutinise her niece , and say suddenly : 
  not so good ! I do dislike that expression ; who teach it I ? tell I about the Judge , Dinny ; be his nose long ? 
  no ; but he sit very low and shoot his neck out . 
  why ? 
  I didn t ask he , dear . 
 Lady Mont turn to Fleur . 
  can Clare have her dinner in bed ? go and have a long bath , my dear , and don t get up till tomorrow . then you ll be fresh for that Judge . Fleur , you go with she , I want to talk to Dinny .   when they have go , she move across to where the wood fire burn . 
  Dinny , comfort I . why do we have these thing in our family ? so unlike    except your great - grandfather ; and he be old than Queen Victoria when he be bear . 
  you mean he be naturally rakish ? 
  yes , gamblin , and enjoyin   himself and other . his wife be long - sufferin . scottish . so odd ! 
  that , I suppose ,   murmur Dinny ,   be why we ve all be so good ever since . 
  what be why ? 
  the combination . 
  it s more the money ,   say Lady Mont ;   he spend it all . 
  be there much ? 
  yes . the price of corn . 
  Ill - get . 
  his father couldn t help Napoleon . there be six thousand acre then , and your great - grandfather only leave eleven hundred . 
  mostly wood . 
  that be the woodcock shootin . will the case be in the evenin   paper ? 
  certain to be . Jerry s a public man . 
  not her dress , I hope . do you like the jury ? 
 Dinny shrug .   I can t ever tell what people be really think . 
  like dog   nose , when they feel hot and aren t. what about that young man ? 
  he s the one I m truly sorry for . 
  yes ,   say Lady Mont.   every man commit adultery in his heart , but not in car . 
  it s not truth but appearance that matter , Aunt Em . 
  Circumstantial , Lawrence say    provin   they do when they didn t. more reliable that way , he think ; otherwise , he say , when they didn t you could prove they do . be that right , Dinny ? 
  no , dear . 
  well , I must go home to your mother . she doesn t eat a thing    sit and read and look pale . and Con win t go near his Club . Fleur want we and they to go to Monte Carlo in her car when it s over . she say we shall be in our element , and that Riggs can drive on the right - hand side of the road when he remember . 
 Dinny shake her head . 
  nothing like one s own hole , Auntie . 
  I don t like creepin ,   say Lady Mont.   kiss I . and get married soon . 
 when she have sway out of the room , Dinny stand look out into the Square . 
 how incorrigible be that prepossession ! Aunt Em and Uncle Adrian , her father and her mother , Fleur , yes and even clare herself    all anxious that she should marry Dornford and be do with it ! 
 and what good would it do any of they ? whence come this instinct for press people into each other s arm ? if she have any use in the world , would that increase it ?   for the procreation of child ,   go the word of the old order . the world have to be carry on ! why have the world to be carry on ? everybody use the word   hell   in connection with it nowadays . nothing to look forward to but brave new world ! 
  or the catholic church ,   she think ,   and I don t believe in either . 
 she open the window , and lean against its frame . a fly buzz at she ; she blow it away , and it instantly come back . fly ! they fulfil a purpose . what purpose ? while they be alive they be alive ; when they be dead they be dead .   but not half - alive ,   she think . she blow again , and this time the fly do not come back . 
 Fleur s voice behind she say : 
  isn t it cold enough for you in here , my dear ? do you ever know such a year ? I say that every May . come and have tea . Clare s in her bath , and very nice she look , with a cup of tea in one hand and a cigarette in the other . I suppose they ll get to the end tomorrow ? 
  your cousin say so . 
  he s come to dinner . luckily his wife s at Droitwich . 
  why   luckily ? 
  oh ! well , she s a wife . if there s anything he want to say to Clare , I shall send he up to she ; she ll be out of her bath by then . but he can say it to you just as well . how do you think Clare will do in the box ? 
  can anyone do well in the box ? 
  my father say I do , but he be partial ; and the Coroner compliment you , didn t he , at the Ferse inquest ? 
  there be no cross - examination . Clare s not patient , Fleur . 
  tell she to count five before she answer , and lift her eyebrow . the thing be to get Brough rattle . 
  his voice would madden I ,   say Dinny ,   and he have a way of pausing as if he have all day before he . 
  yes , quite a common trick . the whole thing s extraordinarily like the inquisition . what do you think of Clare s counsel ? 
  I should hate he if I be on the other side . 
  then he s good . well , Dinny , what s the moral of all this ? 
  Don t marry . 
  bit sweeping , till we can grow baby in bottle . Hasn t it ever strike you that civilisation s build on the maternal instinct ? 
  I think it be build on agriculture . 
  by   civilisation   I mean everything that isn t just force . 
 Dinny look at her cynical and often flippant cousin , who stand so poised and trim and well - manicure before she , and she feel ashamed . Fleur say , unexpectedly : 
  you re rather a darling . 
 Dinner , Clare have it in bed and the only guest be   very young   Roger , be decidedly vocal . start with an account of how his family feel about taxation ,   very young   Roger wax amusing . his Uncle Thomas Forsyte , it appear , have go to live in Jersey , and return indignantly when Jersey begin to talk about taxation of its own . he have then write to the Times under the nom de guerre of   Individualist ,   sell all his investment , and reinveste they in tax - free security , which bring he in slightly less revenue than he have be receive nett from his tax security . he have vote for the Nationalists at the last election , and , since this new budget , be look out for a party that he could conscientiously vote for at the next election . he be live at Bournemouth . 
  extremely well - preserve ,   conclude   very young   Roger .   do you know anything about bee , Fleur ? 
  I once sit on one . 
  do you , Miss Cherrell ? 
  we keep they . 
  if you be I , would you go in for they ? 
  where do you live ? 
  a little beyond Hatfield . there be some quite nice clover crop round . bee appeal to I in theory . they feed on other people s flower and clover ; and if you find a swarm you can stick to it . what be the drawback ? 
  well , if they swarm on other people s ground , ten to one you lose they ; and you have to feed they all the winter . otherwise it s only a question of the time , trouble , and sting . 
  I don t know that I should mind that ,   murmur   very young   Roger ;   my wife would take they on .   he cock his eye slightly :   she have rheumatism . apic acid , they say , be the good cure . 
  well make sure first ,   murmur Dinny ,   that they ll ste she . you can t get bee to ste people they like . 
  you can always sit on they ,   murmur Fleur . 
  seriously ,   say   very young   Roger ,   half - a - dozen sting would be well worth it , poor thing . 
  what make you take up law , Forsyte ?   strike in Michael . 
  well , I get a   blighty   one in the war , and have to get something sedentary . I rather like it , you know , in a way , and in a way I think it s   
  quite !   say Michael :   Hadn t you an Uncle George ? 
  Old George ! rather ! always give I ten bob at school , and tip I the name of a horse to put it on . 
  do it ever win ? 
  no . 
  well , tell we , frankly : what s go to win tomorrow ? 
  frankly ,   say the solicitor , look at Dinny ,   it depend on your sister , Miss Cherrell . Corven s witness have do well . they didn t claim too much , and they weren t shake ; but if Lady Corven keep her head and her temper , we may pull through . if her veracity be whittle away at any point , then   !   he shrug , and look    Dinny think    old .   there be one or two bird on the jury I don t like the look of . the foreman s one . the average man , you know , be dead against wife leave without notice . I d feel much happy if your sister would open up on her married life . it s not too late . 
 Dinny shake her head . 
  well , then , it s very much a case of the personal appeal . but there s a prejudice against mouse play when the cat s away . 
 Dinny go to bed with the sick feeling of one who know she have again to watch some form of torture . 
 chapter 31 

 Day by day the Courts of Law be stony and unchanged . the same gesture be make , the same seat take ; the same effluvium prevail , not too strong , but just strong enough . 
 Clare be in black on this second day , with a slim green feather in a close - fitting black hat . Pale , her lip barely touch with salve , she sit so still that one could not speak to she . the word   Society Divorce Suit ,   and the   perfect   headline ,   night in a car ,   have produce their effect ; there be hardly stand room . Dinny notice young Croom seat just behind his counsel . she notice , too , that the birdlike jurywoman s cold be well , and the foreman s parroty eye fix on Clare . the Judge seem to be sit low than ever . he raise himself slightly at the sound of Instone s voice . 
  if it please your Lordship , and member of the jury    the answer to the allegation of misconduct between the respondent and co - respondent will be a simple and complete denial . I call the respondent . 
 with a sensation of see her sister for the first time , Dinny look up . Clare , as Dornford have recommend , stand rather far back in the box , and the shade from the canopy give she a withdrawn and mysterious air . her voice , however , be clear , and perhaps only Dinny could have tell that it be more clip than usual . 
  be it true , Lady Corven , that you have be unfaithful to your husband ? 
  it be not . 
  you swear that ? 
  I do . 
  there have be no love passage between you and Mr. Croom ? 
  none . 
  you swear that ? 
  I do . 
  now it be say   
 to question on question on question Dinny sit listen , her eye not move from her sister , marvel at the even distinctness of her speech and the motionless calm of her face and figure . Instone s voice today be so different that she hardly recognise it . 
  now , Lady Corven , I have one more question to ask , and , before you answer it , I beg you to consider that very much depend on that answer . why do you leave your husband ? 
 Dinny see her sister s head tilt slightly backwards . 
  I leave because I do not feel I could remain and keep my self - respect . 
  quite ! but can you not tell we why that be ? you have do nothing that you be ashamed of ? 
  no . 
  your husband have admit that he have , and that he have apologise ? 
  yes . 
  what have he do ? 
  forgive I . it s instinct with I not to talk about my married life . 
 Dinny catch her father s whisper :   by Gad ! she s right !   she see the Judge s neck poke forward , his face turn towards the box , his lip open . 
  I understand you to say you feel you could not remain with your husband and keep your self - respect ? 
  yes , my Lord . 
  do you feel you could leave he like that and keep your self - respect ? 
  yes , my Lord . 
 Dinny see the Judge s body raise itself slightly , and his face move from side to side , as if carefully avoid any recipient of his word :   well , there it be , Mr. Instone . I don t think you can usefully pursue the point . the respondent have evidently make up her mind on it .   his eye under droop lid continue to survey what be unseen . 
  if your Lordship please . once more , Lady Corven , there be no truth in these allegation of misconduct with Mr. Croom ? 
  no truth whatever . 
  thank you . 
 Dinny draw a long breath and brace herself against the pause and the slow rich voice to the right behind she . 
  you , a married woman , would not call invite a young man to your cabin , entertain he alone in your room at half - past eleven at night , spend a night with he in a car , and go about with he continually in the absence of your husband , misconduct ? 
  not in itself . 
  very well . you have say that until you see he on the ship you have never see the co - respondent . could you explain how it be that from , I think , the second day at sea you be so thick with he ? 
  I be not thick with he at first . 
  oh , come ! always together , weren t you ? 
  often , not always . 
  often , not always    from the second day ? 
  yes , a ship be a ship . 
  quite true , Lady Corven . and you have never see he before ? 
  not to my knowledge . 
  Ceylon be not a large place , be it , from a society point of view ? 
  it be not . 
  lot of polo match , cricket match , other function where you be constantly meet the same people . 
  yes . 
  and yet you never meet Mr. Croom ? Odd , wasn t it ? 
  not at all . Mr. Croom be on a plantation . 
  but he play polo , I think ? 
  yes . 
  and you be a horsewoman , very interested in all that sort of thing ? 
  yes . 
  and yet you never meet Mr. Croom ? 
  I have say I never do . if you ask I till tomorrow I shall say the same . 
 Dinny draw in her breath . before she spring up a mental snapshot of Clare as a little girl be question about Oliver Cromwell . 
 the slow rich voice go on : 
  you never miss a polo match at Kandy , do you ? 
  never , if I could help it . 
  and on one occasion you entertain the player ? 
 Dinny could see a frown on her sister s brow . 
  yes . 
  when be that ? 
  I believe it be last June . 
  Mr. Croom be one of the player , wasn t he ? 
  if he be , I didn t see he . 
  you entertain he but you do not see he ? 
  I do not . 
  be that usual with hostess in Kandy ? 
  there be quite a lot of people , if I remember . 
  come now , Lady Corven , here be the programme of the match    just take a look at it to refresh your memory . 
  I remember the match perfectly . 
  but you don t remember Mr. Croom , either on the ground , or afterwards at your house ? 
  I don t. I be interested in the play of the Kandy team , and afterwards there be too many people . if I remember he I should say so at once . 
 it seem to Dinny an immense time before the next question come . 
  I be suggest , you know , that you do not meet as stranger on the boat ? 
  you may suggest what you like , but we do . 
  so you say . 
 catch her father s muttered :   Damn the fellow !   Dinny touch his arm with her own . 
  you hear the stewardess give her evidence ? be that the only time the co - respondent come to your state - room ? 
  the only time he come for more than a minute . 
  oh ! he do come at other time ? 
  once or twice to borrow or return a book . 
  on the occasion when he come and spend    what be it ?    half an hour there   
  twenty minute , I should say . 
  twenty minute    what be you do ? 
  show he photograph . 
  oh ! why not on deck ? 
  I don t know . 
  Didn t it occur to you that it be indiscreet ? 
  I didn t think about it . there be a lot of photo    snapshot and photo of my family . 
  but nothing that you couldn t have show he perfectly in the saloon or on deck ? 
  I suppose not . 
  I take it you imagine he wouldn t be see ? 
  I tell you I didn t think about it . 
  who propose that he should come ? 
  I do . 
  you know you be in a very dubious position ? 
  yes , but other people didn t. 
  you could have show he those photograph anywhere ? look back on it , don t you think it be singular of you to do such a compromise thing for no reason at all ? 
  it be less trouble to show they to he in the cabin ; besides , they be private photo . 
  now , Lady Corven , do you mean to say that nothing whatever take place between you during those twenty minute ? 
  he kiss my hand before he go out . 
  that be something , but not quite an answer to my question . 
  nothing else that could give you satisfaction . 
  how be you dress ? 
  I regret to have to inform you that I be fully dress . 
  my Lord , may I ask to be protect from these sarcasm ? 
 Dinny admire the stilly way in which the Judge say : 
  answer the question simply , please . 
  yes , my Lord . 
 Clare have move out from under the shadow of the canopy and be stand with her hand on the rail of the box ; spot of red have come into her cheek . 
  I suggest that you be lover before you leave the ship ? 
  we be not , and we never have be . 
  when do you first see the co - respondent again after you leave he on the dock ? 
  I think about a week later . 
  where ? 
  down near my people s at Condaford . 
  what be you do ? 
  I be in a car . 
  alone ? 
  yes , I have be canvass and be go home to tea . 
  and the co - respondent ? 
  he be in a car , too . 
  spring up in it , I suppose , quite naturally ? 
  my Lord , I ask to be protect from these sarcasm . 
 Dinny hear a tittering , and hear the Judge s voice address nobody : 
  what be sauce for the goose be sauce for the gander , Mr. Brough . 
 the tittering deepen . Dinny could not resist steal a glance . the handsome face be inimitably wine - colour . beside she ,   very young   Roger wear an expression of enjoyment tincture by anxiety . 
  how come the co - respondent to be on this country road fifty mile from London ? 
  he have come to see I . 
  you admit that ? 
  he say so . 
  perhaps you could tell we the exact word he use . 
  I could not , but I remember that he ask if he might kiss I . 
  and you let he ? 
  yes . I put my cheek out of the car , and he kiss it , and go back to his car and drive away . 
  and yet you say you be not lover before you leave the ship ? 
  not in your sense . I do not say that he be not in love with I . he be ; at least he tell I so . 
  do you suggest that you be not in love with he ? 
  I m afraid I do . 
  but you let he kiss you ? 
  I be sorry for he . 
  you think that be proper conduct for a married woman ? 
  perhaps not . but after I leave my husband I do not regard myself as a married woman . 
  oh ! 
 Dinny have a feeling as if the whole Court have say that word .   very young   Roger s hand emerge from his side pocket ; he look at what it contain intently , and put it back . a rueful frown have come on the pleasant broad face of the jurywoman who resemble a housekeeper . 
  and what do you do after you have be kiss ? 
  go home to tea . 
  feel none the bad ? 
  no ; well if anything . 
 again the titter rise . the Judge s face go round towards the box . 
  be you speak seriously ? 
  yes , my Lord . I wish to be absolutely truthful . even when they be not in love , woman be grateful for be love . 
 the Judge s face come round again to gaze at the unseen above Dinny s head . 
  go on , Mr. Brough . 
  when be the next occasion on which you see the co - respondent ? 
  at my aunt s house in London where I be stay . 
  do he come to see your aunt ? 
  no , to see my uncle . 
  do he kiss you on that occasion ? 
  no . I tell he that if we be to meet , it must be platonically . 
  a very convenient word . 
  what other should I have use ? 
  you be not stand there to ask I question , madam . what do he say to that ? 
  that he would do anything I wish . 
  do he see your uncle ? 
  no . 
  be that the occasion on which your husband say he see he leave the house ? 
  I imagine so . 
  your husband come directly he have go ? 
  yes . 
  he see you , and ask who that young man be ? 
  yes . 
  do you tell he ? 
  yes . 
  I think you call the co - respondent Tony ? 
  yes . 
  be that his name ? 
  no . 
  it be your pet name for he ? 
  not at all . everybody call he that . 
  and he call you Clare , or darling , I suppose ? 
  one or the other . 
 Dinny see the Judge s eye lift to the unseen . 
  young people nowadays call each other darling on very little provocation , Mr. Brough . 
  I be aware of that , my Lord . . . . do you call HIM darling ? 
  I may have , but I don t think so . 
  you see your husband alone on that occasion ? 
  yes . 
  how do you receive he ? 
  coldly . 
  have just part from the co - respondent ? 
  that have nothing to do with it . 
  do your husband ask you to go back to he ? 
  yes . 
  and you refuse ? 
  yes . 
  and that have nothing to do with the co - respondent ? 
  no . 
  do you seriously tell the jury , Lady Corven , that your relation with the co - respondent , or if you like it well , your feeling for the co - respondent , play no part in your refusal to go back to your husband ? 
  none . 
  I ll put it at your own valuation : you have spend three week in the close company of this young man . you have allow he to kiss you , and feel well for it . you have just part from he . you know of his feeling for you . and you tell the jury that he count for nothing in the equation ? 
 Clare bow her head . 
  Answer , please . 
  I don t think he do . 
  not very human , be it ? 
  I don t know what you mean by that . 
  I mean , Lady Corven , that it s go to be a little difficult for the jury to believe you . 
  I can t help what they believe , I can only speak the truth . 
  very well ! when do you next see the co - respondent ? 
  on the following evening , and the evening after that he come to the unfurnished room I be go into and help I to distemper the wall . 
  oh ! a little unusual , wasn t it ? 
  perhaps . I have no money to spare , and he have do his own bungalow in Ceylon . 
  I see . just a friendly office on his part . and during the hour he spend with you there no passage take place between you ? 
  no passage have ever take place between we . 
  at what time do he leave ? 
  we leave together both evening about nine o clock and go and have some food . 
  and after that ? 
  I go back to my aunt s house . 
  nowhere in between ? 
  nowhere . 
  very well ! you see your husband again before he be compel to go back to Ceylon ? 
  yes , twice . 
  where be the first time ? 
  at my room . I have get into they by then . 
  do you tell he that the co - respondent have help you distemper the wall ? 
  no . 
  why not ? 
  why should I ? I tell my husband nothing , except that I wasn t go back to he . I regard my life with he as finish . 
  do he on that occasion again ask you to go back to he ? 
  yes . 
  and you refuse ? 
  yes . 
  with contumely ? 
  I beg your pardon . 
  insultingly ? 
  no . simply . 
  have your husband give you any reason to suppose that he wish to divorce you ? 
  no . but I don t know what be in his mind . 
  and , apparently , you give he no chance to know what be in your ? 
  as little as possible . 
  a stormy meeting ? 
 Dinny hold her breath . the flush have die out of Clare s cheek ; her face look pale and peak . 
  no ; disturbed and unhappy . I do not want to see he . 
  you hear your counsel say that from the time of your leave he in Ceylon , your husband in his wounded pride have conceive the idea of divorce you the moment he get the chance ? be that your impression ? 
  I have and have no impression . it be possible . I don t pretend to know the working of his mind . 
  though you live with he for nearly eighteen month ? 
  yes . 
  but , anyway , you again refuse definitely to go back to he ? 
  I have say so . 
  do you believe he mean it when he ask you to go back ? 
  at the moment , yes . 
  do you see he again before he go ? 
  yes , for a minute or two , but not alone . 
  who be present ? 
  my father . 
  do he ask you again to go back to he on that occasion ? 
  yes . 
  and you refuse ? 
  yes . 
  and after that you have a message from your husband before he leave London , ask you once more to change your mind and accompany he ? 
  yes . 
  and you do not ? 
  no . 
  now let I take you to the date of January the    er    third    Dinny breathe again    that be the day which you spend , from five in the afternoon till nearly midnight , with the co - respondent . you admit do that ? 
  yes . 
  no passage between you ? 
  only one . he hadn t see I for nearly three week , and he kiss my cheek when he first come in to have tea . 
  oh ! the cheek again ? only the cheek ? 
  yes . I be sorry . 
  so I be sure be he . 
  possibly . 
  you first spend half an hour alone , after this separation , have    tea ? 
  yes . 
  your room , I think , be in an old mew    a room below , a staircase , a room above    where you sleep ? 
  yes . 
  and a bathroom ? besides the tea I suppose you have a chat ? 
  yes . 
  where ? 
  in the ground - floor room . 
  and then do you walk together , chat , to the Temple , and afterwards to a film and to dinner at a restaurant , during which you chat , I suppose , and then take a cab back to your room , chat ? 
  quite correct . 
  and then you think that have be with he nearly six hour , you have still a good deal to say and it be necessary that he should come in , and he come ? 
  yes . 
  that would be past eleven , wouldn t it ? 
  just past , I think . 
  how long do he stay on that occasion ? 
  about half an hour . 
  no passage ? 
  none . 
  just a drink and a cigarette or two , and a little more chat ? 
  precisely . 
  what have you to talk about for so many hour with this young man who be privileged to kiss your cheek ? 
  what have anyone to talk about at any time ? 
  I be ask you that question . 
  we talk about everything and nothing . 
  a little more explicit , please . 
  horse , film , my people , his people , theatre    I really don t remember . 
  carefully bar the subject of love ? 
  yes . 
  strictly platonic from begin to end ? 
  I should say so . 
  come , Lady Corven , do you mean to tell we that this young man , who on your own admission be in love with you , and who hadn t see you for nearly three week , never once during all those hour yield to his feeling ? 
  I think he tell I he love I once or twice ; but he always stick splendidly to his promise . 
  what promise ? 
  not to make love to I . to love a person be not a crime , it be only a misfortune . 
  you speak feelingly    from your own experience ? 
 Clare do not answer . 
  do you seriously tell we that you have not be and be not in love with this young man ? 
  I be very fond of he , but not in your sense . 
 in Dinny flame up compassion for young Croom listen to all this . her cheek go hot , and she fix her blue eye on the Judge . he have just finish take down Clare s answer ; and suddenly she see he yawn . it be an old man s yawn , and last so long that it seem never go to end . it change her mood , and fill she with a sort of pity . he , too , have to listen day after day to long - draw - out attempt to hurt people , and make they stultify themselves . 
  you have hear the enquiry agent s evidence that there be a light in the upstairs room after you return with the co - respondent from the restaurant . what do you say to that ? 
  there would be . we sit there . 
  why there , and not downstairs ? 
  because it s much warm and more comfortable . 
  that be your bedroom ? 
  no , it s a sitting - room . I have no bedroom . I just sleep on the sofa . 
  I see . and there you spend the time from soon after eleven to nearly midnight with the co - respondent ? 
  yes . 
  and you think there be no harm in that ? 
  no harm , but I think it be extremely foolish . 
  you mean that you would not have do so if you have know you be be watch ? 
  we certainly shouldn t. 
  what make you take these particular room ? 
  their cheapness . 
  very inconvenient , wasn t it , have no bedroom , and nowhere for a servant , and no porter ? 
  those be luxury for which one have to pay . 
  do you say that you do not take these particular room because there be no one of any kind on the premise ? 
  I do . I have only just enough money to live on . 
  no thought of the co - respondent , when you take they ? 
  none . 
  not even just a sidelong thought of he ? 
  my Lord , I have answer . 
  I think she have , Mr. Brough . 
  after this you see the co - respondent constantly ? 
  no . occasionally . he be live in the country . 
  I see , and come up to see you ? 
  he always see I when he do come up , perhaps twice a week . 
  and when you see he what do you do ? 
  go to a picture gallery or a film ; once to a theatre , I think . we use to dine together . 
  do you know you be be watch ? 
  no . 
  do he come to your room ? 
  not again till February the third . 
  yes , that be the day I be come to . 
  I think so . 
  you think so . it be a day and night indelibly fix in your mind ? 
  I remember it very well . 
  my friend have take you at length through the event of that day , and except for the hour at Oxford , it seem to have be spend almost entirely in the car . be that so ? 
  yes . 
  and this car be a two - seater , with what , my Lord , be call a   dicky .  
 the Judge stir . 
  I have never be in a   dicky ,   Mr. Brough , but I know what they be . 
  be it a roomy , comfortable little car ? 
  quite . 
  Closed , I think ? 
  yes . it didn t open . 
  Mr. Croom drive and you be seat beside he ? 
  yes . 
  now when you be drive back from Oxford you have say that this car s light go out about half - past ten , four mile or so short of Henley , in a wood ? 
  yes . 
  be that an accident ? 
  of course . 
  do you examine the battery ? 
  no . 
  do you know when or how it be last charge ? 
  no . 
  do you see it when it be recharge ? 
  no . 
  then why    of course ? 
  if you be suggest that Mr. Croom tamper with the battery   
  just answer my question , please . 
  I be answer . Mr. Croom be incapable of any such dirty trick . 
  it be a dark night ? 
  very . 
  and a large wood ? 
  yes . 
  just the spot one would choose on the whole of that journey from Oxford to London ? 
  choose ? 
  if one have design to spend the night in the car . 
  yes , but the suggestion be monstrous . 
  never mind that , Lady Corven . you regard it as a pure coincidence ? 
  of course . 
  just tell we what Mr. Croom say when the light go out . 
  I think he say :   Hallo ! my light be go !   and he get out and examine the battery . 
  have he a torch ? 
  no . 
  and it be pitch dark . I wonder how he do it . Didn t you wonder too ? 
  no . he use a match . 
  and what be wrong ? 
  I think he say a wire must have go . 
  then    you have tell we that he try to drive on , and twice get off the road . it must have be very dark ? 
  it be , fearfully . 
  I think you say it be your suggestion that you should spend the night in the car ? 
  I do . 
  after Mr. Croom have propose one or two alternative ? 
  yes ; he propose that we should walk into Henley , and that he should come back to the car with a torch . 
  do he seem keen on that ? 
  Keen ? not particularly . 
  Didn t press it ? 
  N   no . 
  do you think he ever mean it ? 
  of course I do . 
  in fact , you have the utmost confidence in Mr. Croom ? 
  the utmost . 
  quite ! you have hear of the expression   palm the card ? 
  yes . 
  you know what it mean ? 
  it mean force a person to take a card that you wish he to take . 
  precisely . 
  if you be suggest that Mr. Croom be try to force I to propose that we should spend the night in the car , you be wholly wrong ; and it s a base suggestion . 
  what make you think I be go to make that suggestion , Lady Corven ? have the idea be present to your mind ? 
  no . when I suggest that we should spend the night in the car , Mr. Croom be take aback . 
  oh ! how do he show that ? 
  he ask I if I could trust he . I have to tell he not to be old - fashioned . of course , I could trust he . 
  trust he to act exactly as you wish ? 
  trust he not to make love to I . I be trust he every time I see he . 
  you have not spend a night with he before ? 
  of course I have not . 
  you use the expression   of course   rather freely , and it seem to I with very little reason . you have plenty of opportunity of pass a night with he , hadn t you    on the ship , and in your room where there be nobody but yourself ? 
  Plenty , and I do not avail myself of they . 
  so you say ; and if you do not , doesn t it seem to you rather singular that you suggest it on this occasion ? 
  no . I think it would be rather fun . 
  rather fun ? yet you know this young man be passionately in love with you ? 
  I regret it afterwards . it wasn t fair to he . 
  really , Lady Corven , do you ask we to believe that you , a married woman of experience , didn t realise the ordeal by fire through which you be put he ? 
  I do afterwards , and I be extremely sorry . 
  oh , afterwards ! I be speak of before . 
  I m afraid I didn t before . 
  you be on your oath . do you persist in swear that nothing take place between you in or out of the car on the night of February the third in that dark wood ? 
  I do . 
  you hear the enquiry agent s evidence that , when about two in the morning he steal up to the car and look into it , he see by the light of his torch that you be both asleep and that your head be on the co - respondent s shoulder ? 
  yes , I hear that . 
  be it true ? 
  if I be asleep how can I say , but I think it s quite likely . I have put my head there early on . 
  oh ! you admit that ? 
  certainly . it be more comfortable . I have ask he if he mind . 
  and , of course , he didn t ? 
  I think you didn t like the expression   of course ,   but anyway he say he didn t. 
  he have marvellous control , hadn t he , this young man , who be in love with you ? 
  yes , I ve think since that he have . 
  you know then that he must have , if your story be true . but be it true , Lady Corven ; isn t it entirely fantastic ? 
 Dinny see her sister s hand clench on the rail , and a flood of crimson come up into her cheek and ebb again before she answer : 
  it may be fantastic , but it s entirely true . everything I ve say in this box be true . 
  and then in the morning you wake up as if nothing have happen , and say :   now we can go home and have breakfast !   and you go ? to your room ? 
  yes . 
  how long do he stay on that occasion ? 
  about half an hour or a little more . 
  the same perfect innocence in your relation ? 
  the same . 
  and the day after that you be serve with this petition ? 
  yes . 
  do it surprise you ? 
  yes . 
  conscious of perfect innocence , you be quite hurt in your feeling ? 
  not when I think about thing . 
  oh , not when you think about thing ? what exactly do you mean by that ? 
  I remember that my husband have say I must look out for myself ; and I realise how silly I be not to know that I be be watch . 
  tell I , Lady Corven , why do you defend this action ? 
  because I know that , however appearance be against we , we have do nothing . 
 Dinny see the Judge look towards Clare , take down her answer , hold up his pen , and speak . 
  on that night in the car you be on a main road . what be to prevent your stop another car and ask they to give you a lead into Henley ? 
  I don t think we think of it , my Lord ; I do ask Mr. Croom to try and follow one , but they go by too quickly . 
  in any case , what be there to prevent your walking into Henley and leave the car in the wood ? 
  I suppose nothing really , only it would have be midnight before we get to Henley ; and I think it would be more awkward than just stay in the car ; and I always have want to try sleep in a car . 
  and do you still want to ? 
  no , my Lord , it s overrate . 
  Mr. Brough , I ll break for luncheon . 
 chapter 32 

 Dinny refuse all solicitation to lunch , and , take her sister s arm , walk she out into Carey Street . they circle Lincoln s Inn Fields in silence . 
  nearly over , darling ,   she say at last .   you ve do wonderfully . he hasn t really shake you at all , and I believe the Judge feel that . I like the Judge much well than the jury . 
  oh ! Dinny , I m so tired . that perpetual suggestion that one s lie screw I up till I could scream . 
  that s what he do it for . Don t gratify he ! 
  and poor Tony . I do feel a beast . 
  what about a   nice hot   cup of tea ? we ve just time . 
 they walk down Chancery Lane into the Strand . 
  nothing with it , dearest . I couldn t eat . 
 neither of they could eat . they stir the pot , drink their tea as strong as they could get it , and make their way silently back to the Court . Clare , not acknowledge even her father s anxious glance , resume her old position on the front bench , her hand in her lap and her eye cast down . 
 Dinny be conscious of Jerry Corven sit deep in confabulation with his solicitor and counsel .   very young   Roger , pass to his seat , say : 
  they re go to recall Corven . 
  why ? 
  I don t know . 
 as if walk in his sleep , the Judge come in , bow slightly to the Court s presence , and sit down .   low than ever ,   think Dinny . 
  my Lord , before resume my cross - examination of the respondent , I should be glad , with your permission , to recall the petitioner in connection with the point of which my friend make so much . your Lordship will recollect that in his cross - examination of the petitioner he impute to he the intention of secure a divorce from the moment of his wife s departure . the petitioner have some additional evidence to give in regard to that point , and it will be more convenient for I to recall he now . I shall be very short , my Lord . 
 Dinny see Clare s face raise suddenly to the Judge , and the expression on it make her heart beat furiously . 
  very well , Mr. Brough . 
  Sir Gerald Corven . 
 watch that contain figure step again into the box , Dinny see that Clare too be watch , almost as if she wish to catch his eye . 
  you have tell we , Sir Gerald , that on the last occasion but one on which you see your wife before you return to Ceylon    the first of November , that be    you see she at her room in Melton Mews ? 
  yes . 
 Dinny gasp . it have come ! 
  now on that occasion , besides any conversation that take place between you , what else occur ? 
  we be husband and wife . 
  you mean that the marital relationship between you be re - establish ? 
  yes , my Lord . 
  thank you , Sir Gerald ; I think that dispose finally of my friend s point ; and it be all I want to ask . 
 Instone be speak . 
  why do you not say that when you be first examine ? 
  I do not see its relevance until after your cross - examination . 
  do you swear that you have not invent it ? 
  most certainly I do . 
 and still Dinny sit brace against the woodwork with her eye shut , think of the young man three row behind she . atrocious ! but who would see it , here ? People s innermost nerve be tear out of they , examine coldly , almost with enjoyment , and put back lacerated . 
  now , Lady Corven , will you go back to the box ? 
 when Dinny open her eye Clare be stand close up to the rail with her head hold high and her gaze fix on her questioner . 
  now , Lady Corven ,   say the slow rich voice ,   you hear that piece of evidence . 
  yes . 
  be it true ? 
  I do not wish to answer . 
  why ? 
 Dinny see that she have turn to the Judge . 
  my Lord , when my counsel ask I about my married life , I refuse to go into it , and I do not wish to go into it now . 
 for a moment the Judge s eye be turn towards the box ; then stray from it to stare at the unseen . 
  this question arise out of evidence give in rebuttal of a suggestion make by your own counsel . you must answer it . 
 no answer come . 
  ask the question again , Mr. Brough . 
  be it true that on the occasion of which your husband speak the marital relationship be re - establish between you ? 
  no . it be not true . 
 Dinny , who know that it be , look up . the Judge s eye be still fix above her head , but she see the slight pouting of his lip . he do not believe the answer . 
 the slow rich voice be speak , and she catch in it a peculiar veil triumph . 
  you swear that ? 
  yes . 
  so your husband have go out of his way to commit perjury in make that statement ? 
  it be his word against mine . 
  and I think I know which will be take . be it not true that you have make the answer you have in order to save the feeling of the co - respondent ? 
  it be not . 
  from first to last , can we attach any more importance to the truth in any of your answer than to the truth in that last ? 
  I don t think that be a fair question , Mr. Brough . the witness do not know what importance we attach . 
  very good , my Lord . I ll put it another way . throughout have you tell the truth , Lady Corven , and nothing but the truth ? 
  I have . 
  very well . I have no more to ask you . 
 during the few question put to her sister , in a re - examination which carefully avoid the last point , Dinny could think only of young Croom . at heart she feel the case be lose , and long to take Clare and creep away . if only that man behind with the hooked nose have not try to blacken Corven and prove too much , this last mine would not have be spring ! and yet    to blacken the other side    what be it but the essence of procedure ! 
 when Clare be back in her seat , white and exhausted , she whisper : 
  would you like to come away , darling ? 
 Clare shake her head . 
  James Bernard Croom . 
 for the first time since the case begin Dinny have a full view , and hardly know he . his tanned face be parch and draw ; he look excessively thin . his grey eye seem hide under their brow , and his lip be bitter and compress . he look at least five year old , and she know at once that Clare s denial have not deceive he . 
  your name be James Bernard Croom , you live at Bablock Hythe , and be in charge of a horse - breeding establishment there ? have you any private mean ? 
  none whatever . 
 it be not Instone who be examine , but a young man with a sharp nose , seat just behind he . 
  up to September last year you be superintend a tea plantation in Ceylon ? do you ever meet the respondent in Ceylon ? 
  never . 
  you be never at her house ? 
  no . 
  you have hear of a certain polo match in which you play , and after which she entertain the player ? 
  yes , but I didn t go . I have to get back . 
  be it on the boat , then , that you first meet she ? 
  yes . 
  you make no secret of the fact that you fall in love with she ? 
  none . 
  in spite of that , be there any truth in these allegation of misconduct between you ? 
  none whatever . 
 and as the evidence he give to the Court go on and on , Dinny s eye never leave his face , as if fascinate by its constrained but bitter unhappiness . 
  now , Mr. Croom , this be my last question : you be aware that if these allegation of misconduct be true , you would be in the position of a man who have seduce a wife in her husband s absence . what have you to say to that ? 
  I have to say that if Lady Corven have feel for I what I feel for she , I should have write to her husband at once to tell he the state of thing . 
  you mean that you would have give he warn before anything take place between you ? 
  I don t say that , but as soon as possible . 
  but she do not feel for you what you feel for she ? 
  I be sorry to say , no . 
  so that in fact no occasion to inform the husband ever arise ? 
  no . 
  thank you . 
 a slight stiffening of young Croom s figure herald Brough s rich slow voice , say with peculiar deliberation : 
  in your experience , sir , be the feeling of lover towards each other ever the same ? 
  I have no experience . 
  no experience ? you know the french proverb as to there be always one who kiss and the other who offer the cheek to the kiss ? 
  I ve hear it . 
  Don t you think it s true ? 
  about as true as any proverb . 
  accord to the story you both tell , you be pursue in her husband s absence a married woman who didn t want you to pursue she ? not a very honourable position    yours    be it ? not exactly what be call   play the game ? 
  I suppose not . 
  but I suggest , Mr. Croom , that your position be not as dishonourable as all that , and that in spite of the french proverb she do want you to pursue she ? 
  she do not . 
  you say that in face of the cabin incident ; in face of she get you in to distemper her wall ; in face of the invitation to tea and to spend over half an hour with she at nearly midnight in those convenient room of her ; in face of the suggestion that you should spend the night with she in a car , and come to breakfast the morning after ? come , Mr. Croom , isn t that carry your chivalry rather far ? what you say have to convince man and woman of the world , you know . 
  I can only say that , if her feeling for I have be what mine be for she , we should have go away together at once . the blame be entirely mine , and she have only treat I kindly because she be sorry for I . 
  if what you both say be true , she give you hell    I beg your pardon , my Lord    in the car , didn t she ? be that kind ? 
  when a person be not in love I don t think they realise the feeling of one who be . 
  be you a cold - blooded person ? 
  no . 
  but she be ? 
  how be the witness to know that , Mr. Brough ? 
  my Lord , I should have put it : but you think she be ? 
  I do not think so . 
  and yet you would have we think that she be kind in let you pass the night with her head on your shoulder ? well , well ! you say if her feeling have be your , you would have go away at once . what would you have go away on ? have you any money ? 
  two hundred pound . 
  and she ? 
  two hundred a year , apart from her job . 
  fly away and live on air , eh ? 
  I should have get some job . 
  not your present one ? 
  probably not . 
  I suggest that both of you feel it would be mad to fle your cap over the windmill like that ? 
  I never feel so . 
  what make you defend this action ? 
  I wish we hadn t. 
  then why do you ? 
  she think , and her people think , that as we have do nothing , we ought to defend . 
  but you didn t think so ? 
  I didn t think we should be believe , and I want she free . 
  her honour didn t occur to you ? 
  of course it do ; but I think for she to stay tie be too heavy a price to pay for it . 
  you say you didn t think you d be believe ? altogether too improbable a story ? 
  no ; but the more one speak the truth , the less one expect to be believe . 
 Dinny see the Judge turn and look at he . 
  be you speak generally ? 
  no , my Lord , I mean here . 
 the Judge s face come round again and his eye study the unseen above Dinny s head . 
  I be consider , you know , whether I should commit you for contempt of Court . 
  I be sorry , my Lord ; what I mean be that anything one say be turn against one . 
  you speak out of inexperience . I will let it pass this time , but you mustn t say thing of that sort again . go on , Mr. Brough . 
  the question of damage , of course , didn t affect you in make up your mind to defend this action ? 
  no . 
  you have say that you have no private mean . be that true ? 
  certainly . 
  then how do you mean that it didn t affect you ? 
  I be think so much of other thing that bankruptcy didn t seem to matter . 
  now , you have say in examination that you be not aware of Lady Corven s existence until you be on this ship come home . do you know a place in Ceylon call Neuralya ? 
  no . 
  what ? 
 Dinny see a faint smile creep out among the Judge s fold and wrinkle . 
  put the question another way , Mr. Brough ; we generally call it neuralya . 
  I know Neuralya , my Lord . 
  be you there in June last ? 
  yes . 
  be Lady Corven there ? 
  she may have be . 
  Wasn t she in the same hotel as you ? 
  no . I wasn t in an hotel . I be stay with a friend . 
  and you do not meet her play golf or tennis , or out rid ? 
  I do not . 
  or anywhere ? 
  no . 
  not a large place , be it ? 
  not very . 
  and she s a conspicuous person , isn t she ? 
  I think so . 
  so you never meet she till you be both on this ship ? 
  no . 
  when do you first become conscious that you be in love with she ? 
  about the second or third day out . 
  love almost at first sight , in fact ? 
  yes . 
  and it didn t occur to you , know that she be a married woman , to avoid she ? 
  I know I ought to , but I wasn t able . 
  you would have be able to if she have discourage you ? 
  I don t know . 
  do she in fact discourage you ? 
  N - no . I don t think she be aware of my feeling for some time . 
  woman be very quick in such matter , Mr. Croom . do you seriously suggest that she be unaware ? 
  I don t know . 
  do you trouble to conceal your feeling ? 
  if you mean do I make love to she on the ship    I do not . 
  when do you first make love to she ? 
  I tell she my feeling just before we leave the ship . 
  be there any real reason why you should have go to her state - room to see those photograph ? 
  I suppose not . 
  do you look at any photograph at all ? 
  certainly . 
  what else do you do ? 
  I think we talk . 
  Don t you know ? this be an occasion for you , wasn t it ? or be it only one of several occasion of which we have not be tell ? 
  it be the only time I be inside her state - room . 
  in that case surely you remember ? 
  we just sit and talk . 
  begin to remember , eh ? where do you sit ? 
  in the chair . 
  and where do she sit ? 
  on her bed . it be a small cabin    there be no other chair . 
  an outside cabin ? 
  yes . 
  no chance of be overlook ? 
  no , but there be nothing to overlook . 
  so you both say . I suppose it give you something of a thrill , didn t it ? 
 Dinny see the Judge s face poke forward . 
  I don t want to interrupt you , Mr. Brough , but the witness have make no secret of his feeling . 
  very well , my Lord . I will put it to he bluntly . I suggest , sir , that on that occasion there be misconduct between you ? 
  there be none . 
  H m ! tell the jury why it be that when Sir Gerald Corven come to London you do not go to he and frankly avow your relation with his wife . 
  what relation ? 
  come , sir ! the fact , on your own showing , that you be see all you could of his wife ; the fact that you be in love with she , and want she to go away with you . 
  she do not want to go away with I . I would willingly have go to her husband , but I have no right to without her permission . 
  do you ask for that permission ? 
  no . 
  why not ? 
  because she have tell I we could only meet as friend . 
  I suggest she tell you nothing of the sort ? 
  my Lord , that be ask I if I be a liar . 
  answer the question . 
  I be not a liar . 
  that be the answer , I think , Mr. Brough . 
  tell I , sir : you hear the respondent s evidence , do it strike you as entirely truthful ? 
 Dinny see , and hop that no one else see , the quivering of his face . 
  yes , so far as I could judge . 
  it be perhaps not quite a fair question . but I may put it this way : if the respondent be to say that she have do , or not do , this or that , you would feel bind in honour to corroborate her statement , where you could , and to believe it where you could not ? 
  I be not sure that be quite fair , Mr. Brough . 
  my Lord , I submit that it be vital to my case to establish to the jury what the state of the co - respondent s mind have be throughout this business . 
  well , I win t stop the question , but there be a limit , you know , to these generality . 
 Dinny see the first flicker of a smile on young Croom s face . 
  my Lord , I don t at all mind answer the question . I do not know what I should feel bind in honour to do , generally speak . 
  well , let we come to the particular . Lady Corven have say that she could trust you not to make love to she . would you say that be true ? 
 Dinny see his face darken . 
  not quite true . but she know I do my good not to . 
  but now and then you couldn t help it ? 
  I don t know what you mean by the expression   make love ; but now and then I know I show my feeling . 
  now and then ? Mr. Croom , didn t you always show your feeling ? 
  if you mean do I always show that I be in love with she    of course I do , you can t hide a thing like that . 
  that be a fair admission . I don t want to catch you . I mean more than just show by your face and eye that you be in love . I mean downright physical expression . 
  then , no , except   
  yes ? 
  kiss her cheek three time altogether , and hold her hand sometimes . 
  so much she have admit , and it be all you be prepared to swear to ? 
  I will swear there be no more . 
  tell I , do you sleep at all during that night in the car , when her head be on your shoulder ? 
  yes . 
  consider the state of your feeling , wasn t that singular ? 
  yes . but I be up at five that morning and I d drive a hundred and fifty mile . 
  you seriously expect we to believe that after nearly five month of longing you take no advantage of that marvellous opportunity , but just go to sleep ? 
  I take no advantage . but I have tell you that I do not expect to be believe . 
  I don t wonder . 
 for a long time the slow rich voice go on ask question , and for a long time Dinny s eye remain fix on that bitterly unhappy face , till a sort of numbness come over she . she be rouse by : 
  I suggest to you , sir , that from begin to end of your evidence you have be actuate by the feeling that you must do everything you can for this lady without regard to your own consciousness of what be true ? that your attitude , in fact , have be one of distorted chivalry ? 
  no . 
  very well . that be all . 
 then come the re - examination , and the Judge s release remark . 
 Dinny and Clare arise and , follow by their father , walk out into the corridor , and , as quickly as might be , to open air . 
 the General say : 
  Instone s make a mess of it with that quite unnecessary point of his . 
 Clare do not answer . 
  I be glad ,   say Dinny .   you ll get your divorce . 
 chapter 33 

 the speech be over , and the Judge be sum up . from beside her father , on one of the back bench now , Dinny could see Jerry Corven still sit in front beside his solicitor , and   very young   Roger sit alone . Clare be not in Court . neither be young Croom . 
 the Judge s voice come slowly , as if struggle past his tooth . it seem to Dinny marvellous how he remember everything , for he look but little at his note ; nor could she detect anything that be not fair in his review of the evidence . now and again his eye , turn towards the jury , seem to close , but his voice never stop . now and again he poke his neck forward , priest and tortoise for a moment coalescing ; then he would draw it back and speak as it be to himself . 
  the evidence not be of the conclusive nature which we expect of evidence tender to this Court    no   call with a cup of tea ,   she think ,   counsel for the petitioner in his able speech lay great stress , and rightly , upon credibility . he direct your attention especially to the respondent s denial that there be any renewal of the marital relationship between the petitioner and herself on the occasion when he go to her room . he suggest that there be reason for her denial in her desire to spare the feeling of the co - respondent . but you must consider whether a woman who , as she say , be not in love with the co - respondent , have not encourage he , or be intimate with he in any way , would go so far as to perjure herself to save his feeling . accord to her account , he be from the beginning of their acquaintanceship in the nature of a friend to she and nothing more . on the other hand , if you believe the petitioner on that point    and there seem no sufficient reason for his volunteering perjury    it follow that you disbelieve the respondent , and she have deliberately deny evidence which be in her favour rather than against she . it seem difficult to believe that she would do that unless she have feeling for the co - respondent warm than those of mere friendship . this be , in fact , a very crucial point , and the decision you come to as to which be true    the husband s statement or the wife s denial of it    seem to I a cardinal factor in your consideration of whether or not to accept the respondent s evidence in the rest of the case . you have only what be call circumstantial evidence to go upon ; and in such case the credibility of the party be a very important factor . if on one point you be satisfied that one of the party be not speak the truth , then the whole of his or her evidence be ting with doubt . in regard to the co - respondent , though he convey an impression of candour , you must remember that there be a traditional belief in this country , regrettable or not , that a man whose attention have involve a married woman in a situation of this kind must not , in vulgar parlance ,   give she away .   you must ask yourselves how far you can treat this young man , who be quite obviously , and by his own admission , deeply in love , as a free , independent , truthful witness . 
  on the other hand , and apart from this question of general credibility , you must not let appearance run away with your judgment . in these day young people be free and easy in their association with each other . what might have seem conclusive indication in the day of my youth be now by no means conclusive . in regard to the night , however , that be spend in the car , you may think it well to pay particular attention to the answer the respondent give to my question : why , when the light go out , they do not simply stop a pass car , tell the occupant what have happen , and request to be give a lead into Henley . her answer be :   I don t think we think of it , my Lord . I do ask Mr. Croom to follow a car , but it be go too fast .   it be for you to consider , in the light of that answer , whether the respondent really want that simple solution of the difficulty they be in , namely , a lead into Henley , where no doubt the damage could have be repair ; or whence at least she could have return to London by train . it be say by her counsel that to have go into Henley at that time with a damage car would have make they too conspicuous . but you will remember that she have say she be not aware that she be be watch . if that be so , you will consider whether the question of conspicuosity would have be present to her mind . 
 Dinny s gaze by now have leave the Judge s face and be fix upon the jury . and , while she search the lack of expression on those twelve face , a   cardinal factor   be uppermost in her mind : it be easy to disbelieve than to believe . remove whatever temper influence there might be from a witness s voice and face , and would not the spicy version of event prevail ? the word   damage   take her eye back to the Judge s face . 
  because ,   he be say ,   if you should come to a decision in favour of the petitioner , the question of the damage he claim will arise . and in regard to that I must draw your attention to one or two salient consideration . it can not be say that claim for damage in divorce suit be common in these day , or indeed look on with any great favour in this Court . it have become disagreeable to think of woman in term of money . not much more than a hundred year ago it be actually not unknown    though illegal even then    for a man to offer his wife for sale . such day    thank God !    be long past . though damage can still be ask for in this Court , they must not be what be call   vindictive ,   and they must bear reasonable relation to the co - respondent s mean . in this case the petitioner have state that if any damage be award he , they will be settle on the respondent . that is , one may say , the usual practice nowadays where damage be claim . in regard to the co - respondent s , mean , if it should become necessary for you to consider the question of damage , I would remind you that his counsel state that he have no private mean , and offer to provide evidence of the fact . one have never know counsel to make a statement of that sort without be sure of his ground , and I think you may take the co - respondent s word for it that his only mean of subsistence be derive from his    er    job ,   which appear to carry a salary of four hundred pound a year . those , then , be the consideration which should guide you if you should have to consider the amount , if any , of damage to be award . now , member of the jury , I send you to your task . the issue be grave for the future of these people , and I be sure that I can trust you to give they your good attention . you may retire if you wish to do so . 
 Dinny be startle by the way he withdraw almost at once into contemplation of a document which he raise from the desk in front . 
  he really be an old ducky ,   she think , and her gaze go back to the jury rise from their seat . now that the ordeal of her sister and Tony Croom be over , she feel very little interested . even the Court today be but sparsely fill . 
  they only come to enjoy the suffering ,   be her bitter thought . 
 a voice say : 
  Clare be still in the Admiralty Court when you want she .   Dornford , in wig and gown , be sit down beside she .   how do the Judge sum up ? 
  very fairly . 
  he be fair . 
  but barrister , I think , might wear :   Fairness be a virtue , a little more won t hurt you ,   nicely print on their collar . 
  you might as well print it round the neck of hound on a scent . still , even this Court isn t as bad in that way as it use to be . 
  I m so glad . 
 he sit quite still , look at she . and she think : 
  his wig suit the colour of his face . 
 her father lean across she . 
  how long do they give you to pay cost in , Dornford ? 
  a fortnight be the usual order , but you can get it extend . 
  it s a foregone conclusion ,   say the General glumly .   well , she ll be free of he . 
  where be Tony Croom ?   ask Dinny . 
  I see he as I come in . at the corridor window    quite , close . you can t miss he . shall I go and tell he to wait ? 
  if you would . 
  then will you all come to my chamber when it s over ?   receive their nod , he go out , and do not come back . 
 Dinny and her father sit on . an usher bring the Judge a write communication ; he write upon it , and the usher take it back to the jury . almost immediately they come in . 
 the broad and pleasant face of she who look like a housekeeper have a mortified expression as if she have be overridden ; and , instantly , Dinny know what be come . 
  member of the jury , be you agree on your verdict ? 
 the foreman rise . 
  we be . 
  do you find the respondent guilty of adultery with the co - respondent ? 
  yes . 
  do you find the co - respondent guilty of adultery with the respondent ? 
  Isn t that the same ?   think Dinny . 
  yes . 
  and what damage do you say the co - respondent should be order to pay ? 
  we think that he should pay the cost of all the party to the action . 
 through Dinny pass the thought :   the more one love the more one pay .   barely listen to the Judge s word , she whisper to her father , and slip away . 
  Young Croom be lean against the stone that frame the window , and she think she have never see so desolate a figure . 
  well , Dinny ? 
  Lost . no damage , just all the cost . come out , I want to talk to you . 
 they go in silence . 
  let s go and sit on the Embankment . 
 Young Croom laugh .   the Embankment ! marvellous ! 
 no other word pass between they till they be seat under a plane tree whose leaf be not yet fully unfurled in that cold spring . 
  Rotten !   say Dinny . 
  I ve be a complete fool all through , and there s an end of it . 
  have you have anything to eat these last two day ? 
  I suppose so . I ve drink quite a lot , anyway . 
  what be you go to do now , dear boy ? 
  see Jack Muskham , and try and get another job somewhere out of England . 
 Dinny feel as if she have grasp a stick by the wrong end . she could only be helpful if she know Clare s feeling . 
  no one take advice ,   she say ,   but couldn t you manage to do nothing at all for a month or so ? 
  I don t know , Dinny . 
  have those mare come ? 
  not yet . 
  surely you win t give that job up before it s even begin ? 
  it seem to I I ve only get one job at the moment    to keep go somehow , somewhere . 
  Don t I know that feeling ? but don t do anything desperate ! promise ! good - bye , my dear , I must hurry back . 
 she stand up and press his hand hard . 
 when she reach Dornford s chamber , her father and Clare be already there , and   very young   Roger with they . 
 Clare s face look as though the whole thing have happen to someone else . 
 the General be say : 
  what will the total cost come to , Mr. Forsyte ? 
  not far short of a thousand , I should say . 
  a thousand pound for speak the truth ! we can t possibly let young Croom pay more than his own share . he hasn t a bob . 
  very young   Roger take snuff . 
  well ,   say the General ,   I must go and put my wife out of her misery . we re go back to Condaford this afternoon , Dinny . come ? 
 Dinny nod . 
  good ! many thank , Mr. Forsyte . early in November , then    the decree ? good - bye ! 
 when he have go Dinny say in a low voice : 
  now that it s over , what do you really think ? 
  as I do at first : if you d be your sister we should have win . 
  I want ,   say Dinny coldly ,   to know whether you believe they or not ? 
  on the whole    yes . 
  be it impossible for a lawyer to go far than that ? 
  very young   Roger smile . 
  no one tell the truth without mental reservation of some kind . 
  perfectly true ,   think Dinny .   could we have a taxi ? 
 in the cab Clare say :   do something for I , Dinny . bring I my thing to the Mews . 
  of course . 
  I don t feel like Condaford . do you see Tony ? 
  yes . 
  how be he ? 
  Rotten . 
  Rotten !   repeat Clare , bitterly .   how could I help what they spring on I ? I lie for he , anyway . 
 Dinny , look straight before she , say : 
  when you can , tell I exactly what your feeling towards he be . 
  when I know myself , I will . 
  you ll want something to eat , darling . 
  yes , I m hungry . I ll stop here in Oxford Street . I shall be clean up when you come with my thing . I feel as if I could sleep the clock round , and probably I shan t sleep a wink . when you re divorce , Dinny , don t defend    you keep on thinking of well answer . 
 Dinny squeeze her arm , and take the taxi on to South Square . 
 chapter 34 

 more deadly than the atmosphere during a fight be that when it be over . you   keep on thinking of well answer ,   and you feel that life be not worth live . the primary law of existence have be follow to its logical and    win or lose    unsatisfying conclusion , the sand be out of your dolly , you loll and droop . such be the sensation of Dinny , who have but understudy . unable to feel that she could be of any real help , she fall back on pig , and have be for a good week in this posture when she receive a letter head : 
  Kingson Cuthcott    Forsyte , 
  Old Jewry . 
  May 17th , 1932 . 
  MY dear MISS CHARWELL  
  I write to tell you that we have succeed in come to an arrangement by which the cost of the action will be meet without make any call upon either Mr. Croom or your sister . I shall be grateful if you could take an opportunity of relieve their mind and also your father s mind in the matter . 
  believe I , my dear Miss Charwell , 
  very faithfully your , 
  ROGER FORSYTE . 
 reach she on a really warm morning , to sound of mow machine and to scent of grass , it would have   intrigue   she if she have not detest the word . she turn from the window and say : 
  the lawyer say we need none of we worry any more about those cost , dad ; they ve come to an arrangement . 
  how ? 
  they don t say , but they want your mind relieve . 
  I don t understand lawyer ,   mutter the General ,   but if they say it s all right , I m very glad . I ve be worry . 
  yes , dear . Coffee ? 
 but she resume her meditation on that cryptic letter . do something in Jerry Corven s conduct force he to agree to this   arrangement ? be there not someone call   the King s Proctor   who could stop decree be grant ? or    what ? 
 abandon her first idea of drive over to Tony Croom because of the question he might ask , she write to he and to Clare instead . the more , however , she ponder over the wording of the solicitor s letter , the more convinced she become that she must see   very young   Roger . there be that at the back of her mind which refuse quietus . she , therefore , arrange to see he at a teashop near the British Museum on his way homeward from the City , and go there direct from her train . the place be an   artifact ,   design , so far as a Regency edifice could be , to reproduce such a   coffee house   as Boswell and Johnson might have frequent . its floor be not sand , but look as if it should be . there be no long clay pipe , but there be long cardboard cigarette - holder . the furniture be wooden , the light dim . no record have be discover of what the   staff   should look like , they look sea - green . print of old coaching inn be hang on wall panel by the Tottenham Court Road . quite a few patron be drink tea and smoke cigarette . none of they use the long cardboard holder .   very young   Roger , limp slightly , and with his customary air of not be quite what he ought to be , uncover his sandyish head and smile above his chin . 
  China or Indian ?   say Dinny . 
  whatever you re have . 
  then two coffee , please , and muffin . 
  muffin ! this be a treat , dear papa . those be quite good old copper bed - warmer , Miss Cherrell . I wonder if they d sell they . 
  do you collect ? 
  pick thing up . no use have a Queen Anne house unless you can do something for it . 
  do your wife sympathise ? 
  no , she s all for the T.C.R. , bridge , golf , and the modernity . I never can keep my hand off old silver . 
  I have to ,   murmur Dinny .   your letter be a very pleasant relief . do you really mean that we should none of we have to pay ? 
  I do . 
 she consider she next question , scrutinise he through her lash . with all his æsthetic leaning , he look uncommonly spry . 
  in confidence , Mr. Forsyte , how do you manage to make that arrangement ? have it to do with my brother - inlaw ? 
  very young   Roger lay his hand on his heart . 
   the tongue of Forsyte be his own ,   cf . marmion . but you needn t worry . 
  I need , or shall , unless I know it wasn t that . 
  make your mind easy , then ; it have nothing to do with Corven . 
 Dinny eat a muffin in complete silence , then speak of period silver .   very young   Roger give an erudite dissertation on its mark    if she would come down for a week - end , he would turn she into a connoisseur . 
 they part cordially , and Dinny go towards her Uncle Adrian s. that uneasiness be still at the back of her mind . the tree have leave enticingly these last warm day ; the Square wherein he dwell have an air quiet and green , as if inhabit by mind . nobody be at home .   but ,   say the maid ,   Mr. Cherrell be sure to be in about six , miss . 
 Dinny wait in a small panel room full of book and pipe and photograph of Diana and the two Ferse child . an old collie keep her company , and through the open window seep the sound of London street . she be crumple the dog s ear when Adrian come in . 
  well , Dinny , so it s over . I hope you feel well . 
 Dinny hand he the letter . 
  I know it s nothing to do with Jerry Corven . you know Eustace Dornford , Uncle . I want you to find out from he quietly whether it s he who be pay these cost . 
 Adrian pull at his beard . 
  I don t suppose he d tell I . 
  somebody must have pay they , and I can only think of he . I don t want to go to he myself . 
 Adrian look at she intently . her face be concerned and brooding . 
  not easy , Dinny ; but I ll try . what s go to happen to those two ? 
  I don t know , they don t know ; nobody know . 
  how be your people take it ? 
  terribly glad it s over , and don t care much now it be . you ll let I know soon , win t you , Uncle dear ? 
  I will , my dear ; but I shall probably draw blank . 
 Dinny make for Melton Mews , and meet her sister on the doorstep . Clare s cheek be flush ; there be febrility in her whole manner and appearance . 
  I ve ask Tony Croom here this evening ,   she say , when Dinny be leave to catch her train .   one must pay one s debt . 
  oh !   murmur Dinny , and for the life of she could say no more . 
 the word haunt she in the bus to Paddington , in the refreshment room while she eat a sandwich , in the railway carriage go home . pay one s debt ! the first canon of self - respect ! suppose Dornford have pay those cost ! be she as precious as all that ? Wilfrid have have all of she accord to her heart and her hope and her desire . if Dornford want what be leave over    why not ? she drop think of herself and go back to thought of Clare . have she pay her debt by now ? transgressor by law    ought to transgress ! and yet    so much future could be compromise in so few minute ! 
 she sit very still . and the train rattle on in the die twilight . 
 chapter 35 

 Tony Croom have spend a miserable week in his converted cottage at Bablock Hythe . the evidence give by Corven on his recall to the box have sear he , nor have Clare s denial anoint the burn . in this young man be an old - fashioned capacity for jealousy . that a wife should accept her husband s embrace be not , of course , unknown ; but , in the special circumstance and state of feeling , it have seem to he improper , if not monstrous , and the giving of his own evidence , directly after such a thrust at his vital , have but inflame the wound . a sad unreason govern sex ; to be aware that he have no right to be suffer bring no relief . and now , a week after the trial , receive her note of invitation , he have the impulse not to answer , to answer and upbraid , to answer   like a gentleman    and , all the time , he know he would just go up . 
 with nothing clear in his mind and that bruise still in his heart , he reach the Mews an hour after Dinny have go . Clare let he in , and they stand look at each other for a minute without speak . at last she say with a laugh : 
  well , Tony ! funny business    the whole thing , wasn t it ? 
  exquisitely humorous . 
  you look ill . 
  you look fine . 
 and she do , in a red frock open at the neck , and without sleeve . 
  sorry I m not dress , Clare . I didn t know you d want to go out . 
  I don t. we re go to dine in . you can leave the car out there , and stay as long as you like , and nobody the bad . isn t it nice ? 
  Clare ! 
  put your hat down and come upstairs . I ve make a new cocktail . 
  I take this chance to say I m bitterly sorry . 
  Don t be an idiot , Tony .   she begin to mount the spiral stairway , turn at the top .   Come ! 
 drop his hat and drive glove , he follow she . to the eye of one throbbing and distraught , the room above have an air of preparation , as if for ceremony , or    be it sacrifice ? the little table be set out daintily with flower , a narrow - neck bottle , green glass    the couch cover with some jade - green stuff and heap with bright cushion . the window be open , for it be hot , but the curtain be nearly draw across and the light turn on . he go straight across to the window , stifle by the violent confusion within he . 
  in spite of the Law s blessing , well close the curtain ,   say Clare .   would you like a wash ? 
 he shake his head , draw the curtain close , and sit on the sill . Clare have drop on to the sofa . 
  I couldn t bear to see you in the box , Tony . I owe you a lot . 
  Owe ! you owe I nothing . it s I ! 
  no ! I be the debtor . 
 with her bare arm cross behind her neck , her body so graceful , her face a little tilt up    there be all he have dream about and long for all these month ! there she be , infinitely desirable , seem to say :   here I be ! take I !   and he sit star at she . the moment he have yearn and yearn for , and he could not seize it ! 
  why so far off , Tony ? 
 he get up , his lip tremble , every limb trembling , come as far as the table , and stand grip the back of a chair . his eye fix on her eye , search and search . what be behind those dark eye look up at he ? not love ! the welcome of duty ? the payment of a debt ? the toleration of a pal ? the invitation of one who would have it over and do with ? but not love , with its soft gleam . and , suddenly , there come before his eye the image of she and Corven    THERE ! he cover his face with his arm , rush headlong down those twist iron stair , seize hat and glove , and dash out into his car . his mind do not really work again till he be far along the Uxbridge Road ; and how he have get there without disaster he could not conceive . he have behave like a perfect fool ! he have behave exactly as he have to ! the startled look on her face ! to be treat as a creditor ! to be pay ! there ! on that sofa ! no ! he drive again with a sort of frenzy , and be bring up sharply by a lorry lumber along in front . the night be just begin , moonlit and warm . he turn the car into a gateway and get out . lean against the gate , he fill and light his pipe . where be he go ? home ? what use ? what use go anywhere ? his brain clear suddenly . drive to Jack Muskham s , release himself , and    Kenya ! he have money enough for that . a job would turn up . but stay here ? no ! Lucky those mare hadn t come ! he get over the gate and sit down on the grass . relaxed against the bank he look up . lot of star ! what have he    fifty pound    sixty    nothing owe ! an east african boat    go steerage ! anything    anywhere away ! close to he on the bank be ox - eyed daisy slowly brighten in the moonlight ; the air be scent by ripen grass . if in her eye there have be one look of love ! he let his head fall back on the grass . not her fault she didn t love he ! his misfortune ! home    get his kit together , lock up , straight to Muskham s ! it would take all the night ! see those lawyer    Dinny , too , if possible ! but Clare ? no ! his pipe cease to draw ; the moon and star , the ox - eyed daisy , the grassy scent , the shadow creep out , the feel of the bank , lose all power to soothe . get on , do something , go on do something , till he be again on shipboard and away . he get up , climb back over the gate , and start his engine . he keep straight on , instinctively avoid the route through Maidenhead and Henley . he pass through High Wycombe and approach Oxford from the north . the old town be light up and in evening feather when he drop down on it from Headington and thread into the quiet Cumnor road . on the little old New Bridge over the Upper Thames he stop . something special about this upper river , quiet and winding , and withdraw from human blatancy ! in full moonlight now the reed glisten and the willow seem to drip silver into the water , dark below their branch . some window in the inn beyond be lamp - light , but no sound of gramophone come forth . with the moon rid so high , the star now be but a pricking of the grape - colour sky ; the scent from the reedy bank and the river field , after a whole week of warmth , mount to his nostril , sweet and a little rank . it bring a sudden wave of sheer sex - longing    so often and so long have he dream of Clare and himself in love on this wind field - scented stream . he start the car with a jerk , and turn past the inn down the narrow road . in twenty minute he stand in the doorway of his cottage , look into the moonlit room he have leave sunlit seven hour before . there be the novel he have be try to read , tip on to the floor ; the remain of his cheese and fruit lunch not clear away ; a pair of brown shoe which he have be go to shine up . the big black beam across the low ceiling and around the big old fireplace rescue from victorian enclosure and brown varnish , the copper fire - dog and pewter plate and jug and bowl he have hardily collect , hop they would appeal to Clare , all his re angusta domi , welcome he dimly . he feel suddenly exhaust , drink half a tumbler of whisky and water , eat some biscuit , and sink into his long wicker armchair . almost at once he fall asleep , and awake in daylight . he wake remember that he have mean to spend the night in action . level sunlight be slant in at the window . he finish the water in the jug , and look at his watch . five o clock . he throw open the door . early haze be bright over the field . he go out past the mare   box and their meadow . a track , slop down towards the river , lead over grass break by bushy scoop and green bank cover with hazel and alder . no dew have fall , but the grass and every shrub smell new . 
 about fifty yard from the river he throw himself down in a little hollow . rabbit and bee and bird    nothing else as yet awake . he lie on his back staring at the grass and the bush and the early sky , blue and lightly fleece . perhaps because he could see so little from that hollow all England seem to be with he . a wild bee close to his hand be dig into a flower , there be a faint scent , as of daisy - chain ; but chiefly it be the quality of the grass    its close freshness , its true greenness .   greatness and dignity and peace !   that play ! those word have give he a choke . other people have laugh , Clare have laugh .   Sentimental !   she have say .   no country ever have , or will have   Greatness and dignity and peace .    probably not , certainly not    a country , even one s own , be a mish - mash of beauty and monstrosity , a vague generalisation that betray dramatist into over - writing , journalist into blurb . all the same , you couldn t anywhere else in the world get just such a spot , or just such grass to feel and see , a scent that be wellnigh none , a tender fleecy sky , tiny flower , bird   song , age and youth at once ! let people laugh    you couldn t ! leave grass like this ! he remember the thrill he have feel six month ago , see again english grass ! leave his job before it have begin ; chuck it back at Muskham , who have be so really decent to he ! he turn over on to his face and lay his cheek to that grass . there he get the scent well    not sweet , not bitter , but fresh , intimate and delighting , a scent apprehend from his early childhood    the scent of England . if only those mare would come , and he could get at it ! he sit up again , and listen . no sound of train or car or airplane , no human sound , no sound of any four - footed thing ; just bird   song , and those indistinguishable and a little far    a long meander tune wide above the grass . well ! no use make a song ! if one couldn t have a thing , one couldn t ! 
 chapter 36 

 the moment Dinny have leave , Adrian make the not uncommon discovery that he have promise what would need performance . to get one of his Majesty s Counsel to commit himself    how ? too point to go to he ! impossible to pump a guest ! em , if he prompt she , would ask they both to dinner , especially if make to understand that the matter concerned Dinny ; but even then   ? he wait to consult Diana , and , after dining , go round to Mount Street . he find they play piquet . 
  four king ,   say Lady Mont.   so old - fashioned    Lawrence and I and Mussolini . have you come for something , Adrian ? 
  naturally , Em . I want you to ask Eustace Dornford to dinner , and I to meet he . 
  that ll be Dinny . I can t get Lawrence to be chivalrous ; when I have four king he always have four ace . when ? 
  the soon the well . 
  Ring , dear . 
 Adrian rang . 
  Blore , call up Mr. Dornford and ask he to dinner    black tie . 
  when , my lady ? 
  the first evenin   not in my book . like dentist ,   she add , as Blore withdraw .   tell I about Dinny . she hasn t be near we since the case . 
  the case ,   repeat Sir Lawrence ,   go much as one expect , didn t you think , Adrian ? any repercussion ? 
  someone have settle the cost , and Dinny suspect Dornford . 
 Sir Lawrence lay down his card .   bit too like a bid for she , that ! 
  oh , he win t admit it , but she want I to find out . 
  if he win t admit it , why should he do it ? 
  Knights ,   murmur Lady Mont ,   wearin   a glove , and gettin   kill , and nobody knowin   whose glove . yes , Blore ? 
  Mr. Dornford will be happy to dine on Monday , my lady . 
  put he in my book , then , and Mr. Adrian . 
  go away with he after dinner , Adrian ,   say Sir Lawrence ,   and do it then    not so pointed ; and , Em , not a hint , not even a sigh or a groan . 
  he s a nice creature ,   say Lady Mont ,   so pale - brown . . . 
 with the   nice creature so pale - brown   Adrian walk away the follow Monday night . their direction be more or less the same , since Dornford be not yet in his new house . to Adrian s relief , his companion seem as glad of the opportunity as himself , for he begin at once to talk of Dinny . 
  be I right in think something s happen to Dinny lately    I don t mean that case    but when she be ill and you go abroad together ? 
  yes . the man I tell you of that she be in love with two year ago be drown out in Siam . 
  oh ! 
 Adrian steal a look . what should Dornford s face express    concern , relief , hope , sympathy ? it only wear a little frown . 
  there be a question I want to ask you , Dornford . someone have settle the cost grant against young Croom in that case .   the eyebrow be raise now , but the face say nothing .   I think you might have know who . the lawyer will only say that it wasn t the other side . 
  I ve no idea . 
  so !   think Adrian .   no nearer , except that , if a liar , he s a good one ! 
  I like young Croom ,   say Dornford ;   he s behave decently , and have hard luck . that ll save he from bankruptcy . 
  bit mysterious , though ,   murmur Adrian . 
  it be . 
  on the whole ,   adrian thought ,   I believe he do . but what a poker face !   he say , however : 
  how do you find Clare since the case ? 
  a little more cynical . she express her view on my profession rather freely when we be rid this morning . 
  do you think she ll marry young Croom ? 
 Dornford shake his head . 
  I doubt it , especially if what you say about those cost be true . she might have out of a sense of obligation , but otherwise I think the case have work against his chance . she s no real feeling for he    at least that s my view . 
  Corven disillusion she thoroughly . 
  I ve certainly seldom see a more disillusioning face than his ,   murmured Dornford .   but she seem to I head for quite an amusing life on her own . she s get pluck and , like all these young woman now , she s essentially independent . 
  yes , I can t see Clare be domestic . 
 Dornford be silent .   would you say that of Dinny , too ?   he ask suddenly . 
  well , I can t see Clare as a mother ; Dinny I can . I can t see Dinny here , there and everywhere ; Clare I can . all the same     domestic   of Dinny ! it s not the word . 
  no !   say Dornford fervently .   I don t know what be . you believe very much in she , don t you ? 
 Adrian nod . 
  Enormously . 
  it s be tremendous for I ,   say Dornford , very low ,   to have come across she ; but I m afraid so far it s be nothing to she . 
  much to allow for ,   suggest Adrian .    Patience be a virtue ,   or so it use to be before the world go up in that blue flame and never come down again . 
  but I m rise forty . 
  well , Dinny s rise twenty - nine . 
  what you tell I just now make a difference , or    doesn t it ? 
  about Siam ? I think it do    a great difference . 
  well thank you . 
 they part with a firm clasp , and Adrian branch off northward . he walk slowly , think of the balance - sheet that confront each lover s unlimited liability . no watering of capital nor any insurance could square or guarantee that shift lifelong document . by love be man fling into the world ; with love be he in business nearly all his day , make debt or profit ; and when he die be by the result of love , if not by the parish , bury and forget . in this swarm London not a creature but be deeply in account with a Force so whimsical , inexorable , and strong , that none , man or woman , in their proper sens would choose to do business with it .   good match ,    happy marriage ,    ideal partnership ,    life - long union ,   ledgere against   don t get on ,    just a flare up ,    tragic state of thing ,    misfit ! all his other activity man could insure , modify , foresee , provide against   save the inconvenient activity of death ; love he could not . it step to he out of the night , into the night return . it stay , it flee . on one side or the other of the balance sheet it score an entry , leave he to cast up and wait for the next entry . it mock dictator , parliament , judge , bishop , police , and even good intention ; it madden with joy and grief ; wanton , procreate , thieve , and murder ; be devoted , faithful , fickle . it have no shame , and own no master ; build home and gutte they ; pass by on the other side ; and now and again make of two heart one heart till death . to think of London , Manchester , Glasgow without love appear to Adrian , walk up the Charing Cross Road , to be easy ; and yet without love not one of these pass citizen would be sniff the petrol of this night air , not one grimy brick would have be lay upon brick , not one bus be drone past , no street musician would wail , nor lamp light up the firmament . a somewhat primary concern ! and he , whose primary concern be with the bone of ancient man , who but for love would have have no bone to be dig up , classify and keep under glass , think of Dornford and Dinny , and whether they would   click   . . . 
 and Dornford , on his way to Harcourt Buildings , think even more intensively of himself and she . rise forty ! this overmaster wish of his    for its fulfilment it be now or never with he ! if he be not to become set in the groove of a   getter - on ,   he must marry and have child . life have become a half - bake thing without Dinny to give it meaning and savour . she have become    what have she not become ? and , pass through the narrow portal of Middle Temple Lane , he say to a learn brother , also move towards his bed : 
  what s go to win the Derby , Stubbs ? 
  God know !   say his learn brother , wonder why he have play that last trump when he do , instead of when he didn t . . . 
 and in Mount Street Sir Lawrence , come into her room to say   good - night ,   find his wife sit up in bed in the lace cap which always make she look so young , and , on the edge of the bed , in his black silk dressing - gown , sit down . 
  well , Em ? 
  Dinny will have two boy and a girl . 
  deuce she will ! that s count her chicken rather fast . 
  somebody must . give I a nice kiss . 
 Sir Lawrence stoop over and comply . 
  when she marry ,   say Lady Mont , shut her eye ,   she ll only be half there for a long time . 
  well half there at the beginning than not at all at the end . but what make you think she ll take he ? 
  my bone . we don t like be leave out when it come to the point , Lawrence . 
  Continuation of the specie . H m ! 
  if he d get into a scrape , or break his leg . 
  well give he a hint . 
  his liver s sound . 
  how do you know that ? 
  the white of his eye be blue . those browny man often have liver . 
 Sir Lawrence stand up . 
  my trouble ,   he say ,   be to see Dinny sufficiently interested in herself again to get marry . after all , it be a personal activity . 
  Harridge s for bed ,   murmur Lady Mont. 
 Sir Lawrence s eyebrow rise . Em be inexhaustible ! 
 chapter 37 

 she whose abstinence from interest in herself be interesting so many people , receive three letter on Wednesday morning . that which she open first say : 
  DINNY DARLING  
  I try to pay , but Tony would have none of it , and go off like a rocket ; so I m a wholly unattached female again . if you hear any news of he , let I have it . 
  Dornford get more   interesting - look   every day . we only talk of you , and he s raise my salary to three hundred as compensation . 
  love to you and all , 
  CLARE . 
 that which she open second say : 
  MY DEAR DINNY  
  I m go to stick it here . the mare arrive on Monday . I have Muskham down yesterday , and he be jolly decent , didn t say a word about the case . I m try to take up bird . there be one thing you could do for I if you would    find out who pay those cost . it s badly on my mind . 
  ever so many thank for always be so nice to I . 
  your ever , 
  TONY CROOM . 
 that which she read last say : 
  DINNY , MY dear  
  nothing do . he either didn t , or else play   possum ,   but if so it be very good   possum .   all the same , I wouldn t put it past he that it be   possum .   if you really set store by know , I think I should ask he point - blank . I don t believe he would tell you a lie , even   a little one .   as you know , I like he . in my avuncular opinion he be still on the gold standard . 
  your ever devoted 
  ADRIAN . 
 so ! she feel a vague irritation . and this feeling , which she have think momentary , she find to be recurrent . her state of mind , indeed , like the weather , turn cold again and torpid . she write to Clare what Tony Croom have write of himself , and that he have not mention she . she write to Tony Croom , and neither mention Clare nor answer his question about the cost ; she concentrate on bird    they seem safe , and to lead nowhere . she write to Adrian :   I m feel I ought to be wound - up , only there d be no dividend for the shareholder . it s very cold and dull , my consolation be that little   cuff   be begin to   sit up and take real notice   of I . 
 and then , as if by arrangement with the clerk of the course at Ascot , the weather change to   set warm ; and , suddenly , she write to Dornford . she write on pig , their breed and sty , the Government and the farmer . she end with these word : 
  we be all very worried by not know who have settle the cost in my sister s case . it be so disquieting to be under an obligation to an unknown person . could you by any mean find out for we ?   she debate some time how to sign herself in this her first letter to he , and finally write   your always , Dinny Charwell . 
 his answer come very quickly : 
  MY DEAR DINNY  
  I be delighted to get a letter from you . to answer your last question first . I will do my good to get the lawyer to   come clean ,   but if they win t tell you , I can t imagine their tell I . still , I can try . though I fancy that if your sister or young Croom insist they d have to tell . now about pig    there follow certain information , and a lamentation that agriculture be still not be properly tackle .   if only they would realise that all the need pig , poultry , and potato , nearly all the vegetable , much of the fruit , and much more than the present dairy produce , can really be produce at home , and by a graduated prohibition of foreign produce encourage , and indeed force , our home grower to supply the home market , we should , within ten year , have a living and profitable native agriculture once more , no rise to speak of in the cost of living , and a huge saving in our import bill . you see how new I be to politic ! wheat and meat be the red herring across the trail . wheat and meat from the Dominions , and the rest   bar hot climate fruit and vegetable   home - grown , be my motto . I hope your father agree . Clare be become restive , and I m wonder if she wouldn t be happy in a more active job than this . if I can come across a good one , I shall advise she to take it . would you ask your mother whether I should be in the way if I come down for the last week - end this month ? she be good enough to tell I to let she know any time I be come to the constituency . I be again at Cavalcade the other night . it wear well , but I miss you . I can t even begin to tell you how I miss you . 
  your ever faithful 
  EUSTACE DORNFORD . 
 miss she ! after the faint warmth those wistful word arouse , she think almost at once of Clare . Restive ! who would be otherwise in her anomalous position ? she have not be down at Condaford since the case . and that seem to Dinny very natural . however one might say it didn t matter what people think , it do , especially in a place where one have grow up , and belong , as it be , to the blood royal of the neighbourhood . and Dinny think , unhappily :   I don t know what I want for she    and that s lucky , because one day she ll see exactly what she want for herself .   how nice to see exactly what one want for oneself ! she read Dornford s letter again , and suddenly face her own feeling for the first time . be she or be she not ever go to marry ? if so , she would as soon marry Eustace Dornford as anyone    she like , admire , could talk to he . but her    past ! how funny it sound ! her   past ,   strangle almost from birth , yet the deep thing she would ever know !   one of these day you ll have to go down into the battle again .   unpleasant to be think a shirker by one s own mother ! but it wasn t shirk ! spot of colour rise in her cheek . it be something no one would understand    a horror of be unfaithful to he to whom she have belong in soul if not in body . of be unfaithful to that utter surrender , which she know could never be repeat . 
  I be not in love with Eustace ,   she think ;   he know it , he know I can t even pretend it . if he want I on those term , what be it fair for I    what be it possible for I to do ?   she go out into the old yew - hedge rose garden , where the first burst of rose have begin , and wander round , smell at this and that , follow half - heartedly by the spaniel Foch , who have no feeling for flower . 
  whatever I do ,   she think ,   I ought to do now . I can t keep he on tenterhook . 
 she stand by the sundial , where the shadow be an hour behind its time , and look into the eye of the sun over the fruit tree beyond the yew hedge . if she marry he , there would be child    without they it would not be possible . she see frankly    or think she do    where she stand in the matter of sex . what she could not see be how it would all turn for herself and for he in the recess of the spirit . Restless , she wander from rose - bush to rose - bush , extinguish the few greenfly between her gloved finger . and , in a corner , with a sort of despair , the spaniel Foch sit down unnoticed and eat a quantity of coarse grass . 
 she write to Dornford the same evening . her mother would be delighted if he would come for that week - end . her father quite agree with his view on agriculture , but be not sure that anyone else do , except Michael , who , after listen to he carefully one evening in London , have say :   yes . what s want be a lead , and where s it come from ?   she hop that when he come down he would be able to tell she about those cost . it must have be thrill to see Cavalcade again . do he know a flower call meconopsis , if that be the way to spell it , a sort of poppy of a most lovely colour ? it come from the Himalayas , and so would be suitable for Campden Hill , which she believe have much the same climate . if he could induce Clare to come down it would rejoice the heart of the aborigine . this time she sign herself   always your ,   a distinction too subtle to explain even to herself . 
 tell her mother that he be come , she add : 
  I ll try and get Clare ; and don t you think , mother , that we ought to ask Michael and Fleur ? they be very sweet to put we up so long . 
 Lady Charwell sigh . 
  one get into a way of just go on . but do , dear . 
  they ll talk tennis , and that ll be so nice and useful . 
 Lady Charwell look at her daughter , in whose voice something recall the Dinny of two year back . 
 when Dinny know that Clare be come , as well as Michael and Fleur , she debate whether to tell Tony Croom . in the end she decide not to , sorrowfully , for she have for he the fellow feeling of one who have be through the same mill . 
 the camouflage above her father s and mother s feeling touch she . Dornford    high time , of course , he be down in the constituency again ! pity he hadn t a place of his own    didn t do to get out of touch with the elector ! presumably he d come by car , and bring Clare ; or Michael and Fleur could call for she ! by such remark they hide their nervousness about Clare and about herself . 
 she have just put the last flower in the last bedroom when the first car slide up the driveway ; and she come down the stair to see Dornford stand in the hall . 
  this place have a soul , Dinny . it may be the fantail on the stone roof , or perhaps the deep way it s settle in , but you catch it at once . 
 she leave her hand in his long than she have mean to . 
  it s be so overgrown . there s the smell , too    old hay and flower verbena , and perhaps the mullion be crumble . 
  you look well , Dinny . 
  I be , thank you . you haven t have time for Wimbledon , I suppose ? 
  no . but Clare s be go    she s come straight from it with the young Monts . 
  what do you mean in your letter by   restive ? 
  well , as I see Clare , she must be in the picture , and just now she isn t. 
 Dinny nod . 
  have she say anything to you about Tony Croom ? 
  yes . she laugh and say he d drop she like a hot potato . 
 Dinny take his hat and hang it up . 
  about those cost ?   she say , without turn . 
  well , I go to see Forsyte specially , but I get nothing out of he . 
  oh ! would you like a wash , or would you rather go straight up ? dinner s at quarter - past eight . it s half - past seven now . 
  straight up , if I may . 
  you re in a different room ; I ll show you . 
 she precede he to the foot of the little stairway lead to the priest s room . 
  that s your bathroom . up here , now . 
  the priest s room ? 
  yes . there s no ghost .   she cross to the window .   see ! he be feed here at night from the roof . do you like the view ? well in the spring when the blossom s out , of course . 
  Lovely !   he stand beside she at the window , and she could see his hand clench so hard on the stone sill that the knuckle show white . a bitter wind sweep through her being . here she have dream of stand with Wilfrid beside she . she lean against the side of the embrasured window and close her eye . when she open they he be face she , she could see his lip tremble , his hand clasp behind he , his eye fix on her face .   she move across to the door . 
  I ll have your thing bring up and unpacked at once . would you answer I one question : do you pay those cost yourself ? 
 he give a start and a little laugh , as if he have be suddenly switch from tragedy to comedy . 
  I ? no . never even think of it . 
  oh !   say Dinny again .   you ve lot of time .   and she go down the little stairway . 
 do she believe he ? whether she believe he or not , do it make any difference ? the question would be ask and must be answer .   one more river    one more river to cross !   and at the sound of the second car she go hurry down the stair . 
 chapter 38 

 during that strange week - end , with only Michael and Fleur at ease , Dinny receive one piece of enlightenment as she stroll in the garden . 
  em tell I ,   say Fleur ,   you re all work up about those cost    she say you think Dornford pay they , and that it s give you a feeling of obligation ? 
  oh ? well , it be worry , like find you owe nothing to your dressmaker . 
  my dear ,   say Fleur ,   for your strictly private ear , I pay they . Roger come to dinner and make a song about hat to send in such a bill to people who have no money to spare , so I talk it over with Michael and send Roger a cheque . my Dad make his money out of the Law , so it seem appropriate . 
 Dinny star . 
  you see ,   continue Fleur , take her arm ,   thank to the Government convert that loan , all my beautiful gilt - edged have go up about ten point , so that , even after pay that nine hundred - odd , I m still about fifteen thousand rich than I be , and they re still go up . I ve only tell you , in confidence , because I be afraid it would weigh with you in make up your mind about Dornford . tell I : would it ? 
  I don t know ,   say Dinny dully ; and she didn t. 
  Michael say Dornford s the fresh egg he s come across for a long time ; and Michael be very sensitive to freshness in egg . you know ,   say Fleur , stop suddenly , and let go her arm ,   you puzzle I , Dinny . everybody can see what you re cut out for    wife and mother . of course , I know what you ve be through , but the past bury its dead . it be so , I ve be through it , too . it s the present and the future that matter , and we re the present , and our child be the future . and you specially    because you re so stuck on tradition and continuity and that    ought to carry on . anybody who let a memory spoil her life    forgive I , old thing , but it s rather obviously now or never with you . and to think of you with   never   chalk against you be too bleak . I ve precious little MORAL sense ,   continue Fleur , sniff at a rose ,   but I ve a lot of the commoner article , and I simply hate to see waste . 
 Dinny , touch by the look in those hazel eye with the extraordinarily clear white , stand very still , and say quietly : 
  if I be a Catholic , like he , I shouldn t have any doubt . 
  the cloister ?   say Fleur sharply :   no ! my mother s a Catholic , but    no ! anyway , you re not a Catholic . no , my dear    the hearth . that title be wrong , you know . it can t be both . 
 Dinny smile .   I do apologise for worry people so . do you like these Angèle Pernets ? 
 she have no talk with Dornford all that Saturday , preoccupy as he be with the conviction of the neighbouring farmer . but after dinner , when she be score for the four who be play russian pool , he come and stand beside she . 
  hilarity in the home ,   she say , add nine present by Fleur to the side on which she be not play :   how do you find the farmer ? 
  Confident . 
  Con   ? 
  that whatever s do will make thing bad . 
  oh ! ah ! they re so used to that , you see . 
  and what have you be do all day , Dinny ? 
  pick flower , walk with Fleur , play with   cuff ,   and dally with the pig . . . . five on to your side , Michael , and seven on to the other . this be a very christian game    do unto other as you would they should do unto you . 
  russian pool !   murmur Dornford :   curious name nowadays for anything so infected with religion . 
  Apropos , if you want to go to Mass tomorrow , there s Oxford . 
  you wouldn t come with I ? 
  oh ! yes . I love Oxford , and I ve only once hear a Mass. it take about three - quarter of an hour to drive over . 
 his look at she be much as the spaniel Foch give when she return to he after absence . 
  Quarter past nine , then , in my car . . . 
 when next day they be seat side by side , he say :   shall we slide the roof back ? 
  please . 
  Dinny , this be like a dream . 
  I wish my dream have such a smooth action . 
  do you dream much ? 
  yes . 
  nice or nasty ? 
  oh ! like all dream , a little of both . 
  any recurrent one ? 
  one . a river I can t cross . 
  ah ! like an examination one can t pass . dream be ruthlessly reveal . if you could cross that river in your dream , would you be happy ? 
  I don t know . 
 there be a silence , till he say : 
  this car be a new make . you don t have to change gear in the old way . but you don t care for drive , do you ? 
  I m an idiot at it . 
  you re not modern , you see , Dinny . 
  no . I m much less efficient than most people . 
  in your own way I don t know anybody so efficient . 
  you mean I can arrange flower . 
  and see a joke ; and be    a darling . 
 it seem to Dinny the last thing she have be able to be for nearly two year , so she merely reply : 
  what be your college at Oxford ? 
  Oriel 
 and the conversation lapse . 
 some hay be stack and some still lie out , and the midsummer air be full of its scent . 
  I m afraid ,   say Dornford suddenly ,   I don t want to go to Mass. I don t get so many chance to be with you , Dinny . let s make for Clifton and sit in a boat . 
  well , it be rather lovely for indoor . 
 they turn off to the left , and , pass through Dorchester , come to the river by the bend and bluff at Clifton . leave the car , they procure a punt and after drift a little , moor it to the bank . 
  this ,   say Dinny ,   be a nice exhibition of high purpose , I don t think .   something do   isn t always what be attempt , be it ? 
  no , but it s often well . 
  I wish we d bring Foch ; he like any kind of vehicle where he can sit on one s foot and get a nice sick feeling . 
 but in that hour and more on the river they hardly talk at all . it be as if he understand    which , as a fact , he do not    how , in that drowsing summer silence , on water half in sunlight , half in shade , she be come close to he than ever before . there be , indeed , to Dinny something really restful and reassuring in those long lazing minute , when she need not talk , but just take summer in at every pore    its scent , and hum , and quiet movement , the careless and untroubled hovering of its green spirit , the vague sway of the bulrush , and the clucking of the water , and always that distant calling of the wood pigeon from far tree . she be find , indeed , the truth of Clare s word , that he could   let one s mouth alone . 
 by the time they be back at the Grange , it have be one of the most silent and satisfactory morning she have ever know . but between his :   thank you , Dinny , a heavenly time ,   and his real feeling , she could tell from his eye there be a great gap fix . it be unnatural the way he keep his feeling in check ! and , as become a woman , compassion soon change in she to irritation . anything well than this eternal repression , perfect consideration , patience , and long wait ! and all that afternoon she see as little of he as she have see much all the morning . his eye , fix on she with longing and a sort of reproach , become an add source of vexation , and she carefully refrain from seem to notice they .   Verra pavairse ,   her old scottish nurse would have say . 
 bid he   good night   at the foot of the stair , she feel a keen pleasure at the dashed look on his face , and an equally keen sense that she be   a beast .   she enter her bedroom in a curious turmoil , at odd with herself , and he , and all the world . 
  damn !   she mutter , feel for the switch . 
 a low laugh startle she . Clare , in her pyjama , be perch on the window - seat , smoke a cigarette . 
  Don t turn up , Dinny ; come and sit here with I , and let s puff out of the window together . 
 three wide - open casement lay bare the night under a teazle - blue heaven tremble with star . Dinny , look out at it , say : 
  where have you be ever since lunch ? I didn t even know you be back . 
  have a gasper ? you seem to want soothe . 
 Dinny expel a puff of smoke . 
  I do . I m sick of myself . 
  so be I ,   murmur Clare ,   but I feel well . 
  what have you be do , then ? 
 again Clare laugh , and in the sound be something that make Dinny say : 
  see Tony Croom ? 
 Clare lean back and her throat show pale . 
  yes , my dear . the Ford and I go over . Dinny , we ve justify the law . Tony no long look like a bereaved orphan . 
  oh !   say Dinny , and again :   oh ! 
 her sister s voice , warm and languid , and satisfy , make her cheek go hot and her breath come quickly . 
  yes , I prefer he as lover to a friend . how sane be the law    it know what we ought to have be ! and I like his converted cottage . only there s a fireplace upstairs that still want opening up . 
  be you go to get marry , then ? 
  my dear , how can we ? no , we shall live in sin . later , I suppose , we shall see . I think this   nisi   period be very thoughtful . Tony will come up in the middle of the week , and I shall go down at the week - end . and all so legal . 
 Dinny laugh . Clare sit up , suddenly , clasp her knee . 
  I m happy than I ve be for ever so long . it doesn t do to make other people wretche . also , woman ought to be love , it suit they somehow . man , too . 
 Dinny lean out of the window , and the night slowly cool her cheek . beautiful and deep it be , out there , the shape unstirring , dark and as if brood . through the tense stillness come a far drone , swell to the rightful sound of a pass car , and , between the tree , she could see its travel light burnish up the hedgerow for fly moment , and die beyond the angle of vision . then the drone grow faint and fainter , and stillness recommence . a moth fly by , and a little white feather from a fantail on the roof float down , turn over in the quiet air . she feel Clare s arm come round her waist . 
  good - night , old thing ! rub nose . 
 withdraw from the night , Dinny clasp that slim pyjamae body . their cheek touch , and to each the warmth of the other s skin be move    to clare a blessing , to Dinny an infection , as though the linger glow from many kiss be pass into she . 
 when her sister have go , she move restlessly up and down her dark room . 
  it doesn t do to make people wretche ! . . . woman ought to be love . . . . man , too .   quite a minor prophet ! convert by lightning , like Paul on his way to wherever it be . up and down , up and down , till at last , quite tired , she turn on the light , throw off her clothe , and sit down in a wrapper to brush her hair . brush away at it , she star at her image in the glass with fascination , as if she have not see herself for a long time . the fever with which she have be infect seem still in her cheek and eye and hair , she look unnaturally vivid to herself ; or be it that the sun , while she and Dornford be sit in that punt , have leave she with this hot feeling in the vein ? she finish brush , shake back her hair , and get into bed . she have leave the casement open , the curtain undrawn ; and the starry night confront she lie on her back in the darkness of her narrow room . the hall clock strike midnight faintly    only three hour or so before it would be light ! she think of Clare sink in beauty sleep close by . she think of Tony Croom , deep - drug with happiness , in his converted cottage , and the old tag from the Beggars   Opera run in her mind :   with bliss her kiss dissolve we in pleasure and soft respose .   but she ! she could not sleep ! she feel , as sometimes when a little girl , that she must roam about , explore the strangeness of the dead of night , sit on the stair , peep into room , curl up in some armchair . and , get up , she put on her dressing - gown and slipper and steal out . she sit on the top stair , clasp her knee and listen . not a sound in the old dark house , except a little scrap noise , where some mouse be at work . she rise , clutch the banister , and creep downstairs . the hall smell musty already , too much old wood and furniture to stand enclosure by the night . she grope across to the drawing - room door and open it . here flower and last year s pot - pourri and stale cigarette smoke scent the air with a heavy reek . she make her way to one of the french window , draw the curtain back , and open it . she stand there a minute take deep breath . very dark , very still , very warm . by starlight she could just see the sheen on the magnolia leave . leave the window open , she seek her favourite old armchair , and curl up in it with her foot tuck under she . there , hug herself , she try to recapture the feeling that she be a child again . the night air come in , the clock tick , and the hot feeling in her vein seem to cool away in measure with its rhythm . she shut her eye fast , and the sort of cosiness she use to feel in that old chair , as if she be all clasped and protect , steal upon she ; but still she do not sleep . behind she from the window with the rise of the moon a presence have steal in , a sort of finger uncanny light , slowly lift each familiar object into ghostly semblance of itself . it be as if the room have come awake to keep her company ; and the feeling she have sometimes have , that the old house have a life of its own , feel , see , know its spell of wakefulness and of slumber , tingle once more within she . suddenly , she hear footstep on the terrace and sit up startled . 
 someone say :   who be that ? be anyone there ? 
 a figure stand in the open window ; by the voice she know that it be Dornford , and say : 
  only I . 
  only you ! 
 she see he come in and stand beside the chair , look down . he be still in his evening clothe , and , with his back to the faint light , she could hardly see his face at all . 
  anything the matter , Dinny ? 
  just couldn t sleep . and you ? 
  I ve be finish a bit of work in the library . I go out on the terrace for a breath , and see this window open . 
  which of we be go to say :   how marvellous ? 
 neither of they say anything . but Dinny unclasp herself and let her foot seek the ground . 
 suddenly , Dornford put his hand to his head and turn his back on she . 
  forgive my being like this ,   she murmur ,   I naturally didn t expect   
 he turn round again , and drop on his knee beside she .   Dinny , it s the end of the world , unless   
 she put her hand on his hair and say quietly :     it s the beginning . 
 chapter 39 

 Adrian sit write to his wife . 
  condaford : August 10 . 
  MY very dear  
  I promise to give you a true and particular account of how Dinny go off . look in the Lantern for their conception of   the bride and bridegroom leave the church .   fortunately , the lens of that enquire organ catch they just before they push off    except in movie the camera simply can not record movement ; it always get the sole of one foot cock towards the eye , flannelise the knee of the other leg , and upset the set of the trouser . Dornford look quite good value    in this style , fourteen - and - six ; and Dinny    bless she !    without the   bride s smile ,   almost as if she see the joke . ever since the engagement , I ve wonder what she s really feel . love such as she give Desert it certainly be not , but I don t believe there s any physical reluctance . when , yesterday , I say to she :   in good heart ?   her answer be :   no half heart , anyway .   we both of we have reason to know that she can go all out in what she do for other people . but she s really do this for herself . she ll be carry on    she ll have child    and she ll count . that s as it should be , and so I believe she feel . if she hasn t what hopeful youth call   a crush on   Dornford , she admire and respect he , and I think quite rightly . besides , he know from I , if not from she , what she s capable of , and win t expect more until he get it . the weather hold up all right , and the church    wherein , by the way , your special correspondent be baptize    in the word of Verdant Green never look   berrer .   the congregation be perhaps a trifle early English , though it seem to I you could have get most of the face at Woolworth s. 
  at the top of the nave , in the more holy position , come our own gang , County and would - be County . the more I look at County the more I think how merciful that the state of life into which it have please God to call we have prevent the Charwells of our generation from look County . even Con and Liz , who have to stick down here all the time , haven t get quite the hang of it . remarkable , if you think , that there be such a thing as   County   leave ; but I suppose it ll last while there s   huntin   and shootin . I remember , as a boy , out hunt   when I could screw a mount out of our stable or somebody else s , I use to lurk out of reach of people for fear of have to talk to they , their word and music be so try . well to be human than County or even would - be County . I must say that Clare , after all her jollification in the court , carry it off amazingly , and so far as I could see , nobody have the nerve to show any of the feeling which , as a fact , at this time of day , they probably hadn t get . then , a little less holy , come the village in force    Dinny s a great favourite with they    quite a show of old inhabitant . some real face ; an old chap call Downer , in a Bath chair , all   Whitechapel   whisker and beard , and shrewd remain brown space . he perfectly remember Hilary and I fall off a hay - cart we oughtn t to have be on . and old Mrs. Tibwhite    a sweet old witch of a thing , who always let I eat her raspberry . the schoolchildren have a special holiday . Liz tell I not one in twenty of they have ever see London , or indeed be ten mile out of the village , even now . but there s a real difference in the young man and maiden . the girl have most excellent leg and stocking and quite tasteful dress ; and the youth good flannel suit and collar and tie    all do by the motor bike and the film . lot of flower in the church , and a good deal of bell - ring and blowy organ - playing . Hilary do the swearing - in with his usual rapidity , and the old rector , who hold the sponge , look blue at the pace he go and the thing he leave out . well , you want , of course , to hear about those dress . the general effect , as they stand in the aisle , be what you might call delphinian . Dinny , even in white , have that look , and , consciously or not , the bridesmaid be tog up accord ; and what with Monica and Joan and two young Dornford niece be slim and tall , they really look like a planting of blue delphinium , precede by four blue tot , sweet , but none as pretty as Sheila . really , that chickenpox be very perverse ; you and your two be terribly miss , and Ronald as a page would just have top everything up . I walk back to the Grange with Lawrence and Em , an impose steel - grey presence slightly mar where   tear have get mix with her powder sometimes .   in fact , I have to stop she under a stricken tree and do some good work with one of those silk handkerchief you give I . Lawrence be in feather    think the whole show the least gimcrack thing he have see for a long time , and have now more hope of the pound go still low . em have be to see the house on Campden Hill ; she predict that Dinny would be in love with Dornford within a year , which start another tear , so I call her attention to the tree which have in fact be strike by lightning while she and I and Hilary be stand under it .   yes ,   she say ,   you be squit    so providential ; and the butler make a penholder out of the wood ; it wouldn t hold nib , so I give it to Con for school , and he curse I . Lawrence , I m old .   Whereon Lawrence take her hand , and they walk hand in hand the rest of the way . 
  the reception be hold on the terrace and lawn ; everybody come , schoolchildren and all , a quaint mix - up , but jolly , it seem to I . I didn t know I be so fond of the old place . however much one may believe in levelling - up chance , there s something about old place . they can t be re - create if they re once let slip , and they focus landscape in a queer kind of way . some village and landscape seem to have no core    you can t explain why , but they feel hollow , and shallow and flat . a real old place put heart into a neighbourhood . if the people who live in it be not just selfish pig , it mean a lot in a quiet way to people who have no actual ownership in it . the Grange be a sort of anchor to this neighbourhood . I doubt if you d find a single villager , however poor , who grudge its existence , or wouldn t feel the bad for its ruination . generation of love and trouble , and goodness know not too much money , have be spend on it , and the result be something very hand - make and special . everything s change , and have get to change , no doubt , and how to save the old that s worth saving , whether in landscape , house , manner , institution , or human type , be one of our great problem , and the one that we bother least about . we save our work of art , our old furniture , we have our cult    and a strong one    of   antique ,   and not even the most go - ahead modern thought object to that . why not the same throughout our social life ?   the old order changeth    yes , but we ought to be able to preserve beauty and dignity , and the sense of service , and manner    thing that have come very slowly , and can be make to vanish very fast if we aren t set on preserve they somehow . human nature be what it be , nothing seem to I more futile than to level to the ground and start again . the old order have many excrescence , and be by no mean   all werry capital ,   but , now that the housebreaker be in , one do see that you can smash in an hour what have take century to produce ; and that , unless you can see your way pretty clearly to replace what admittedly wasn t perfect with something more perfect , you re throw human life back instead of advance it . the thing be to pick on what s worth preserve , though I don t say there s very much that be . well , that s all very portentous ! to come back to Dinny    they re go to spend their honeymoon in Shropshire , round about where Dornford come from . then they come back here for a bit , then settle in on Campden Hill . I hope this weather will last for they . honeymoon in wet weather , especially when one be keener on the other than the other be on the one , should be very try . Dinny s   go away   frock , you may like to know , be blue , and suit she not quite down to the ground . we have a minute together . I give she your love , and she send you her , and say :   well , I m very nearly over , Uncle dear . wish I luck !   I feel like pip my eye . over what ? well , anyway , if wish for luck will help , she go wreathe with they ; but all that kiss business be hard to get through . Con and Liz take theirs down at the car . I feel rather a brute , look at their face when she d go . they go away in Dornford s car , with himself drive . after that I confess that I slunk off . they re all right , I know , but it didn t feel like it . there s such cursed finality about a wedding , however easy divorce be or may become ; besides , Dinny be not the sort who would take someone who love she and then let he down ; it s the old - fashioned   for well for bad   there , but I think it ll be   for well    in the long run , anyway . I sneak out of sight into the orchard and then up through the field to the wood . I hope it be as gorgeous a day with you as it be here . these beech - wood on the slope be more beautiful than the careful beech - clump they plant on down , though even those have a sort of temple - like effect , in spite of be mean as landmark or to give shade to sheep . I can assure you that wood about half - past five be enchant . I go up the slope and sit down and just enjoy it . great shift shafts of sunlight come in below and splash the trunk ; and ever - so - green cool space between    only one word for it , holy . the tree , many of they , go up branchless for a long way , and some of the trunk look almost white . not much undergrowth and very little   life   except jay and a brown squirrel . when you re in a wood as lovely as that , and think of death duty and timber , your heart turn over and over as if you d sup entirely off spanish onion . two hundred year in his sight may be as yesterday , but in mine I confess they re like eternity . these wood be no long   shoot ,   and anybody can come into they . I suppose the young folk do    what a place to wander about in , lovere ! I lie down in a patch of sunlight and think of you ; and two small grey wood - dove perch about fifty yard off and talk cosily to each other , so that I could have do with my field - glass . willow - herb and tansy be out where tree have come down and be clear away    foxglove don t seem to flourish round here . it be very restful , except that one ache a bit because it be green and beautiful . Queer , that   beauty   ache ! lurk consciousness of mortality , perhaps knowledge that all thing must slip away from one in time , and the great their beauty the great the loss in store ! Mistake in our make - up , that . we ought to feel : the great the earth s beauty , the more marvellous the screen of light and wind and foliage , the lovelier nature , in fact    the deep and sweeter our rest in she will be . all very puzzling ! I know the sight of a dead rabbit out in a wood like that affect I more than it do in a poulterer s shop . I pass one as I be go back    kill by a weasel ; its soft limpness seem say :   Pity I m dead !   death may be a good thing , but life s a well . a dead shape that s still a shape move one horribly . shape be life , and when life s go one can t see why shape should remain even for the little time it do . I d have like to stay and see the moon come up and peer about in there , and slowly fill it all up with ghostly glistening ; then I might have catch the feeling that shape live on in rarefied form , and all of we , even the dead rabbit and bird and moth , still move and have their being    which may be the truth , for all I know or ever shall . but dinner be at eight , so I have to come away with the light still green and golden    there flow alliteration again like a twopenny brook ! outside , on the terrace , I meet Dinny s spaniel , Foch . know his history , it be like meet a banshee    not that he be howl ; but it remind I sharply of what Dinny have be through . he be sit on his haunch and look down at nothing , as dog    especially spaniel    will when thing be beyond they , and the one and only scent be no more , for the time be . he ll go with they , of course , to Campden Hill when they come back . I go up and have a bath , and dress , and stand at my window , listen to the drone of a tractor still cut corn , and get a little drunk on whiff from the honeysuckle that climb and flower round my window . I see now what Dinny mean by :   over .   over the river that she use to dream she couldn t cross . well , all life be cross river , or get drown on the way . I hope    I believe    she s touch shore . dinner be just like dinner always be    we didn t talk of she , or mention our feeling in any way . I play Clare a game of billiard    she strike I as soft and more attractive than I ve ever see she . and then I sit up till past midnight with Con , in order , apparently , that we might say nothing . they ll miss she a lot , I m afraid . 
  the silence in my room , when I get up here at last , be stunning , and the moonlight almost yellow . the moon s hiding , now , behind one of the elm , and the evening star shin above a dead branch . a few other star be out , but very dim . it s a night far from our time , far even from our world . not an owl hoot , but the honeysuckle still sweet . and so , my most dear , here endeth the tale ! good night ! 
  your ever love 
  ADRIAN . 
