 JOHN GALSWORTHY 
 the MAN of PROPERTY 
 PART I 
 CHAPTER i - ' AT HOME ' AT OLD JOLYON 's 
 those privileged to be present at a family festival of the Forsytes have see that charming and instructive sight - an upper middle - class family in full plumage . but whosoever of these favour person have possess the gift of psychological analysis   a talent without monetary value and properly ignore by the Forsytes , have witness a spectacle , not only delightful in itself , but illustrative of an obscure human problem . in plainer word , he have glean from a gathering of this family - no branch of which have a liking for the other , between no three member of whom exist anything worthy of the name of sympathy - evidence of that mysterious concrete tenacity which render a family so formidable a unit of society , so clear a reproduction of society in miniature . he have be admit to a vision of the dim road of social progress , have understand something of patriarchal life , of the swarming of savage horde , of the rise and fall of nation . he be like one who , have watch a tree grow from its planting - a paragon of tenacity , insulation , and success , amidst the death of a hundred other plant less fibrous , sappy , and persistent - one day will see it flourish with bland , full foliage , in an almost repugnant prosperity , at the summit of its efflorescence . 
 on June 15 , eighteen eighty - six , about four of the afternoon , the observer who chance to be present at the house of old Jolyon Forsyte in Stanhope Gate , might have see the high efflorescence of the Forsytes . 
 this be the occasion of an ' at home ' to celebrate the engagement of Miss June Forsyte , old Jolyon 's granddaughter , to Mr. Philip Bosinney . in the bravery of light glove , buff waistcoat , feather and frock , the family be present , even Aunt Ann , who now but seldom leave the corner of her brother Timothy 's green drawing - room , where , under the aegis of a plume of dye pampas grass in a light blue vase , she sit all day reading and knitting , surround by the effigy of three generation of Forsytes . even Aunt Ann be there ; her inflexible back , and the dignity of her calm old face personify the rigid possessiveness of the family idea . 
 when a Forsyte be engage , married , or bear , the Forsytes be present ; when a Forsyte die - but no Forsyte have as yet die ; they do not die ; death be contrary to their principle , they take precaution against it , the instinctive precaution of highly vitalize person who resent encroachment on their property . 
 about the Forsytes mingle that day with the crowd of other guest , there be a more than ordinarily groom look , an alert , inquisitive assurance , a brilliant respectability , as though they be attire in defiance of something . the habitual sniff on the face of Soames Forsyte have spread through their rank ; they be on their guard . 
 the subconscious offensiveness of their attitude have constitute old Jolyon 's ' home ' the psychological moment of the family history , make it the prelude of their drama . 
 the Forsytes be resentful of something , not individually , but as a family ; this resentment express itself in an add perfection of raiment , an exuberance of family cordiality , an exaggeration of family importance , and - the sniff . danger - so indispensable in bring out the fundamental quality of any society , group , or individual - be what the Forsytes scent ; the premonition of danger put a burnish on their armour . for the first time , as a family , they appear to have an instinct of be in contact , with some strange and unsafe thing . 
 over against the piano a man of bulk and stature be wear two waistcoat on his wide chest , two waistcoat and a ruby pin , instead of the single satin waistcoat and diamond pin of more usual occasion , and his shaven , square , old face , the colour of pale leather , with pale eye , have its most dignified look , above his satin stock . this be Swithin Forsyte . close to the window , where he could get more than his fair share of fresh air , the other twin , James - the fat and the lean of it , old Jolyon call these brother - like the bulky Swithin , over six foot in height , but very lean , as though destine from his birth to strike a balance and maintain an average , brood over the scene with his permanent stoop ; his grey eye have an air of fix absorption in some secret worry , break at interval by a rapid , shift scrutiny of surround fact ; his cheek , thin by two parallel fold , and a long , clean - shaven upper lip , be frame within dundreary whisker . in his hand he turn and turn a piece of china . not far off , listen to a lady in brown , his only son Soames , pale and well - shave , dark - haire , rather bald , have poke his chin up sideways , carry his nose with that aforesaid appearance of ' sniff , ' as though despise an egg which he know he could not digest . behind he his cousin , the tall George , son of the fifth Forsyte , Roger , have a Quilpish look on his fleshy face , ponder one of his sardonic jest . something inherent to the occasion have affect they all . 
 seat in a row close to one another be three lady - Aunts Ann , hester   the two forsyte maid , and Juley   short for Julia , who not in first youth have so far forget herself as to marry Septimus Small , a man of poor constitution . she have survive he for many year . with her eld and young sister she live now in the house of Timothy , her sixth and young brother , on the Bayswater Road . each of these lady hold fan in their hand , and each with some touch of colour , some emphatic feather or brooch , testify to the solemnity of the opportunity . 
 in the centre of the room , under the chandelier , as become a host , stand the head of the family , old Jolyon himself . eighty year of age , with his fine , white hair , his dome - like forehead , his little , dark grey eye , and an immense white moustache , which droop and spread below the level of his strong jaw , he have a patriarchal look , and in spite of lean cheek and hollow at his temple , seem master of perennial youth . he hold himself extremely upright , and his shrewd , steady eye have lose none of their clear shining . thus he give an impression of superiority to the doubt and dislike of small man . have have his own way for innumerable year , he have earn a prescriptive right to it . it would never have occur to old Jolyon that it be necessary to wear a look of doubt or of defiance . 
 between he and the four other brother who be present , James , Swithin , Nicholas , and Roger , there be much difference , much similarity . in turn , each of these four brother be very different from the other , yet they , too , be alike . 
 through the vary feature and expression of those five face could be mark a certain steadfastness of chin , underlie surface distinction , mark a racial stamp , too prehistoric to trace , too remote and permanent to discuss - the very hall - mark and guarantee of the family fortune . 
 among the young generation , in the tall , bull - like George , in pallid strenuous Archibald , in young Nicholas with his sweet and tentative obstinacy , in the grave and foppishly determined Eustace , there be this same stamp - less meaningful perhaps , but unmistakable - a sign of something ineradicable in the family soul . at one time or another during the afternoon , all these face , so dissimilar and so alike , have wear an expression of distrust , the object of which be undoubtedly the man whose acquaintance they be thus assemble to make . Philip Bosinney be know to be a young man without fortune , but forsyte girl have become engaged to such before , and have actually marry they . it be not altogether for this reason , therefore , that the mind of the Forsytes misgave they . they could not have explain the origin of a misgiving obscure by the mist of family gossip . a story be undoubtedly tell that he have pay his duty call to Aunts Ann , Juley , and Hester , in a soft grey hat - a soft grey hat , not even a new one - a dusty thing with a shapeless crown . " so , extraordinary , my dear - so odd , " Aunt Hester , pass through the little , dark hall   she be rather short - sighted , have try to ' shoo ' it off a chair , take it for a strange , disreputable cat - Tommy have such disgraceful friend ! she be disturb when it do not move . 
 like an artist for ever seek to discover the significant trifle which embody the whole character of a scene , or place , or person , so those unconscious artist - the Forsytes have fasten by intuition on this hat ; it be their significant trifle , the detail in which be embed the meaning of the whole matter ; for each have ask himself : " come , now , should I have pay that visit in that hat ? " and each have answer " no ! " and some , with more imagination than other , have add : " it would never have come into my head ! " 
 George , on hear the story , grin . the hat have obviously be wear as a practical joke ! he himself be a connoisseur of such . " very haughty ! " he say , " the wild Buccaneer . " 
 and this mot , the ' Buccaneer , ' be bandy from mouth to mouth , till it become the favourite mode of allude to Bosinney . 
 her aunt reproach June afterwards about the hat . 
 " we do not   think you ought to let he , dear ! " they have say . 
 June have answer in her imperious brisk way , like the little embodiment of will she be : " oh ! what do it matter ? Phil never know what he be get on ! " 
 no one have credit an answer so outrageous . a man not to know what he have on ? no , no ! what indeed be this young man , who , in become engage to June , old Jolyon 's acknowledge heiress , have do so well for himself ? he be an architect , not in itself a sufficient reason for wear such a hat . none of the Forsytes happen to be architect , but one of they know two architect who would never have wear such a hat upon a call of ceremony in the London season . 
 dangerous - ah , dangerous ! June , of course , have not see this , but , though not yet nineteen , she be notorious . have she not say to Mrs. Soames - who be always so beautifully dress - that feather be vulgar ? Mrs. Soames have actually give up wear feather , so dreadfully downright be dear June ! 
 these misgiving , this disapproval , and perfectly genuine distrust , do not prevent the Forsytes from gather to old Jolyon 's invitation . an ' at home ' at Stanhope Gate be a great rarity ; none have be hold for twelve year , not indeed , since old Mrs. Jolyon have die . 
 never have there be so full an assembly , for , mysteriously unite in spite of all their difference , they have take arm against a common peril . like cattle when a dog come into the field , they stand head to head and shoulder to shoulder , prepare to run upon and trample the invader to death . they have come , too , no doubt , to get some notion of what sort of present they would ultimately be expect to give ; for though the question of wedding gift be usually graduate in this way : ' what be you givin ' ? Nicholas be givin ' spoon ! ' - so very much depend on the bridegroom . if he be sleek , well - brush , prosperous - look , it be more necessary to give he nice thing ; he would expect they . in the end each give exactly what be right and proper , by a species of family adjustment arrive at as price be arrive at on the Stock Exchange - the exact nicety be regulate at Timothy 's commodious , red - brick residence in bayswater , overlook the Park , where dwelt Aunts Ann , Juley , and hester . 
 the uneasiness of the forsyte family have be justify by the simple mention of the hat . how impossible and wrong would it have be for any family , with the regard for appearance which should ever characterize the great upper middle - class , to feel otherwise than uneasy ! 
 the author of the uneasiness stand talk to June by the further door ; his curly hair have a rumpled appearance , as though he find what be go on around he unusual . he have an air , too , of have a joke all to himself . George , speak aside to his brother , Eustace , say : 
 " look as if he might make a bolt of it - the dash Buccaneer ! " 
 this ' ve ry singular - look man , ' as Mrs. Small afterwards call he , be of medium height and strong build , with a pale , brown face , a dust - colour moustache , very prominent cheek - bone , and hollow check . his forehead slop back towards the crown of his head , and bulge out in bump over the eye , like forehead see in the Lion - house at the Zoo . he have sherry - colour eye , disconcertingly inattentive at time . Old Jolyon 's coachman , after drive June and Bosinney to the theatre , have remark to the butler : 
 " I dunno what to make of ' I m. look to I for all the world like an ' alf - tame leopard . " and every now and then a Forsyte would come up , sidle round , and take a look at he . 
 June stand in front , fend off this idle curiosity - a little bit of a thing , as somebody once say , ' all hair and spirit , ' with fearless blue eye , a firm jaw , and a bright colour , whose face and body seem too slender for her crown of red - gold hair . 
 a tall woman , with a beautiful figure , which some member of the family have once compare to a heathen goddess , stand look at these two with a shadowy smile . 
 her hand , glove in french grey , be cross one over the other , her grave , charming face hold to one side , and the eye of all man near be fasten on it . her figure sway , so balanced that the very air seem to set it move . there be warmth , but little colour , in her cheek ; her large , dark eye be soft . 
 but it be at her lip - ask a question , give an answer , with that shadowy smile - that man look ; they be sensitive lip , sensuous and sweet , and through they seem to come warmth and perfume like the warmth and perfume of a flower . 
 the engaged couple thus scrutinize be unconscious of this passive goddess . it be Bosinney who first notice she , and ask her name . 
 June take her lover up to the woman with the beautiful figure . 
 " Irene be my great chum , " she say : " please be good friend , you two ! " 
 at the little lady 's command they all three smile ; and while they be smile , soame Forsyte , silently appear from behind the woman with the beautiful figure , who be his wife , say : 
 " ah ! introduce I too ! " 
 he be seldom , indeed , far from Irene 's side at public function , and even when separate by the exigency of social intercourse , could be see follow she about with his eye , in which be strange expression of watchfulness and longing . 
 at the window his father , James , be still scrutinize the mark on the piece of china . 
 " I wonder at Jolyon 's allow this engagement , " he say to Aunt Ann . " they tell I there be no chance of their getting married for year . this young Bosinney "   he make the word a dactyl in opposition to general usage of a short o   " have get nothing . when Winifred married Dartie , I make he bring every penny into settlement - lucky thing , too - they would ha ' have nothing by this time ! " 
 Aunt Ann look up from her velvet chair . Grey curl band her forehead , curl that , unchanged for decade , have extinguish in the family all sense of time . she make no reply , for she rarely speak , husband her aged voice ; but to James , uneasy of conscience , her look be as good as an answer . 
 " well , " he say , " I could not   help Irene be have no money . soame be in such a hurry ; he get quite thin dancing attendance on she . " 
 put the bowl pettishly down on the piano , he let his eye wander to the group by the door . 
 " it be my opinion , " he say unexpectedly , " that it be just as well as it be . " 
 Aunt Ann do not ask he to explain this strange utterance . she know what he be think . if Irene have no money she would not be so foolish as to do anything wrong ; for they say - they say - she have be ask for a separate room ; but , of course , Soames have not .... 
 James interrupt her reverie : 
 " but where , " he ask , " be Timothy ? had not   he come with they ? " 
 through Aunt Ann 's compressed lip a tender smile force its way : 
 " no , he do not   think it wise , with so much of this diphtheria about ; and he so liable to take thing . " 
 James answer : 
 " well , he take good care of himself . I can not   afford to take the care of myself that he do . " 
 nor be it easy to say which , of admiration , envy , or contempt , be dominant in that remark . 
 Timothy , indeed , be seldom see . the baby of the family , a publisher by profession , he have some year before , when business be at full tide , scent out the stagnation which , indeed , have not yet come , but which ultimately , as all agree , be bind to set in , and , sell his share in a firm engage mainly in the production of religious book , have invest the quite conspicuous proceed in three per cent . consol . by this act he have at once assume an isolated position , no other Forsyte be content with less than four per cent . for his money ; and this isolation have slowly and surely undermine a spirit perhaps well than commonly endow with caution . he have become almost a myth - a kind of incarnation of security haunt the background of the forsyte universe . he have never commit the imprudence of marrying , or encumber himself in any way with child . 
 James resume , tap the piece of china : 
 " this be not   real old Worcester . I s'pose Jolyon 's tell you something about the young man . from all I can learn , he be get no business , no income , and no connection worth speak of ; but then , I know nothing - nobody tell I anything . " 
 Aunt Ann shake her head . over her square - chin , aquiline old face a trembling pass ; the spidery finger of her hand press against each other and interlace , as though she be subtly recharge her will . 
 the eld by some year of all the Forsytes , she hold a peculiar position amongst they . opportunist and egotist one and all - though not , indeed , more so than their neighbour - they quail before her incorruptible figure , and , when opportunity be too strong , what could they do but avoid she ! 
 twist his long , thin leg , James go on : 
 " Jolyon , he will have his own way . he be get no child " - and stop , recollect the continued existence of old Jolyon 's son , young Jolyon , June 's father , who have make such a mess of it , and do for himself by desert his wife and child and run away with that foreign governess . " well , " he resume hastily , " if he like to do these thing , I s'pose he can afford to . now , what be he go to give she ? I s'pose he will give she a thousand a year ; he be get nobody else to leave his money to . " 
 he stretch out his hand to meet that of a dapper , clean - shaven man , with hardly a hair on his head , a long , broken nose , full lip , and cold grey eye under rectangular brow . 
 " well , Nick , " he mutter , " how be you ? " 
 Nicholas Forsyte , with his bird - like rapidity and the look of a preternaturally sage schoolboy   he have make a large fortune , quite legitimately , out of the company of which he be a director , place within that cold palm the tip of his still cold finger and hastily withdraw they . 
 " I be bad , " he say , pouting - " be bad all the week ; do not   sleep at night . the doctor can not   tell why . he be a clever fellow , or I should not   have he , but I get nothing out of he but bill . " 
 " doctor ! " say James , come down sharp on his word : " I have   have all the doctor in London for one or another of we . there be no satisfaction to be get out of they ; they will tell you anything . there be Swithin , now . what good have they do he ? there he be ; he be big than ever ; he be enormous ; they can not   get his weight down . look at he ! " 
 Swithin Forsyte , tall , square , and broad , with a chest like a pouter pigeon 's in its plumage of bright waistcoat , come strut towards they . 
 " Er - how be you ? " he say in his dandified way , aspirate the ' h ' strongly   this difficult letter be almost absolutely safe in his keeping   - " how be you ? " 
 each brother wear an air of aggravation as he look at the other two , know by experience that they would try to eclipse his ailment . 
 " we be just say , " say James , " that you do not   get any thin . " 
 Swithin protrude his pale round eye with the effort of hearing . 
 " Thinner ? I be in good case , " he say , lean a little forward , " not one of your thread - paper like you ! " 
 but , afraid of lose the expansion of his chest , he lean back again into a state of immobility , for he prize nothing so highly as a distinguished appearance . 
 Aunt Ann turn her old eye from one to the other . indulgent and severe be her look . in turn the three brother look at Ann . she be get shaky . wonderful woman ! eighty - six if a day ; might live another ten year , and have never be strong . Swithin and James , the twin , be only seventy - five , Nicholas a mere baby of seventy or so . all be strong , and the inference be comfort . of all form of property their respective health naturally concern they most . 
 " I be very well in myself , " proceed James , " but my nerve be out of order . the least thing worry I to death . I shall have to go to Bath . " 
 " bath ! " say Nicholas . " I have   try Harrogate . that be no good . what I want be sea air . there be nothing like Yarmouth . now , when I go there I sleep .... " 
 " my liver be very bad , " interrupt Swithin slowly . " dreadful pain here ; " and he place his hand on his right side . 
 " want of exercise , " mutter James , his eye on the china . he quickly add : " I get a pain there , too . " 
 Swithin redden , a resemblance to a turkey - cock come upon his old face . 
 " exercise ! " he say . " I take plenty : I never use the lift at the Club . " 
 " I do not   know , " James hurry out . " I know nothing about anybody ; nobody tell I anything .... " 
 Swithin fix he with a stare : 
 " what do you do for a pain there ? " 
 James brighten . 
 " I take a compound .... " 
 " how be you , uncle ? " 
 June stand before he , her resolute small face raise from her little height to his great height , and her hand outheld . 
 the brightness fade from James 's visage . 
 " how be you ? " he say , brood over she . " so you be go to Wales to - morrow to visit your young man 's aunt ? you will have a lot of rain there . this be not   real old worcester . " he tap the bowl . " now , that set I give your mother when she marry be the genuine thing . " 
 June shake hand one by one with her three great - uncle , and turn to Aunt Ann . a very sweet look have come into the old lady 's face , she kiss the girl 's check with tremble fervour . 
 " well , my dear , " she say , " and so you be go for a whole month ! " 
 the girl pass on , and Aunt Ann look after her slim little figure . the old lady 's round , steel grey eye , over which a film like a bird 's be begin to come , follow she wistfully amongst the bustling crowd , for people be begin to say good - bye ; and her finger - tip , press and press against each other , be busy again with the recharging of her will against that inevitable ultimate departure of her own . 
 ' yes , ' she think , ' everybody be be most kind ; quite a lot of people come to congratulate she . she ought to be very happy . ' amongst the throng of people by the door , the well - dress throng draw from the family of lawyer and doctor , from the Stock Exchange , and all the innumerable avocation of the upper - middle class - there be only some twenty percent of Forsytes ; but to Aunt Ann they seem all Forsytes - and certainly there be not much difference - she see only her own flesh and blood . it be her world , this family , and she know no other , have never perhaps know any other . all their little secret , illness , engagement , and marriage , how they be get on , and whether they be make money - all this be her property , her delight , her life ; beyond this only a vague , shadowy mist of fact and person of no real significance . this it be that she would have to lay down when it come to her turn to die ; this which give to she that importance , that secret self - importance , without which none of we can bear to live ; and to this she cling wistfully , with a greed that grow each day ! if life be slip away from she , this she would retain to the end . 
 she think of June 's father , young Jolyon , who have run away with that foreign girl . and what a sad blow to his father and to they all . such a promising young fellow ! a sad blow , though there have be no public scandal , most fortunately , Jo 's wife seek for no divorce ! a long time ago ! and when June 's mother die , six year ago , Jo have marry that woman , and they have two child now , so she have hear . still , he have forfeit his right to be there , have cheat she of the complete fulfilment of her family pride , deprive she of the rightful pleasure of see and kiss he of whom she have be so proud , such a promising young fellow ! the thought rankle with the bitterness of a long - inflict injury in her tenacious old heart . a little water stand in her eye . with a handkerchief of the fine lawn she wipe they stealthily . 
 " well , Aunt Ann ? " say a voice behind . 
 soame Forsyte , flat - shoulder , clean - shaven , flat - cheeked , flat - waiste , yet with something round and secret about his whole appearance , look downwards and aslant at Aunt Ann , as though try to see through the side of his own nose . 
 " and what do you think of the engagement ? " he ask . 
 Aunt Ann 's eye rest on he proudly ; of all the nephew since young Jolyon 's departure from the family nest , he be now her favourite , for she recognise in he a sure trustee of the family soul that must so soon slip beyond her keeping . 
 " very nice for the young man , " she say ; " and he be a good - looking young fellow ; but I doubt if he be quite the right lover for dear June . " 
 soame touch the edge of a gold - lacquer lustre . 
 " she will tame he , " he say , stealthily wet his finger and rub it on the knobby bulb . " that be genuine old lacquer ; you can not   get it nowadays . it would do well in a sale at Jobson 's . " he speak with relish , as though he feel that he be cheer up his old aunt . it be seldom he be so confidential . " I would not   mind have it myself , " he add ; " you can always get your price for old lacquer . " 
 " you be so clever with all those thing , " say Aunt Ann . " and how be dear Irene ? " 
 Soames 's smile die . 
 " pretty well , " he say . " complain she can not   sleep ; she sleep a great deal well than I do , " and he look at his wife , who be talk to Bosinney by the door . 
 Aunt Ann sigh . 
 " perhaps , " she say , " it will be just as well for she not to see so much of June . she be such a decided character , dear June ! " 
 soame flush ; his flush pass rapidly over his flat cheek and center between his eye , where they remain , the stamp of disturb thought . 
 " I do not   know what she see in that little flibbertigibbet , " he burst out , but notice that they be no long alone , he turn and again begin examine the lustre . 
 " they tell I Jolyon 's buy another house , " say his father 's voice close by ; " he must have a lot of money - he must have more money than he know what to do with ! Montpellier Square , they say ; close to soame ! they never tell I , Irene never tell I anything ! " 
 " capital position , not two minute from I , " say the voice of Swithin , " and from my room I can drive to the Club in eight . " 
 the position of their house be of vital importance to the Forsytes , nor be this remarkable , since the whole spirit of their success be embody therein . 
 their father , of farming stock , have come from dorsetshire near the beginning of the century . 
 ' Superior Dosset Forsyte , as he be call by his intimate , have be a stonemason by trade , and rise to the position of a master - builder . 
 towards the end of his life he move to London , where , build on until he die , he be bury at Highgate . he leave over thirty thousand pound between his ten child . Old Jolyon allude to he , if at all , as ' a hard , thick sort of man ; not much refinement about he . ' the second generation of Forsytes feel indeed that he be not greatly to their credit . the only aristocratic trait they could find in his character be a habit of drink Madeira . 
 Aunt Hester , an authority on family history , describe he thus : " I do not   recollect that he ever do anything ; at least , not in my time . he be er - an owner of house , my dear . his hair about your Uncle Swithin 's colour ; rather a square build . tall ? no - not very tall "   he have be five foot five , with a mottled face ; " a fresh - coloured man . I remember he use to drink Madeira ; but ask your Aunt Ann . what be his father ? he - er - have to do with the land down in Dorsetshire , by the sea . " 
 James once go down to see for himself what sort of place this be that they have come from . he find two old farm , with a cart track rut into the pink earth , lead down to a mill by the beach ; a little grey church with a buttress outer wall , and a small and greyer chapel . the stream which work the mill come bubble down in a dozen rivulet , and pig be hunt round that estuary . a haze hover over the prospect . down this hollow , with their foot deep in the mud and their face towards the sea , it appear that the primeval Forsytes have be content to walk Sunday after Sunday for hundred of year . 
 whether or no James have cherish hope of an inheritance , or of something rather distinguished to be find down there , he come back to town in a poor way , and go about with a pathetic attempt at make the good of a bad job . 
 " there be very little to be have out of that , " he say ; " regular country little place , old as the hill .... " 
 its age be feel to be a comfort . Old Jolyon , in whom a desperate honesty well up at time , would allude to his ancestor as : " yeoman - I suppose very small beer . " yet he would repeat the word ' yeoman ' as if it afford he consolation . 
 they have all do so well for themselves , these Forsytes , that they be all what be call ' of a certain position . ' they have share in all sort of thing , not as yet - with the exception of Timothy - in consol , for they have no dread in life like that of 3 per cent . for their money . they collect picture , too , and be supporter of such charitable institution as might be beneficial to their sick domestic . from their father , the builder , they inherit a talent for brick and mortar . originally , perhaps , member of some primitive sect , they be now in the natural course of thing member of the Church of England , and cause their wife and child to attend with some regularity the more fashionable church of the Metropolis . to have doubt their Christianity would have cause they both pain and surprise . some of they pay for pew , thus express in the most practical form their sympathy with the teaching of Christ . 
 their residence , place at state interval round the park , watch like sentinel , lest the fair heart of this London , where their desire be fix , should slip from their clutch , and leave they low in their own estimation . 
 there be old Jolyon in Stanhope Place ; the Jameses in Park Lane ; Swithin in the lonely glory of orange and blue chamber in Hyde Park Mansions - he have never marry , not he - the Soamses in their nest off Knightsbridge ; the Rogers in Prince 's Gardens   Roger be that remarkable Forsyte who have conceive and carry out the notion of bring up his four son to a new profession . " collect house property , nothing like it , " he would say ; " I never do anything else " . 
 the Haymans again - Mrs. Hayman be the one married forsyte sister - in a house high up on Campden Hill , shape like a giraffe , and so tall that it give the observer a crick in the neck ; the Nicholases in Ladbroke Grove , a spacious abode and a great bargain ; and last , but not least , Timothy 's on the Bayswater Road , where Ann , and Juley , and Hester , live under his protection . 
 but all this time James be musing , and now he inquire of his host and brother what he have give for that house in Montpellier Square . he himself have have his eye on a house there for the last two year , but they want such a price . 
 Old Jolyon recount the detail of his purchase . 
 " twenty - two year to run ? " repeat James ; " the very house I be after - you have   give too much for it ! " 
 Old Jolyon frown . 
 " it be not that I want it , " say James hastily ; " it would not   suit my purpose at that price . soame know the house , well - he will tell you it be too dear - his opinion 's worth have . " 
 " I do not , " say old Jolyon , " care a fig for his opinion . " 
 " well , " murmur James , " you will have your own way - it be a good opinion . good - bye ! we be go to drive down to Hurlingham . they tell I June 's go to Wales . you will be lonely tomorrow . what will you do with yourself ? you would well come and dine with we ! " 
 Old Jolyon refuse . he go down to the front door and see they into their barouche , and twinkle at they , have already forget his spleen - Mrs. James face the horse , tall and majestic with auburn hair ; on her left , Irene - the two husband , father and son , sit forward , as though they expect something , opposite their wife . bob and bound upon the spring cushion , silent , sway to each motion of their chariot , old Jolyon watch they drive away under the sunlight . 
 during the drive the silence be break by Mrs. James . 
 " do you ever see such a collection of rumty - too people ? " 
 soame , glance at she beneath his eyelid , nod , and he see Irene steal at he one of her unfathomable look . it be likely enough that each branch of the Forsyte family make that remark as they drive away from old Jolyon 's ' at home ! ' 
 amongst the last of the depart guest the fourth and fifth brother , Nicholas and Roger , walk away together , direct their step alongside Hyde Park towards the Praed Street Station of the Underground . like all other Forsytes of a certain age they keep carriage of their own , and never take cab if by any mean they could avoid it . 
 the day be bright , the tree of the Park in the full beauty of mid - June foliage ; the brother do not seem to notice phenomena , which contribute , nevertheless , to the jauntiness of promenade and conversation . 
 " yes , " say Roger , ' she be a good - lookin ' woman , that wife of Soames 's . I be tell they do not   get on . " 
 this brother have a high forehead , and the fresh colour of any of the Forsytes ; his light grey eye measure the street frontage of the house by the way , and now and then he would level his , umbrella and take a ' lunar , ' as he express it , of the vary height . 
 " she have no money , " reply Nicholas . 
 he himself have marry a good deal of money , of which , it be then the golden age before the Married Women 's Property Act , he have mercifully be enable to make a successful use . 
 " what be her father ? " 
 " Heron be his name , a Professor , so they tell I . " 
 Roger shake his head . 
 " there be no money in that , " he say . 
 " they say her mother 's father be cement . " 
 Roger 's face brighten . 
 " but he go bankrupt , " go on Nicholas . 
 " ah ! " exclaim Roger , " soame will have trouble with she ; you mark my word , he will have trouble - she be get a foreign look . " 
 Nicholas lick his lip . 
 " she be a pretty woman , " and he wave aside a crossing - sweeper . 
 " how do he get hold of she ? " ask Roger presently . " she must cost he a pretty penny in dress ! " 
 " Ann tell I , " reply Nicholas , " he be half - crack about she . she refuse he five time . James , he be nervous about it , I can see . " 
 " ah ! " say Roger again ; " I be sorry for James ; he have trouble with Dartie . " his pleasant colour be heighten by exercise , he swing his umbrella to the level of his eye more frequently than ever . Nicholas 's face also wear a pleasant look . 
 " too pale for I , " he say , " but her figure capital ! " 
 Roger make no reply . 
 " I call she distinguished - look , " he say at last - it be the high praise in the forsyte vocabulary . " that young Bosinney will never do any good for himself . they say at Burkitt 's he be one of these artistic chap - get an idea of improve english architecture ; there be no money in that ! I should like to hear what Timothy would say to it . " 
 they enter the station . 
 " what class be you go ? I go second . " 
 " no second for I , " say Nicholas ; - " you never know what you may catch . " 
 he take a first - class ticket to Notting Hill Gate ; Roger a second to South Kensington . the train come in a minute later , the two brother part and enter their respective compartment . each feel aggrieved that the other have not modify his habit to secure his society a little long ; but as Roger voice it in his thought : 
 ' always a stubborn beggar , Nick ! ' 
 and as Nicholas express it to himself : 
 ' cantankerous chap Roger - always be ! ' 
 there be little sentimentality about the Forsytes . in that great London , which they have conquer and become merge in , what time have they to be sentimental ? 
 CHAPTER II - OLD JOLYON go to the opera 
 at five o'clock the follow day old Jolyon sit alone , a cigar between his lip , and on a table by his side a cup of tea . he be tired , and before he have finish his cigar he fall asleep . a fly settle on his hair , his breathing sound heavy in the drowsy silence , his upper lip under the white moustache puff in and out . from between the finger of his veined and wrinkle hand the cigar , drop on the empty hearth , burn itself out . 
 the gloomy little study , with window of stain glass to exclude the view , be full of dark green velvet and heavily - carve mahogany - a suite of which old Jolyon be will not to say : ' should not   wonder if it make a big price some day ! ' 
 it be pleasant to think that in the after life he could get more for thing than he have give . 
 in the rich brown atmosphere peculiar to back room in the mansion of a Forsyte , the rembrandtesque effect of his great head , with its white hair , against the cushion of his high - back seat , be spoil by the moustache , which impart a somewhat military look to his face . an old clock that have be with he since before his marriage forty year ago keep with its tick a jealous record of the second slip away forever from its old master . 
 he have never care for this room , hardly go into it from one year 's end to another , except to take cigar from the japanese cabinet in the corner , and the room now have its revenge . 
 his temple , curve like thatch over the hollow beneath , his cheek - bone and chin , all be sharpen in his sleep , and there have come upon his face the confession that he be an old man . 
 he wake . June have go ! James have say he would be lonely . James have always be a poor thing . he recollect with satisfaction that he have buy that house over James 's head . 
 serve he right for stick at the price ; the only thing the fellow thought of be money . have he give too much , though ? it want a lot of do to - he dare say he would want all his money before he have do with this affair of June 's . he ought never to have allow the engagement . she have meet this Bosinney at the house of Baynes , Baynes and Bildeboy , the architect . he believe that Baynes , whom he know - a bit of an old woman - be the young man 's uncle by marriage . after that she have be always run after he ; and when she take a thing into her head there be no stop she . she be continually take up with ' lame duck ' of one sort or another . this fellow have no money , but she must need become engaged to he - a harumscarum , unpractical chap , who would get himself into no end of difficulty . 
 she have come to he one day in her slap - dash way and tell he ; and , as if it be any consolation , she have add : 
 " he be so splendid ; he be often live on cocoa for a week ! " 
 " and he want you to live on cocoa too ? " 
 " oh no ; he be get into the swim now . " 
 Old Jolyon have take his cigar from under his white moustache , stain by coffee at the edge , and look at she , that little slip of a thing who have get such a grip of his heart . he know more about ' swim ' than his granddaughter . but she , have clasp her hand on his knee , rub her chin against he , make a sound like a purr cat . and , knock the ash off his cigar , he have explode in nervous desperation : 
 " you be all alike : you will not   be satisfied till you have   get what you want . if you must come to grief , you must ; I wash my hand of it . " 
 so , he have wash his hand of it , make the condition that they should not marry until Bosinney have at least four hundred a year . 
 " I shall not   be able to give you very much , " he have say , a formula to which June be not unaccustomed . " perhaps this what's - his - name will provide the cocoa . " 
 he have hardly see anything of she since it begin . a bad business ! he have no notion of give she a lot of money to enable a fellow he know nothing about to live on in idleness . he have see that sort of thing before ; no good ever come of it . bad of all , he have no hope of shake her resolution ; she be as obstinate as a mule , always have be from a child . he do not   see where it be to end . they must cut their coat accord to their cloth . he would not give way till he see young Bosinney with an income of his own . that June would have trouble with the fellow be as plain as a pikestaff ; he have no more idea of money than a cow . as to this rush down to Wales to visit the young man 's aunt , he fully expect they be old cat . 
 and , motionless , old Jolyon star at the wall ; but for his open eye , he might have be asleep .... the idea of suppose that young cub soame could give he advice ! he have always be a cub , with his nose in the air ! he would be set up as a man of property next , with a place in the country ! a man of property ! H'mph ! like his father , he be always nose out bargain , a cold - blooded young beggar ! 
 he rise , and , go to the cabinet , begin methodically stock his cigar - case from a bundle fresh in . they be not bad at the price , but you could not   get a good cigar , nowadays , nothing to hold a candle to those old Superfinos of Hanson and Bridger 's . that be a cigar ! 
 the thought , like some steal perfume , carry he back to those wonderful night at Richmond when after dinner he sit smoke on the terrace of the Crown and Sceptre with Nicholas Treffry and Traquair and Jack Herring and Anthony Thornworthy . how good his cigar be then ! poor old Nick ! - dead , and Jack Herring - dead , and traquair - dead of that wife of his , and Thornworthy - awfully shaky   no wonder , with his appetite . 
 of all the company of those day he himself alone seem left , except Swithin , of course , and he so outrageously big there be no do anything with he . 
 difficult to believe it be so long ago ; he feel young still ! of all his thought , as he stand there count his cigar , this be the most poignant , the most bitter . with his white head and his loneliness he have remain young and green at heart . and those Sunday afternoon on Hampstead Heath , when young Jolyon and he go for a stretch along the Spaniard 's Road to Highgate , to Child 's Hill , and back over the heath again to dine at Jack Straw 's Castle - how delicious his cigar be then ! and such weather ! there be no weather now . 
 when June be a toddler of five , and every other Sunday he take she to the Zoo , away from the society of those two good woman , her mother and her grandmother , and at the top of the bear den bait his umbrella with bun for her favourite bear , how sweet his cigar be then ! 
 cigar ! he have not even succeed in out - live his palate - the famous palate that in the fifty man swear by , and speak of he , say : " Forsyte 's the good palate in London ! " the palate that in a sense have make his fortune - the fortune of the celebrated tea man , Forsyte and Treffry , whose tea , like no other man 's tea , have a romantic aroma , the charm of a quite singular genuineness . about the house of Forsyte and Treffry in the City have clung an air of enterprise and mystery , of special dealing in special ship , at special port , with special Orientals . 
 he have work at that business ! man do work in those day ! these young pup hardly know the meaning of the word . he have go into every detail , know everything that go on , sometimes sit up all night over it . and he have always choose his agent himself , pride himself on it . his eye for man , he use to say , have be the secret of his success , and the exercise of this masterful power of selection have be the only part of it all that he have really like . not a career for a man of his ability . even now , when the business have be turn into a Limited Liability Company , and be decline   he have get out of his share long ago , he feel a sharp chagrin in thinking of that time . how much well he might have do ! he would have succeed splendidly at the Bar ! he have even think of stand for Parliament . how often have not Nicholas Treffry say to he : 
 " you could do anything , Jo , if you be not   so d - damned careful of yourself ! " dear old Nick ! such a good fellow , but a racketty chap ! the notorious Treffry ! he have never take any care of himself . so he be dead . Old Jolyon count his cigar with a steady hand , and it come into his mind to wonder if perhaps he have be too careful of himself . 
 he put the cigar - case in the breast of his coat , button it in , and walk up the long flight to his bedroom , lean on one foot and the other , and help himself by the bannister . the house be too big . after June be marry , if she ever do marry this fellow , as he suppose she would , he would let it and go into room . what be the use of keep half a dozen servant eat their head off ? 
 the butler come to the ring of his bell - a large man with a beard , a soft tread , and a peculiar capacity for silence . Old Jolyon tell he to put his dress clothe out ; he be go to dine at the Club . 
 how long have the carriage be back from take Miss June to the station ? since two ? then let he come round at half - past six ! 
 the Club which old Jolyon enter on the stroke of seven be one of those political institution of the upper middle class which have see well day . in spite of be talk about , perhaps in consequence of be talk about , it betray a disappointing vitality . People have grow tired of say that the ' Disunion ' be on its last leg . Old Jolyon would say it , too , yet disregard the fact in a manner truly irritate to well - constitute Clubmen . 
 " why do you keep your name on ? " Swithin often ask he with profound vexation . " why do not   you join the ' polyglot ' ? you can not   get a wine like our Heidsieck under twenty shillin ' a bottle anywhere in London ; " and , drop his voice , he add : " there be only five hundred dozen leave . I drink it every night of my life . " 
 " I will think of it , " old Jolyon would answer ; but when he do think of it there be always the question of fifty guineas entrance fee , and it would take he four or five year to get in . he continue to think of it . 
 he be too old to be a Liberal , have long cease to believe in the political doctrine of his Club , have even be know to allude to they as ' wretched stuff , ' and it afford he pleasure to continue a member in the tooth of principle so opposed to his own . he have always have a contempt for the place , have join it many year ago when they refuse to have he at the ' Hotch Potch ' owe to his be ' in trade . ' as if he be not as good as any of they ! he naturally despise the Club that do take he . the member be a poor lot , many of they in the City - stockbroker , solicitor , auctioneer - what not ! like most man of strong character but not too much originality , old Jolyon set small store by the class to which he belong . faithfully he follow their custom , social and otherwise , and secretly he think they ' a common lot . ' 
 year and philosophy , of which he have his share , have dim the recollection of his defeat at the ' Hotch Potch ' ; and now in his thought it be enshrine as the Queen of Clubs . he would have be a member all these year himself , but , owe to the slipshod way his proposer , Jack Herring , have go to work , they have not know what they be do in keep he out . why ! they have take his son Jo at once , and he believe the boy be still a member ; he have receive a letter date from there eight year ago . 
 he have not be near the ' Disunion ' for month , and the house have undergo the piebald decoration which people bestow on old house and old ship when anxious to sell they . 
 ' beastly colour , the smoking - room ! ' he think . ' the dining - room be good ! ' 
 its gloomy chocolate , pick out with light green , take his fancy . 
 he order dinner , and sit down in the very corner , at the very table perhaps !   thing do not progress much at the ' Disunion , ' a Club of almost radical principle   at which he and young Jolyon use to sit twenty - five year ago , when he be take the latter to Drury Lane , during his holiday . 
 the boy have love the theatre , and old Jolyon recall how he use to sit opposite , conceal his excitement under a careful but transparent nonchalance . 
 he order himself , too , the very dinner the boy have always choose - soup , whitebait , cutlet , and a tart . ah ! if he be only opposite now ! 
 the two have not meet for fourteen year . and not for the first time during those fourteen year old Jolyon wonder whether he have be a little to blame in the matter of his son . an unfortunate love - affair with that precious flirt Danae Thornworthy   now Danae Pellew , Anthony Thornworthy 's daughter , have throw he on the rebound into the arm of June 's mother . he ought perhaps to have put a spoke in the wheel of their marriage ; they be too young ; but after that experience of Jo 's susceptibility he have be only too anxious to see he marry . and in four year the crash have come ! to have approve his son 's conduct in that crash be , of course , impossible ; reason and training - that combination of potent factor which stand for his principle - tell he of this impossibility , and his heart cry out . the grim remorselessness of that business have no pity for heart . there be June , the atom with flame hair , who have climb all over he , twin and twist herself about he - about his heart that be make to be the plaything and beloved resort of tiny , helpless thing . with characteristic insight he see he must part with one or with the other ; no half - measure could serve in such a situation . in that lie its tragedy . and the tiny , helpless thing prevail . he would not run with the hare and hunt with the hound , and so to his son he say good - bye . 
 that good - bye have last until now . 
 he have propose to continue a reduce allowance to young Jolyon , but this have be refuse , and perhaps that refusal have hurt he more than anything , for with it have go the last outlet of his pen - in affection ; and there have come such tangible and solid proof of rupture as only a transaction in property , a bestowal or refusal of such , could supply . 
 his dinner taste flat . his pint of champagne be dry and bitter stuff , not like the Veuve Clicquots of old day . 
 over his cup of coffee , he bethink he that he would go to the opera . in the Times , therefore - he have a distrust of other paper - he read the announcement for the evening . it be ' Fidelio . ' 
 mercifully not one of those new - fangled german pantomime by that fellow Wagner . 
 put on his ancient opera hat , which , with its brim flatten by use , and huge capacity , look like an emblem of great day , and , pull out an old pair of very thin lavender kid glove smell strongly of Russia leather , from habitual proximity to the cigar - case in the pocket of his overcoat , he step into a hansom . 
 the cab rattle gaily along the street , and old Jolyon be strike by their unwonted animation . 
 ' the hotel must be do a tremendous business , ' he think . a few year ago there have be none of these big hotel . he make a satisfactory reflection on some property he have in the neighbourhood . it must be go up in value by leap and bound ! what traffic ! 
 but from that he begin indulge in one of those strange impersonal speculation , so uncharacteristic of a Forsyte , wherein lay , in part , the secret of his supremacy amongst they . what atom man be , and what a lot of they ! and what would become of they all ? 
 he stumble as he get out of the cab , give the man his exact fare , walk up to the ticket office to take his stall , and stand there with his purse in his hand - he always carry his money in a purse , never have approve of that habit of carry it loosely in the pocket , as so many young man do nowadays . the official lean out , like an old dog from a kennel . 
 " why , " he say in a surprised voice , " it be Mr. Jolyon Forsyte ! so it be ! have not   see you , sir , for year . dear I ! time be not   what they be . why ! you and your brother , and that auctioneer - Mr. Traquair , and Mr. Nicholas Treffry - you use to have six or seven stall here regular every season . and how be you , sir ? we do not   get young ! " 
 the colour in old Jolyon 's eye deepen ; he pay his guinea . they have not forget he . he march in , to the sound of the overture , like an old war - horse to battle . 
 fold his opera hat , he sit down , draw out his lavender glove in the old way , and take up his glass for a long look round the house . drop they at last on his fold hat , he fix his eye on the curtain . more poignantly than ever he feel that it be all over and do with he . where be all the woman , the pretty woman , the house use to be so full of ? where be that old feeling in the heart as he wait for one of those great singer ? where that sensation of the intoxication of life and of his own power to enjoy it all ? 
 the great opera - goer of his day ! there be no opera now ! that fellow Wagner have ruin everything ; no melody leave , nor any voice to sing it . ah ! the wonderful singer ! go ! he sit watch the old scene act , a numb feeling at his heart . 
 from the curl of silver over his ear to the pose of his foot in its elastic - sided patent boot , there be nothing clumsy or weak about old Jolyon . he be as upright - very nearly - as in those old time when he come every night ; his sight be as good - almost as good . but what a feeling of weariness and disillusion ! 
 he have be in the habit all his life of enjoy thing , even imperfect thing - and there have be many imperfect thing - he have enjoy they all with moderation , so as to keep himself young . but now he be desert by his power of enjoyment , by his philosophy , and leave with this dreadful feeling that it be all do with . not even the Prisoners ' chorus , nor Florian 's Song , have the power to dispel the gloom of his loneliness . 
 if Jo be only with he ! the boy must be forty by now . he have waste fourteen year out of the life of his only son . and Jo be no long a social pariah . he be marry . Old Jolyon have be unable to refrain from mark his appreciation of the action by enclose his son a cheque for l500 . the cheque have be return in a letter from the ' Hotch Potch , ' couch in these word . 
 ' MY DEAREST FATHER , 
 ' your generous gift be welcome as a sign that you might think bad of I . I return it , but should you think fit to invest it for the benefit of the little chap   we call he jolly , who bear our Christian and , by courtesy , our surname , I shall be very glad . 
 ' I hope with all my heart that your health be as good as ever . 
 ' your love son , 
 ' Jo . ' 
 the letter be like the boy . he have always be an amiable chap . Old Jolyon have send this reply : 
 ' my DEAR jo , 
 ' the sum   l500   stand in my book for the benefit of your boy , under the name of Jolyon Forsyte , and will be duly - credit with interest at 5 per cent . I hope that you be do well . my health remain good at present . 
 ' with love , I be , 
 ' your affectionate Father , 
 ' JOLYON FORSYTE . ' 
 and every year on the 1st of January he have add a hundred and the interest . the sum be mount up - next New Year 's Day it would be fifteen hundred and odd pound ! and it be difficult to say how much satisfaction he have get out of that yearly transaction . but the correspondence have end . 
 in spite of his love for his son , in spite of an instinct , partly constitutional , partly the result , as in thousand of his class , of the continual handling and watching of affair , prompt he to judge conduct by result rather than by principle , there be at the bottom of his heart a sort of uneasiness . his son ought , under the circumstance , to have go to the dog ; that law be lay down in all the novel , sermon , and play he have ever read , hear , or witness . 
 after receive the cheque back there seem to he to be something wrong somewhere . why have his son not go to the dog ? but , then , who could tell ? 
 he have hear , of course - in fact , he have make it his business to find out - that Jo live in St. John 's Wood , that he have a little house in Wistaria Avenue with a garden , and take his wife about with he into society - a queer sort of society , no doubt - and that they have two child - the little chap they call Jolly   consider the circumstance the name strike he as cynical , and old Jolyon both fear and dislike cynicism , and a girl call Holly , bear since the marriage . who could tell what his son 's circumstance really be ? he have capitalize the income he have inherit from his mother 's father and join Lloyd 's as an underwriter ; he paint picture , too - water - colour . Old Jolyon know this , for he have surreptitiously buy they from time to time , after chance to see his son 's name sign at the bottom of a representation of the river Thames in a dealer 's window . he think they bad , and do not hang they because of the signature ; he keep they lock up in a drawer . 
 in the great opera - house a terrible yearning come on he to see his son . he remember the day when he have be will not to slide he , in a brown holland suit , to and fro under the arch of his leg ; the time when he run beside the boy 's pony , teach he to ride ; the day he first take he to school . he have be a love , lovable little chap ! after he go to Eton he have acquire , perhaps , a little too much of that desirable manner which old Jolyon know be only to be obtain at such place and at great expense ; but he have always be companionable . always a companion , even after Cambridge - a little far off , perhaps , owe to the advantage he have receive . Old Jolyon 's feeling towards our public school and ' varsity never waver , and he retain touchingly his attitude of admiration and mistrust towards a system appropriate to the high in the land , of which he have not himself be privileged to partake .... now that June have go and leave , or as good as leave he , it would have be a comfort to see his son again . guilty of this treason to his family , his principle , his class , old Jolyon fix his eye on the singer . a poor thing - a wretched poor thing ! and the Florian a perfect stick ! 
 it be over . they be easily pleased nowadays ! 
 in the crowded street he snap up a cab under the very nose of a stout and much young gentleman , who have already assume it to be his own . his route lie through Pall Mall , and at the corner , instead of go through the Green Park , the cabman turn to drive up St. James 's Street . Old Jolyon put his hand through the trap   he could not bear be take out of his way ; in turn , however , he find himself opposite the ' Hotch Potch , ' and the yearning that have be secretly with he the whole evening prevail . he call to the driver to stop . he would go in and ask if Jo still belong there . 
 he go in . the hall look exactly as it do when he use to dine there with Jack Herring , and they have the good cook in London ; and he look round with the shrewd , straight glance that have cause he all his life to be well serve than most man . 
 " Mr. Jolyon Forsyte still a member here ? " 
 " yes , sir ; in the Club now , sir . what name ? " 
 Old Jolyon be take aback . 
 " his father , " he say . 
 and have speak , he take his stand , back to the fireplace . 
 Young Jolyon , on the point of leave the Club , have put on his hat , and be in the act of cross the hall , as the porter meet he . he be no long young , with hair go grey , and face - a narrow replica of his father 's , with the same large droop moustache - decidedly worn . he turn pale . this meeting be terrible after all those year , for nothing in the world be so terrible as a scene . they meet and cross hand without a word . then , with a quaver in his voice , the father say : 
 " how be you , my boy ? " 
 the son answer : 
 " how be you , Dad ? " 
 Old Jolyon 's hand tremble in its thin lavender glove . 
 " if you be go my way , " he say , " I can give you a lift . " 
 and as though in the habit of take each other home every night they go out and step into the cab . 
 to old Jolyon it seem that his son have grow . ' More of a man altogether , ' be his comment . over the natural amiability of that son 's face have come a rather sardonic mask , as though he have find in the circumstance of his life the necessity for armour . the feature be certainly those of a Forsyte , but the expression be more the introspective look of a student or philosopher . he have no doubt be oblige to look into himself a good deal in the course of those fifteen year . 
 to young Jolyon the first sight of his father be undoubtedly a shock - he look so worn and old . but in the cab he seem hardly to have change , still have the calm look so well remember , still be upright and keen - eyed . 
 " you look well , Dad . " 
 " middling , " old Jolyon answer . 
 he be the prey of an anxiety that he find he must put into word . have get his son back like this , he feel he must know what be his financial position . 
 " Jo , " he say , " I should like to hear what sort of water you be in . I suppose you be in debt ? " 
 he put it this way that his son might find it easy to confess . 
 Young Jolyon answer in his ironical voice : 
 " no ! I be not in debt ! " 
 Old Jolyon see that he be angry , and touch his hand . he have run a risk . it be worth it , however , and Jo have never be sulky with he . they drive on , without speak again , to Stanhope Gate . Old Jolyon invite he in , but young Jolyon shake his head . 
 " June 's not here , " say his father hastily : " go of to - day on a visit . I suppose you know that she be engaged to be marry ? " 
 " already ? " murmur young Jolyon ' . 
 Old Jolyon step out , and , in pay the cab fare , for the first time in his life give the driver a sovereign in mistake for a shilling . 
 place the coin in his mouth , the cabman whip his horse secretly on the underneath and hurry away . 
 Old Jolyon turn the key softly in the lock , push open the door , and beckon . his son see he gravely hang up his coat , with an expression on his face like that of a boy who intend to steal cherry . 
 the door of the dining - room be open , the gas turn low ; a spirit - urn hiss on a tea - tray , and close to it a cynical look cat have fall asleep on the dining - table . Old Jolyon ' shoo'd ' she off at once . the incident be a relief to his feeling ; he rattle his opera hat behind the animal . 
 " she be get flea , " he say , follow she out of the room . through the door in the hall lead to the basement he call " Hssst ! " several time , as though assist the cat 's departure , till by some strange coincidence the butler appear below . 
 " you can go to bed , Parfitt , " say old Jolyon . " I will lock up and put out . " 
 when he again enter the dining - room the cat unfortunately precede he , with her tail in the air , proclaim that she have see through this manouevre for suppress the butler from the first .... 
 a fatality have dog old Jolyon 's domestic stratagem all his life . 
 Young Jolyon could not help smile . he be very well verse in irony , and everything that evening seem to he ironical . the episode of the cat ; the announcement of his own daughter 's engagement . so he have no more part or parcel in she than he have in the Puss ! and the poetical justice of this appeal to he . 
 " what be June like now ? " he ask . 
 " she be a little thing , " return old Jolyon ; " they say she be like I , but that be their folly . she be more like your mother - the same eye and hair . " 
 " ah ! and she be pretty ? " 
 Old Jolyon be too much of a Forsyte to praise anything freely ; especially anything for which he have a genuine admiration . 
 " not bad look - a regular forsyte chin . it will be lonely here when she be go , Jo . " 
 the look on his face again give young Jolyon the shock he have feel on first see his father . 
 " what will you do with yourself , Dad ? I suppose she be wrap up in he ? " 
 " do with myself ? " repeat old Jolyon with an angry break in his voice . " it will be miserable work live here alone . I do not   know how it be to end . I wish to goodness .... " he check himself , and add : " the question be , what have I well do with this house ? " 
 Young Jolyon look round the room . it be peculiarly vast and dreary , decorate with the enormous picture of still life that he remember as a boy - sleep dog with their nose rest on bunch of carrot , together with onion and grape lie side by side in mild surprise . the house be a white elephant , but he could not conceive of his father live in a small place ; and all the more do it all seem ironical . 
 in his great chair with the book - rest sit old Jolyon , the figurehead of his family and class and creed , with his white head and dome - like forehead , the representative of moderation , and order , and love of property . as lonely an old man as there be in London . 
 there he sit in the gloomy comfort of the room , a puppet in the power of great force that care nothing for family or class or creed , but move , machine - like , with dread process to inscrutable end . this be how it strike young Jolyon , who have the impersonal eye . 
 the poor old Dad ! so this be the end , the purpose to which he have live with such magnificent moderation ! to be lonely , and grow old and old , yearn for a soul to speak to ! 
 in his turn old Jolyon look back at his son . he want to talk about many thing that he have be unable to talk about all these year . it have be impossible to seriously confide in June his conviction that property in the Soho quarter would go up in value ; his uneasiness about that tremendous silence of Pippin , the superintendent of the New Colliery Company , of which he have so long be chairman ; his disgust at the steady fall in American Golgothas , or even to discuss how , by some sort of settlement , he could well avoid the payment of those death duty which would follow his decease . under the influence , however , of a cup of tea , which he seem to stir indefinitely , he begin to speak at last . a new vista of life be thus open up , a promise land of talk , where he could find a harbour against the wave of anticipation and regret ; where he could soothe his soul with the opium of devise how to round off his property and make eternal the only part of he that be to remain alive . 
 Young Jolyon be a good listener ; it be his great quality . he keep his eye fix on his father 's face , put a question now and then . 
 the clock strike one before old Jolyon have finish , and at the sound of its strike his principle come back . he take out his watch with a look of surprise : 
 " I must go to bed , Jo , " he say . 
 Young Jolyon rise and hold out his hand to help his father up . the old face look worn and hollow again ; the eye be steadily avert . 
 " good - bye , my boy ; take care of yourself . " 
 a moment pass , and young Jolyon , turn on his , heel , march out at the door . he could hardly see ; his smile quaver . never in all the fifteen year since he have first find out that life be no simple business , have he find it so singularly complicated . 
 CHAPTER iii - DINNER AT SWITHIN 'S 
 in Swithin 's orange and light - blue dining - room , face the Park , the round table be lay for twelve . 
 a cut - glass chandelier fill with light candle hang like a giant stalactite above its centre , radiate over large gilt - frame mirror , slab of marble on the top of side - table , and heavy gold chair with crewel work seat . everything betoken that love of beauty so deeply implant in each family which have have its own way to make into Society , out of the more vulgar heart of Nature . Swithin have indeed an impatience of simplicity , a love of ormolu , which have always stamp he amongst his associate as a man of great , if somewhat luxurious taste ; and out of the knowledge that no one could possibly enter his room without perceive he to be a man of wealth , he have derive a solid and prolonged happiness such as perhaps no other circumstance in life have afford he . 
 since his retirement from land agency , a profession deplorable in his estimation , especially as to its auctioneering department , he have abandon himself to naturally aristocratic taste . 
 the perfect luxury of his latter day have embed he like a fly in sugar ; and his mind , where very little take place from morning till night , be the junction of two curiously opposite emotion , a lingering and sturdy satisfaction that he have make his own way and his own fortune , and a sense that a man of his distinction should never have be allow to soil his mind with work . 
 he stand at the sideboard in a white waistcoat with large gold and onyx button , watch his valet screw the neck of three champagne bottle deeply into ice - pail . between the point of his stand - up collar , which - though it hurt he to move - he would on no account have have alter , the pale flesh of his under chin remain immovable . his eye rove from bottle to bottle . he be debate , and he argue like this : Jolyon drink a glass , perhaps two , he be so careful of himself . James , he can not   take his wine nowadays . Nicholas - Fanny and he would swill water he should not   wonder ! soame do not   count ; these young nephew - soame be thirty - one - could not   drink ! but Bosinney ? 
 encounter in the name of this strange something outside the range of his philosophy , Swithin pause . a misgiving arise within he ! it be impossible to tell ! June be only a girl , in love too ! Emily   Mrs. James   like a good glass of champagne . it be too dry for Juley , poor old soul , she have no palate . as to Hatty Chessman ! the thought of this old friend cause a cloud of thought to obscure the perfect glassiness of his eye : he should not   wonder if she drink half a bottle ! 
 but in thinking of his remain guest , an expression like that of a cat who be just go to purr steal over his old face : Mrs. Soames ! she might not   take much , but she would appreciate what she drank ; it be a pleasure to give her good wine ! a pretty woman - and sympathetic to he ! 
 the thought of she be like champagne itself ! a pleasure to give a good wine to a young woman who look so well , who know how to dress , with charming manner , quite distinguished - a pleasure to entertain she . between the point of his collar he give his head the first small , painful oscillation of the evening . 
 " Adolf ! " he say . " put in another bottle . " 
 he himself might drink a good deal , for , thank to that prescription of Blight 's , he find himself extremely well , and he have be careful to take no lunch . he have not feel so well for week . puff out his low lip , he give his last instruction : 
 " Adolf , the least touch of the West India when you come to the ham . " 
 pass into the anteroom , he sit down on the edge of a chair , with his knee apart ; and his tall , bulky form be wrap at once in an expectant , strange , primeval immobility . he be ready to rise at a moment 's notice . he have not give a dinner - party for month . this dinner in honour of June 's engagement have seem a bore at first   among Forsytes the custom of solemnize engagement by feast be religiously observe , but the labour of send invitation and order the repast over , he feel pleasantly stimulate . 
 and thus sit , a watch in his hand , fat , and smooth , and golden , like a flattened globe of butter , he think of nothing . 
 a long man , with side whisker , who have once be in Swithin 's service , but be now a greengrocer , enter and proclaim : 
 " Mrs. Chessman , Mrs. Septimus Small ! " 
 two lady advance . the one in front , habit entirely in red , have large , settle patch of the same colour in her cheek , and a hard , dash eye . she walk at Swithin , hold out a hand case in a long , primrose - coloured glove : 
 " well ! Swithin , " she say , " I have not   see you for age . how be you ? why , my dear boy , how stout you be get ! " 
 the fixity of Swithin 's eye alone betray emotion . a dumb and grumble anger swell his bosom . it be vulgar to be stout , to talk of be stout ; he have a chest , nothing more . turn to his sister , he grasp her hand , and say in a tone of command : 
 " well , Juley . " 
 Mrs. Septimus Small be the tall of the four sister ; her good , round old face have go a little sour ; an innumerable pout clung all over it , as if it have be encase in an iron wire mask up to that evening , which , be suddenly remove , leave little roll of mutinous flesh all over her countenance . even her eye be pout . it be thus that she record her permanent resentment at the loss of Septimus Small . 
 she have quite a reputation for say the wrong thing , and , tenacious like all her breed , she would hold to it when she have say it , and add to it another wrong thing , and so on . with the decease of her husband the family tenacity , the family matter - of - factness , have go sterile within she . a great talker , when allow , she would converse without the faint animation for hour together , relate , with epic monotony , the innumerable occasion on which Fortune have misuse she ; nor do she ever perceive that her hearer sympathize with Fortune , for her heart be kind . 
 have sit , poor soul , long by the bedside of Small   a man of poor constitution , she have acquire , the habit , and there be countless subsequent occasion when she have sit immense period of time to amuse sick people , child , and other helpless person , and she could never divest herself of the feeling that the world be the most ungrateful place anybody could live in . Sunday after Sunday she sit at the foot of that extremely witty preacher , the Rev. Thomas Scoles , who exercise a great influence over she ; but she succeed in convince everybody that even this be a misfortune . she have pass into a proverb in the family , and when anybody be observe to be peculiarly distressing , he be know as a regular ' Juley . ' the habit of her mind would have kill anybody but a Forsyte at forty ; but she be seventy - two , and have never look well . and one feel that there be capacity for enjoyment about she which might yet come out . she own three canary , the cat Tommy , and half a parrot - in common with her sister Hester ; - and these poor creature   keep carefully out of Timothy 's way - he be nervous about animal , unlike human being , recognise that she could not help be blight , attach themselves to she passionately . 
 she be sombrely magnificent this evening in black bombazine , with a mauve front cut in a shy triangle , and crown with a black velvet ribbon round the base of her thin throat ; black and mauve for evening wear be esteem very chaste by nearly every Forsyte . 
 pouting at Swithin , she say : 
 " Ann have be ask for you . you have not   be near we for an age ! " 
 Swithin put his thumb within the armhole of his waistcoat , and reply : 
 " Ann be get very shaky ; she ought to have a doctor ! " 
 " Mr. and Mrs. Nicholas Forsyte ! " 
 Nicholas Forsyte , cock his rectangular eyebrow , wear a smile . he have succeed during the day in bring to fruition a scheme for the employment of a tribe from Upper India in the gold - mine of Ceylon . a pet plan , carry at last in the tooth of great difficulty - he be justly pleased . it would double the output of his mine , and , as he have often forcibly argue , all experience tend to show that a man must die ; and whether he die of a miserable old age in his own country , or prematurely of damp in the bottom of a foreign mine , be surely of little consequence , provide that by a change in his mode of life he benefit the British Empire . 
 his ability be undoubted . raise his broken nose towards his listener , he would add : 
 " for want of a few hundred of these fellow we have not   pay a dividend for year , and look at the price of the share . I can not   get ten shilling for they . " 
 he have be at Yarmouth , too , and have come back feeling that he have add at least ten year to his own life . he grasp Swithin 's hand , exclaim in a jocular voice : 
 " well , so here we be again ! " 
 Mrs. Nicholas , an effete woman , smile a smile of frightened jollity behind his back . 
 " Mr. and Mrs. James Forsyte ! Mr. and Mrs. Soames Forsyte ! " 
 Swithin draw his heel together , his deportment ever admirable . 
 " well , James , well emily ! how be you , soame ? how do you do ? " 
 his hand enclose Irene 's , and his eye swell . she be a pretty woman - a little too pale , but her figure , her eye , her tooth ! too good for that chap Soames ! 
 the god have give Irene dark brown eye and golden hair , that strange combination , provocative of man 's glance , which be say to be the mark of a weak character . and the full , soft pallor of her neck and shoulder , above a gold - colour frock , give to her personality an alluring strangeness . 
 soame stand behind , his eye fasten on his wife 's neck . the hand of Swithin 's watch , which he still hold open in his hand , have leave eight behind ; it be half an hour beyond his dinner - time - he have have no lunch - and a strange primeval impatience surge up within he . 
 " it be not like Jolyon to be late ! " he say to Irene , with uncontrollable vexation . " I suppose it will be June keep he ! " 
 " People in love be always late , " she answer . 
 Swithin star at she ; a dusky orange dye his cheek . 
 " they have   no business to be . some fashionable nonsense ! " 
 and behind this outburst the inarticulate violence of primitive generation seem to mutter and grumble . 
 " tell I what you think of my new star , Uncle Swithin , " say Irene softly . 
 among the lace in the bosom of her dress be shin a five - point star , make of eleven diamond . Swithin look at the star . he have a pretty taste in stone ; no question could have be more sympathetically devise to distract his attention . 
 " who give you that ? " he ask . 
 " soame . " 
 there be no change in her face , but Swithin 's pale eye bulge as though he might suddenly have be afflict with insight . 
 " I dare say you be dull at home , " he say . " any day you like to come and dine with I , I will give you as good a bottle of wine as you will get in London . " 
 " Miss June Forsyte - Mr. Jolyon Forsyte ! ... Mr. Boswainey ! ... " 
 Swithin move his arm , and say in a rumble voice : 
 " Dinner , now - dinner ! " 
 he take in Irene , on the ground that he have not entertain she since she be a bride . June be the portion of Bosinney , who be place between Irene and his fiancee . on the other side of June be James with Mrs. Nicholas , then old Jolyon with Mrs. James , Nicholas with Hatty Chessman , Soames with Mrs. Small , completing , the circle to Swithin again . 
 family dinner of the Forsytes observe certain tradition . there be , for instance , no hor d'oeuvre . the reason for this be unknown . theory among the young member trace it to the disgraceful price of oyster ; it be more probably due to a desire to come to the point , to a good practical sense decide at once that hor d'oeuvre be but poor thing . the Jameses alone , unable to withstand a custom almost universal in Park Lane , be now and then unfaithful . 
 a silent , almost morose , inattention to each other succeed to the subsidence into their seat , last till well into the first entree , but intersperse with remark such as , " Tom 's bad again ; I can not   tell what be the matter with he ! " " I suppose Ann do not   come down in the morning ? " - " what be the name of your doctor , Fanny ? " " Stubbs ? " " he be a quack ! " - " Winifred ? she be get too many child . four , be not   it ? she be as thin as a lath ! " - " what d'you give for this sherry , Swithin ? too dry for I ! " 
 with the second glass of champagne , a kind of hum make itself hear , which , when divest of casual accessory and resolve into its primal element , be find to be James tell a story , and this go on for a long time , encroach sometimes even upon what must universally be recognise as the crown point of a forsyte feast - ' the saddle of mutton . ' 
 no Forsyte have give a dinner without provide a saddle of mutton . there be something in its succulent solidity which make it suitable to people ' of a certain position . ' it be nourishing and tasty ; the sort of thing a man remember eat . it have a past and a future , like a deposit pay into a bank ; and it be something that can be argue about . 
 each branch of the family tenaciously hold to a particular locality - old Jolyon swearing by Dartmoor , James by Welsh , Swithin by Southdown , Nicholas maintain that people might sneer , but there be nothing like New Zealand ! as for Roger , the ' original ' of the brother , he have be oblige to invent a locality of his own , and with an ingenuity worthy of a man who have devise a new profession for his son , he have discover a shop where they sell German ; on be remonstrate with , he have prove his point by produce a butcher 's bill , which show that he pay more than any of the other . it be on this occasion that old Jolyon , turn to June , have say in one of his burst of philosophy : 
 " you may depend upon it , they be a cranky lot , the Forsytes - and you will find it out , as you grow old ! " 
 Timothy alone hold apart , for though he eat saddle of mutton heartily , he be , he say , afraid of it . 
 to anyone interested psychologically in Forsytes , this great saddle - of - mutton trait be of prime importance ; not only do it illustrate their tenacity , both collectively and as individual , but it mark they as belong in fibre and instinct to that great class which believe in nourishment and flavour , and yield to no sentimental craving for beauty . 
 young member of the family indeed would have do without a joint altogether , prefer guinea - fowl , or lobster salad - something which appeal to the imagination , and have less nourishment - but these be female ; or , if not , have be corrupt by their wife , or by mother , who have be force to eat saddle of mutton throughout their married life , have pass a secret hostility towards it into the fibre of their son . 
 the great saddle - of - mutton controversy at an end , a Tewkesbury ham commence , together with the least touch of West Indian - Swithin be so long over this course that he cause a block in the progress of the dinner . to devote himself to it with well heart , he pause in his conversation . 
 from his seat by Mrs. Septimus Small Soames be watch . he have a reason of his own connect with a pet building scheme , for observe Bosinney . the architect might do for his purpose ; he look clever , as he sit lean back in his chair , moodily make little rampart with bread - crumb . soame note his dress clothe to be well cut , but too small , as though make many year ago . 
 he see he turn to Irene and say something and her face sparkle as he often see it sparkle at other people - never at himself . he try to catch what they be say , but Aunt Juley be speak . 
 had not   that always seem very extraordinary to soame ? only last Sunday dear Mr. Scole , have be so witty in his sermon , so sarcastic , " for what , " he have say , ' shall it profit a man if he gain his own soul , but lose all his property ? " that , he have say , be the motto of the middle - class ; now , what have he mean by that ? of course , it might be what middle - class people believe - she do not   know ; what do soame think ? 
 he answer abstractedly : " how should I know ? Scoles be a humbug , though , be not   he ? " for Bosinney be look round the table , as if point out the peculiarity of the guest , and Soames wonder what he be say . by her smile Irene be evidently agree with his remark . she seem always to agree with other people . 
 her eye be turn on himself ; soame drop his glance at once . the smile have die off her lip . 
 a humbug ? but what do soame mean ? if Mr. Scoles be a humbug , a clergyman - then anybody might be - it be frightful ! 
 " well , and so they be ! " say soame . 
 during Aunt Juley 's momentary and horrified silence he catch some word of Irene 's that sound like : ' Abandon hope , all ye who enter here ! ' 
 but Swithin have finish his ham . 
 " where do you go for your mushroom ? " he be say to Irene in a voice like a courtier 's ; " you ought to go to Smileybob 's - he will give them you fresh . these little man , they will not   take the trouble ! " 
 Irene turn to answer he , and Soames see Bosinney watch she and smile to himself . a curious smile the fellow have . a half - simple arrangement , like a child who smile when he be pleased . as for George 's nickname - ' the Buccaneer ' - he do not think much of that . and , see Bosinney turn to June , Soames smile too , but sardonically - he do not like June , who be not look too pleased . 
 this be not surprising , for she have just hold the follow conversation with James : 
 " I stay on the river on my way home , Uncle James , and see a beautiful site for a house . " 
 James , a slow and thorough eater , stop the process of mastication . 
 " Eh ? " he say . " now , where be that ? " 
 " close to pangbourne . " 
 James place a piece of ham in his mouth , and June wait . 
 " I suppose you would not   know whether the land about there be freehold ? " he ask at last . " you would not   know anything about the price of land about there ? " 
 " yes , " say June ; " I make inquiry . " her little resolute face under its copper crown be suspiciously eager and aglow . 
 James regard she with the air of an inquisitor . 
 " what ? you be not think of buy land ! " he ejaculate , drop his fork . 
 June be greatly encourage by his interest . it have long be her pet plan that her uncle should benefit themselves and Bosinney by build country - house . 
 " of course not , " she say . " I think it would be such a splendid place for - you or - someone to build a country - house ! " 
 James look at her sideways , and place a second piece of ham in his mouth .... 
 " land ought to be very dear about there , " he say . 
 what June have take for personal interest be only the impersonal excitement of every Forsyte who hear of something eligible in danger of pass into other hand . but she refuse to see the disappearance of her chance , and continue to press her point . 
 " you ought to go into the country , Uncle James . I wish I have a lot of money , I would not   live another day in London . " 
 James be stir to the depth of his long thin figure ; he have no idea his niece hold such downright view . 
 " why do not   you go into the country ? " repeat June ; " it would do you a lot of good . " 
 " why ? " begin James in a fluster . " buy land - what good d'you suppose I can do buy land , build house ? - I could not   get four per cent . for my money ! " 
 " what do that matter ? you would get fresh air . " 
 " fresh air ! " exclaim James ; " what should I do with fresh air , " 
 " I should have think anybody like to have fresh air , " say June scornfully . 
 James wipe his napkin all over his mouth . 
 " you do not   know the value of money , " he say , avoid her eye . 
 " no ! and I hope I never shall ! " and , bite her lip with inexpressible mortification , poor June be silent . 
 why be her own relation so rich , and Phil never know where the money be come from for to - morrow 's tobacco . why could not   they do something for he ? but they be so selfish . why could not   they build country - house ? she have all that naive dogmatism which be so pathetic , and sometimes achieve such great result . Bosinney , to whom she turn in her discomfiture , be talk to Irene , and a chill fall on June 's spirit . her eye grow steady with anger , like old Jolyon 's when his will be cross . 
 James , too , be much disturbed . he feel as though someone have threaten his right to invest his money at five per cent . Jolyon have spoil she . none of his girl would have say such a thing . James have always be exceedingly liberal to his child , and the consciousness of this make he feel it all the more deeply . he trifle moodily with his strawberry , then , deluge they with cream , he eat they quickly ; they , at all event , should not escape he . 
 no wonder he be upset . engage for fifty - four year   he have be admit a solicitor on the early day sanction by the law   in arrange mortgage , preserve investment at a dead level of high and safe interest , conduct negotiation on the principle of secure the utmost possible out of other people compatible with safety to his client and himself , in calculation as to the exact pecuniary possibility of all the relation of life , he have come at last to think purely in term of money . money be now his light , his medium for see , that without which he be really unable to see , really not cognisant of phenomena ; and to have this thing , " I hope I shall never know the value of money ! " say to his face , sadden and exasperate he . he know it to be nonsense , or it would have frighten he . what be the world come to ! suddenly recollect the story of young Jolyon , however , he feel a little comfort , for what could you expect with a father like that ! this turn his thought into a channel still less pleasant . what be all this talk about Soames and Irene ? 
 as in all self - respect family , an emporium have be establish where family secret be barter , and family stock price . it be know on Forsyte ' Change that Irene regret her marriage . her regret be disapprove of . she ought to have know her own mind ; no dependable woman make these mistake . 
 James reflect sourly that they have a nice house   rather small   in an excellent position , no child , and no money trouble . soame be reserve about his affair , but he must be get a very warm man . he have a capital income from the business - for soame , like his father , be a member of that well - know firm of solicitor , Forsyte , Bustard and Forsyte - and have always be very careful . he have do quite unusually well with some mortgage he have take up , too - a little timely foreclosure - most lucky hit ! 
 there be no reason why Irene should not be happy , yet they say she have be ask for a separate room . he know where that end . it be not   as if Soames drank . 
 James look at his daughter - in - law . that unseen glance of his be cold and dubious . appeal and fear be in it , and a sense of personal grievance . why should he be worried like this ? it be very likely all nonsense ; woman be funny thing ! they exaggerate so , you do not   know what to believe ; and then , nobody tell he anything , he have to find out everything for himself . again he look furtively at Irene , and across from she to soame . the latter , listen to Aunt Juley , be look up , under his brow in the direction of Bosinney . 
 ' he be fond of she , I know , ' think James . ' look at the way he be always give her thing . ' 
 and the extraordinary unreasonableness of her disaffection strike he with increase force . 
 it be a pity , too , she be a take little thing , and he , James , would be really quite fond of she if she have only let he . she have take up lately with June ; that be do she no good , that be certainly do she no good . she be get to have opinion of her own . he do not   know what she want with anything of the sort . she have a good home , and everything she could wish for . he feel that her friend ought to be choose for she . to go on like this be dangerous . 
 June , indeed , with her habit of champion the unfortunate , have drag from Irene a confession , and , in return , have preach the necessity of face the evil , by separation , if need be . but in the face of these exhortation , Irene have keep a brooding silence , as though she find terrible the thought of this struggle carry through in cold blood . he would never give she up , she have say to June . 
 " who care ? " June cry ; " let he do what he like - you have   only to stick to it ! " and she have not scruple to say something of this sort at Timothy 's ; James , when he hear of it , have feel a natural indignation and horror . 
 what if Irene be to take it into her head to - he could hardly frame the thought - to leave soame ? but he feel this thought so unbearable that he at once put it away ; the shady vision it conjure up , the sound of family tongue buzz in his ear , the horror of the conspicuous happening so close to he , to one of his own child ! luckily , she have no money - a beggarly fifty pound a year ! and he think of the deceased Heron , who have have nothing to leave she , with contempt . brood over his glass , his long leg twist under the table , he quite omit to rise when the lady leave the room . he would have to speak to Soames - would have to put he on his guard ; they could not go on like this , now that such a contingency have occur to he . and he notice with sour disfavour that June have leave her wine - glass full of wine . 
 ' that little , thing be at the bottom of it all , ' he muse ; ' Irene'd never have think of it herself . ' James be a man of imagination . 
 the voice of Swithin rouse he from his reverie . 
 " I give four hundred pound for it , " he be say . " of course it be a regular work of art . " 
 " four hundred ! H'm ! that be a lot of money ! " chime in Nicholas . 
 the object allude to be an elaborate group of statuary in italian marble , which , place upon a lofty stand   also of marble , diffuse an atmosphere of culture throughout the room . the subsidiary figure , of which there be six , female , nude , and of highly ornate workmanship , be all point towards the central figure , also nude , and female , who be point at herself ; and all this give the observer a very pleasant sense of her extreme value . Aunt Juley , nearly opposite , have have the great difficulty in not look at it all the evening . 
 Old Jolyon speak ; it be he who have start the discussion . 
 " four hundred fiddlestick ! do not   tell I you give four hundred for that ? " 
 between the point of his collar Swithin 's chin make the second painful oscillatory movement of the evening . 
 " four - hundred - pound , of english money ; not a farthing less . I do not   regret it . it be not common English - it be genuine modern italian ! " 
 soame raise the corner of his lip in a smile , and look across at Bosinney . the architect be grin behind the fume of his cigarette . now , indeed , he look more like a buccaneer . 
 " there be a lot of work about it , " remark James hastily , who be really move by the size of the group . " it would sell well at Jobson 's . " 
 " the poor foreign dey - vil that make it , " go on Swithin , " ask I five hundred - I give he four . it be worth eight . look half - starve , poor dey - vil ! " 
 " ah ! " chime in Nicholas suddenly , " poor , seedy - lookin ' chap , these artist ; it be a wonder to I how they live . now , there be young Flageoletti , that Fanny and the girl be always hav'in ' in , to play the fiddle ; if he make a hundred a year it be as much as ever he do ! " 
 James shake his head . " ah ! " he say , " I do not   know how they live ! " 
 Old Jolyon have rise , and , cigar in mouth , go to inspect the group at close quarter . 
 " would not   have give two for it ! " he pronounce at last . 
 soame see his father and Nicholas glance at each other anxiously ; and , on the other side of Swithin , Bosinney , still shroud in smoke . 
 ' I wonder what he think of it ? ' think Soames , who know well enough that this group be hopelessly vieux jeu ; hopelessly of the last generation . there be no long any sale at Jobson 's for such work of art . 
 Swithin 's answer come at last . " you never know anything about a statue . you have   get your picture , and that be all ! " 
 Old Jolyon walk back to his seat , puff his cigar . it be not likely that he be go to be draw into an argument with an obstinate beggar like Swithin , pig - head as a mule , who have never know a statue from a - -straw hat . 
 " Stucco ! " be all he say . 
 it have long be physically impossible for Swithin to start ; his fist come down on the table . 
 " Stucco ! I should like to see anything you have   get in your house half as good ! " 
 and behind his speech seem to sound again that rumble violence of primitive generation . 
 it be James who save the situation . 
 " now , what do you say , Mr. Bosinney ? you be an architect ; you ought to know all about statue and thing ! " 
 every eye be turn upon Bosinney ; all wait with a strange , suspicious look for his answer . 
 and soame , speak for the first time , ask : 
 " yes , Bosinney , what do you say ? " 
 Bosinney reply coolly : 
 " the work be a remarkable one . " 
 his word be address to Swithin , his eye smile slyly at old Jolyon ; only soame remain unsatisfied . 
 " remarkable for what ? " 
 " for its naivete " 
 the answer be follow by an impressive silence ; Swithin alone be not sure whether a compliment be intend . 
 CHAPTER IV - PROJECTION of the HOUSE 
 Soames Forsyte walk out of his green - paint front door three day after the dinner at Swithin 's , and look back from across the Square , confirm his impression that the house want painting . 
 he have leave his wife sit on the sofa in the drawing - room , her hand cross in her lap , manifestly wait for he to go out . this be not unusual . it happen , in fact , every day . 
 he could not understand what she find wrong with he . it be not as if he drank ! do he run into debt , or gamble , or swear ; be he violent ; be his friend rackety ; do he stay out at night ? on the contrary . 
 the profound , subdued aversion which he feel in his wife be a mystery to he , and a source of the most terrible irritation . that she have make a mistake , and do not love he , have try to love he and could not love he , be obviously no reason . 
 he that could imagine so outlandish a cause for his wife 's not get on with he be certainly no Forsyte . 
 soame be force , therefore , to set the blame entirely down to his wife . he have never meet a woman so capable of inspire affection . they could not go anywhere without his see how all the man be attract by she ; their look , manner , voice , betray it ; her behaviour under this attention have be beyond reproach . that she be one of those woman - not too common in the anglo - Saxon race - bear to be love and to love , who when not love be not live , have certainly never even occur to he . her power of attraction , he regard as part of her value as his property ; but it make he , indeed , suspect that she could give as well as receive ; and she give he nothing ! ' then why do she marry I ? ' be his continual thought . he have , forget his courtship ; that year and a half when he have besiege and lain in wait for she , devise scheme for her entertainment , give her present , propose to she periodically , and keep she other admirer away with his perpetual presence . he have forget the day when , adroitly take advantage of an acute phase of her dislike to her home surrounding , he crown his labour with success . if he remember anything , it be the dainty capriciousness with which the gold - haire , dark - eyed girl have treat he . he certainly do not remember the look on her face - strange , passive , appeal - when suddenly one day she have yield , and say that she would marry he . 
 it have be one of those real devoted wooing which book and people praise , when the lover be at length reward for hammer the iron till it be malleable , and all must be happy ever after as the wedding bell . 
 soame walk eastward , mouse doggedly along on the shady side . 
 the house want do , up , unless he decide to move into the country , and build . 
 for the hundredth time that month he turn over this problem . there be no use in rush into thing ! he be very comfortably off , with an increase income get on for three thousand a year ; but his invest capital be not perhaps so large as his father believe - James have a tendency to expect that his child should be well off than they be . ' I can manage eight thousand easily enough , ' he think , ' without call in either Robertson 's or Nicholl 's . ' 
 he have stop to look in at a picture shop , for Soames be an ' amateur ' of picture , and have a little - room in No . 62 , Montpellier Square , full of canvas , stack against the wall , which he have no room to hang . he bring they home with he on his way back from the City , generally after dark , and would enter this room on Sunday afternoon , to spend hour turn the picture to the light , examine the mark on their back , and occasionally make note . 
 they be nearly all landscape with figure in the foreground , a sign of some mysterious revolt against London , its tall house , its interminable street , where his life and the life of his breed and class be pass . every now and then he would take one or two picture away with he in a cab , and stop at Jobson 's on his way into the City . 
 he rarely show they to anyone ; Irene , whose opinion he secretly respect and perhaps for that reason never solicit , have only be into the room on rare occasion , in discharge of some wifely duty . she be not ask to look at the picture , and she never do . to Soames this be another grievance . he hat that pride of her , and secretly dread it . 
 in the plate - glass window of the picture shop his image stand and look at he . 
 his sleek hair under the brim of the tall hat have a sheen like the hat itself ; his cheek , pale and flat , the line of his clean - shaven lip , his firm chin with its greyish shaven tinge , and the buttoned strictness of his black cut - away coat , convey an appearance of reserve and secrecy , of imperturbable , enforce composure ; but his eye , cold , - grey , strained - look , with a line in the brow between they , examine he wistfully , as if they know of a secret weakness . 
 he note the subject of the picture , the name of the painter , make a calculation of their value , but without the satisfaction he usually derive from this inward appraisement , and walk on . 
 no . 62 would do well enough for another year , if he decide to build ! the time be good for building , money have not be so dear for year ; and the site he have see at Robin Hill , when he have go down there in the spring to inspect the Nicholl mortgage - what could be well ! within twelve mile of Hyde Park Corner , the value of the land certain to go up , would always fetch more than he give for it ; so that a house , if build in really good style , be a first - class investment . 
 the notion of be the one member of his family with a country house weigh but little with he ; for to a true Forsyte , sentiment , even the sentiment of social position , be a luxury only to be indulge in after his appetite for more material pleasure have be satisfy . 
 to get Irene out of London , away from opportunity of go about and see people , away from her friend and those who put idea into her head ! that be the thing ! she be too thick with June ! June dislike he . he return the sentiment . they be of the same blood . 
 it would be everything to get Irene out of town . the house would please she she would enjoy mess about with the decoration , she be very artistic ! 
 the house must be in good style , something that would always be certain to command a price , something unique , like that last house of Parkes , which have a tower ; but Parkes have himself say that his architect be ruinous . you never know where you be with those fellow ; if they have a name they run you into no end of expense and be conceite into the bargain . 
 and a common architect be no good - the memory of Parkes ' tower preclude the employment of a common architect : 
 this be why he have think of Bosinney . since the dinner at Swithin 's he have make enquiry , the result of which have be meagre , but encouraging : " one of the new school . " 
 " Clever ? " 
 " as clever as you like - a bit - a bit up in the air ! " 
 he have not be able to discover what house Bosinney have build , nor what his charge be . the impression he gather be that he would be able to make his own term . the more he reflect on the idea , the more he like it . it would be keep the thing in the family , with Forsytes almost an instinct ; and he would be able to get ' favour - nation , ' if not nominal term - only fair , consider the chance to Bosinney of display his talent , for this house must be no common edifice . 
 soame reflect complacently on the work it would be sure to bring the young man ; for , like every Forsyte , he could be a thorough optimist when there be anything to be have out of it . 
 Bosinney 's office be in Sloane Street , close at , hand , so that he would be able to keep his eye continually on the plan . 
 again , Irene would not be to likely to object to leave London if her great friend 's lover be give the job . June 's marriage might depend on it . Irene could not decently stand in the way of June 's marriage ; she would never do that , he know she too well . and June would be please ; of this he see the advantage . 
 Bosinney look clever , but he have also - and - it be one of his great attraction - an air as if he do not quite know on which side his bread be butter ; he should be easy to deal with in money matter . soame make this reflection in no defraud spirit ; it be the natural attitude of his mind - of the mind of any good business man - of all those thousand of good business man through whom he be thread his way up Ludgate Hill . 
 thus he fulfil the inscrutable law of his great class - of human nature itself - when he reflect , with a sense of comfort , that Bosinney would be easy to deal with in money matter . 
 while he elbow his way on , his eye , which he usually keep fix on the ground before his foot , be attract upwards by the dome of St. Paul 's . it have a peculiar fascination for he , that old dome , and not once , but twice or three time a week , would he halt in his daily pilgrimage to enter beneath and stop in the side aisle for five or ten minute , scrutinize the name and epitaph on the monument . the attraction for he of this great church be inexplicable , unless it enable he to concentrate his thought on the business of the day . if any affair of particular moment , or demand peculiar acuteness , be weigh on his mind , he invariably go in , to wander with mouse - like attention from epitaph to epitaph . then retire in the same noiseless way , he would hold steadily on up Cheapside , a thought more of dogged purpose in his gait , as though he have see something which he have make up his mind to buy . 
 he go in this morning , but , instead of steal from monument to monument , turn his eye upwards to the column and spacing of the wall , and remain motionless . 
 his uplifted face , with the awed and wistful look which face take on themselves in church , be whiten to a chalky hue in the vast building . his gloved hand be clasp in front over the handle of his umbrella . he lift they . some sacred inspiration perhaps have come to he . 
 ' yes , ' he think , ' I must have room to hang my picture . 
 that evening , on his return from the City , he call at Bosinney 's office . he find the architect in his shirt - sleeve , smoke a pipe , and rule off line on a plan . soame refuse a drink , and come at once to the point . 
 " if you have   nothing well to do on Sunday , come down with I to Robin Hill , and give I your opinion on a building site . " 
 " be you go to build ? " 
 " perhaps , " say soame ; " but do not   speak of it . I just want your opinion . " 
 " quite so , " say the architect . 
 soame peer about the room . 
 " you be rather high up here , " he remark . 
 any information he could gather about the nature and scope of Bosinney 's business would be all to the good . 
 " it do well enough for I so far , " answer the architect . " you be accustomed to the swell . " 
 he knock out his pipe , but replace it empty between his tooth ; it assist he perhaps to carry on the conversation . soame note a hollow in each cheek , make as it be by suction . 
 " what do you pay for an office like this ? " say he . 
 " fifty too much , " reply Bosinney . 
 this answer impress soame favourably . 
 " I suppose it be dear , " he say . " I will call for you - on Sunday about eleven . " 
 the following Sunday therefore he call for Bosinney in a hansom , and drive he to the station . on arrive at Robin Hill , they find no cab , and start to walk the mile and a half to the site . 
 it be the 1st of August - a perfect day , with a burn sun and cloudles sky - and in the straight , narrow road lead up the hill their foot kick up a yellow dust . 
 " gravel soil , " remark soame , and sideways he glance at the coat Bosinney wear . into the side - pocket of this coat be thrust bundle of paper , and under one arm be carry a queer - look stick . soame note these and other peculiarity . 
 no one but a clever man , or , indeed , a buccaneer , would have take such liberty with his appearance ; and though these eccentricity be revolt to Soames , he derive a certain satisfaction from they , as evidence of quality by which he must inevitably profit . if the fellow could build house , what do his clothe matter ? 
 " I tell you , " he say , " that I want this house to be a surprise , so do not   say anything about it . I never talk of my affair until they be carry through . " 
 Bosinney nod . 
 " let woman into your plan , " pursue soame , " and you never know where it will end . " 
 " ah ! " Said Bosinney , " woman be the devil ! " 
 this feeling have long be at the - bottom of Soames 's heart ; he have never , however , put it into word . 
 " oh ! " he mutter , ' so you be begin to .... " he stop , but add , with an uncontrollable burst of spite : " June 's get a temper of her own - always have . " 
 " a temper be not a bad thing in an angel . " 
 soame have never call Irene an angel . he could not so have violate his good instinct , let other people into the secret of her value , and give himself away . he make no reply . 
 they have strike into a half - make road across a warren . a cart - track lead at right - angle to a gravel pit , beyond which the chimney of a cottage rise amongst a clump of tree at the border of a thick wood . tussock of feathery grass cover the rough surface of the ground , and out of these the lark soar into the hate of sunshine . on the far horizon , over a countless succession of field and hedge , rise a line of down . 
 soame lead till they have cross to the far side , and there he stop . it be the choose site ; but now that he be about to divulge the spot to another he have become uneasy . 
 " the agent live in that cottage , " he say ; " he will give we some lunch - we would well have lunch before we go into this matter . " 
 he again take the lead to the cottage , where the agent , a tall man name Oliver , with a heavy face and grizzle beard , welcome they . during lunch , which soame hardly touch , he keep look at Bosinney , and once or twice pass his silk handkerchief stealthily over his forehead . the meal come to an end at last , and Bosinney rise . 
 " I dare say you have   get business to talk over , " he say ; " I will just go and nose about a bit . " without wait for a reply he stroll out . 
 soame be solicitor to this estate , and he spend nearly an hour in the agent 's company , look at ground - plan and discuss the Nicholl and other mortgage ; it be as it be by an afterthought that he bring up the question of the building site . 
 " your people , " he say , " ought to come down in their price to I , consider that I shall be the first to build . " 
 Oliver shake his head . 
 the site you have   fix on , Sir , he say , " be the cheap we have   get . site at the top of the slope be dearer by a good bit . " 
 " mind , " say soame , " I have   not decide ; it be quite possible I shall not   build at all . the ground rent 's very high . " 
 " well , Mr. Forsyte , I shall be sorry if you go off , and I think you will make a mistake , Sir . there be not a bit of land near London with such a view as this , nor one that be cheap , all thing consider ; we have   only to advertise , to get a mob of people after it . " 
 they look at each other . their face say very plainly : ' I respect you as a man of business ; and you can not   expect I to believe a word you say . ' 
 well , repeat soame , " I have not   make up my mind ; the thing will very likely go off ! " with these word , take up his umbrella , he put his chilly hand into the agent 's , withdraw it without the faint pressure , and go out into the sun . 
 he walk slowly back towards the site in deep thought . his instinct tell he that what the agent have say be true . a cheap site . and the beauty of it be , that he know the agent do not really think it cheap ; so that his own intuitive knowledge be a victory over the agent 's . 
 ' cheap or not , I mean to have it , ' he think . 
 the lark spring up in front of his foot , the air be full of butterfly , a sweet fragrance rise from the wild grass . the sappy scent of the bracken steal forth from the wood , where , hide in the depth , pigeon be coo , and from afar on the warm breeze , come the rhythmic chiming of church bell . 
 soame walk with his eye on the ground , his lip opening and closing as though in anticipation of a delicious morsel . but when he arrive at the site , Bosinney be nowhere to be see . after wait some little time , he cross the warren in the direction of the slope . he would have shout , but dread the sound of his voice . 
 the warren be as lonely as a prairie , its silence only break by the rustle of rabbit bolt to their hole , and the song of the lark . 
 soame , the pioneer - leader of the great forsyte army advance to the civilization of this wilderness , feel his spirit daunt by the loneliness , by the invisible singing , and the hot , sweet air . he have begin to retrace his step when he at last catch sight of Bosinney . 
 the architect be sprawl under a large oak tree , whose trunk , with a huge spread of bough and foliage , rag with age , stand on the verge of the rise . 
 soame have to touch he on the shoulder before he look up . 
 " Hallo ! Forsyte , " he say , " I have   find the very place for your house ! look here ! " 
 soame stand and look , then he say , coldly : 
 " you may be very clever , but this site will cost I half as much again . " 
 " hang the cost , man . look at the view ! " 
 almost from their foot stretch ripe corn , dip to a small dark copse beyond . a plain of field and hedge spread to the distant grey - bluedown . in a silver streak to the right could be see the line of the river . 
 the sky be so blue , and the sun so bright , that an eternal summer seem to reign over this prospect . thistledown float round they , enrapture by the serenity , of the ether . the heat dance over the corn , and , pervade all , be a soft , insensible hum , like the murmur of bright minute hold revel between earth and heaven . 
 soame look . in spite of himself , something swell in his breast . to live here in sight of all this , to be able to point it out to his friend , to talk of it , to possess it ! his cheek flush . the warmth , the radiance , the glow , be sink into his sens as , four year before , Irene 's beauty have sink into his sens and make he long for she . he steal a glance at Bosinney , whose eye , the eye of the coachman 's ' half - tame leopard , ' seem run wild over the landscape . the sunlight have catch the promontory of the fellow 's face , the bumpy cheekbone , the point of his chin , the vertical ridge above his brow ; and Soames watch this rugged , enthusiastic , careless face with an unpleasant feeling . 
 a long , soft ripple of wind flow over the corn , and bring a puff of warm air into their face . 
 " I could build you a teaser here , " say Bosinney , break the silence at last . 
 " I dare say , " reply Soames , drily . " you have not   get to pay for it . " 
 " for about eight thousand I could build you a palace . " 
 soame have become very pale - a struggle be go on within he . he drop his eye , and say stubbornly : 
 " I can not   afford it . " 
 and slowly , with his mouse walk , he lead the way back to the first site . 
 they spend some time there go into particular of the project house , and then Soames return to the agent 's cottage . 
 he come out in about half an hour , and , join Bosinney , start for the station . 
 " well , " he say , hardly open his lip , " I have   take that site of your , after all . " 
 and again he be silent , confusedly debate how it be that this fellow , whom by habit he despise , should have overbear his own decision . 
 CHAPTER V - a forsyte menage 
 like the enlighten thousand of his class and generation in this great city of London , who no long believe in red velvet chair , and know that group of modern italian marble be ' vieux jeu , ' Soames Forsyte inhabit a house which do what it could . it own a copper door knocker of individual design , window which have be alter to open outward , hang flower box fill with fuchsia , and at the back   a great feature   a little court tile with jade - green tile , and surround by pink hydrangea in peacock - blue tub . here , under a parchment - colour japanese sunshade cover the whole end , inhabitant or visitor could be screen from the eye of the curious while they drink tea and examine at their leisure the late of Soames 's little silver box . 
 the inner decoration favour the First Empire and William Morris . for its size , the house be commodious ; there be countless nook resemble bird ' nest , and little thing make of silver be deposit like egg . 
 in this general perfection two kind of fastidiousness be at war . there live here a mistress who would have dwell daintily on a desert island ; a master whose daintiness be , as it be , an investment , cultivate by the owner for his advancement , in accordance with the law of competition . this competitive daintiness have cause soame in his Marlborough day to be the first boy into white waistcoat in summer , and corduroy waistcoat in winter , have prevent he from ever appear in public with his tie climb up his collar , and induce he to dust his patent leather boot before a great multitude assemble on Speech Day to hear he recite Moliere . 
 Skin - like immaculateness have grow over Soames , as over many londoner ; impossible to conceive of he with a hair out of place , a tie deviate one - eighth of an inch from the perpendicular , a collar unglossed ! he would not have go without a bath for world - it be the fashion to take bath ; and how bitter be his scorn of people who omit they ! 
 but Irene could be imagine , like some nymph , bath in wayside stream , for the joy of the freshness and of see her own fair body . 
 in this conflict throughout the house the woman have go to the wall . as in the struggle between Saxon and Celt still go on within the nation , the more impressionable and receptive temperament have have force on it a conventional superstructure . 
 thus the house have acquire a close resemblance to hundred of other house with the same high aspiration , have become : ' that very charming little house of the Soames Forsytes , quite individual , my dear - really elegant . ' 
 for soame Forsyte - read James Peabody , Thomas Atkins , or Emmanuel Spagnoletti , the name in fact of any upper - middle class Englishman in London with any pretension to taste ; and though the decoration be different , the phrase be just . 
 on the evening of August 8 , a week after the expedition to Robin Hill , in the dining - room of this house - ' quite individual , my dear - really elegant ' - Soames and Irene be seat at dinner . a hot dinner on Sundays be a little distinguish elegance common to this house and many other . early in married life soame have lay down the rule : ' the servant must give we hot dinner on Sundays - they have   nothing to do but play the concertina . ' 
 the custom have produce no revolution . for - to Soames a rather deplorable sign - servant be devoted to Irene , who , in defiance of all safe tradition , appear to recognise their right to a share in the weakness of human nature . 
 the happy pair be seat , not opposite each other , but rectangularly , at the handsome rosewood table ; they din without a cloth - a distinguish elegance - and so far have not speak a word . 
 soame like to talk during dinner about business , or what he have be buy , and so long as he talk Irene 's silence do not distress he . this evening he have find it impossible to talk . the decision to build have be weigh on his mind all the week , and he have make up his mind to tell she . 
 his nervousness about this disclosure irritate he profoundly ; she have no business to make he feel like that - a wife and a husband be one person . she have not look at he once since they sit down ; and he wonder what on earth she have be think about all the time . it be hard , when a man work as he do , make money for she - yes , and with an ache in his heart - that she should sit there , look - look as if she see the wall of the room close in . it be enough to make a man get up and leave the table . 
 the light from the rose - shade lamp fall on her neck and arm - Soames like she to dine in a low dress , it give he an inexpressible feeling of superiority to the majority of his acquaintance , whose wife be content with their good high frock or with tea - gown , when they din at home . under that rosy light her amber - colour hair and fair skin make strange contrast with her dark brown eye . 
 could a man own anything pretty than this dining - table with its deep tint , the starry , soft - petalle rose , the ruby - colour glass , and quaint silver furnish ; could a man own anything pretty than the woman who sit at it ? Gratitude be no virtue among Forsytes , who , competitive , and full of common - sense , have no occasion for it ; and soame only experience a sense of exasperation amount to pain , that he do not own she as it be his right to own she , that he could not , as by stretch out his hand to that rose , pluck she and sniff the very secret of her heart . 
 out of his other property , out of all the thing he have collect , his silver , his picture , his house , his investment , he get a secret and intimate feeling ; out of she he get none . 
 in this house of his there be write on every wall . his business - like temperament protest against a mysterious warning that she be not make for he . he have marry this woman , conquer she , make she his own , and it seem to he contrary to the most fundamental of all law , the law of possession , that he could do no more than own her body - if indeed he could do that , which he be begin to doubt . if any one have ask he if he want to own her soul , the question would have seem to he both ridiculous and sentimental . but he do so want , and the writing say he never would . 
 she be ever silent , passive , gracefully averse ; as though terrify lest by word , motion , or sign she might lead he to believe that she be fond of he ; and he ask himself : must I always go on like this ? 
 like most novel reader of his generation   and Soames be a great novel reader , literature colour his view of life ; and he have imbibe the belief that it be only a question of time . 
 in the end the husband always gain the affection of his wife . even in those case - a class of book he be not very fond of - which end in tragedy , the wife always die with poignant regret on her lip , or if it be the husband who die - unpleasant thought - throw herself on his body in an agony of remorse . 
 he often take Irene to the theatre , instinctively choose the modern Society play with the modern Society conjugal problem , so fortunately different from any conjugal problem in real life . he find that they too always end in the same way , even when there be a lover in the case . while he be watch the play soame often sympathize with the lover ; but before he reach home again , drive with Irene in a hansom , he see that this would not do , and he be glad the play have end as it have . there be one class of husband that have just then come into fashion , the strong , rather rough , but extremely sound man , who be peculiarly successful at the end of the play ; with this person Soames be really not in sympathy , and have it not be for his own position , would have express his disgust with the fellow . but he be so conscious of how vital to himself be the necessity for be a successful , even a ' strong , ' husband , that he never speak of a distaste bear perhaps by the perverse process of Nature out of a secret fund of brutality in himself . 
 but Irene 's silence this evening be exceptional . he have never before see such an expression on her face . and since it be always the unusual which alarm , soame be alarmed . he eat his savoury , and hurry the maid as she sweep off the crumb with the silver sweeper . when she have leave the room , he fill his glass with wine and say : 
 " anybody be here this afternoon ? " 
 " June . " 
 " what do she want ? " it be an axiom with the Forsytes that people do not go anywhere unless they want something . " come to talk about her lover , I suppose ? " 
 Irene make no reply . 
 " it look to I , " continue soame , " as if she be sweet on he than he be on she . she be always follow he about . " 
 Irene 's eye make he feel uncomfortable . 
 " you have   no business to say such a thing ! " she exclaim . 
 " why not ? anybody can see it . " 
 " they can not . and if they could , it be disgraceful to say so . " 
 soame 's composure give way . 
 " you be a pretty wife ! " he say . but secretly he wonder at the heat of her reply ; it be unlike she . " you be crack about June ! I can tell you one thing : now that she have the Buccaneer in tow , she do not   care twopence about you , and , you will find it out . but you will not   see so much of she in future ; we be go to live in the country . " 
 he have be glad to get his news out under cover of this burst of irritation . he have expect a cry of dismay ; the silence with which his pronouncement be receive alarmed he . 
 " you do not   seem interested , " he be oblige to add . 
 " I know it already . " 
 he look at she sharply . 
 " who tell you ? " 
 " June . " 
 " how do she know ? " 
 Irene do not answer . baffled and uncomfortable , he say : 
 " it be a fine thing for Bosinney , it will be the making of he . I suppose she be tell you all about it ? " 
 " yes . " 
 there be another pause , and then Soames say : 
 " I suppose you do not   want to , go ? " 
 Irene make no reply . 
 " well , I can not   tell what you want . you never seem content here . " 
 " have my wish anything to do with it ? " 
 she take the vase of rose and leave the room . soame remain seat . be it for this that he have sign that contract ? be it for this that he be go to spend some ten thousand pound ? Bosinney 's phrase come back to he : " woman be the devil ! " 
 but presently he grow calm . it might have , be bad . she might have flare up . he have expect something more than this . it be lucky , after all , that June have break the ice for he . she must have worm it out of Bosinney ; he might have know she would . 
 he light his cigarette . after all , Irene have not make a scene ! she would come round - that be the good of she ; she be cold , but not sulky . and , puff the cigarette smoke at a lady - bird on the shin table , he plunge into a reverie about the house . it be no good worrying ; he would go and make it up presently . she would be sit out there in the dark , under the japanese sunshade , knitting . a beautiful , warm night .... 
 in truth , June have come in that afternoon with shin eye , and the word : " soame be a brick ! it be splendid for Phil - the very thing for he ! " 
 Irene 's face remain dark and puzzle , she go on : 
 " your new house at Robin Hill , of course . what ? do not   you know ? " 
 Irene do not know . 
 " oh ! then , I suppose I ought not   to have tell you ! " look impatiently at her friend , she cry : " you look as if you do not   care . do not   you see , it be what I have ' be pray for - the very chance he be be want all this time . now you will see what he can do ; " and thereupon she pour out the whole story . 
 since her own engagement she have not seem much interested in her friend 's position ; the hour she spend with Irene be give to confidence of her own ; and at time , for all her affectionate pity , it be impossible to keep out of her smile a trace of compassionate contempt for the woman who have make such a mistake in her life - such a vast , ridiculous mistake . 
 " he be to have all the decoration as well - a free hand . it be perfect - " June break into laughter , her little figure quiver gleefully ; she raise her hand , and strike a blow at a muslin curtain . " do you , know I even ask Uncle James .... " but , with a sudden dislike to mention that incident , she stop ; and presently , find her friend so unresponsive , go away . she look back from the pavement , and Irene be still stand in the doorway . in response to her farewell wave , Irene put her hand to her brow , and , turn slowly , shut the door .... 
 soame go to the drawing - room presently , and peer at she through the window . 
 out in the shadow of the japanese sunshade she be sit very still , the lace on her white shoulder stir with the soft rise and fall of her bosom . 
 but about this silent creature sit there so motionless , in the dark , there seem a warmth , a hidden fervour of feeling , as if the whole of her be have be stir , and some change be take place in its very depth . 
 he steal back to the dining - room unnoticed . 
 CHAPTER VI - JAMES AT LARGE 
 it be not long before Soames 's determination to build go the round of the family , and create the flutter that any decision connect with property should make among Forsytes . 
 it be not his fault , for he have be determine that no one should know . June , in the fulness of her heart , have tell Mrs. Small , give her leave only to tell Aunt Ann - she think it would cheer she , the poor old sweet ! for Aunt Ann have keep her room now for many day . 
 Mrs. Small tell Aunt Ann at once , who , smile as she lie back on her pillow , say in her distinct , tremble old voice : 
 " it be very nice for dear June ; but I hope they will be careful - it be rather dangerous ! " 
 when she be leave alone again , a frown , like a cloud presage a rainy morrow , cross her face . 
 while she be lie there so many day the process of recharge she will go on all the time ; it spread to her face , too , and tighten movement be always in action at the corner of her lip . 
 the maid Smither , who have be in her service since girlhood , and be speak of as " Smither - a good girl - but so slow ! " - the maid Smither perform every morning with extreme punctiliousness the crown ceremony of that ancient toilet . take from the recess of their pure white band - box those flat , grey curl , the insignia of personal dignity , she place they securely in her mistress 's hand , and turn she back . 
 and every day Aunts Juley and Hester be require to come and report on Timothy ; what news there be of Nicholas ; whether dear June have succeed in get Jolyon to shorten the engagement , now that Mr. Bosinney be build Soames a house ; whether young Roger 's wife be really - expect ; how the operation on Archie have succeed ; and what Swithin have do about that empty house in Wigmore Street , where the tenant have lose all his money and treat he so badly ; above all , about soame ; be Irene still - still ask for a separate room ? and every morning Smither be tell : " I shall be come down this afternoon , Smither , about two o'clock . I shall want your arm , after all these day in bed ! " 
 after tell Aunt Ann , Mrs. Small have speak of the house in the strict confidence to Mrs. Nicholas , who in her turn have ask Winifred Dartie for confirmation , supposing , of course , that , be soame 's sister , she would know all about it . through she it have in due course come round to the ear of James . he have be a good deal agitated . 
 " nobody , " he say , " tell he anything . " and , rather than go direct to Soames himself , of whose taciturnity he be afraid , he take his umbrella and go round to Timothy 's . 
 he find Mrs. Septimus and Hester   who have be tell - she be so safe , she find it tiring to talk   ready , and indeed eager , to discuss the news . it be very good of dear soame , they think , to employ Mr. Bosinney , but rather risky . what have George name he ? ' the Buccaneer ' how droll ! but George be always droll ! however , it would be all in the family they suppose they must really look upon Mr. Bosinney as belong to the family , though it seem strange . 
 James here break in : 
 " nobody know anything about he . I do not   see what soame want with a young man like that . I should not   be surprised if Irene have put she oar in . I shall speak to .... " 
 " soame , " interpose Aunt Juley , " tell Mr. Bosinney that he do not   wish it mention . he would not   like it to be talk about , I be sure , and if Timothy know he would be very vexed , I .... " 
 James put his hand behind his ear : 
 " what ? " he say . " I be get very deaf . I suppose I do not   hear people . Emily 's get a bad toe . we shall not   be able to start for Wales till the end of the month . there be always something ! " and , have get what he want , he take his hat and go away . 
 it be a fine afternoon , and he walk across the Park towards Soames 's , where he intend to dine , for Emily 's toe keep she in bed , and Rachel and Cicely be on a visit to the country . he take the slanting path from the bayswater side of the row to the Knightsbridge Gate , across a pasture of short , burn grass , dot with blacken sheep , strew with seated couple and strange waif ; lie prone on their face , like corps on a field over which the wave of battle have roll . 
 he walk rapidly , his head bend , look neither to right nor , leave . the appearance of this park , the centre of his own battle - field , where he have all his life be fight , excite no thought or speculation in his mind . these corps fling down , there , from out the press and turmoil of the struggle , these pair of lover sit cheek by jowl for an hour of idle Elysium snatch from the monotony of their treadmill , awaken no fancy in his mind ; he have outlive that kind of imagination ; his nose , like the nose of a sheep , be fasten to the pasture on which he browse . 
 one of his tenant have lately show a disposition to be behind - hand in his rent , and it have become a grave question whether he have not well turn he out at once , and so run the risk of not re - letting before Christmas . Swithin have just be let in very badly , but it have serve he right - he have hold on too long . 
 he ponder this as he walk steadily , hold his umbrella carefully by the wood , just below the crook of the handle , so as to keep the ferule off the ground , and not fray the silk in the middle . and , with his thin , high shoulder stoop , his long leg move with swift mechanical precision , this passage through the Park , where the sun shine with a clear flame on so much idleness - on so many human evidence of the remorseless battle of Property , rag beyond its ring - be like the flight of some land bird across the sea . 
 he feel a - touch on the arm as he come out at Albert Gate . 
 it be soame , who , cross from the shady side of Piccadilly , where he have be walk home from the office , have suddenly appear alongside . 
 " your mother 's in bed , " say James ; " I be , just come to you , but I suppose I shall be in the way . " 
 the outward relation between James and his son be mark by a lack of sentiment peculiarly Forsytean , but for all that the two be by no mean unattached . perhaps they regard one another as an investment ; certainly they be solicitous of each other 's welfare , glad of each other 's company . they have never exchange two word upon the more intimate problem of life , or reveal in each other 's presence the existence of any deep feeling . 
 something beyond the power of word - analysis bind they together , something hide deep in the fibre of nation and family - for blood , they say , be thick than water - and neither of they be a cold - blooded man . indeed , in James love of his child be now the prime motive of his existence . to have creature who be part of himself , to whom he might transmit the money he save , be at the root of his saving ; and , at seventy - five , what be leave that could give he pleasure , but - saving ? the kernel of life be in this saving for his child . 
 than James Forsyte , notwithstanding all his ' Jonah - ism , ' there be no saner man   if the lead symptom of sanity , as we be tell , be self - preservation , though without doubt Timothy go too far   in all this London , of which he own so much , and love with such a dumb love , as the centre of his opportunity . he have the marvellous instinctive sanity of the middle class . in he - more than in Jolyon , with his masterful will and his moment of tenderness and philosophy - more than in Swithin , the martyr to crankiness - Nicholas , the sufferer from ability - and Roger , the victim of enterprise - beat the true pulse of compromise ; of all the brother he be least remarkable in mind and person , and for that reason more likely to live for ever . 
 to James , more than to any of the other , be " the family " significant and dear . there have always be something primitive and cosy in his attitude towards life ; he love the family hearth , he love gossip , and he love grumble . all his decision be form of a cream which he skim off the family mind ; and , through that family , off the mind of thousand of other family of similar fibre . year after year , week after week , he go to Timothy 's , and in his brother 's front drawing - room - his leg twist , his long white whisker frame his clean - shaven mouth - would sit watch the family pot simmer , the cream rise to the top ; and he would go away shelter , refresh , comfort , with an indefinable sense of comfort . 
 beneath the adamant of his self - preserve instinct there be much real softness in James ; a visit to Timothy 's be like an hour spend in the lap of a mother ; and the deep craving he himself have for the protection of the family wing react in turn on his feeling towards his own child ; it be a nightmare to he to think of they expose to the treatment of the world , in money , health , or reputation . when his old friend John Street 's son volunteer for special service , he shake his head querulously , and wonder what John Street be about to allow it ; and when young Street be assagaie , he take it so much to heart that he make a point of call everywhere with the special object of say : he know how it would be - he have no patience with they ! 
 when his son - in - law Dartie have that financial crisis , due to speculation in Oil share , James make himself ill worry over it ; the knell of all prosperity seem to have sound . it take he three month and a visit to Baden - Baden to get well ; there be something terrible in the idea that but for his , James 's , money , Dartie 's name might have appear in the Bankruptcy List . 
 compose of a physiological mixture so sound that if he have an earache he think he be die , he regard the occasional ailment of his wife and child as in the nature of personal grievance , special intervention of Providence for the purpose of destroy his peace of mind ; but he do not believe at all in the ailment of people outside his own immediate family , affirm they in every case to be due to neglect liver . 
 his universal comment be : " what can they expect ? I have it myself , if I be not careful ! " 
 when he go to Soames 's that evening he feel that life be hard on he : there be Emily with a bad toe , and Rachel gad about in the country ; he get no sympathy from anybody ; and Ann , she be ill - he do not believe she would last through the summer ; he have call there three time now without she be able to see he ! and this idea of Soames 's , build a house , that would have to be look into . as to the trouble with Irene , he do not   know what be to come of that - anything might come of it ! 
 he enter 62 , Montpellier Square with the full intention of be miserable . it be already half - past seven , and Irene , dress for dinner , be seat in the drawing - room . she be wear her gold - colour frock - for , have be display at a dinner - party , a soiree , and a dance , it be now to be wear at home - and she have adorn the bosom with a cascade of lace , on which James 's eye rivet themselves at once . 
 " where do you get your thing ? " he say in an aggravated voice . " I never see Rachel and Cicely look half so well . that rose - point , now - that be not real ! " 
 Irene come close , to prove to he that he be in error . 
 and , in spite of himself , James feel the influence of her deference , of the faint seductive perfume exhale from she . no self - respect Forsyte surrender at a blow ; so he merely say : he do not   know - he expect she be spend a pretty penny on dress . 
 the gong sound , and , put her white arm within his , Irene take he into the dining - room . she seat he in Soames 's usual place , round the corner on her left . the light fall softly there , so that he would not be worry by the gradual dying of the day ; and she begin to talk to he about himself . 
 presently , over James come a change , like the mellowing that steal upon a fruit in the sun ; a sense of be caress , and praise , and pet , and all without the bestowal of a single caress or word of praise . he feel that what he be eat be agree with he ; he could not get that feeling at home ; he do not know when he have enjoy a glass of champagne so much , and , on inquire the brand and price , be surprised to find that it be one of which he have a large stock himself , but could never drink ; he instantly form the resolution to let his wine merchant know that he have be swindle . 
 look up from his food , he remark : 
 " you have   a lot of nice thing about the place . now , what do you give for that sugar - sifter ? should not   wonder if it be worth money ! " 
 he be particularly pleased with the appearance of a picture , on the wall opposite , which he himself have give they : 
 " I would no idea it be so good ! " he say . 
 they rise to go into the drawing - room , and James follow Irene closely . 
 " that be what I call a capital little dinner , " he murmur , breathe pleasantly down on her shoulder ; " nothing heavy - and not too frenchify . but I can not   get it at home . I pay my cook sixty pound a year , but she can not   give I a dinner like that ! " 
 he have as yet make no allusion to the building of the house , nor do he when soame , plead the excuse of business , betook himself to the room at the top , where he keep his picture . 
 James be leave alone with his daughter - in - law . the glow of the wine , and of an excellent liqueur , be still within he . he feel quite warm towards she . she be really a take little thing ; she listen to you , and seem to understand what you be say ; and , while talk , he keep examine her figure , from her bronze - colour shoe to the waved gold of her hair . she be lean back in an Empire chair , her shoulder poise against the top - her body , flexibly straight and unsupported from the hip , sway when she move , as though give to the arm of a lover . her lip be smile , her eye half - closed . 
 it may have be a recognition of danger in the very charm of her attitude , or a twang of digestion , that cause a sudden dumbness to fall on James . he do not remember ever have be quite alone with Irene before . and , as he look at she , an odd feeling creep over he , as though he have come across something strange and foreign . 
 now what be she think about - sit back like that ? 
 thus when he speak it be in a sharp voice , as if he have be awaken from a pleasant dream . 
 " what d'you do with yourself all day ? " he say . " you never come round to Park Lane ! " 
 she seem to be make very lame excuse , and James do not look at she . he do not want to believe that she be really avoid they - it would mean too much . 
 " I expect the fact be , you have not   time , " he say ; " you be always about with June . I expect you be useful to she with her young man , chaperoning , and one thing and another . they tell I she be never at home now ; your Uncle Jolyon he do not   like it , I fancy , be leave so much alone as he be . they tell I she be always hang about for this young Bosinney ; I suppose he come here every day . now , what do you think of he ? d'you think he know his own mind ? he seem to I a poor thing . I should say the grey mare be the well horse ! " 
 the colour deepen in Irene 's face ; and James watch she suspiciously . 
 " perhaps you do not   quite understand Mr. Bosinney , " she say . 
 " do not   understand he ! " James hum out : " why not ? - you can see he be one of these artistic chap . they say he be clever - they all think they be clever . you know more about he than I do , " he add ; and again his suspicious glance rest on she . 
 " he be design a house for Soames , " she say softly , evidently try to smooth thing over . 
 " that bring I to what I be go to say , " continue James ; " I do not   know what soame want with a young man like that ; why do not   he go to a first - rate man ? " 
 " perhaps Mr. Bosinney be first - rate ! " 
 James rise , and take a turn with bent head . 
 " that be it ' , " he say , " you young people , you all stick together ; you all think you know well ! " 
 halt his tall , lank figure before she , he raise a finger , and level it at her bosom , as though bring an indictment against her beauty : 
 " all I can say be , these artistic people , or whatever they call themselves , they be as unreliable as they can be ; and my advice to you be , do not   you have too much to do with he ! " 
 Irene smile ; and in the curve of her lip be a strange provocation . she seem to have lose her deference . her breast rise and fall as though with secret anger ; she draw her hand inward from their rest on the arm of her chair until the tip of her finger meet , and her dark eye look unfathomably at James . 
 the latter gloomily scrutinize the floor . 
 " I tell you my opinion , " he say , " it be a pity you have not   get a child to think about , and occupy you ! " 
 a brooding look come instantly on Irene 's face , and even James become conscious of the rigidity that take possession of her whole figure beneath the softness of its silk and lace clothing . 
 he be frighten by the effect he have produce , and like most man with but little courage , he seek at once to justify himself by bully . 
 " you do not   seem to care about go about . why do not   you drive down to Hurlingham with we ? and go to the theatre now and then . at your time of life you ought to take an interest in thing . you be a young woman ! " 
 the brood look darken on her face ; he grow nervous . 
 " well , I know nothing about it , " he say ; " nobody tell I anything . soame ought to be able to take care of himself . if he can not   take care of himself he must not   look to I - that be all . " 
 bite the corner of his forefinger he steal a cold , sharp look at his daughter - in - law . 
 he encounter her eye fix on his own , so dark and deep , that he stop , and break into a gentle perspiration . 
 " well , I must be go , " he say after a short pause , and a minute later rise , with a slight appearance of surprise , as though he have expect to be ask to stop . give his hand to Irene , he allow himself to be conduct to the door , and let out into the street . he would not have a cab , he would walk , Irene be to say good - night to Soames for he , and if she want a little gaiety , well , he would drive she down to Richmond any day . 
 he walk home , and go upstairs , wake Emily out of the first sleep she have have for four and twenty hour , to tell she that it be his impression thing be in a bad way at Soames 's ; on this theme he descant for half an hour , until at last , say that he would not sleep a wink , he turn on his side and instantly begin to snore . 
 in Montpellier Square Soames , who have come from the picture room , stand invisible at the top of the stair , watch Irene sort the letter bring by the last post . she turn back into the drawing - room ; but in a minute come out , and stand as if listen . then she come steal up the stair , with a kitten in her arm . he could see her face bent over the little beast , which be purr against her neck . why could not   she look at he like that ? 
 suddenly she see he , and her face change . 
 " any letter for I ? " he say . 
 " Three . " 
 he stand aside , and without another word she pass on into the bedroom . 
 CHAPTER VII - OLD JOLYON 's PECCADILLO 
 Old Jolyon come out of Lord 's cricket ground that same afternoon with the intention of go home . he have not reach Hamilton Terrace before he change his mind , and hail a cab , give the driver an address in Wistaria Avenue . he have take a resolution . 
 June have hardly be at home at all that week ; she have give he nothing of her company for a long time past , not , in fact , since she have become engaged to Bosinney . he never ask she for her company . it be not his habit to ask people for thing ! she have just that one idea now - Bosinney and his affair - and she leave he strand in his great house , with a parcel of servant , and not a soul to speak to from morning to night . his Club be close for cleaning ; his board in recess ; there be nothing , therefore , to take he into the City . June have want he to go away ; she would not go herself , because Bosinney be in London . 
 but where be he to go by himself ? he could not go abroad alone ; the sea upset his liver ; he hat hotel . Roger go to a hydropathic - he be not go to begin that at his time of life , those new - fangle place we be all humbug ! 
 with such formula he clothe to himself the desolation of his spirit ; the line down his face deepen , his eye day by day look forth with the melancholy which sit so strangely on a face will not to be strong and serene . 
 and so that afternoon he take this journey through St. John 's Wood , in the golden - light that sprinkle the rounded green bush of the acacia 's before the little house , in the summer sunshine that seem hold a revel over the little garden ; and he look about he with interest ; for this be a district which no Forsyte enter without open disapproval and secret curiosity . 
 his cab stop in front of a small house of that peculiar buff colour which imply a long immunity from paint . it have an outer gate , and a rustic approach . 
 he step out , his bear extremely compose ; his massive head , with its droop moustache and wing of white hair , very upright , under an excessively large top hat ; his glance firm , a little angry . he have be drive into this ! 
 " Mrs. Jolyon Forsyte at home ? " 
 " oh , yes sir ! - what name shall I say , if you please , sir ? " 
 Old Jolyon could not help twinkle at the little maid as he give his name . she seem to he such a funny little toad ! 
 and he follow she through the dark hall , into a small double , drawing - room , where the furniture be cover in chintz , and the little maid place he in a chair . 
 " they be all in the garden , sir ; if you will kindly take a seat , I will tell they . " 
 Old Jolyon sit down in the chintz - cover chair , and look around he . the whole place seem to he , as he would have express it , pokey ; there be a certain - he could not tell exactly what - air of shabbiness , or rather of make two end meet , about everything . as far as he could see , not a single piece of furniture be worth a five - pound note . the wall , distemper rather a long time ago , be decorate with water - colour sketch ; across the ceiling meander a long crack . 
 these little house be all old , second - rate concern ; he should hope the rent be under a hundred a year ; it hurt he more than he could have say , to think of a Forsyte - his own son live in such a place . 
 the little maid come back . would he please to go down into the garden ? 
 Old Jolyon march out through the french window . in descend the step he notice that they want paint . 
 Young Jolyon , his wife , his two child , and his dog Balthasar , be all out there under a pear - tree . 
 this walk towards they be the most courageous act of old Jolyon 's life ; but no muscle of his face move , no nervous gesture betray he . he keep his deep - set eye steadily on the enemy . in those two minute he demonstrate to perfection all that unconscious soundness , balance , and vitality of fibre that make , of he and so many other of his class the core of the nation . in the unostentatious conduct of their own affair , to the neglect of everything else , they typify the essential individualism , bear in the Briton from the natural isolation of his country 's life . 
 the dog Balthasar sniff round the edge of his trouser ; this friendly and cynical mongrel - offspring of a liaison between a russian poodle and a fox - terrier - have a nose for the unusual . 
 the strange greeting over , old Jolyon seat himself in a wicker chair , and his two grandchild , one on each side of his knee , look at he silently , never have see so old a man . 
 they be unlike , as though recognise the difference set between they by the circumstance of their birth . jolly , the child of sin , pudgy - face , with his tow - colour hair brush off his forehead , and a dimple in his chin , have an air of stubborn amiability , and the eye of a Forsyte ; little Holly , the child of wedlock , be a dark - skin , solemn soul , with her mother 's , grey and wistful eye . 
 the dog Balthasar , have walk round the three small flower - bed , to show his extreme contempt for thing at large , have also take a seat in front of old Jolyon , and , oscillate a tail curl by Nature tightly over his back , be star up with eye that do not blink . 
 even in the garden , that sense of thing be pokey haunt old Jolyon ; the wicker chair creak under his weight ; the garden - bed look ' daverdy ' ; on the far side , under the smut - stain wall , cat have make a path . 
 while he and his grandchild thus regard each other with the peculiar scrutiny , curious yet trustful , that pass between the very young and the very old , young Jolyon watch his wife . 
 the colour have deepen in her thin , oval face , with its straight brow , and large , grey eye . her hair , brush in fine , high curve back from her forehead , be go grey , like his own , and this greyness make the sudden vivid colour in her cheek painfully pathetic . 
 the look on her face , such as he have never see there before , such as she have always hide from he , be full of secret resentment , and longing , and fear . her eye , under their twitching brow , star painfully . and she be silent . 
 jolly alone sustain the conversation ; he have many possession , and be anxious that his unknown friend with extremely large moustache , and hand all cover with blue vein , who sit with leg cross like his own father   a habit he be himself try to acquire , should know it ; but be a Forsyte , though not yet quite eight year old , he make no mention of the thing at the moment dearest to his heart - a camp of soldier in a shop - window , which his father have promise to buy . no doubt it seem to he too precious ; a tempting of Providence to mention it yet . 
 and the sunlight play through the leaf on that little party of the three generation group tranquilly under the pear - tree , which have long bear no fruit . 
 Old Jolyon 's furrowed face be redden patchily , as old man 's face redden in the sun . he take one of Jolly 's hand in his own ; the boy climb on to his knee ; and little Holly , mesmerize by this sight , creep up to they ; the sound of the dog Balthasar 's scratching arise rhythmically . 
 suddenly young Mrs. Jolyon get up and hurry indoor . a minute later her husband mutter an excuse , and follow . Old Jolyon be leave alone with his grandchild . 
 and nature with her quaint irony begin work in he one of her strange revolution , follow her cyclic law into the depth of his heart . and that tenderness for little child , that passion for the beginning of life which have once make he forsake his son and follow June , now work in he to forsake June and follow these littler thing . Youth , like a flame , burn ever in his breast , and to youth he turn , to the round little limb , so reckless , that want care , to the small round face so unreasonably solemn or bright , to the treble tongue , and the shrill , chuckle laughter , to the insistent tug hand , and the feel of small body against his leg , to all that be young and young , and once more young . and his eye grow soft , his voice , and thin - veined hand soft , and soft his heart within he . and to those small creature he become at once a place of pleasure , a place where they be secure , and could talk and laugh and play ; till , like sunshine , there radiate from old Jolyon 's wicker chair the perfect gaiety of three heart . 
 but with young Jolyon follow to his wife 's room it be different . 
 he find she seat on a chair before her dressing - glass , with her hand before her face . 
 her shoulder be shake with sob . this passion of her for suffer be mysterious to he . he have be through a hundred of these mood ; how he have survive they he never know , for he could never believe they be mood , and that the last hour of his partnership have not strike . 
 in the night she would be sure to throw her arm round his neck and say : " oh ! Jo , how I make you suffer ! " as she have do a hundred time before . 
 he reach out his hand , and , unseen , slip his razor - case into his pocket . ' I can not stay here , ' he think , ' I must go down ! ' without a word he leave the room , and go back to the lawn . 
 Old Jolyon have little Holly on his knee ; she have take possession of his watch ; Jolly , very red in the face , be try to show that he could stand on his head . the dog Balthasar , as close as he might be to the tea - table , have fix his eye on the cake . 
 Young Jolyon feel a malicious desire to cut their enjoyment short . 
 what business have his father to come and upset his wife like this ? it be a shock , after all these year ! he ought to have know ; he ought to have give they warning ; but when do a Forsyte ever imagine that his conduct could upset anybody ! and in his thought he do old Jolyon wrong . 
 he speak sharply to the child , and tell they to go in to their tea . greatly surprised , for they have never hear their father speak sharply before , they go off , hand in hand , little Holly look back over her shoulder . 
 Young Jolyon pour out the tea . 
 " my wife be not the thing today , " he say , but he know well enough that his father have penetrate the cause of that sudden withdrawal , and almost hat the old man for sit there so calmly . 
 " you have   get a nice little house here , " say old Jolyon with a shrewd look ; " I suppose you have   take a lease of it ! " 
 Young Jolyon nod . 
 " I do not   like the neighbourhood , " say old Jolyon ; " a ramshackle lot . " 
 Young Jolyon reply : " yes , we be a ramshackle lot . " ' 
 the silence be now only break by the sound of the dog Balthasar 's scratching . 
 Old Jolyon say simply : " I suppose I ought not   to have come here , Jo ; but I get so lonely ! " 
 at these word young Jolyon get up and put his hand on his father 's shoulder . 
 in the next house someone be play over and over again : ' La Donna mobile ' on an untuned piano ; and the little garden have fall into shade , the sun now only reach the wall at the end , whereon bask a crouch cat , her yellow eye turn sleepily down on the dog Balthasar . there be a drowsy hum of very distant traffic ; the creepered trellis round the garden shut out everything but sky , and house , and pear - tree , with its top branch still gild by the sun . 
 for some time they sit there , talk but little . then old Jolyon rise to go , and not a word be say about his come again . 
 he walk away very sadly . what a poor miserable place ; and he think of the great , empty house in Stanhope Gate , fit residence for a Forsyte , with its huge billiard - room and drawing - room that no one enter from one week 's end to another . 
 that woman , whose face he have rather like , be too thin - skinned by half ; she give Jo a bad time he know ! and those sweet child ! ah ! what a piece of awful folly ! 
 he walk towards the Edgware Road , between row of little house , all suggest to he   erroneously no doubt , but the prejudice of a Forsyte be sacred   shady history of some sort or kind . 
 Society , forsooth , the chatter hag and jackanape - have set themselves up to pass judgment on his flesh and blood ! a parcel of old woman ! he stump his umbrella on the ground , as though to drive it into the heart of that unfortunate body , which have dare to ostracize his son and his son 's son , in whom he could have live again ! 
 he stump his umbrella fiercely ; yet he himself have follow Society 's behaviour for fifteen year - have only today be false to it ! 
 he think of June , and her dead mother , and the whole story , with all his old bitterness . a wretched business ! 
 he be a long time reach Stanhope Gate , for , with native perversity , be extremely tired , he walk the whole way . 
 after wash his hand in the lavatory downstairs , he go to the dining - room to wait for dinner , the only room he use when June be out - it be less lonely so . the evening paper have not yet come ; he have finish the Times , there be therefore nothing to do . 
 the room face the backwater of traffic , and be very silent . he dislike dog , but a dog even would have be company . his gaze , travel round the wall , rest on a picture entitle : ' Group of dutch fishing boat at sunset ' ; the chef d'oeuvre of his collection . it give he no pleasure . he close his eye . he be lonely ! he ought not   to complain , he know , but he could not   help it : he be a poor thing - have always be a poor thing - no pluck ! such be his thought . 
 the butler come to lay the table for dinner , and see his master apparently asleep , exercise extreme caution in his movement . this bearded man also wear a moustache , which have give rise to grave doubt in the mind of many member - of the family - , especially those who , like soame , have be to public school , and be accustom to niceness in such matter . could he really be consider a butler ? playful spirit allude to he as : ' Uncle Jolyon 's Nonconformist ' ; George , the acknowledge wag , have name he : ' Sankey . ' 
 he move to and fro between the great polished sideboard and the great polished table inimitably sleek and soft . 
 Old Jolyon watch he , feign sleep . the fellow be a sneak - he have always think so - who care about nothing but rattle through his work , and get out to his betting or his woman or goodness know what ! a slug ! fat too ! and do not   care a pin about his master ! 
 but then against his will , come one of those moment of philosophy which make old Jolyon different from other Forsytes : 
 after all why should the man care ? he be not   pay to care , and why expect it ? in this world people could not   look for affection unless they pay for it . it might be different in the next - he do not   know - could not   tell ! and again he shut his eye . 
 Relentless and stealthy , the butler pursue his labour , take thing from the various compartment of the sideboard . his back seem always turn to old Jolyon ; thus , he rob his operation of the unseemliness of be carry on in his master 's presence ; now and then he furtively breathe on the silver , and wipe it with a piece of chamois leather . he appear to pore over the quantity of wine in the decanter , which he carry carefully and rather high , let his hear droop over they protectingly . when he have finish , he stand for over a minute watch his master , and in his greenish eye there be a look of contempt : 
 after all , this master of his be an old buffer , who have not   much leave in he ! 
 Soft as a tom - cat , he cross the room to press the bell . his order be ' dinner at seven . ' what if his master be asleep ; he would soon have he out of that ; there be the night to sleep in ! he have himself to think of , for he be due at his Club at half - past eight ! 
 in answer to the ring , appear a page boy with a silver soup tureen . the butler take it from his hand and place it on the table , then , stand by the open door , as though about to usher company into the room , he say in a solemn voice : 
 " dinner be on the table , sir ! " 
 slowly old Jolyon get up out of his chair , and sit down at the table to eat his dinner . 
 CHAPTER viii - plan of the HOUSE 
 Forsytes , as be generally admit , have shell , like that extremely useful little animal which be make into turkish delight , in other word , they be never see , or if see would not be recognise , without habitat , compose of circumstance , property , acquaintance , and wife , which seem to move along with they in their passage through a world compose of thousand of other Forsytes with their habitat . without a habitat a Forsyte be inconceivable - he would be like a novel without a plot , which be well - know to be an anomaly . 
 to forsyte eye Bosinney appear to have no habitat , he seem one of those rare and unfortunate man who go through life surround by circumstance , property , acquaintance , and wife that do not belong to they . 
 his room in Sloane Street , on the top floor , outside which , on a plate , be his name , ' Philip Baynes Bosinney , Architect , ' be not those of a Forsyte . - he have no sit - room apart from his office , but a large recess have be screen off to conceal the necessary of life - a couch , an easy chair , his pipe , spirit case , novel and slipper . the business part of the room have the usual furniture ; an open cupboard with pigeon - hole , a round oak table , a fold wash - stand , some hard chair , a standing desk of large dimension cover with drawing and design . June have twice be to tea there under the chaperonage of his aunt . 
 he be believe to have a bedroom at the back . 
 as far as the family have be able to ascertain his income , it consist of two consult appointment at twenty pound a year , together with an odd fee once in a way , and - more worthy item - a private annuity under his father 's will of one hundred and fifty pound a year . 
 what have transpire concern that father be not so reassuring . it appear that he have be a Lincolnshire country doctor of cornish extraction , strike appearance , and byronic tendency - a well - know figure , in fact , in his county . Bosinney 's uncle by marriage , Baynes , of Baynes and Bildeboy , a Forsyte in instinct if not in name , have but little that be worthy to relate of his brother - in - law . 
 " an odd fellow ! ' he would say : ' always speak of his three eld boy as ' good creature , but so dull ' ; they be all do capitally in the indian Civil ! Philip be the only one he like . I have   hear he talk in the queer way ; he once say to I : ' my dear fellow , never let your poor wife know what you be think of ! but I do not   follow his advice ; not I ! an eccentric man ! he would say to Phil : ' whether you live like a gentleman or not , my boy , be sure you die like one ! and he have himself embalm in a frock coat suit , with a satin cravat and a diamond pin . oh , quite an original , I can assure you ! " 
 of Bosinney himself Baynes would speak warmly , with a certain compassion : " he be get a streak of his father 's Byronism . why , look at the way he throw up his chance when he leave my office ; go off like that for six month with a knapsack , and all for what ? - to study foreign architecture - foreign ! what could he expect ? and there he be - a clever young fellow - do not   make his hundred a year ! now this engagement be the good thing that could have happen - keep he steady ; he be one of those that go to bed all day and stay up all night , simply because they have   no method ; but no vice about he - not an ounce of vice . Old Forsyte 's a rich man ! " 
 Mr. Baynes make himself extremely pleasant to June , who frequently visit his house in Lowndes Square at this period . 
 " this house of your cousin 's - what a capital man of business - be the very thing for Philip , " he would say to she ; " you must not   expect to see too much of he just now , my dear young lady . the good cause - the good cause ! the young man must make his way . when I be his age I be at work day and night . my dear wife use to say to I , ' Bobby , do not   work too hard , think of your health ' ; but I never spar myself ! " 
 June have complain that her lover find no time to come to Stanhope Gate . 
 the first time he come again they have not be together a quarter of an hour before , by one of those coincidence of which she be a mistress , Mrs. Septimus Small arrive . Thereon Bosinney rise and hide himself , accord to previous arrangement , in the little study , to wait for her departure . 
 " my dear , " say Aunt Juley , " how thin he be ! I have   often notice it with engaged people ; but you must not   let it get bad . there be Barlow 's extract of veal ; it do your Uncle Swithin a lot of good . " 
 June , her little figure erect before the hearth , her small face quiver grimly , for she regard her aunt 's untimely visit in the light of a personal injury , reply with scorn : 
 " it be because he be busy ; people who can do anything worth do be never fat ! " 
 Aunt Juley pout ; she herself have always be thin , but the only pleasure she derive from the fact be the opportunity of longing to be stouter . 
 " I do not   think , " she say mournfully , " that you ought to let they call he ' the Buccaneer ' ; people might think it odd , now that he be go to build a house for Soames . I do hope he will be careful ; it be so important for he . soame have such good taste ! " 
 " Taste ! " cry June , flare up at once ; " would not   give that for his taste , or any of the family 's ! " 
 Mrs. Small be take aback . 
 " your Uncle Swithin , " she say , " always have beautiful taste ! and Soames 's little house be lovely ; you do not   mean to say you do not   think so ! " 
 " H'mph ! " say June , " that be only because Irene be there ! " 
 Aunt Juley try to say something pleasant : 
 " and how will dear Irene like live in the country ? " 
 June gaze at she intently , with a look in her eye as if her conscience have suddenly leap up into they ; it pass ; and an even more intent look take its place , as if she have star that conscience out of countenance . she reply imperiously : 
 " of course she will like it ; why should not   she ? " 
 Mrs. Small grow nervous . 
 " I do not   know , " she say ; " I think she might not   like to leave her friend . your Uncle James say she do not   take enough interest in life . we think - I mean Timothy think - she ought to go out more . I expect you will miss she very much ! " 
 June clasp her hand behind her neck . 
 " I do wish , " she cry , " Uncle Timothy would not   talk about what do not   concern he ! " 
 Aunt Juley rise to the full height of her tall figure . 
 " he never talk about what do not   concern he , " she say . 
 June be instantly compunctious ; she run to her aunt and kiss she . 
 " I be very sorry , auntie ; but I wish they would let Irene alone . " 
 Aunt Juley , unable to think of anything far on the subject that would be suitable , be silent ; she prepare for departure , hook her black silk cape across her chest , and , take up her green reticule : 
 " and how be your dear grandfather ? " she ask in the hall , " I expect he be very lonely now that all your time be take up with Mr. Bosinney . " 
 she bent and kiss her niece hungrily , and with little , mince step pass away . 
 the tear spring up in June 's eye ; run into the little study , where Bosinney be sit at the table draw bird on the back of an envelope , she sink down by his side and cry : 
 " oh , Phil ! it be all so horrid ! " her heart be as warm as the colour of her hair . 
 on the following Sunday morning , while Soames be shaving , a message be bring he to the effect that Mr. Bosinney be below , and would be glad to see he . open the door into his wife 's room , he say : 
 " Bosinney 's downstair . just go and entertain he while I finish shave . I will be down in a minute . it be about the plan , I expect . " 
 Irene look at he , without reply , put the finishing touch to her dress and go downstairs . he could not make she out about this house . she have say nothing against it , and , as far as Bosinney be concern , seem friendly enough . 
 from the window of his dressing - room he could see they talk together in the little court below . he hurry on with his shaving , cut his chin twice . he hear they laugh , and think to himself : " well , they get on all right , anyway ! " 
 as he expect , Bosinney have come round to fetch he to look at the plan . 
 he take his hat and go over . 
 the plan be spread on the oak table in the architect 's room ; and pale , imperturbable , inquire , soame bent over they for a long time without speak . 
 he say at last in a puzzled voice : 
 " it be an odd sort of house ! " 
 a rectangular house of two story be design in a quadrangle round a cover - in court . this court , encircle by a gallery on the upper floor , be roof with a glass roof , support by eight column run up from the ground . 
 it be indeed , to forsyte eye , an odd house . 
 " there be a lot of room cut to waste , " pursue Soames . 
 Bosinney begin to walk about , and soame do not like the expression on his face . 
 " the principle of this house , " say the architect , " be that you should have room to breathe - like a gentleman ! " 
 soame extend his finger and thumb , as if measure the extent of the distinction he should acquire ; and reply : 
 " oh ! yes ; I see . " 
 the peculiar look come into Bosinney 's face which mark all his enthusiasm . 
 " I have   try to plan you a house here with some self - respect of its own . if you do not   like it , you would well say so . it be certainly the last thing to be consider - who want self - respect in a house , when you can squeeze in an extra lavatory ? " he put his finger suddenly down on the left division of the centre oblong : " you can swing a cat here . this be for your picture , divide from this court by curtain ; draw they back and you will have a space of fifty - one by twenty - three six . this double - faced stove in the centre , here , look one way towards the court , one way towards the picture room ; this end wall be all window ; you have   a southeast light from that , a north light from the court . the rest of your picture you can hang round the gallery upstairs , or in the other room . " " in architecture , " he go on - and though look at Soames he do not seem to see he , which give soame an unpleasant feeling - " as in life , you will get no self - respect without regularity . fellow tell you that be old fashioned . it appear to be peculiar any way ; it never occur to we to embody the main principle of life in our building ; we load our house with decoration , gimcrack , corner , anything to distract the eye . on the contrary the eye should rest ; get your effect with a few strong line . the whole thing be regularity there be no self - respect without it . " 
 soame , the unconscious ironist , fix his gaze on Bosinney 's tie , which be far from be in the perpendicular ; he be unshaven too , and his dress not remarkable for order . architecture appear to have exhaust his regularity . 
 " will not   it look like a barrack ? " he inquire . 
 he do not at once receive a reply . 
 " I can see what it be , " say Bosinney , " you want one of Littlemaster 's house - one of the pretty and commodious sort , where the servant will live in garret , and the front door be sink so that you may come up again . by all mean try Littlemaster , you will find he a capital fellow , I have   know he all my life ! " 
 soame be alarmed . he have really be strike by the plan , and the concealment of his satisfaction have be merely instinctive . it be difficult for he to pay a compliment . he despise people who be lavish with their praise . 
 he find himself now in the embarrassing position of one who must pay a compliment or run the risk of lose a good thing . Bosinney be just the fellow who might tear up the plan and refuse to act for he ; a kind of grow - up child ! 
 this grow - up childishness , to which he feel so superior , exercise a peculiar and almost mesmeric effect on Soames , for he have never feel anything like it in himself . 
 " well , " he stammer at last , " it be - it be , certainly original . " 
 he have such a private distrust and even dislike of the word ' original ' that he feel he have not really give himself away by this remark . 
 Bosinney seem pleased . it be the sort of thing that would please a fellow like that ! and his success encourage Soames . 
 " it be - a big place , " he say . 
 " Space , air , light , " he hear Bosinney murmur , " you can not   live like a gentleman in one of Littlemaster 's - he build for manufacturer . " 
 soame make a deprecating movement ; he have be identify with a gentleman ; not for a good deal of money now would he be class with manufacturer . but his innate distrust of general principle revive . what the deuce be the good of talk about regularity and self - respect ? it look to he as if the house would be cold . 
 " Irene can not   stand the cold ! " he say . 
 " ah ! " say Bosinney sarcastically . " your wife ? she do not   like the cold ? I will see to that ; she shall not   be cold . look here ! " he point , to four mark at regular interval on the wall of the court . " I have   give you hot - water pipe in aluminium casing ; you can get they with very good design . " 
 soame look suspiciously at these mark . 
 " it be all very well , all this , " he say , " but what be it go to cost ? " 
 the architect take a sheet of paper from his pocket : 
 " the house , of course , should be build entirely of stone , but , as I think you would not   stand that , I have   compromise for a facing . it ought to have a copper roof , but I have   make it green slate . as it be , include metal work , it will cost you eight thousand five hundred . " 
 " eight thousand five hundred ? " say soame . " why , I give you an outside limit of eight ! " 
 " can not   be do for a penny less , " reply Bosinney coolly . 
 " you must take it or leave it ! " 
 it be the only way , probably , that such a proposition could have be make to Soames . he be nonplus . Conscience tell he to throw the whole thing up . but the design be good , and he know it - there be completeness about it , and dignity ; the servant ' apartment be excellent too . he would gain credit by live in a house like that - with such individual feature , yet perfectly well - arrange . 
 he continue pore over the plan , while Bosinney go into his bedroom to shave and dress . 
 the two walk back to Montpellier Square in silence , soame watch he out of the corner of his eye . 
 the Buccaneer be rather a good - look fellow - so he think - when he be properly get up . 
 Irene be bend over her flower when the two man come in . 
 she speak of send across the Park to fetch June . 
 " no , no , " say soame , " we have   still get business to talk over ! " 
 at lunch he be almost cordial , and keep press Bosinney to eat . he be pleased to see the architect in such high spirit , and leave he to spend the afternoon with Irene , while he steal off to his picture , after his Sunday habit . at tea - time he come down to the drawing - room , and find they talk , as he express it , nineteen to the dozen . 
 unobserve in the doorway , he congratulate himself that thing be take the right turn . it be lucky she and Bosinney get on ; she seem to be fall into line with the idea of the new house . 
 quiet meditation among his picture have decide he to spring the five hundred if necessary ; but he hop that the afternoon might have soften Bosinney 's estimate . it be so purely a matter which Bosinney could remedy if he like ; there must be a dozen way in which he could cheapen the production of a house without spoil the effect . 
 he await , therefore , his opportunity till Irene be hand the architect his first cup of tea . a chink of sunshine through the lace of the blind warm her cheek , shine in the gold of her hair , and in her soft eye . possibly the same gleam deepen Bosinney 's colour , give the rather startled look to his face . 
 soame hat sunshine , and he at once get up , to draw the blind . then he take his own cup of tea from his wife , and say , more coldly than he have intend : 
 " can not   you see your way to do it for eight thousand after all ? there must be a lot of little thing you could alter . " 
 Bosinney drink off his tea at a gulp , put down his cup , and answer : 
 " not one ! " 
 soame see that his suggestion have touch some unintelligible point of personal vanity . 
 " well , " he agree , with sulky resignation ; " you must have it your own way , I suppose . " 
 a few minute later Bosinney rise to go , and soame rise too , to see he off the premise . the architect seem in absurdly high spirit . after watch he walk away at a swinging pace , soame return moodily to the drawing - room , where Irene be put away the music , and , move by an uncontrollable spasm of curiosity , he ask : 
 " well , what do you think of ' the Buccaneer ' ? " 
 he look at the carpet while wait for her answer , and he have to wait some time . 
 " I do not   know , " she say at last . 
 " do you think he be good - look ? " 
 Irene smile . and it seem to Soames that she be mock he . 
 " yes , " she answer ; " very . " 
 CHAPTER ix - DEATH of AUNT ANN 
 there come a morning at the end of September when Aunt Ann be unable to take from Smither 's hand the insignia of personal dignity . after one look at the old face , the doctor , hurriedly send for , announce that Miss Forsyte have pass away in her sleep . 
 Aunts Juley and Hester be overwhelm by the shock . they have never imagine such an ending . indeed , it be doubtful whether they have ever realize that an ending be bind to come . secretly they feel it unreasonable of Ann to have leave they like this without a word , without even a struggle . it be unlike she . 
 perhaps what really affect they so profoundly be the thought that a Forsyte should have let go her grasp on life . if one , then why not all ! 
 it be a full hour before they could make up their mind to tell Timothy . if only it could be keep from he ! if only it could be break to he by degree ! 
 and long they stand outside his door whisper together . and when it be over they whisper together again . 
 he would feel it more , they be afraid , as time go on . still , he have take it well than could have be expect . he would keep his bed , of course ! 
 they separate , cry quietly . 
 Aunt Juley stay in her room , prostrate by the blow . her face , discolour by tear , be divide into compartment by the little ridge of pout flesh which have swell with emotion . it be impossible to conceive of life without Ann , who have live with she for seventy - three year , break only by the short interregnum of her married life , which seem now so unreal . at fix interval she go to her drawer , and take from beneath the lavender bag a fresh pocket - handkerchief . her warm heart could not bear the thought that Ann be lie there so cold . 
 Aunt Hester , the silent , the patient , that backwater of the family energy , sit in the drawing - room , where the blind be draw ; and she , too , have weep at first , but quietly , without visible effect . her guide principle , the conservation of energy , do not abandon she in sorrow . she sit , slim , motionless , study the grate , her hand idle in the lap of her black silk dress . they would want to rouse she into do something , no doubt . as if there be any good in that ! do something would not bring back Ann ! why worry she ? five o'clock bring three of the brother , Jolyon and James and Swithin ; Nicholas be at Yarmouth , and Roger have a bad attack of gout . Mrs. Hayman have be by herself early in the day , and , after see Ann , have go away , leave a message for Timothy - which be keep from he - that she ought to have be tell soon . in fact , there be a feeling amongst they all that they ought to have be tell soon , as though they have miss something ; and James say : 
 " I know how it would be ; I tell you she would not   last through the summer . " 
 Aunt Hester make no reply ; it be nearly October , but what be the good of argue ; some people be never satisfied . 
 she send up to tell her sister that the brother be there . Mrs. Small come down at once . she have bath her face , which be still swollen , and though she look severely at Swithin 's trouser , for they be of light blue - he have come straight from the club , where the news have reach he - she wear a more cheerful expression than usual , the instinct for do the wrong thing be even now too strong for she . 
 presently all five go up to look at the body . under the pure white sheet a quilt counter - pane have be place , for now , more than ever , Aunt Ann have need of warmth ; and , the pillow remove , her spine and head rest flat , with the semblance of their life - long inflexibility ; the coif band the top of her brow be draw on either side to the level of the ear , and between it and the sheet her face , almost as white , be turn with closed eye to the face of her brother and sister . in its extraordinary peace the face be strong than ever , nearly all bone now under the scarce - wrinkle parchment of skin - square jaw and chin , cheekbone , forehead with hollow temple , chisel nose - the fortress of an unconquerable spirit that have yield to death , and in its upward sightlessness seem try to regain that spirit , to regain the guardianship it have just lay down . 
 Swithin take but one look at the face , and leave the room ; the sight , he say afterwards , make he very queer . he go downstairs shake the whole house , and , seize his hat , clamber into his brougham , without give any direction to the coachman . he be drive home , and all the evening sit in his chair without move . 
 he could take nothing for dinner but a partridge , with an imperial pint of champagne .... 
 Old Jolyon stand at the bottom of the bed , his hand fold in front of he . he alone of those in the room remember the death of his mother , and though he look at Ann , it be of that he be think . Ann be an old woman , but death have come to she at last - death come to all ! his face do not move , his gaze seem travel from very far . 
 Aunt Hester stand beside he . she do not cry now , tear be exhausted - her nature refuse to permit a further escape of force ; she twist her hand , look not at Ann , but from side to side , seek some way of escape the effort of realization . 
 of all the brother and sister James manifest the most emotion . tear roll down the parallel furrow of his thin face ; where he should go now to tell his trouble he do not know ; Juley be no good , hester bad than useless ! he feel Ann 's death more than he have ever think he should ; this would upset he for week ! 
 presently Aunt Hester steal out , and Aunt Juley begin move about , do ' what be necessary , ' so that twice she knock against something . Old Jolyon , rouse from his reverie , that reverie of the long , long past , look sternly at she , and go away . James alone be leave by the bedside ; glance stealthily round , to see that he be not observe , he twist his long body down , place a kiss on the dead forehead , then he , too , hastily leave the room . encounter Smither in the hall , he begin to ask she about the funeral , and , find that she know nothing , complain bitterly that , if they do not   take care , everything would go wrong . she have well send for Mr. Soames - he know all about that sort of thing ; her master be very much upset , he suppose - he would want look after ; as for her mistress , they be no good - they have no gumption ! they would be ill too , he should not   wonder . she have well send for the doctor ; it be good to take thing in time . he do not   think his sister Ann have have the good opinion ; if she have have Blank she would have be alive now . Smither might send to Park Lane any time she want advice . of course , his carriage be at their service for the funeral . he suppose she have not   such a thing as a glass of claret and a biscuit - he have have no lunch ! 
 the day before the funeral pass quietly . it have long be know , of course , that Aunt Ann have leave she little property to Timothy . there be , therefore , no reason for the slight agitation . soame , who be sole executor , take charge of all arrangement , and in due course send out the follow invitation to every male member of the family : 
 to ........... 
 your presence be request at the funeral of Miss Ann Forsyte , in Highgate Cemetery , at noon of Oct. 1st . carriage will meet at " the bower , " Bayswater Road , at 10.45 . no flower by request . ' R.S.V.P. ' 
 the morning come , cold , with a high , grey , London sky , and at half - past ten the first carriage , that of James , drive up . it contain James and his son - in - law Dartie , a fine man , with a square chest , button very tightly into a frock coat , and a sallow , fattish face adorn with dark , well - curl moustache , and that incorrigible commencement of whisker which , elude the strict attempt at shaving , seem the mark of something deeply ingrained in the personality of the shaver , be especially noticeable in man who speculate . 
 soame , in his capacity of executor , receive the guest , for Timothy still keep his bed ; he would get up after the funeral ; and Aunts Juley and Hester would not be come down till all be over , when it be understand there would be lunch for anyone who care to come back . the next to arrive be Roger , still limp from the gout , and encircle by three of his son - young Roger , Eustace , and Thomas . George , the remain son , arrive almost immediately afterwards in a hansom , and pause in the hall to ask Soames how he find undertake pay . 
 they dislike each other . 
 then come two Haymans - Giles and Jesse perfectly silent , and very well dress , with special crease down their evening trouser . then old Jolyon alone . next , Nicholas , with a healthy colour in his face , and a carefully veil sprightliness in every movement of his head and body . one of his son follow he , meek and subdue . Swithin Forsyte , and Bosinney arrive at the same moment , - and stand - bow precedence to each other , - but on the door opening they try to enter together ; they renew their apology in the hall , and , Swithin , settle his stock , which have become disarrange in the struggle , very slowly mount the stair . the other Hayman ; two married son of Nicholas , together with Tweetyman , Spender , and Warry , the husband of married Forsyte and Hayman daughter . the company be then complete , twenty - one in all , not a male member of the family be absent but Timothy and young Jolyon . 
 enter the scarlet and green drawing - room , whose apparel make so vivid a setting for their unaccustomed costume , each try nervously to find a seat , desirous of hide the emphatic blackness of his trouser . there seem a sort of indecency in that blackness and in the colour of their glove - a sort of exaggeration of the feeling ; and many cast shocked look of secret envy at ' the Buccaneer , ' who have no glove , and be wear grey trouser . a subdued hum of conversation rise , no one speak of the depart , but each ask after the other , as though thereby cast an indirect libation to this event , which they have come to honour . 
 and presently James say : 
 " well , I think we ought to be start . " 
 they go downstairs , and , two and two , as they have be tell off in strict precedence , mount the carriage . 
 the hearse start at a foot 's pace ; the carriage move slowly after . in the first go old Jolyon with Nicholas ; in the second , the twin , Swithin and James ; in the third , Roger and young Roger ; soame , young Nicholas , George , and Bosinney follow in the fourth . each of the other carriage , eight in all , hold three or four of the family ; behind they come the doctor 's brougham ; then , at a decent interval , cab contain family clerk and servant ; and at the very end , one contain nobody at all , but bring the total cortege up to the number of thirteen . 
 so long as the procession keep to the highway of the Bayswater Road , it retain the foot' - pace , but , turn into less important thorough - fare , it soon break into a trot , and so proceed , with interval of walk in the more fashionable street , until it arrive . in the first carriage old Jolyon and Nicholas be talk of their will . in the second the twin , after a single attempt , have lapse into complete silence ; both be rather deaf , and the exertion of make themselves hear be too great . only once James break this silence : 
 " I shall have to be look about for some ground somewhere . what arrangement have you make , Swithin ? " 
 and Swithin , fix he with a dreadful stare , answer : 
 " do not   talk to I about such thing ! " 
 in the third carriage a disjointed conversation be carry on in the interval of look out to see how far they have get , George remarking , " well , it be really time that the poor old lady go . " he do not   believe in people live beyond seventy , Young Nicholas reply mildly that the rule do not   seem to apply to the Forsytes . George say he himself intend to commit suicide at sixty . Young Nicholas , smile and stroke a long chin , do not   think his father would like that theory ; he have make a lot of money since he be sixty . well , seventy be the outside limit ; it be then time , George say , for they to go and leave their money to their child . soame , hitherto silent , here join in ; he have not forget the remark about the ' undertaking , ' and , lift his eyelid almost imperceptibly , say it be all very well for people who never make money to talk . he himself intend to live as long as he could . this be a hit at George , who be notoriously hard up . Bosinney mutter abstractedly " hear , hear ! " and , George yawning , the conversation drop . 
 upon arrive , the coffin be bear into the chapel , and , two by two , the mourner file in behind it . this guard of man , all attach to the dead by the bond of kinship , be an impressive and singular sight in the great city of London , with its overwhelming diversity of life , its innumerable vocation , pleasure , duty , its terrible hardness , its terrible call to individualism . 
 the family have gather to triumph over all this , to give a show of tenacious unity , to illustrate gloriously that law of property underlie the growth of their tree , by which it have thriven and spread , trunk and branch , the sap flow through all , the full growth reach at the appoint time . the spirit of the old woman lie in her last sleep have call they to this demonstration . it be her final appeal to that unity which have be their strength - it be her final triumph that she have die while the tree be yet whole . 
 she be spar the watching of the branch jut out beyond the point of balance . she could not look into the heart of her follower . the same law that have work in she , bring she up from a tall , straight - back slip of a girl to a woman strong and grow , from a woman grow to a woman old , angular , feeble , almost witchlike , with individuality all sharpen and sharpen , as all round from the world 's contact fall off from she - that same law would work , be work , in the family she have watch like a mother . 
 she have see it young , and grow , she have see it strong and grow , and before her old eye have time or strength to see any more , she die . she would have try , and who know but she might have keep it young and strong , with her old finger , her trembling kiss - a little long ; alas ! not even Aunt Ann could fight with Nature . 
 ' pride come before a fall ! ' in accordance with this , the great of Nature 's irony , the Forsyte family have gather for a last proud pageant before they fall . their face to right and leave , in single line , be turn for the most part impassively toward the ground , guardian of their thought ; but here and there , one look upward , with a line between his brow , search to see some sight on the chapel wall too much for he , to be listen to something that appal . and the response , low - muttered , in voice through which rise the same tone , the same unseizable family ring , sound weird , as though murmur in hurried duplication by a single person . 
 the service in the chapel over , the mourner file up again to guard the body to the tomb . the vault stand open , and , round it , man in black be wait . 
 from that high and sacred field , where thousand of the upper middle class lie in their last sleep , the eye of the Forsytes travel down across the flock of graf . there - spread to the distance , lie London , with no sun over it , mourn the loss of its daughter , mourn with this family , so dear , the loss of she who be mother and guardian . a hundred thousand spire and house , blur in the great grey web of property , lie there like prostrate worshipper before the grave of this , the old Forsyte of they all . 
 a few word , a sprinkle of earth , the thrusting of the coffin home , and Aunt Ann have pass to her last rest . 
 round the vault , trustee of that passing , the five brother stand , with white head bow ; they would see that Ann be comfortable where she be go . her little property must stay behind , but otherwise , all that could be should be do .... 
 then severally , each stand aside , and put on his hat , turn back to inspect the new inscription on the marble of the family vault : 
 sacred to the memory of ANN FORSYTE , the daughter of the ABOVE JOLYON and ANN FORSYTE , who depart this life the 27th day of SEPTEMBER , 1886 , AGED EIGHTY - seven YEARS and four day 
 soon perhaps , someone else would be want an inscription . it be strange and intolerable , for they have not think somehow , that Forsytes could die . and one and all they have a longing to get away from this painfulness , this ceremony which have remind they of thing they could not bear to think about - to get away quickly and go about their business and forget . it be cold , too ; the wind , like some slow , disintegrate force , blow up the hill over the graf , strike they with its chilly breath ; they begin to split into group , and as quickly as possible to fill the wait carriage . 
 Swithin say he should go back to lunch at Timothy 's , and he offer to take anybody with he in his brougham . it be consider a doubtful privilege to drive with Swithin in his brougham , which be not a large one ; nobody accept , and he go off alone . James and Roger follow immediately after ; they also would drop in to lunch . the other gradually melt away , Old Jolyon take three nephew to fill up his carriage ; he have a want of those young face . 
 soame , who have to arrange some detail in the cemetery office , walk away with Bosinney . he have much to talk over with he , and , have finish his business , they stroll to Hampstead , lunch together at the Spaniard 's Inn , and spend a long time in go into practical detail connect with the building of the house ; they then proceed to the tram - line , and come as far as the Marble Arch , where Bosinney go off to Stanhope Gate to see June . 
 soame feel in excellent spirit when he arrive home , and confide to Irene at dinner that he have have a good talk with Bosinney , who really seem a sensible fellow ; they have have a capital walk too , which have do his liver good - he have be short of exercise for a long time - and altogether a very satisfactory day . if only it have not   be for poor Aunt Ann , he would have take she to the theatre ; as it be , they must make the good of an evening at home . 
 " the Buccaneer ask after you more than once , " he say suddenly . and move by some inexplicable desire to assert his proprietorship , he rise from his chair and plant a kiss on his wife 's shoulder . 
 PART II 
 CHAPTER i - progress of the HOUSE 
 the winter have be an open one . thing in the trade be slack ; and as Soames have reflect before make up his mind , it have be a good time for build . the shell of the house at Robin Hill be thus complete by the end of April . 
 now that there be something to be see for his money , he have be come down once , twice , even three time a week , and would mouse about among the debris for hour , careful never to soil his clothe , move silently through the unfinished brickwork of doorway , or circle round the column in the central court . 
 and he would stand before they for minute ' together , as though peer into the real quality of their substance . 
 on April 30 he have an appointment with Bosinney to go over the account , and five minute before the proper time he enter the tent which the architect have pitch for himself close to the old oak tree . 
 the account be already prepare on a fold table , and with a nod soame sit down to study they . it be some time before he raise his head . 
 " I can not   make they out , " he say at last ; " they come to nearly seven hundred more than they ought . " 
 after a glance at Bosinney 's face he go on quickly : 
 " if you only make a firm stand against these builder chap you will get they down . they stick you with everything if you do not   look sharp .... take ten per cent . off all round . I shall not   mind it be come out a hundred or so over the mark ! " 
 Bosinney shake his head : 
 " I have   take off every farthing I can ! " 
 soame push back the table with a movement of anger , which send the account sheet flutter to the ground . 
 " then all I can say be , " he fluster out , " you have   make a pretty mess of it ! " 
 " I have   tell you a dozen time , " Bosinney answer sharply , " that there would be extras . I have   point they out to you over and over again ! " 
 " I know that , " growl soame : " I should not   have object to a ten pound note here and there . how be I to know that by ' extras ' you mean seven hundred pound ? " 
 the quality of both man have contribute to this not - inconsiderable discrepancy . on the one hand , the architect 's devotion to his idea , to the image of a house which he have create and believe in - have make he nervous of be stop , or force to the use of makeshift ; on the other , Soames ' not less true and wholehearte devotion to the very good article that could be obtain for the money , have render he averse to believe that thing worth thirteen shilling could not be buy with twelve . 
 " I wish I would never undertake your house , " say Bosinney suddenly . " you come down here worry I out of my life . you want double the value for your money anybody else would , and now that you have   get a house that for its size be not to be beat in the county , you do not   want to pay for it . if you be anxious to be off your bargain , I daresay I can find the balance above the estimate myself , but I be d - - d if I do another stroke of work for you ! " 
 soame regain his composure . know that Bosinney have no capital , he regard this as a wild suggestion . he see , too , that he would be keep indefinitely out of this house on which he have set his heart , and just at the crucial point when the architect 's personal care make all the difference . in the meantime there be Irene to be think of ! she have be very queer lately . he really believe it be only because she have take to Bosinney that she tolerate the idea of the house at all . it would not do to make an open breach with she . 
 " you need not   get into a rage , " he say . " if I be willing to put up with it , I suppose you need not   cry out . all I mean be that when you tell I a thing be go to cost so much , I like to - well , in fact , I - like to know where I be . " 
 " look here ! " say Bosinney , and soame be both annoyed and surprise by the shrewdness of his glance . " you have   get my service dirt cheap . for the kind of work I have   put into this house , and the amount of time I have   give to it , you would have have to pay Littlemaster or some other fool four time as much . what you want , in fact , be a first - rate man for a fourth - rate fee , and that be exactly what you have   get ! " 
 soame see that he really mean what he say , and , angry though he be , the consequence of a row rise before he too vividly . he see his house unfinishe , his wife rebellious , himself a laughingstock . 
 " let us go over it , " he say sulkily , " and see how the money 's go . " 
 " very well , " assent Bosinney . " but we will hurry up , if you do not   mind . I have to get back in time to take June to the theatre . " 
 soame cast a stealthy look at he , and say : " come to our place , I suppose to meet she ? " he be always come to their place ! 
 there have be rain the night before - a spring rain , and the earth smell of sap and wild grass . the warm , soft breeze swing the leaf and the golden bud of the old oak tree , and in the sunshine the blackbird be whistle their heart out . 
 it be such a spring day as breathe into a man an ineffable yearning , a painful sweetness , a longing that make he stand motionless , look at the leaf or grass , and fle out his arm to embrace he know not what . the earth give forth a fainting warmth , steal up through the chilly garment in which winter have wrap she . it be her long caress of invitation , to draw man down to lie within her arm , to roll their body on she , and put their lip to her breast . 
 on just such a day as this Soames have get from Irene the promise he have ask she for so often . seat on the fall trunk of a tree , he have promise for the twentieth time that if their marriage be not a success , she should be as free as if she have never marry he ! 
 " do you swear it ? " she have say . a few day back she have remind he of that oath . he have answer : " Nonsense ! I could not   have swear any such thing ! " by some awkward fatality he remember it now . what queer thing man would swear for the sake of woman ! he would have swear it at any time to gain she ! he would swear it now , if thereby he could touch she - but nobody could touch she , she be cold - hearted ! 
 and memory crowd on he with the fresh , sweet savour of the spring wind - memory of his courtship . 
 in the spring of the year 1881 he be visit his old school - fellow and client , George Liversedge , of Branksome , who , with the view of develop his pine - wood in the neighbourhood of Bournemouth , have place the formation of the company necessary to the scheme in Soames 's hand . Mrs. Liversedge , with a sense of the fitness of thing , have give a musical tea in his honour . later in the course of this function , which soame , no musician , have regard as an unmitigated bore , his eye have be catch by the face of a girl dress in mourning , stand by herself . the line of her tall , as yet rather thin figure , show through the wispy , cling stuff of her black dress , her black - gloved hand be cross in front of she , her lip slightly part , and her large , dark eye wander from face to face . her hair , do low on her neck , seem to gleam above her black collar like coil of shin metal . and as soame stand look at she , the sensation that most man have feel at one time or another go steal through he - a peculiar satisfaction of the sens , a peculiar certainty , which novelist and old lady call love at first sight . still stealthily watch she , he at once make his way to his hostess , and stand doggedly wait for the music to cease . 
 " who be that girl with yellow hair and dark eye ? " he ask . 
 " that - oh ! Irene Heron . her father , Professor Heron , die this year . she live with her stepmother . she be a nice girl , a pretty girl , but no money ! " 
 " introduce I , please , " say Soames . 
 it be very little that he find to say , nor do he find her responsive to that little . but he go away with the resolution to see she again . he effect his object by chance , meet she on the pier with her stepmother , who have the habit of walk there from twelve to one of a forenoon . soame make this lady 's acquaintance with alacrity , nor be it long before he perceive in she the ally he be look for . his keen scent for the commercial side of family life soon tell he that Irene cost her stepmother more than the fifty pound a year she bring she ; it also tell he that Mrs. Heron , a woman yet in the prime of life , desire to be marry again . the strange ripen beauty of her stepdaughter stand in the way of this desirable consummation . and soame , in his stealthy tenacity , lay his plan . 
 he leave Bournemouth without have give himself away , but in a month 's time come back , and this time he speak , not to the girl , but to her stepmother . he have make up his mind , he say ; he would wait any time . and he have long to wait , watch Irene bloom , the line of her young figure soften , the strong blood deepen the gleam of her eye , and warm her face to a creamy glow ; and at each visit he propose to she , and when that visit be at an end , take her refusal away with he , back to London , sore at heart , but steadfast and silent as the grave . he try to come at the secret spring of her resistance ; only once have he a gleam of light . it be at one of those assembly dance , which afford the only outlet to the passion of the population of seaside watering - place . he be sit with she in an embrasure , his sens tingle with the contact of the waltz . she have look at he over she , slowly wave fan ; and he have lose his head . seize that moving wrist , he press his lip to the flesh of her arm . and she have shudder - to this day he have not forget that shudder - nor the look so passionately averse she have give he . 
 a year after that she have yield . what have make her yield he could never make out ; and from Mrs. Heron , a woman of some diplomatic talent , he learn nothing . once after they be married he ask she , " what make you refuse I so often ? " she have answer by a strange silence . an enigma to he from the day that he first see she , she be an enigma to he still .... 
 Bosinney be wait for he at the door ; and on his rugged , good - look , face be a queer , yearning , yet happy look , as though he too see a promise of bliss in the spring sky , sniff a come happiness in the spring air . soame look at he wait there . what be the matter with the fellow that he look so happy ? what be he wait for with that smile on his lip and in his eye ? soame could not see that for which Bosinney be wait as he stand there drink in the flower - scented wind . and once more he feel baffle in the presence of this man whom by habit he despise . he hasten on to the house . 
 " the only colour for those tile , " he hear Bosinney say , - " be ruby with a grey tint in the stuff , to give a transparent effect . I should like Irene 's opinion . I be order the purple leather curtain for the doorway of this court ; and if you distemper the drawing - room ivory cream over paper , you will get an illusive look . you want to aim all through the decoration at what I call charm . " 
 soame say : " you mean that my wife have charm ! " 
 Bosinney evade the question . 
 " you should have a clump of iris plant in the centre of that court . " 
 soame smile superciliously . 
 " I will look into Beech 's some time , " he say , " and see what be appropriate ! " 
 they find little else to say to each other , but on the way to the Station Soames ask : 
 " I suppose you find Irene very artistic . " 
 " yes . " the abrupt answer be as distinct a snub as say : " if you want to discuss she you can do it with someone else ! " 
 and the slow , sulky anger soame have feel all the afternoon burn the brighter within he . 
 neither speak again till they be close to the station , then soame ask : 
 " when do you expect to have finish ? " 
 " by the end of June , if you really wish I to decorate as well . " 
 soame nod . " but you quite understand , " he say , " that the house be cost I a lot beyond what I contemplate . I may as well tell you that I should have throw it up , only I be not in the habit of give up what I have   set my mind on . " 
 Bosinney make no reply . and Soames give he askance a look of dogged dislike - for in spite of his fastidious air and that supercilious , dandified taciturnity , soame , with his set lip and square chin , be not unlike a bulldog .... 
 when , at seven o'clock that evening , June arrive at 62 , Montpellier Square , the maid Bilson tell she that Mr. Bosinney be in the drawing - room ; the mistress - she say - be dress , and would be down in a minute . she would tell she that Miss June be here . 
 June stop she at once . 
 " all right , Bilson , " she say , " I will just go in . you , need not   hurry Mrs. Soames . " 
 she take off her cloak , and Bilson , with an understanding look , do not even open the drawing - room door for she , but run downstairs . 
 June pause for a moment to look at herself in the little old - fashioned silver mirror above the oaken rug chest - a slim , imperious young figure , with a small resolute face , in a white frock , cut moon - shape at the base of a neck too slender for her crown of twisted red - gold hair . 
 she open the drawing - room door softly , mean to take he by surprise . the room be fill with a sweet hot scent of flower azalea . 
 she take a long breath of the perfume , and hear Bosinney 's voice , not in the room , but quite close , say . 
 " ah ! there be such heap of thing I want to talk about , and now we shall not   have time ! " 
 Irene 's voice answer : " why not at dinner ? " 
 " how can one talk .... " 
 June 's first thought be to go away , but instead she cross to the long window opening on the little court . it be from there that the scent of the azalea come , and , stand with their back to she , their face bury in the golden - pink blossom , stand her lover and Irene . 
 silent but unashamed , with flaming cheek and angry eye , the girl watch . 
 " come on Sunday by yourself - we can go over the house together . " 
 June see Irene look up at he through her screen of blossom . it be not the look of a coquette , but - far bad to the watch girl - of a woman fearful lest that look should say too much . 
 " I have   promise to go for a drive with Uncle .... " 
 " the big one ! make he bring you ; it be only ten mile - the very thing for his horse . " 
 " poor old Uncle Swithin ! " 
 a wave of the azalea scent drift into June 's face ; she feel sick and dizzy . 
 " do ! ah ! do ! " 
 " but why ? " 
 " I must see you there - I think you would like to help I .... " 
 the answer seem to the girl to come softly with a tremble from amongst the blossom : " so I do ! " 
 and she step into the open space of the window . 
 " how stuffy it be here ! " she say ; " I can not   bear this scent ! " 
 her eye , so angry and direct , sweep both their face . 
 " be you talk about the house ? I have not   see it yet , you know - shall we all go on Sunday ? " ' 
 from Irene 's face the colour have fly . 
 " I be go for a drive that day with Uncle Swithin , " she answer . 
 " Uncle Swithin ! what do he matter ? you can throw he over ! " 
 " I be not in the habit of throw people over ! " 
 there be a sound of footstep and June see soame stand just behind she . 
 " well ! if you be all ready , " say Irene , look from one to the other with a strange smile , " dinner be too ! " 
 CHAPTER II - JUNE 's TREAT 
 Dinner begin in silence ; the woman face one another , and the man . 
 in silence the soup be finish - excellent , if a little thick ; and fish be bring . in silence it be hand . 
 Bosinney venture : " it be the first spring day . " 
 Irene echo softly : " yes - the first spring day . " 
 " Spring ! " say June : " there be not   a breath of air ! " no one reply . 
 the fish be take away , a fine fresh sole from Dover . and Bilson bring champagne , a bottle swathe around the neck with white .... 
 soame say : " you will find it dry . " 
 cutlet be hand , each pink - frille about the leg . they be refuse by June , and silence fall . 
 soame say : " you would well take a cutlet , June ; there be nothing come . " 
 but June again refuse , so they be bear away . and then Irene ask : " Phil , have you hear my blackbird ? " 
 Bosinney answer : " rather - he be get a hunting - song . as I come round I hear he in the Square . " 
 " he be such a darling ! " 
 " Salad , sir ? " spring chicken be remove . 
 but Soames be speak : " the asparagus be very poor . Bosinney , glass of sherry with your sweet ? June , you be drink nothing ! " 
 June say : " you know I never do . Wine 's such horrid stuff ! " 
 an apple charlotte come upon a silver dish , and smilingly Irene say : " the azalea be so wonderful this year ! " 
 to this Bosinney murmur : " wonderful ! the scent 's extraordinary ! " 
 June say : " how can you like the scent ? Sugar , please , Bilson . " 
 Sugar be hand she , and soame remark : " this charlotte good ! " 
 the charlotte be remove . long silence follow . Irene , beckoning , say : " take out the azalea , Bilson . Miss June can not   bear the scent . " 
 " no ; let it stay , " say June . 
 olive from France , with russian caviare , be place on little plate . and Soames remark : " why can not   we have the Spanish ? " but no one answer . 
 the olive be remove . lift her tumbler June demand : " give I some water , please . " Water be give she . a silver tray be bring , with german plum . there be a lengthy pause . in perfect harmony all be eat they . 
 Bosinney count up the stone : " this year - next year - some time . " 
 Irene finish softly : " never ! there be such a glorious sunset . the sky 's all ruby still - so beautiful ! " 
 he answer : " underneath the dark . " 
 their eye have meet , and June cry scornfully : " a London sunset ! " 
 egyptian cigarette be hand in a silver box . soame , take one , remark : " what time be your play begin ? " 
 no one reply , and turkish coffee follow in enamel cup . 
 Irene , smile quietly , say : " if only .... " 
 " only what ? " say June . 
 " if only it could always be the spring ! " 
 Brandy be hand ; it be pale and old . 
 soame say : " Bosinney , well take some brandy . " 
 Bosinney take a glass ; they all arise . 
 " you want a cab ? " ask Soames . 
 June answer : " no ! my cloak please , Bilson . " her cloak be bring . 
 Irene , from the window , murmur : " such a lovely night ! the star be come out ! " 
 soame add : " well , I hope you will both enjoy yourself . " 
 from the door June answer : " thank . Come , Phil . " 
 Bosinney cry : " I be come . " 
 soame smile a sneer smile , and say : " I wish you luck ! " 
 and at the door Irene watch they go . 
 Bosinney call : " good night ! " 
 " good night ! " she answer softly .... 
 June make her lover take she on the top of a ' bus , say she want air , and there sit silent , with her face to the breeze . 
 the driver turn once or twice , with the intention of venture a remark , but think well of it . they be a lively couple ! the spring have get into his blood , too ; he feel the need for let steam escape , and cluck his tongue , flourish his whip , wheel his horse , and even they , poor thing , have smell the spring , and for a brief half - hour spurn the pavement with happy hoof . 
 the whole town be alive ; the bough , curl upward with their decking of young leaf , await some gift the breeze could bring . new - light lamp be gain mastery , and the face of the crowd show pale under that glare , while on high the great white cloud slide swiftly , softly , over the purple sky . 
 man in , evening dress have throw back overcoat , step jauntily up the step of Clubs ; work folk loiter ; and woman - those woman who at that time of night be solitary - solitary and move eastward in a stream - swing slowly along , with expectation in their gait , dream of good wine and a good supper , or - for an unwonted minute , of kiss give for love . 
 those countless figure , go their way under the lamp and the move - sky , have one and all receive some restless blessing from the stir of spring . and one and all , like those clubman with their open coat , have shed something of caste , and creed , and custom , and by the cock of their hat , the pace of their walk , their laughter , or their silence , reveal their common kinship under the passionate heaven . 
 Bosinney and June enter the theatre in silence , and mount to their seat in the upper box . the piece have just begin , and the half - darken house , with its row of creature peer all one way , resemble a great garden of flower turn their face to the sun . 
 June have never before be in the upper box . from the age of fifteen she have habitually accompany her grandfather to the stall , and not common stall , but the good seat in the house , towards the centre of the third row , book by old Jolyon , at Grogan and Boyne 's , on his way home from the City , long before the day ; carry in his overcoat pocket , together with his cigar - case and his old kid glove , and hand to June to keep till the appoint night . and in those stall - an erect old figure with a serene white head , a little figure , strenuous and eager , with a red - gold head - they would sit through every kind of play , and on the way home old Jolyon would say of the principal actor : " oh , he be a poor stick ! you should have see little Bobson ! " 
 she have look forward to this evening with keen delight ; it be steal , chaperone - less , undreame of at Stanhope Gate , where she be suppose to be at Soames ' . she have expect reward for her subterfuge , plan for her lover 's sake ; she have expect it to break up the thick , chilly cloud , and make the relation between they which of late have be so puzzling , so tormenting - sunny and simple again as they have be before the winter . she have come with the intention of say something definite ; and she look at the stage with a furrow between her brow , see nothing , her hand squeeze together in her lap . a swarm of jealous suspicion sting and sting she . 
 if Bosinney be conscious of her trouble he make no sign . 
 the curtain drop . the first act have come to an end . 
 " it be awfully hot here ! " say the girl ; " I should like to go out . " 
 she be very white , and she know - for with her nerve thus sharpen she see everything - that he be both uneasy and compunctious . 
 at the back of the theatre an open balcony hang over the street ; she take possession of this , and stand lean there without a word , wait for he to begin . 
 at last she could bear it no long . 
 " I want to say something to you , Phil , " she say . 
 " yes ? " 
 the defensive tone of his voice bring the colour fly to her cheek , the word fly to her lip : " you do not   give I a chance to be nice to you ; you have not   for age now ! " 
 Bosinney star down at the street . he make no answer .... 
 June cry passionately : " you know I want to do everything for you - that I want to be everything to you .... " 
 a hum rise from the street , and , pierce it with a sharp ' ping , ' the bell sound for the raising of the curtain . June do not stir . a desperate struggle be go on within she . should she put everything to the proof ? should she challenge directly that influence , that attraction which be drive he away from she ? it be her nature to challenge , and she say : " Phil , take I to see the house on Sunday ! " 
 with a smile quiver and break on her lip , and try , how hard , not to show that she be watch , she search his face , see it waver and hesitate , see a troubled line come between his brow , the blood rush into his face . he answer : " not Sunday , dear ; some other day ! " 
 " why not Sunday ? I should not   be in the way on Sunday . " 
 he make an evident effort , and say : " I have an engagement . " 
 " you be go to take .... " 
 his eye grow angry ; he shrug his shoulder , and answer : " an engagement that will prevent my take you to see the house ! " 
 June bit her lip till the blood come , and walk back to her seat without another word , but she could not help the tear of rage roll down her face . the house have be mercifully darken for a crisis , and no one could see her trouble . 
 yet in this world of Forsytes let no man think himself immune from observation . 
 in the third row behind , Euphemia , Nicholas 's young daughter , with her marry - sister , Mrs. Tweetyman , be watch . 
 they report at Timothy 's , how they have see June and her fiance at the theatre . 
 " in the stall ? " " no , not in the .... " " oh ! in the dress circle , of course . that seem to be quite fashionable nowadays with young people ! " 
 well - not exactly . in the .... anyway , that engagement would not   last long . they have never see anyone look so thunder and lightningy as that little June ! with tear of enjoyment in their eye , they relate how she have kick a man 's hat as she return to her seat in the middle of an act , and how the man have look . Euphemia have a note , silent laugh , terminate most disappointingly in squeak ; and when Mrs. Small , hold up her hand , say : " my dear ! kick a ha - at ? " she let out such a number of these that she have to be recover with smelling - salt . as she go away she say to Mrs. Tweetyman : 
 " kick a - ha - at ! oh ! I shall die . " 
 for ' that little June ' this evening , that be to have be ' her treat , ' be the most miserable she have ever spend . God know she try to stifle her pride , her suspicion , her jealousy ! 
 she part from Bosinney at old Jolyon 's door without break down ; the feeling that her lover must be conquer be strong enough to sustain she till his retire footstep bring home the true extent of her wretchedness . 
 the noiseless ' Sankey ' let she in . she would have slip up to her own room , but old Jolyon , who have hear her entrance , be in the dining - room doorway . 
 " come in and have your milk , " he say . " it be be keep hot for you . you be very late . where have you be ? " 
 June stand at the fireplace , with a foot on the fender and an arm on the mantelpiece , as her grandfather have do when he come in that night of the opera . she be too near a breakdown to care what she tell he . 
 " we din at Soames 's . " 
 " H'm ! the man of property ! his wife there and Bosinney ? " 
 " yes . " 
 Old Jolyon 's glance be fix on she with the penetrate gaze from which it be difficult to hide ; but she be not look at he , and when she turn her face , he drop his scrutiny at once . he have see enough , and too much . he bend down to lift the cup of milk for she from the hearth , and , turn away , grumble : " you ought not   to stay out so late ; it make you fit for nothing . " 
 he be invisible now behind his paper , which he turn with a vicious crackle ; but when June come up to kiss he , he say : " good - night , my darling , " in a tone so tremulous and unexpected , that it be all the girl could do to get out of the room without break into the fit of sobbing which last she well on into the night . 
 when the door be closed , old Jolyon drop his paper , and star long and anxiously in front of he . 
 ' the beggar ! ' he think . ' I always know she would have trouble with he ! ' 
 uneasy doubt and suspicion , the more poignant that he feel himself powerless to check or control the march of event , come crowd upon he . 
 be the fellow go to jilt she ? he long to go and say to he : " look here , you sir ! be you go to jilt my grand - daughter ? " but how could he ? know little or nothing , he be yet certain , with his unerre astuteness , that there be something go on . he suspect Bosinney of be too much at Montpellier Square . 
 ' this fellow , ' he think , ' may not be a scamp ; his face be not a bad one , but he be a queer fish . I do not   know what to make of he . I shall never know what to make of he ! they tell I he work like a nigger , but I see no good come of it . he be unpractical , he have no method . when he come here , he sit as glum as a monkey . if I ask he what wine he will have , he say : " thank , any wine . " if I offer he a cigar , he smoke it as if it be a twopenny german thing . I never see he look at June as he ought to look at she ; and yet , he be not after her money . if she be to make a sign , he would be off his bargain to - morrow . but she will not   - not she ! she will stick to he ! she be as obstinate as fate - she will never let go ! ' 
 sigh deeply , he turn the paper ; in its column , perchance he might find consolation . 
 and upstairs in her room June sit at her open window , where the spring wind come , after its revel across the Park , to cool her hot cheek and burn her heart . 
 CHAPTER iii - drive with SWITHIN 
 two line of a certain song in a certain famous old school 's songbook run as follow : 
 ' how the button on his blue frock shone , tra - la - la ! how he carol and he sing , like a bird ! ... ' 
 Swithin do not exactly carol and sing like a bird , but he feel almost like endeavour to hum a tune , as he step out of Hyde Park Mansions , and contemplate his horse draw up before the door . 
 the afternoon be as balmy as a day in June , and to complete the simile of the old song , he have put on a blue frock - coat , dispense with an overcoat , after send Adolf down three time to make sure that there be not the least suspicion of east in the wind ; and the frock - coat be button so tightly around his personable form , that , if the button do not shine , they might pardonably have do so . Majestic on the pavement he fit on a pair of dog - skin glove ; with his large bell - shape top hat , and his great stature and bulk he look too primeval for a Forsyte . his thick white hair , on which Adolf have bestow a touch of pomatum , exhale the fragrance of opoponax and cigar - the celebrate Swithin brand , for which he pay one hundred and forty shilling the hundred , and of which old Jolyon have unkindly say , he would not   smoke they as a gift ; they want the stomach of a horse ! 
 " Adolf ! " 
 " Sare ! " 
 " the new plaid rug ! " 
 he would never teach that fellow to look smart ; and Mrs. Soames he feel sure , have an eye ! 
 " the phaeton hood down ; I be go - to - drive - a - lady ! " 
 a pretty woman would want to show off her frock ; and well - he be go to drive a lady ! it be like a new beginning to the good old day . 
 age since he have drive a woman ! the last time , if he remember , it have be Juley ; the poor old soul have be as nervous as a cat the whole time , and so put he out of patience that , as he drop she in the Bayswater Road , he have say : " well I be d - -d if I ever drive you again ! " and he never have , not he ! 
 go up to his horse ' head , he examine their bit ; not that he know anything about bit - he do not   pay his coachman sixty pound a year to do his work for he , that have never be his principle . indeed , his reputation as a horsey man rest mainly on the fact that once , on Derby Day , he have be welsh by some thimble - rigger . but someone at the Club , after see he drive his grey up to the door - he always drive grey horse , you get more style for the money , some thought - have call he ' four - in - hand Forsyte . ' the name have reach his ear through that fellow Nicholas Treffry , old Jolyon 's dead partner , the great drive man notorious for more carriage accident than any man in the kingdom - Swithin have ever after conceive it right to act up to it . the name have take his fancy , not because he have ever drive four - in - hand , or be ever likely to , but because of something distinguished in the sound . four - in - hand Forsyte ! not bad ! bear too soon , Swithin have miss his vocation . come upon London twenty year later , he could not have fail to have become a stockbroker , but at the time when he be oblige to select , this great profession have not as yet become the chief glory of the upper - middle class . he have literally be force into land agency . 
 once in the driving seat , with the rein hand to he , and blink over his pale old cheek in the full sunlight , he take a slow look round - Adolf be already up behind ; the cockaded groom at the horse ' head stand ready to let go ; everything be prepare for the signal , and Swithin give it . the equipage dash forward , and before you could say Jack Robinson , with a rattle and flourish draw up at Soames ' door . 
 Irene come out at once , and step in - he afterward describe it at Timothy 's - " as light as - er - Taglioni , no fuss about it , no want this or want that ; " and above all , Swithin dwell on this , star at Mrs. Septimus in a way that disconcert she a good deal , " no silly nervousness ! " to Aunt Hester he portray Irene 's hat . " not one of your great flopping thing , sprawl about , and catch the dust , that woman be so fond of nowadays , but a neat little - " he make a circular motion of his hand , " white veil - capital taste . " 
 " what be it make of ? " inquire Aunt Hester , who manifest a languid but permanent excitement at any mention of dress . 
 " make of ? " return Swithin ; " now how should I know ? " 
 he sink into silence so profound that Aunt Hester begin to be afraid he have fall into a trance . she do not try to rouse he herself , it not be her custom . 
 ' I wish somebody would come , ' she think ; ' I do not   like the look of he ! ' 
 but suddenly Swithin return to life . " make of " he wheeze out slowly , " what should it be make of ? " 
 they have not go four mile before Swithin receive the impression that Irene like drive with he . her face be so soft behind that white veil , and her dark eye shine so in the spring light , and whenever he speak she raise they to he and smile . 
 on Saturday morning Soames have find she at her writing - table with a note write to Swithin , put he off . why do she want to put he off ? he ask . she might put her own people off when she like , he would not have she put off his people ! 
 she have look at he intently , have tear up the note , and say : " very well ! " 
 and then she begin write another . he take a casual glance presently , and see that it be address to Bosinney . 
 " what be you write to he about ? " he ask . 
 Irene , look at he again with that intent look , say quietly : " something he want I to do for he ! " 
 " Humph ! " say Soames , - " commission ! " 
 " you will have your work cut out if you begin that sort of thing ! " he say no more . 
 Swithin open his eye at the mention of Robin Hill ; it be a long way for his horse , and he always din at half - past seven , before the rush at the Club begin ; the new chef take more trouble with an early dinner - a lazy rascal ! 
 he would like to have a look at the house , however . a house appeal to any Forsyte , and especially to one who have be an auctioneer . after all he say the distance be nothing . when he be a young man he have have room at Richmond for many year , keep his carriage and pair there , and drive they up and down to business every day of his life . 
 four - in - hand Forsyte they call he ! his t - cart , his horse have be know from Hyde Park Corner to the Star and Garter . the Duke of Z .... want to get hold of they , would have give he double the money , but he have keep they ; know a good thing when you have it , eh ? a look of solemn pride come portentously on his shaven square old face , he roll his head in his stand - up collar , like a turkey - cock preen himself . 
 she be really - a charming woman ! he enlarge upon her frock afterwards to Aunt Juley , who hold up her hand at his way of put it . 
 fit she like a skin - tight as a drum ; that be how he like them , all of a piece , none of your daverdy , scarecrow woman ! he gaze at Mrs. Septimus Small , who take after James - long and thin . 
 " there be style about she , " he go on , " fit for a king ! and she be so quiet with it too ! " 
 " she seem to have make quite a conquest of you , any way , " drawl Aunt Hester from her corner . 
 Swithin hear extremely well when anybody attack he . 
 " what be that ? " he say . " I know a - pretty - woman when I see one , and all I can say be , I do not   see the young man about that be fit for she ; but perhaps - you - do , come , perhaps - you - do ! " 
 " oh ? " murmur Aunt Hester , " ask Juley ! " 
 long before they reach Robin Hill , however , the unaccustomed airing have make he terribly sleepy ; he drive with his eye close , a life - time of deportment alone keep his tall and bulky form from fall askew . 
 Bosinney , who be watch , come out to meet they , and all three enter the house together ; Swithin in front making play with a stout gold - mount Malacca cane , put into his hand by Adolf , for his knee be feel the effect of their long stay in the same position . he have assume his fur coat , to guard against the draught of the unfinished house . 
 the staircase - he say - be handsome ! the baronial style ! they would want some statuary about ! he come to a standstill between the column of the doorway into the inner court , and hold out his cane inquiringly . 
 what be this to be - this vestibule , or whatever they call it ? but gaze at the skylight , inspiration come to he . 
 " ah ! the billiard - room ! " 
 when tell it be to be a tile court with plant in the centre , he turn to Irene : 
 " waste this on plant ? you take my advice and have a billiard table here ! " 
 Irene smile . she have lift her veil , band it like a nun 's coif across her forehead , and the smile of her dark eye below this seem to Swithin more charming than ever . he nod . she would take his advice he see . 
 he have little to say of the drawing or dining - room , which he describe as ' spacious " ; but fall into such rapture as he permit to a man of his dignity , in the wine - cellar , to which he descend by stone step , Bosinney go first with a light . 
 " you will have room here , " he say , " for six or seven hundred dozen - a very pooty little cellar ! " 
 Bosinney have express the wish to show they the house from the copse below , Swithin come to a stop . 
 " there be a fine view from here , " he remark ; " you have not   such a thing as a chair ? " 
 a chair be bring he from Bosinney 's tent . 
 " you go down , " he say blandly ; " you two ! I will sit here and look at the view . " 
 he sit down by the oak tree , in the sun ; square and upright , with one hand stretch out , rest on the nob of his cane , the other plant on his knee ; his fur coat throw open , his hat , roof with its flat top the pale square of his face ; his stare , very blank , fix on the landscape . 
 he nod to they as they go off down through the field . he be , indeed , not sorry to be leave thus for a quiet moment of reflection . the air be balmy , not too much heat in the sun ; the prospect a fine one , a remarka .... his head fall a little to one side ; he jerk it up and think : Odd ! he - ah ! they be wave to he from the bottom ! he put up his hand , and move it more than once . they be active - the prospect be remar .... his head fall to the left , he jerk it up at once ; it fall to the right . it remain there ; he be asleep . 
 and asleep , a sentinel on the - top of the rise , he appear to rule over this prospect - remarkable - like some image block out by the special artist , of primeval Forsytes in pagan day , to record the domination of mind over matter ! 
 and all the unnumbered generation of his yeoman ancestor , will not of a Sunday to stand akimbo survey their little plot of land , their grey unmove eye hide their instinct with its hidden root of violence , their instinct for possession to the exclusion of all the world - all these unnumbered generation seem to sit there with he on the top of the rise . 
 but from he , thus slumber , his jealous forsyte spirit travel far , into God - know - what jungle of fancy ; with those two young people , to see what they be do down there in the copse - in the copse where the spring be run riot with the scent of sap and burst bud , the song of bird innumerable , a carpet of bluebell and sweet grow thing , and the sun catch like gold in the top of the tree ; to see what they be do , walk along there so close together on the path that be too narrow ; walk along there so close that they be always touching ; to watch Irene 's eye , like dark thief , steal the heart out of the spring . and a great unseen chaperon , his spirit be there , stop with they to look at the little furry corpse of a mole , not dead an hour , with his mushroom - and - silver coat untouched by the rain or dew ; watch over Irene 's bent head , and the soft look of her pity eye ; and over that young man 's head , gaze at she so hard , so strangely . walk on with they , too , across the open space where a wood - cutter have be at work , where the bluebell be trample down , and a trunk have sway and stagger down from its gash stump . climb it with they , over , and on to the very edge of the copse , whence there stretch an undiscovered country , from far away in which come the sound , ' cuckoo - cuckoo ! ' 
 Silent , stand with they there , and uneasy at their silence ! very queer , very strange ! 
 then back again , as though guilty , through the wood - back to the cutting , still silent , amongst the song of bird that never cease , and the wild scent - hum ! what be it - like that herb they put in - back to the log across the path .... 
 and then unseen , uneasy , flap above they , try to make noise , his forsyte spirit watch she balanced on the log , her pretty figure sway , smile down at that young man gaze up with such strange , shin eye , slip now - a - ah ! fall , o - oh ! slide - down his breast ; her soft , warm body clutched , her head bend back from his lip ; his kiss ; her recoil ; his cry : " you must know - I love you ! " must know - indeed , a pretty ... ? love ! hah ! 
 Swithin awake ; virtue have go out of he . he have a taste in his mouth . where be he ? 
 Damme ! he have be asleep ! 
 he have dream something about a new soup , with a taste of mint in it . 
 those young people - where have they get to ? his left leg have pin and needle . 
 " Adolf ! " the rascal be not there ; the rascal be asleep somewhere . 
 he stand up , tall , square , bulky in his fur , look anxiously down over the field , and presently he see they come . 
 Irene be in front ; that young fellow - what have they nickname he - ' the Buccaneer ? ' look precious hangdog there behind she ; have get a flea in his ear , he should not   wonder . serve he right , take she down all that way to look at the house ! the proper place to look at a house from be the lawn . 
 they see he . he extend his arm , and move it spasmodically to encourage they . but they have stop . what be they stand there for , talk - talk ? they come on again . she have be , give he a rub , he have not the least doubt of it , and no wonder , over a house like that - a great ugly thing , not the sort of house he be accustom to . 
 he look intently at their face , with his pale , immovable stare . that young man look very queer ! 
 " you will never make anything of this ! " he say tartly , point at the mansion ; - " too newfangle ! " 
 Bosinney gaze at he as though he have not hear ; and Swithin afterwards describe he to Aunt Hester as " an extravagant sort of fellow very odd way of look at you - a bumpy beggar ! " 
 what give rise to this sudden piece of psychology he do not state ; possibly Bosinney 's , prominent forehead and cheekbone and chin , or something hungry in his face , which quarrel with Swithin 's conception of the calm satiety that should characterize the perfect gentleman . 
 he brighten up at the mention of tea . he have a contempt for tea - his brother Jolyon have be in tea ; make a lot of money by it - but he be so thirsty , and have such a taste in his mouth , that he be prepared to drink anything . he long to inform Irene of the taste in his mouth - she be so sympathetic - but it would not be a distinguished thing to do ; he roll his tongue round , and faintly smack it against his palate . 
 in a far corner of the tent Adolf be bend his cat - like moustache over a kettle . he leave it at once to draw the cork of a pint - bottle of champagne . Swithin smile , and , nod at Bosinney , say : " why , you be quite a Monte Cristo ! " this celebrate novel - one of the half - dozen he have read - have produce an extraordinary impression on his mind . 
 take his glass from the table , he hold it away from he to scrutinize the colour ; thirsty as he be , it be not likely that he be go to drink trash ! then , place it to his lip , he take a sip . 
 " a very nice wine , " he say at last , pass it before his nose ; " not the equal of my Heidsieck ! " 
 it be at this moment that the idea come to he which he afterwards impart at Timothy 's in this nutshell : " I should not   wonder a bit if that architect chap be sweet upon Mrs. Soames ! " 
 and from this moment his pale , round eye never cease to bulge with the interest of his discovery . 
 " the fellow , " he say to Mrs. Septimus , " follow she about with his eye like a dog - the bumpy beggar ! I do not   wonder at it - she be a very charming woman , and , I should say , the pink of discretion ! " a vague consciousness of perfume cage about Irene , like that from a flower with half - close petal and a passionate heart , move he to the creation of this image . " but I be not   sure of it , " he say , " till I see he pick up her handkerchief . " 
 Mrs. Small 's eye boil with excitement . 
 " and do he give it she back ? " she ask . 
 " give it back ? " say Swithin : " I see he slobber on it when he think I be not   look ! " 
 Mrs. Small gasp - too interested to speak . 
 " but she give he no encouragement , " go on Swithin ; he stop , and star for a minute or two in the way that alarm Aunt Hester so - he have suddenly recollect that , as they be start back in the phaeton , she have give Bosinney her hand a second time , and let it stay there too .... he have touch his horse smartly with the whip , anxious to get she all to himself . but she have look back , and she have not answer his first question ; neither have he be able to see her face - she have keep it hang down . 
 there be somewhere a picture , which Swithin have not see , of a man sit on a rock , and by he , immerse in the still , green water , a sea - nymph lie on her back , with her hand on her naked breast . she have a half - smile on her face - a smile of hopeless surrender and of secret joy . 
 seat by Swithin 's side , Irene may have be smile like that . 
 when , warm by champagne , he have she all to himself , he unbosom himself of his wrong ; of his smothered resentment against the new chef at the club ; his worry over the house in Wigmore Street , where the rascally tenant have go bankrupt through help his brother - in - law as if charity do not begin at home ; of his deafness , too , and that pain he sometimes get in his right side . she listen , her eye swim under their lid . he think she be think deeply of his trouble , and pity himself terribly . yet in his fur coat , with frog across the breast , his top hat aslant , drive this beautiful woman , he have never feel more distinguished . 
 a coster , however , take his girl for a Sunday airing , seem to have the same impression about himself . this person have flog his donkey into a gallop alongside , and sit , upright as a waxwork , in his shallopy chariot , his chin settle pompously on a red handkerchief , like Swithin be on his full cravat ; while his girl , with the end of a fly - blow boa float out behind , ape a woman of fashion . her swain move a stick with a ragged bit of string dangle from the end , reproduce with strange fidelity the circular flourish of Swithin 's whip , and roll his head at his lady with a leer that have a weird likeness to Swithin 's primeval stare . 
 though for a time unconscious of the lowly ruffian 's presence , Swithin presently take it into his head that he be be guy . he lay his whip - lash across the mare flank . the two chariot , however , by some unfortunate fatality continue abreast . Swithin 's yellow , puffy face grow red ; he raise his whip to lash the costermonger , but be save from so far forget his dignity by a special intervention of Providence . a carriage drive out through a gate force phaeton and donkey - cart into proximity ; the wheel grate , the light vehicle skid , and be overturn . 
 Swithin do not look round . on no account would he have pull up to help the ruffian . serve he right if he have break his neck ! 
 but he could not if he would . the grey have take alarm . the phaeton swing from side to side , and people raise frightened face as they go dash past . Swithin 's great arm , stretch at full length , tug at the rein . his cheek be puff , his lip compress , his swollen face be of a dull , angry red . 
 Irene have her hand on the rail , and at every lurch she grip it tightly . Swithin hear her ask : 
 " be we go to have an accident , Uncle Swithin ? " 
 he gasp out between his pant : " it be nothing ; a - little fresh ! " 
 " I have   never be in an accident . " 
 " do not   you move ! " he take a look at she . she be smile , perfectly calm . " sit still , " he repeat . " never fear , I will get you home ! " 
 and in the midst of all his terrible effort , he be surprised to hear her answer in a voice not like her own : 
 " I do not   care if I never get home ! " 
 the carriage give a terrific lurch , Swithin 's exclamation be jerk back into his throat . the horse , wind by the rise of a hill , now steady to a trot , and finally stop of their own accord . 
 " when " - Swithin describe it at Timothy 's - " I pull them up , there she be as cool as myself . God bless my soul ! she behave as if she do not   care whether she break her neck or not ! what be it she say : ' I do not   care if I never get home ? " lean over the handle of his cane , he wheeze out , to Mrs. Small 's terror : " and I be not altogether surprised , with a finickin ' feller like young soame for a husband ! " 
 it do not occur to he to wonder what Bosinney have do after they have leave he there alone ; whether he have go wander about like the dog to which Swithin have compare he ; wander down to that copse where the spring be still in riot , the cuckoo still call from afar ; go down there with her handkerchief press to lip , its fragrance mingle with the scent of mint and thyme . go down there with such a wild , exquisite pain in his heart that he could have cry out among the tree . or what , indeed , the fellow have do . in fact , till he come to Timothy 's , Swithin have forget all about he . 
 CHAPTER IV - JAMES go to see for HIMSELF 
 those ignorant of Forsyte ' Change would not , perhaps , foresee all the stir make by Irene 's visit to the house . 
 after Swithin have relate at Timothy 's the full story of his memorable drive , the same , with the least suspicion of curiosity , the mere touch of malice , and a real desire to do good , be pass on to June . 
 " and what a dreadful thing to say , my dear ! " end Aunt Juley ; " that about not go home . what do she mean ? " 
 it be a strange recital for the girl . she hear it flush painfully , and , suddenly , with a curt handshake , take her departure . 
 " almost rude ! " Mrs. Small say to Aunt Hester , when June be go . 
 the proper construction be put on her reception of the news . she be upset . something be therefore very wrong . Odd ! she and Irene have be such friend ! 
 it all tally too well with whisper and hint that have be go about for some time past . recollection of Euphemia 's account of the visit to the theatre - Mr. Bosinney always at Soames 's ? oh , indeed ! yes , of course , he would be about the house ! nothing open . only upon the great , the most important provocation be it necessary to say anything open on Forsyte ' Change . this machine be too nicely adjust ; a hint , the mere trifling expression of regret or doubt , suffice to set the family soul so sympathetic - vibrating . no one desire that harm should come of these vibration - far from it ; they be set in motion with the good intention , with the feeling , that each member of the family have a stake in the family soul . 
 and much kindness lie at the bottom of the gossip ; it would frequently result in visit of condolence be make , in accordance with the custom of Society , thereby confer a real benefit upon the sufferer , and afford consolation to the sound , who feel pleasantly that someone at all event be suffer from that from which they themselves be not suffer . in fact , it be simply a desire to keep thing well - air , the desire which animate the Public Press , that bring James , for instance , into communication with Mrs. Septimus , Mrs. Septimus , with the little Nicholases , the little Nicholases with who - know - whom , and so on . that great class to which they have rise , and now belong , demand a certain candour , a still more certain reticence . this combination guarantee their membership . 
 many of the young Forsytes feel , very naturally , and would openly declare , that they do not want their affair pry into ; but so powerful be the invisible , magnetic current of family gossip , that for the life of they they could not help know all about everything . it be feel to be hopeless . 
 one of they   young Roger   have make an heroic attempt to free the rise generation , by speak of Timothy as an ' old cat . ' the effort have justly recoil upon himself ; the word , come round in the most delicate way to Aunt Juley 's ear , be repeat by she in a shocked voice to Mrs. Roger , whence they return again to young Roger . 
 and , after all , it be only the wrong - doer who suffer ; as , for instance , George , when he lose all that money play billiard ; or young Roger himself , when he be so dreadfully near to marry the girl to whom , it be whisper , he be already marry by the law of Nature ; or again Irene , who be think , rather than say , to be in danger . 
 all this be not only pleasant but salutary . and it make so many hour go lightly at Timothy 's in the Bayswater Road ; so many hour that must otherwise have be sterile and heavy to those three who live there ; and Timothy 's be but one of hundred of such home in this City of London - the home of neutral person of the secure class , who be out of the battle themselves , and must find their reason for exist , in the battle of other . 
 but for the sweetness of family gossip , it must indeed have be lonely there . rumour and tale , report , surmise - be they not the child of the house , as dear and precious as the prattling babe the brother and sister have miss in their own journey ? to talk about they be as near as they could get to the possession of all those child and grandchild , after whom their soft heart yearn . for though it be doubtful whether Timothy 's heart yearn , it be indubitable that at the arrival of each fresh forsyte child he be quite upset . 
 useless for young Roger to say , " old cat ! " for Euphemia to hold up her hand and cry : " oh ! those three ! " and break into her silent laugh with the squeak at the end . useless , and not too kind . 
 the situation which at this stage might seem , and especially to forsyte eye , strange - not to say ' impossible ' - be , in view of certain fact , not so strange after all . some thing have be lose sight of . and first , in the security breed of many harmless marriage , it have be forget that Love be no hot - house flower , but a wild plant , bear of a wet night , bear of an hour of sunshine ; spring from wild seed , blow along the road by a wild wind . a wild plant that , when it bloom by chance within the hedge of our garden , we call a flower ; and when it bloom outside we call a weed ; but , flower or weed , whose scent and colour be always , wild ! and far - the fact and figure of their own life be against the perception of this truth - it be not generally recognise by Forsytes that , where , this wild plant spring , man and woman be but moth around the pale , flame - like blossom . 
 it be long since young Jolyon 's escapade - there be danger of a tradition again arise that people in their position never cross the hedge to pluck that flower ; that one could reckon on have love , like measle , once in due season , and get over it comfortably for all time - as with measle , on a soothe mixture of butter and honey - in the arm of wedlock . 
 of all those whom this strange rumour about Bosinney and Mrs. Soames reach , James be the most affected . he have long forget how he have hover , lanky and pale , in side whisker of chestnut hue , round Emily , in the day of his own courtship . he have long forget the small house in the purlieus of Mayfair , where he have spend the early day of his married life , or rather , he have long forget the early day , not the small house , - a Forsyte never forget a house - he have afterwards sell it at a clear profit of four hundred pound . 
 he have long forget those day , with their hope and fear and doubt about the prudence of the match   for Emily , though pretty , have nothing , and he himself at that time be make a bare thousand a year , and that strange , irresistible attraction which have draw he on , till he feel he must die if he could not marry the girl with the fair hair , loop so neatly back , the fair arm emerge from a skin - tight bodice , the fair form decorously shield by a cage of really stupendous circumference . 
 James have pass through the fire , but he have pass also through the river of year which wash out the fire ; he have experience the sad experience of all - forgetfulness of what it be like to be in love . 
 forget ! forget so long , that he have forget even that he have forget . 
 and now this rumour have come upon he , this rumour about his son 's wife ; very vague , a shadow dodge among the palpable , straightforward appearance of thing , unreal , unintelligible as a ghost , but carry with it , like a ghost , inexplicable terror . 
 he try to bring it home to his mind , but it be no more use than try to apply to himself one of those tragedy he read of daily in his evening paper . he simply could not . there could be nothing in it . it be all their nonsense . she do not   get on with soame as well as she might , but she be a good little thing - a good little thing ! 
 like the not inconsiderable majority of man , James relish a nice little bit of scandal , and would say , in a matter - of - fact tone , lick his lip , " yes , yes - she and young Dyson ; they tell I they be live at Monte Carlo ! " 
 but the significance of an affair of this sort - of its past , its present , or its future - have never strike he . what it mean , what torture and rapture have go to its construction , what slow , overmaster fate have lurk within the fact , very naked , sometimes sordid , but generally spicy , present to his gaze . he be not in the habit of blame , praise , draw deduction , or generalize at all about such thing ; he simply listen rather greedily , and repeat what he be tell , find considerable benefit from the practice , as from the consumption of a sherry and bitter before a meal . 
 now , however , that such a thing - or rather the rumour , the breath of it - have come near he personally , he feel as in a fog , which fill his mouth full of a bad , thick flavour , and make it difficult to draw breath . 
 a scandal ! a possible scandal ! 
 to repeat this word to himself thus be the only way in which he could focus or make it thinkable . he have forget the sensation necessary for understand the progress , fate , or meaning of any such business ; he simply could no long grasp the possibility of people run any risk for the sake of passion . 
 amongst all those person of his acquaintance , who go into the City day after day and do their business there , whatever it be , and in their leisure moment buy share , and house , and eat dinner , and play game , as he be tell , it would have seem to he ridiculous to suppose that there be any who would run risk for the sake of anything so recondite , so figurative , as passion . 
 passion ! he seem , indeed , to have hear of it , and rule such as ' a young man and a young woman ought never to be trust together ' be fix in his mind as the parallel of latitude be fix on a map   for all Forsytes , when it come to ' bed - rock ' matter of fact , have quite a fine taste in realism ; but as to anything else - well , he could only appreciate it at all through the catch - word ' scandal . ' 
 ah ! but there be no truth in it - could not be . he be not afraid ; she be really a good little thing . but there it be when you get a thing like that into your mind . and James be of a nervous temperament - one of those man whom thing will not leave alone , who suffer torture from anticipation and indecision . for fear of let something slip that he might otherwise secure , he be physically unable to make up his mind until absolutely certain that , by not make it up , he would suffer loss . 
 in life , however , there be many occasion when the business of make up his mind do not even rest with himself , and this be one of they . 
 what could he do ? talk it over with soame ? that would only make matter bad . and , after all , there be nothing in it , he feel sure . 
 it be all that house . he have mistrust the idea from the first . what do soame want to go into the country for ? and , if he must go spend a lot of money build himself a house , why not have a first - rate man , instead of this young Bosinney , whom nobody know anything about ? he have tell they how it would be . and he have hear that the house be cost soame a pretty penny beyond what he have reckon on spending . 
 this fact , more than any other , bring home to James the real danger of the situation . it be always like this with these ' artistic ' chap ; a sensible man should have nothing to say to they . he have warn Irene , too . and see what have come of it ! 
 and it suddenly spring into James 's mind that he ought to go and see for himself . in the midst of that fog of uneasiness in which his mind be envelop the notion that he could go and look at the house afford he inexplicable satisfaction . it may have be simply the decision to do something - more possibly the fact that he be go to look at a house - that give he relief . he feel that in star at an edifice of brick and mortar , of wood and stone , build by the suspect man himself , he would be look into the heart of that rumour about Irene . 
 without say a word , therefore , to anyone , he take a hansom to the station and proceed by train to Robin Hill ; thence - there be no ' fly , ' in accordance with the custom of the neighbourhood - he find himself oblige to walk . 
 he start slowly up the hill , his angular knee and high shoulder bent complainingly , his eye fix on his foot , yet , neat for all that , in his high hat and his frock - coat , on which be the speckless gloss impart by perfect superintendence . Emily see to that ; that is , she do not , of course , see to it - people of good position not see to each other 's button , and Emily be of good position - but she see that the butler see to it . 
 he have to ask his way three time ; on each occasion he repeat the direction give he , get the man to repeat they , then repeat they a second time , for he be naturally of a talkative disposition , and one could not be too careful in a new neighbourhood . 
 he keep assure they that it be a new house he be look for ; it be only , however , when he be show the roof through the tree that he could feel really satisfied that he have not be direct entirely wrong . 
 a heavy sky seem to cover the world with the grey whiteness of a whitewashed ceiling . there be no freshness or fragrance in the air . on such a day even british workman scarcely care to do more then they be oblige , and move about their business without the drone of talk which while away the pang of labour . 
 through space of the unfinished house , shirt - sleeve figure work slowly , and sound arose - spasmodic knocking , the scraping of metal , the sawing of wood , with the rumble of wheelbarrow along board ; now and again the foreman 's dog , tether by a string to an oaken beam , whimper feebly , with a sound like the singing of a kettle . 
 the fresh - fit window - pane , daub each with a white patch in the centre , star out at James like the eye of a blind dog . 
 and the building chorus go on , strident and mirthless under the grey - white sky . but the thrush , hunt amongst the fresh - turn earth for worm , be silent quite . 
 James pick his way among the heap of gravel - the drive be be lay - till he come opposite the porch . here he stop and raise his eye . there be but little to see from this point of view , and that little he take in at once ; but he stay in this position many minute , and who shall know of what he think . 
 his china - blue eye under white eyebrow that jut out in little horn , never stir ; the long upper lip of his wide mouth , between the fine white whisker , twitch once or twice ; it be easy to see from that anxious rapt expression , whence Soames derive the handicapped look which sometimes come upon his face . James might have be say to himself : ' I do not   know - life be a tough job . ' 
 in this position Bosinney surprise he . 
 James bring his eye down from whatever bird's - nest they have be look for in the sky to Bosinney 's face , on which be a kind of humorous scorn . 
 " how do you do , Mr. Forsyte ? come down to see for yourself ? " 
 it be exactly what James , as we know , have come for , and he be make correspondingly uneasy . he hold out his hand , however , say : 
 " how be you ? " without look at Bosinney . 
 the latter make way for he with an ironical smile . 
 James scent something suspicious in this courtesy . " I should like to walk round the outside first , " he say , " and see what you have   be do ! " 
 a flagged terrace of rounded stone with a list of two or three inch to port have be lay round the south - east and south - west side of the house , and run with a bevelled edge into mould , which be in preparation for be turf ; along this terrace James lead the way . 
 " now what do this cost ? " he ask , when he see the terrace extend round the corner . 
 " what should you think ? " inquire Bosinney . 
 " how should I know ? " reply James somewhat nonplussed ; " two or three hundred , I dare say ! " 
 " the exact sum ! " 
 James give he a sharp look , but the architect appear unconscious , and he put the answer down to mishearing . 
 on arrive at the garden entrance , he stop to look at the view . 
 " that ought to come down , " he say , point to the oak - tree . 
 " you think so ? you think that with the tree there you do not   get enough view for your money . " 
 again James eye he suspiciously - this young man have a peculiar way of put thing : " well ! " he say , with a perplexed , nervous , emphasis , " I do not   see what you want with a tree . " 
 " it shall come down to - morrow , " say Bosinney . 
 James be alarmed . " oh , " he say , " do not   go say I say it be to come down ! I know nothing about it ! " 
 " no ? " 
 James go on in a fluster : " why , what should I know about it ? it be nothing to do with I ! you do it on your own responsibility . " 
 " you will allow I to mention your name ? " 
 James grow more and more alarmed : " I do not   know what you want mention my name for , " he mutter ; " you would well leave the tree alone . it be not your tree ! " 
 he take out a silk handkerchief and wipe his brow . they enter the house . like Swithin , James be impress by the inner court - yard . 
 " you must have spend a douce of a lot of money here , " he say , after star at the column and gallery for some time . " now , what do it cost to put up those column ? " 
 " I can not   tell you off - hand , " thoughtfully answer Bosinney , " but I know it be a deuce of a lot ! " 
 " I should think so , " say James . " I should .... " he catch the architect 's eye , and break off . and now , whenever he come to anything of which he desire to know the cost , he stifle that curiosity . 
 Bosinney appear determined that he should see everything , and have not James be of too ' notice ' a nature , he would certainly have find himself go round the house a second time . he seem so anxious to be ask question , too , that James feel he must be on his guard . he begin to suffer from his exertion , for , though wiry enough for a man of his long build , he be seventy - five year old . 
 he grow discourage ; he seem no nearer to anything , have not obtain from his inspection any of the knowledge he have vaguely hop for . he have merely increase his dislike and mistrust of this young man , who have tire he out with his politeness , and in whose manner he now certainly detect mockery . 
 the fellow be sharp than he have think , and well - look than he have hop . he have a - a ' do not   care ' appearance that James , to whom risk be the most intolerable thing in life , do not appreciate ; a peculiar smile , too , come when least expect ; and very queer eye . he remind James , as he say afterwards , of a hungry cat . this be as near as he could get , in conversation with Emily , to a description of the peculiar exasperation , velvetiness , and mockery , of which Bosinney 's manner have be compose . 
 at last , have see all that be to be see , he come out again at the door where he have go in ; and now , feel that he be waste time and strength and money , all for nothing , he take the courage of a Forsyte in both hand , and , look sharply at Bosinney , say : 
 " I dare say you see a good deal of my daughter - in - law ; now , what do she think of the house ? but she have not   see it , I suppose ? " 
 this he say , know all about Irene 's visit not , of course , that there be anything in the visit , except that extraordinary remark she have make about ' not care to get home ' - and the story of how June have take the news ! 
 he have determine , by this way of put the question , to give Bosinney a chance , as he say to himself . 
 the latter be long in answering , but keep his eye with uncomfortable steadiness on James . 
 " she have see the house , but I can not   tell you what she think of it . " 
 nervous and baffled , James be constitutionally prevent from let the matter drop . 
 " oh ! " he say , ' she have see it ? soame bring she down , I suppose ? " 
 Bosinney smilingly reply : " oh , no ! " 
 " what , do she come down alone ? " 
 " oh , no ! " 
 " then - who bring she ? " 
 " I really do not   know whether I ought to tell you who bring she . " 
 to James , who know that it be Swithin , this answer appear incomprehensible . 
 " why ! " he stammer , " you know that .... " but he stop , suddenly perceive his danger . 
 " well , " he say , " if you do not   want to tell I I suppose you will not ! nobody tell I anything . " 
 somewhat to his surprise Bosinney ask he a question . 
 " by the by , " he say , " could you tell I if there be likely to be any more of you come down ? I should like to be on the spot ! " 
 " any more ? " say James bewildered , " who should there be more ? I do not   know of any more . good - bye ? " 
 look at the ground he hold out his hand , cross the palm of it with Bosinney 's , and take his umbrella just above the silk , walk away along the terrace . 
 before he turn the corner he glance back , and see Bosinney follow he slowly - ' slinking along the wall ' as he put it to himself , ' like a great cat . ' he pay no attention when the young fellow raise his hat . 
 outside the drive , and out of sight , he slacken his pace still more . very slowly , more bent than when he come , lean , hungry , and dishearten , he make his way back to the station . 
 the Buccaneer , watch he go so sadly home , feel sorry perhaps for his behaviour to the old man . 
 CHAPTER v - soames and BOSINNEY CORRESPOND 
 James say nothing to his son of this visit to the house ; but , have occasion to go to Timothy 's on morning on a matter connect with a drainage scheme which be be force by the sanitary authority on his brother , he mention it there . 
 it be not , he say , a bad house . he could see that a good deal could be make of it . the fellow be clever in his way , though what it be go to cost soame before it be do with he do not   know . 
 Euphemia Forsyte , who happen to be in the room - she have come round to borrow the Rev. Mr. Scoles ' last novel , ' passion and Paregoric ' , which be have such a vogue - chime in . 
 " I see Irene yesterday at the Stores ; she and Mr. Bosinney be have a nice little chat in the Groceries . " 
 it be thus , simply , that she record a scene which have really make a deep and complicated impression on she . she have be hurry to the silk department of the Church and Commercial Stores - that Institution than which , with its admirable system , admit only guarantee person on a basis of payment before delivery , no emporium can be more highly recommend to Forsytes - to match a piece of prunella silk for her mother , who be wait in the carriage outside . 
 pass through the Groceries her eye be unpleasantly attract by the back view of a very beautiful figure . it be so charmingly proportion , so balanced , and so well clothe , that Euphemia 's instinctive propriety be at once alarm ; such figure , she know , by intuition rather than experience , be rarely connect with virtue - certainly never in her mind , for her own back be somewhat difficult to fit . 
 her suspicion be fortunately confirm . a young man come from the Drugs have snatch off his hat , and be accost the lady with the unknown back . 
 it be then that she see with whom she have to deal ; the lady be undoubtedly Mrs. soame , the young man Mr. Bosinney . conceal herself rapidly over the purchase of a box of tunisian date , for she be impatient of awkwardly meet people with parcel in her hand , and at the busy time of the morning , she be quite unintentionally an interested observer of their little interview . 
 Mrs. Soames , usually somewhat pale , have a delightful colour in her cheek ; and Mr. Bosinney 's manner be strange , though attractive   she think he rather a distinguished - looking man , and George 's name for he , ' the Buccaneer ' - about which there be something romantic - quite charming . he seem to be plead . indeed , they talk so earnestly - or , rather , he talk so earnestly , for Mrs. Soames do not say much - that they cause , inconsiderately , an eddy in the traffic . one nice old General , go towards cigar , be oblige to step quite out of the way , and chance to look up and see Mrs. Soames ' face , he actually take off his hat , the old fool ! so like a man ! 
 but it be Mrs. Soames ' eye that worry Euphemia . she never once look at Mr. Bosinney until he move on , and then she look after he . and , oh , that look ! 
 on that look Euphemia have spend much anxious thought . it be not too much to say that it have hurt she with its dark , linger softness , for all the world as though the woman want to drag he back , and unsay something she have be say . 
 ah , well , she have have no time to go deeply into the matter just then , with that prunella silk on her hand ; but she be ' ve ry intriguee ' - very ! she have just nod to Mrs. Soames , to show she that she have see ; and , as she confide , in talk it over afterwards , to her chum Francie   Roger 's daughter , " do not   she look catch out just ? ... " 
 James , most averse at the first blush to accept any news confirmatory of his own poignant suspicion , take she up at once . 
 " oh " he say , " they would be after wall - paper no doubt . " 
 Euphemia smile . " in the grocery ? " she say softly ; and , take ' Passion and Paregoric ' from the table , add : " and so you will lend I this , dear Auntie ? good - bye ! " and go away . 
 James leave almost immediately after ; he be late as it be . 
 when he reach the office of Forsyte , Bustard and Forsyte , he find soame , sit in his revolving , chair , draw up a defence . the latter greet his father with a curt good - morning , and , take an envelope from his pocket , say : 
 " it may interest you to look through this . " 
 James read as follow : 
 ' 309D , SLOANE street , May 15 , 
 ' DEAR FORSYTE , 
 ' the construction of your house be now complete , my duty as architect have come to an end . if I be to go on with the business of decoration , which at your request I undertake , I should like you to clearly understand that I must have a free hand . 
 ' you never come down without suggest something that go counter to my scheme . I have here three letter from you , each of which recommend an article I should never dream of put in . I have your father here yesterday afternoon , who make further valuable suggestion . 
 ' please make up your mind , therefore , whether you want I to decorate for you , or to retire which on the whole I should prefer to do . 
 ' but understand that , if I decorate , I decorate alone , without interference of any sort . 
 if I do the thing , I will do it thoroughly , but I must have a free hand . 
 ' your truly , 
 ' PHILIP BOSINNEY . ' 
 the exact and immediate cause of this letter can not , of course , be tell , though it be not improbable that Bosinney may have be move by some sudden revolt against his position towards Soames - that eternal position of art towards Property - which be so admirably sum up , on the back of the most indispensable of modern appliance , in a sentence comparable to the very fine in Tacitus : 
 THOS . T. SORROW , Inventor . BERT M. PADLAND , Proprietor . 
 " what be you go to say to he ? " James ask . 
 soame do not even turn his head . " I have not   make up my mind , " he say , and go on with his defence . 
 a client of his , have put some building on a piece of ground that do not belong to he , have be suddenly and most irritatingly warn to take they off again . after carefully go into the fact , however , Soames have see his way to advise that his client have what be know as a title by possession , and that , though undoubtedly the ground do not belong to he , he be entitle to keep it , and have well do so ; and he be now follow up this advice by take step to - as the sailor say - ' make it so . ' 
 he have a distinct reputation for sound advice ; people say of he : " go to young Forsyte - a long - head fellow ! " and he prize this reputation highly . 
 his natural taciturnity be in his favour ; nothing could be more calculate to give people , especially people with property   soame have no other client , the impression that he be a safe man . and he be safe . tradition , habit , education , inherit aptitude , native caution , all join to form a solid professional honesty , superior to temptation - from the very fact that it be build on an innate avoidance of risk . how could he fall , when his soul abhor circumstance which render a fall possible - a man can not fall off the floor ! 
 and those countless Forsytes , who , in the course of innumerable transaction concern with property of all sort   from wife to water right , have occasion for the service of a safe man , find it both reposeful and profitable to confide in Soames . that slight superciliousness of his , combine with an air of mouse amongst precedent , be in his favour too - a man would not be supercilious unless he know ! 
 he be really at the head of the business , for though James still come nearly every day to , see for himself , he do little now but sit in his chair , twist his leg , slightly confuse thing already decide , and presently go away again , and the other partner , Bustard , be a poor thing , who do a great deal of work , but whose opinion be never take . 
 so Soames go steadily on with his defence . yet it would be idle to say that his mind be at ease . he be suffer from a sense of impend trouble , that have haunt he for some time past . he try to think it physical - a condition of his liver - but know that it be not . 
 he look at his watch . in a quarter of an hour he be due at the General Meeting of the New Colliery Company - one of Uncle Jolyon 's concern ; he should see Uncle Jolyon there , and say something to he about Bosinney - he have not make up his mind what , but something - in any case he should not answer this letter until he have see Uncle Jolyon . he get up and methodically put away the draft of his defence . go into a dark little cupboard , he turn up the light , wash his hand with a piece of brown Windsor soap , and dry they on a roller towel . then he brush his hair , pay strict attention to the parting , turn down the light , take his hat , and say he would be back at half - past two , step into the Poultry . 
 it be not far to the Offices of the New Colliery Company in Ironmonger Lane , where , and not at the Cannon Street Hotel , in accordance with the more ambitious practice of other company , the General Meeting be always hold . Old Jolyon have from the first set his face against the Press . what business - he say - have the Public with his concern ! 
 soame arrive on the stroke of time , and take his seat alongside the Board , who , in a row , each Director behind his own ink - pot , face their Shareholders . 
 in the centre of this row old Jolyon , conspicuous in his black , tightly - button frock - coat and his white moustache , be lean back with finger tip cross on a copy of the Directors ' report and account . 
 on his right hand , always a little large than life , sit the Secretary , ' down - by - the - starn ' hemming ; an all - too - sad sadness beaming in his fine eye ; his iron - grey beard , in mourn like the rest of he , give the feeling of an all - too - black tie behind it . 
 the occasion indeed be a melancholy one , only six week have elapse since that telegram have come from Scorrier , the mining expert , on a private mission to the Mines , inform they that Pippin , their superintendent , have commit suicide in endeavouring , after his extraordinary two year ' silence , to write a letter to his Board . that letter be on the table now ; it would be read to the Shareholders , who would of course be put into possession of all the fact . 
 hemming have often say to Soames , stand with his coat - tail divide before the fireplace : 
 " what our Shareholders do not   know about our affair be not   worth know . you may take that from I , Mr. Soames . " 
 on one occasion , old Jolyon be present , soame recollect a little unpleasantness . his uncle have look up sharply and say : " do not   talk nonsense , hemming ! you mean that what they do know be not   worth know ! " Old Jolyon detest humbug . 
 hemming , angry - eye , and wear a smile like that of a train poodle , have reply in an outburst of artificial applause : " come , now , that be good , sir - that be very good . your uncle will have his joke ! " 
 the next time he have see soame he have take the opportunity of say to he : " the chairman 's get very old ! - I can not   get he to understand thing ; and he be so wilful - but what can you expect , with a chin like his ? " 
 soame have nod . 
 everyone know that Uncle Jolyon 's chin be a caution . he be look worried to - day , in spite of his General Meeting look ; he   soame   should certainly speak to he about Bosinney . 
 beyond old Jolyon on the left be little Mr. Booker , and he , too , wear his General Meeting look , as though search for some particularly tender shareholder . and next he be the deaf director , with a frown ; and beyond the deaf director , again , be old Mr. Bleedham , very bland , and have an air of conscious virtue - as well he might , know that the brown - paper parcel he always bring to the Board - room be conceal behind his hat   one of that old - fashioned class , of flat - brim top - hat which go with very large bow tie , clean - shaven lip , fresh cheek , and neat little , white whisker . 
 soame always attend the General Meeting ; it be consider well that he should do so , in case ' anything should arise ! ' he glance round with his close , supercilious air at the wall of the room , where hang plan of the mine and harbour , together with a large photograph of a shaft lead to a working which have prove quite remarkably unprofitable . this photograph - a witness to the eternal irony underlie commercial enterprise till retain its position on the - wall , an effigy of the director ' pet , but dead , lamb . 
 and now old Jolyon rise , to present the report and account . 
 veil under a jove - like serenity that perpetual antagonism deep - seat in the bosom of a director towards his shareholder , he face they calmly . soame face they too . he know most of they by sight . there be old Scrubsole , a tar man , who always come , as Hemmings would say , ' to make himself nasty , ' a cantankerous - look old fellow with a red face , a jowl , and an enormous low - crown hat reposing on his knee . and the Rev. Mr. Boms , who always propose a vote of thank to the chairman , in which he invariably express the hope that the Board would not forget to elevate their employee , use the word with a double e , as be more vigorous and anglo - Saxon   he have the strong imperialistic tendency of his cloth . it be his salutary custom to buttonhole a director afterwards , and ask he whether he think the come year would be good or bad ; and , accord to the trend of the answer , to buy or sell three share within the ensue fortnight . 
 and there be that military man , Major O'Bally , who could not help speak , if only to second the re - election of the auditor , and who sometimes cause serious consternation by take toast - proposal rather - out of the hand of person who have be flatter with little slip of paper , entrust the say proposal to their care . 
 these make up the lot , together with four or five strong , silent shareholder , with whom soame could sympathize - man of business , who like to keep an eye on their affair for themselves , without be fussy - good , solid man , who come to the City every day and go back in the evening to good , solid wife . 
 good , solid wife ! there be something in that thought which rouse the nameless uneasiness in Soames again . 
 what should he say to his uncle ? what answer should he make to this letter ? 
 . . . . " if any shareholder have any question to put , I shall be glad to answer it . " a soft thump . Old Jolyon have let the report and account fall , and stand twist his tortoise - shell glass between thumb and forefinger . 
 the ghost of a smile appear on Soames ' face . they have well hurry up with their question ! he well know his uncle 's method   the ideal one   of at once say : " I propose , then , that the report and account be adopt ! " never let they get their wind - shareholder be notoriously wasteful of time ! 
 a tall , white - bearded man , with a gaunt , dissatisfied face , arise : 
 " I believe I be in order , Mr. Chairman , in raise a question on this figure of L5000 in the account . ' to the widow and family " '   he look sourly round , " ' of our late superintendent , ' who so - er - ill - advisedly   I say - ill - advisedly   committed suicide , at a time when his service be of the utmost value to this Company . you have state that the agreement which he have so unfortunately cut short with his own hand be for a period of five year , of which one only have expire - I - " 
 Old Jolyon make a gesture of impatience . 
 " I believe I be in order , Mr. Chairman - I ask whether this amount pay , or propose to be pay , by the Board to the er - deceased - be for service which might have be render to the Company - have he not commit suicide ? " 
 " it be in recognition of past service , which we all know - you as well as any of we - to have be of vital value . " 
 " then , sir , all I have to say be that the service be past , the amount be too much . " 
 the shareholder sit down . 
 Old Jolyon wait a second and say : " I now propose that the report and - " 
 the shareholder rise again : " may I ask if the Board realize that it be not their money which - I do not   hesitate to say that if it be their money .... " 
 a second shareholder , with a round , dogged face , whom soame recognise as the late superintendent 's brother - in - law , get up and say warmly : " in my opinion , sir , the sum be not enough ! " 
 the Rev. Mr. Boms now rise to his foot . " if I may venture to express myself , " he say , " I should say that the fact of the - er - deceased have commit suicide should weigh very heavily - very heavily with our worthy chairman . I have no doubt it have weigh with he , for - I say this for myself and I think for everyone present   hear , hear   - he enjoy our confidence in a high degree . we all desire , I should hope , to be charitable . but I feel sure "   he - look severely at the late superintendent 's brother - in - law   " that he will in some way , by some write expression , or well perhaps by reduce the amount , record our grave disapproval that so promising and valuable a life should have be thus impiously remove from a sphere where both its own interest and - if I may say so - our interest so imperatively demand its continuance . we should not - nay , we may not - countenance so grave a dereliction of all duty , both human and divine . " 
 the reverend gentleman resume his seat . the late superintendent 's brother - in - law again rise : " what I have say I stick to , " he say ; " the amount be not enough ! " 
 the first shareholder strike in : " I challenge the legality of the payment . in my opinion this payment be not legal . the Company 's solicitor be present ; I believe I be in order in ask he the question . " 
 all eye be now turn upon Soames . something have arise ! 
 he stand up , close - lipped and cold ; his nerve inwardly flutter , his attention tweak away at last from contemplation of that cloud loom on the horizon of his mind . 
 " the point , " he say in a low , thin voice , " be by no mean clear . as there be no possibility of future consideration be receive , it be doubtful whether the payment be strictly legal . if it be desire , the opinion of the court could be take . " 
 the superintendent 's brother - in - law frown , and say in a meaning tone : " we have no doubt the opinion of the court could be take . may I ask the name of the gentleman who have give we that striking piece of information ? Mr. Soames Forsyte ? indeed ! " he look from soame to old Jolyon in a pointed manner . 
 a flush coloured soame ' pale cheek , but his superciliousness do not waver . Old Jolyon fix his eye on the speaker . 
 " if , " he say , " the late superintendent brother - in - law have nothing more to say , I propose that the report and account .... " 
 at this moment , however , there rise one of those five silent , stolid shareholder , who have excite Soames ' sympathy . he say : 
 " I deprecate the proposal altogether . we be expect to give charity to this man 's wife and child , who , you tell we , be dependent on he . they may have be ; I do not care whether they be or not . I object to the whole thing on principle . it be high time a stand be make against this sentimental humanitarianism . the country be eat up with it . I object to my money be pay to these people of whom I know nothing , who have do nothing to earn it . I object in toto ; it be not business . I now move that the report and account be put back , and amend by strike out the grant altogether . " 
 Old Jolyon have remain stand while the strong , silent man be speak . the speech awake an echo in all heart , voicing , as it do , the worship of strong man , the movement against generosity , which have at that time already commence among the saner member of the community . 
 the word ' it be not business ' have move even the Board ; privately everyone feel that indeed it be not . but they know also the chairman 's domineering temper and tenacity . he , too , at heart must feel that it be not business ; but he be commit to his own proposition . would he go back upon it ? it be think to be unlikely . 
 all wait with interest . Old Jolyon hold up his hand ; dark - rim glass depend between his finger and thumb quiver slightly with a suggestion of menace . 
 he address the strong , silent shareholder . 
 " know , as you do , the effort of our late superintendent upon the occasion of the explosion at the mine , do you seriously wish I to put that amendment , sir ? " 
 " I do . " 
 Old Jolyon put the amendment . 
 " do anyone second this ? " he ask , look calmly round . 
 and it be then that soame , look at his uncle , feel the power of will that be in that old man . no one stir . look straight into the eye of the strong , silent shareholder , old Jolyon say : 
 " I now move , ' that the report and account for the year 1886 be receive and adopt . ' you second that ? those in favour signify the same in the usual way . Contrary - no . carry . the next business , gentleman .... " 
 soame smile . certainly Uncle Jolyon have a way with he ! 
 but now his attention relapse upon Bosinney . 
 Odd how that fellow haunt his thought , even in business hour . 
 Irene 's visit to the house - but there be nothing in that , except that she might have tell he ; but then , again , she never do tell he anything . she be more silent , more touchy , every day . he wish to God the house be finish , and they be in it , away from London . Town do not suit she ; her nerve be not strong enough . that nonsense of the separate room have crop up again ! 
 the meeting be break up now . underneath the photograph of the lose shaft Hemmings be buttonhole by the Rev. Mr. Boms . little Mr. Booker , his bristling eyebrow wreathe in angry smile , be have a parting turn - up with old Scrubsole . the two hat each other like poison . there be some matter of a tar - contract between they , little Mr. Booker have secure it from the Board for a nephew of his , over old Scrubsole 's head . soame have hear that from Hemmings , who like a gossip , more especially about his director , except , indeed , old Jolyon , of whom he be afraid . 
 soame await his opportunity . the last shareholder be vanish through the door , when he approach his uncle , who be put on his hat . 
 " can I speak to you for a minute , Uncle Jolyon ? " 
 it be uncertain what soame expect to get out of this interview . 
 apart from that somewhat mysterious awe in which Forsytes in general hold old Jolyon , due to his philosophic twist , or perhaps - as Hemmings would doubtless have say - to his chin , there be , and always have be , a subtle antagonism between the young man and the old . it have lurk under their dry manner of greeting , under their non - committal allusion to each other , and arise perhaps from old Jolyon 's perception of the quiet tenacity   ' obstinacy , ' he rather naturally call it   of the young man , of a secret doubt whether he could get his own way with he . 
 both these Forsytes , wide asunder as the pole in many respect , possess in their different way - to a great degree than the rest of the family - that essential quality of tenacious and prudent insight into ' affair , ' which be the highwater mark of their great class . either of they , with a little luck and opportunity , be equal to a lofty career ; either of they would have make a good financier , a great contractor , a statesman , though old Jolyon , in certain of his mood when under the influence of a cigar or of Nature - would have be capable of , not perhaps despise , but certainly of questioning , his own high position , while soame , who never smoke cigar , would not . 
 then , too , in old Jolyon 's mind there be always the secret ache , that the son of James - of James , whom he have always think such a poor thing , should be pursue the path of success , while his own son ... ! 
 and last , not least - for he be no more outside the radiation of family gossip than any other Forsyte - he have now hear the sinister , indefinite , but none the less disturbing rumour about Bosinney , and his pride be wound to the quick . 
 characteristically , his irritation turn not against Irene but against soame . the idea that his nephew 's wife   why could not   the fellow take well care of she - oh ! quaint injustice ! as though soame could possibly take more care !   - should be draw to herself June 's lover , be intolerably humiliating . and see the danger , he do not , like James , hide it away in sheer nervousness , but own with the dispassion of his broad outlook , that it be not unlikely ; there be something very attractive about Irene ! 
 he have a presentiment on the subject of Soames ' communication as they leave the Board Room together , and go out into the noise and hurry of Cheapside . they walk together a good minute without speak , soame with his mousing , mince step , and old Jolyon upright and use his umbrella languidly as a walking - stick . 
 they turn presently into comparative quiet , for old Jolyon 's way to a second Board lead he in the direction of Moorage Street . 
 then soame , without lift his eye , begin : " I have   have this letter from Bosinney . you see what he say ; I think I would let you know . I have   spend a lot more than I intend on this house , and I want the position to be clear . " 
 Old Jolyon run his eye unwillingly over the letter : " what he say be clear enough , " he say . 
 " he talk about ' a free hand , ' " reply Soames . 
 Old Jolyon look at he . the long - suppress irritation and antagonism towards this young fellow , whose affair be begin to intrude upon his own , burst from he . 
 " well , if you do not   trust he , why do you employ he ? " 
 soame steal a sideway look : " it be much too late to go into that , " he say , " I only want it to be quite understand that if I give he a free hand , he do not   let I in . I think if you be to speak to he , it would carry more weight ! " 
 " no , " say old Jolyon abruptly ; " I will have nothing to do with it ! " 
 the word of both uncle and nephew give the impression of unspoken meaning , far more important , behind . and the look they interchange be like a revelation of this consciousness . 
 " well , " say soame ; " I think , for June 's sake , I would tell you , that be all ; I think you would well know I shall not   stand any nonsense ! " 
 " what be that to I ? " old Jolyon take he up . 
 " oh ! I do not   know , " say soame , and flurry by that sharp look he be unable to say more . " do not   say I do not   tell you , " he add sulkily , recover his composure . 
 " tell I ! " say old Jolyon ; " I do not   know what you mean . you come worry I about a thing like this . I do not   want to hear about your affair ; you must manage they yourself ! " 
 " very well , " say Soames immovably , " I will ! " 
 " good - morning , then , " say old Jolyon , and they part . 
 soame retrace his step , and go into a celebrated eating - house , ask for a plate of smoke salmon and a glass of Chablis ; he seldom eat much in the middle of the day , and generally eat stand , find the position beneficial to his liver , which be very sound , but to which he desire to put down all his trouble . 
 when he have finish he go slowly back to his office , with bent head , take no notice of the swarm thousand on the pavement , who in their turn take no notice of he . 
 the evening post carry the follow reply to Bosinney : 
 ' FORSYTE , bustard and forsyte , 
 ' Commissioners for Oaths , 
 ' 92001 , BRANCH LANE , POULTRY , E.C. , 
 ' May 17 , 1887 . 
 ' DEAR BOSINNEY , 
 ' I have , receive your letter , the term of which not a little surprise I . I be under the impression that you have , and have have all along , a " free hand " ; for I do not recollect that any suggestion I have be so unfortunate as to make have meet with your approval . in give you , in accordance with your request , this " free hand , " I wish you to clearly understand that the total cost of the house as hand over to I completely decorate , inclusive of your fee   as arrange between we , must not exceed twelve thousand pound - l12,000 . this give you an ample margin , and , as you know , be far more than I originally contemplate . 
 ' I be , 
 ' your truly , 
 ' soames forsyte . ' 
 on the follow day he receive a note from Bosinney : 
 ' PHILIP BAYNES BOSINNEY , 
 ' architect , 
 ' 309D , SLOANE STREET , S.W. , 
 ' May 18 . 
 ' DEAR FORSYTE , 
 ' if you think that in such a delicate matter as decoration I can bind myself to the exact pound , I be afraid you be mistaken . I can see that you be tired of the arrangement , and of I , and I have well , therefore , resign . 
 ' your faithfully , 
 ' PHILIP BAYNES BOSINNEY . ' 
 soame ponder long and painfully over his answer , and late at night in the dining - room , when Irene have go to bed , he compose the follow : 
 ' 62 , MONTPELLIER SQUARE , S.W. , 
 ' May 19 , 1887 . 
 ' DEAR BOSINNEY , 
 ' I think that in both our interest it would be extremely undesirable that matter should be so left at this stage . I do not mean to say that if you should exceed the sum name in my letter to you by ten or twenty or even fifty pound , there would be any difficulty between we . this be so , I should like you to reconsider your answer . you have a " free hand " in the term of this correspondence , and I hope you will see your way to complete the decoration , in the matter of which I know it be difficult to be absolutely exact . 
 ' your truly , 
 ' soames forsyte . ' 
 Bosinney 's answer , which come in the course of the next day , be : 
 ' May 20 . 
 ' DEAR FORSYTE , 
 ' very well . 
 ' PH . BOSINNEY . ' 
 CHAPTER VI - OLD JOLYON at the ZOO 
 Old Jolyon dispose of his second Meeting - an ordinary Board - summarily . he be so dictatorial that his fellow director be leave in cabal over the increase domineeringness of old Forsyte , which they be far from intend to stand much long , they say . 
 he go out by Underground to Portland Road Station , whence he take a cab and drive to the Zoo . 
 he have an assignation there , one of those assignation that have lately be grow more frequent , to which his increase uneasiness about June and the ' change in she , ' as he express it , be drive he . 
 she bury herself away , and be grow thin ; if he speak to she he get no answer , or have his head snap off , or she look as if she would burst into tear . she be as change as she could be , all through this Bosinney . as for tell he about anything , not a bit of it ! 
 and he would sit for long spell brood , his paper unread before he , a cigar extinct between his lip . she have be such a companion to he ever since she be three year old ! and he love she so ! 
 force regardless of family or class or custom be beat down his guard ; impend event over which he have no control throw their shadow on his head . the irritation of one accustomed to have his way be rouse against he know not what . 
 chafing at the slowness of his cab , he reach the Zoo door ; but , with his sunny instinct for seize the good of each moment , he forget his vexation as he walk towards the tryst . 
 from the stone terrace above the bear - pit his son and his two grandchild come hasten down when they see old Jolyon come , and lead he away towards the lion - house . they support he on either side , hold one to each of his hand , - whilst Jolly , perverse like his father , carry his grandfather 's umbrella in such a way as to catch people 's leg with the crutch of the handle . 
 Young Jolyon follow . 
 it be as good as a play to see his father with the child , but such a play as bring smile with tear behind . an old man and two small child walk together can be see at any hour of the day ; but the sight of old Jolyon , with Jolly and Holly seem to young Jolyon a special peep - show of the thing that lie at the bottom of our heart . the complete surrender of that erect old figure to those little figure on either hand be too poignantly tender , and , be a man of an habitual reflex action , young Jolyon swear softly under his breath . the show affect he in a way unbecoming to a Forsyte , who be nothing if not undemonstrative . 
 thus they reach the lion - house . 
 there have be a morning fete at the Botanical Gardens , and a large number of Forsy ... ' - that be , of well - dress people who keep carriage have bring they on to the Zoo , so as to have more , if possible , for their money , before go back to Rutland Gate or Bryanston Square . 
 " let us go on to the Zoo , " they have say to each other ; " it will be great fun ! " it be a shilling day ; and there would not be all those horrid common people . 
 in front of the long line of cage they be collect in row , watch the tawny , ravenous beast behind the bar await their only pleasure of the four - and - twenty hour . the hungry the beast , the great the fascination . but whether because the spectator envy his appetite , or , more humanely , because it be so soon to be satisfied , young Jolyon could not tell . remark keep fall on his ear : " that be a nasty - look brute , that tiger ! " " oh , what a love ! look at his little mouth ! " " yes , he be rather nice ! do not   go too near , mother . " 
 and frequently , with little pat , one or another would clap their hand to their pocket behind and look round , as though expect young Jolyon or some disintereste - look person to relieve they of the content . 
 a well - feed man in a white waistcoat say slowly through his tooth : " it be all greed ; they can not   be hungry . why , they take no exercise . " at these word a tiger snatch a piece of bleed liver , and the fat man laugh . his wife , in a Paris model frock and gold nose - nipper , reprove he : " how can you laugh , Harry ? such a horrid sight ! " 
 Young Jolyon frown . 
 the circumstance of his life , though he have cease to take a too personal view of they , have leave he subject to an intermittent contempt ; and the class to which he have belong - the carriage class - especially excite his sarcasm . 
 to shut up a lion or tiger in confinement be surely a horrible barbarity . but no cultivate person would admit this . 
 the idea of its be barbarous to confine wild animal have probably never even occur to his father for instance ; he belong to the old school , who consider it at once humanizing and educational to confine baboon and panther , hold the view , no doubt , that in course of time they might induce these creature not so unreasonably to die of misery and heart - sickness against the bar of their cage , and put the society to the expense of get other ! in his eye , as in the eye of all Forsytes , the pleasure of see these beautiful creature in a state of captivity far outweigh the inconvenience of imprisonment to beast whom God have so improvidently place in a state of freedom ! it be for the animal good , remove they at once from the countless danger of open air and exercise , and enable they to exercise their function in the guarantee seclusion of a private compartment ! indeed , it be doubtful what wild animal be make for but to be shut up in cage ! 
 but as young Jolyon have in his constitution the element of impartiality , he reflect that to stigmatize as barbarity that which be merely lack of imagination must be wrong ; for none who hold these view have be place in a similar position to the animal they cage , and could not , therefore , be expect to enter into their sensation . it be not until they be leave the garden - Jolly and Holly in a state of blissful delirium - that old Jolyon find an opportunity of speak to his son on the matter next his heart . " I do not   know what to make of it , " he say ; " if she be to go on as she be go on now , I can not   tell what be to come . I want she to see the doctor , but she will not . she be not a bit like I . she be your mother all over . obstinate as a mule ! if she do not   want to do a thing , she will not , and there be an end of it ! " 
 Young Jolyon smile ; his eye have wander to his father 's chin . ' a pair of you , ' he think , but he say nothing . 
 " and then , " go on old Jolyon , " there be this Bosinney . I should like to punch the fellow 's head , but I can not , I suppose , though - I do not   see why you should not , " he add doubtfully . 
 " what have he do ? far well that it should come to an end , if they do not   hit it off ! " 
 Old Jolyon look at his son . now they have actually come to discuss a subject connect with the relation between the sex he feel distrustful . Jo would be sure to hold some loose view or other . 
 " well , I do not   know what you think , " he say ; " I dare say your sympathy 's with he - should not   be surprised ; but I think he be behave precious badly , and if he come my way I shall tell he so . " he drop the subject . 
 it be impossible to discuss with his son the true nature and meaning of Bosinney 's defection . have not his son do the very same thing   bad , if possible   fifteen year ago ? there seem no end to the consequence of that piece of folly . 
 Young Jolyon also be silent ; he have quickly penetrate his father 's thought , for , dethrone from the high seat of an obvious and uncomplicated view of thing , he have become both perceptive and subtle . 
 the attitude he have adopt towards sexual matter fifteen year before , however , be too different from his father 's . there be no bridge the gulf . 
 he say coolly : " I suppose he be fall in love with some other woman ? " 
 Old Jolyon give he a dubious look : " I can not   tell , " he say ; " they say so ! " 
 " then , it be probably true , " remark young Jolyon unexpectedly ; " and I suppose they have   tell you who she be ? " 
 " yes , " say old Jolyon , " Soames 's wife ! " 
 Young Jolyon do not whistle : the circumstance of his own life have render he incapable of whistle on such a subject , but he look at his father , while the ghost of a smile hover over his face . 
 if old Jolyon see , he take no notice . 
 " she and June be bosom friend ! " he mutter . 
 " poor little June ! " say young Jolyon softly . he think of his daughter still as a babe of three . 
 Old Jolyon come to a sudden halt . 
 " I do not   believe a word of it , " he say , " it be some old woman 's tale . get I a cab , Jo , I be tired to death ! " 
 they stand at a corner to see if an empty cab would come along , while carriage after carriage drive past , bear Forsytes of all description from the Zoo . the harness , the livery , the gloss on the horse ' coat , shine and glitter in the May sunlight , and each equipage , landau , sociable , barouche , Victoria , or brougham , seem to roll out proudly from its wheel : 
 ' I and my horse and my man you know , ' indeed the whole turn - out have cost a pot . but we be worth it every penny . look at Master and at Missis now , the dawgs ! ease with security - ah ! that be the ticket ! 
 and such , as everyone know , be fit accompaniment for a perambulating Forsyte . 
 amongst these carriage be a barouche come at a great pace than the other , draw by a pair of bright bay horse . it swing on its high spring , and the four people who fill it seem rock as in a cradle . 
 this chariot attract young Jolyon 's attention ; and suddenly , on the back seat , he recognise his Uncle James , unmistakable in spite of the increase whiteness of his whisker ; opposite , their back defend by sunshade , Rachel Forsyte and her eld but married sister , Winifred Dartie , in irreproachable toilette , have pose their head haughtily , like two of the bird they have be see at the Zoo ; while by James ' side recline Dartie , in a brand - new frock - coat button tight and square , with a large expanse of carefully shoot linen protrude below each wristband . 
 an extra , if subdue , sparkle , an add touch of the good gloss or varnish characterize this vehicle , and seem to distinguish it from all the other , as though by some happy extravagance - like that which mark out the real ' work of art ' from the ordinary ' picture ' - it be designate as the typical car , the very throne of Forsytedom . 
 Old Jolyon do not see they pass ; he be pet poor Holly who be tired , but those in the carriage have take in the little group ; the lady ' head tilt suddenly , there be a spasmodic screening movement of parasol ; James ' face protrude naively , like the head of a long bird , his mouth slowly open . the shield - like round of the parasol grow small and small , and vanish . Young Jolyon see that he have be recognise , even by Winifred , who could not have be more than fifteen when he have forfeit the right to be consider a Forsyte . 
 there be not much change in they ! he remember the exact look of their turn - out all that time ago : horse , man , carriage - all different now , no doubt - but of the precise stamp of fifteen year before ; the same neat display , the same nicely calculate arrogance ease with security ! the swing exact , the pose of the sunshade exact , exact the spirit of the whole thing . 
 and in the sunlight , defend by the haughty shield of parasol , carriage after carriage go by . 
 " Uncle James have just pass , with his female folk , " say young Jolyon . 
 his father look black . " do your uncle see we ? yes ? Hmph ! what be he want , come down into these part ? " 
 an empty cab drive up at this moment , and old Jolyon stop it . 
 " I shall see you again before long , my boy ! " he say . " do not   you go pay any attention to what I have   be say about young Bosinney - I do not   believe a word of it ! " 
 kiss the child , who try to detain he , he step in and be bear away . 
 Young Jolyon , who have take Holly up in his arm , stand motionless at the corner , look after the cab . 
 CHAPTER VII - AFTERNOON AT TIMOTHY 'S 
 if old Jolyon , as he get into his cab , have say : ' I will not   believe a word of it ! ' he would more truthfully have express his sentiment . 
 the notion that James and his womankind have see he in the company of his son have awaken in he not only the impatience he always feel when cross , but that secret hostility natural between brother , the root of which - little nursery rivalry - sometimes toughen and deepen as life go on , and , all hide , support a plant capable of produce in season the bitter fruit . 
 Hitherto there have be between these six brother no more unfriendly feeling than that cause by the secret and natural doubt that the other might be rich than themselves ; a feeling increase to the pitch of curiosity by the approach of death - that end of all handicap - and the great ' closeness ' of their man of business , who , with some sagacity , would profess to Nicholas ignorance of James ' income , to James ignorance of old Jolyon 's , to Jolyon ignorance of Roger 's , to Roger ignorance of Swithin 's , while to Swithin he would say most irritatingly that Nicholas must be a rich man . Timothy alone be exempt , be in gilt - edge security . 
 but now , between two of they at least , have arise a very different sense of injury . from the moment when James have the impertinence to pry into his affair - as he put it - old Jolyon no long choose to credit this story about Bosinney . his grand - daughter slight through a member of ' that fellow 's ' family ! he make up his mind that Bosinney be malign . there must be some other reason for his defection . 
 June have fly out at he , or something ; she be as touchy as she could be ! 
 he would , however , let Timothy have a bit of his mind , and see if he would go on drop hint ! and he would not let the grass grow under his foot either , he would go there at once , and take very good care that he do not   have to go again on the same errand . 
 he see James ' carriage block the pavement in front of ' the Bower . ' so they have get there before he - cackle about have see he , he dare say ! and far on , Swithin 's grey be turn their nose towards the nose of James ' bay , as though in conclave over the family , while their coachman be in conclave above . 
 Old Jolyon , deposit his hat on the chair in the narrow hall , where that hat of Bosinney 's have so long ago be mistaken for a cat , pass his thin hand grimly over his face with its great drooping white moustache , as though to remove all trace of expression , and make his way upstairs . 
 he find the front drawing - room full . it be full enough at the good of time - without visitor - without any one in it - for Timothy and his sister , follow the tradition of their generation , consider that a room be not quite ' nice ' unless it be ' properly ' furnish . it hold , therefore , eleven chair , a sofa , three table , two cabinet , innumerable knicknack , and part of a large grand piano . and now , occupy by Mrs. Small , Aunt Hester , by Swithin , James , Rachel , Winifred , Euphemia , who have come in again to return ' Passion and Paregoric ' which she have read at lunch , and her chum Frances , Roger 's daughter   the musical Forsyte , the one who compose song , there be only one chair leave unoccupied , except , of course , the two that nobody ever sit on - and the only standing room be occupy by the cat , on whom old Jolyon promptly step . 
 in these day it be by no mean unusual for Timothy to have so many visitor . the family have always , one and all , have a real respect for Aunt Ann , and now that she be go , they be come far more frequently to the Bower , and stay long . 
 Swithin have be the first to arrive , and seat torpid in a red satin chair with a gilt back , he give every appearance of last the other out . and symbolize Bosinney 's name ' the big one , ' with his great stature and bulk , his thick white hair , his puffy immovable shaven face , he look more primeval than ever in the highly upholstered room . 
 his conversation , as usual of late , have turn at once upon Irene , and he have lose no time in give Aunts Juley and Hester his opinion with regard to this rumour he hear be go about . no - as he say - she might want a bit of flirtation - a pretty woman must have she fle ; but more than that he do not believe . nothing open ; she have too much good sense , too much proper appreciation of what be due to her position , and to the family ! no sc - , he be go to say ' scandal ' but the very idea be so preposterous that he wave his hand as though to say - ' but let that pass ! ' 
 grant that Swithin take a bachelor 's view of the situation - still what indeed be not due to that family in which so many have do so well for themselves , have attain a certain position ? if he have hear in dark , pessimistic moment the word ' yeoman ' and ' ve ry small beer ' use in connection with his origin , do he believe they ? 
 no ! he cherish , hug it pathetically to his bosom the secret theory that there be something distinguished somewhere in his ancestry . 
 " must be , " he once say to young Jolyon , before the latter go to the bad . " look at we , we have   get on ! there must be good blood in we somewhere . " 
 he have be fond of young Jolyon : the boy have be in a good set at College , have know that old ruffian Sir Charles Fiste 's son - a pretty rascal one of they have turn out , too ; and there be style about he - it be a thousand pity he have run off with that half - foreign governess ! if he must go off like that why could not   he have choose someone who would have do they credit ! and what be he now ? - an underwriter at Lloyd 's ; they say he even paint picture - picture ! Damme ! he might have end as Sir Jolyon Forsyte , Bart . , with a seat in Parliament , and a place in the country ! 
 it be Swithin who , follow the impulse which soon or later urge thereto some member of every great family , go to the Heralds ' Office , where they assure he that he be undoubtedly of the same family as the well - know forsite with an ' i , ' whose arm be ' three dexter buckle on a sable ground gule , ' hop no doubt to get he to take they up . 
 Swithin , however , do not do this , but have ascertain that the crest be a ' pheasant proper , ' and the motto ' for Forsite , ' he have the pheasant proper place upon his carriage and the button of his coachman , and both crest and motto on his writing - paper . the arm he hug to himself , partly because , not have pay for they , he think it would look ostentatious to put they on his carriage , and he hat ostentation , and partly because he , like any practical man all over the country , have a secret dislike and contempt for thing he could not understand he find it hard , as anyone might , to swallow ' three dexter buckle on a sable ground gule . ' 
 he never forget , however , their have tell he that if he pay for they he would be entitle to use they , and it strengthen his conviction that he be a gentleman . imperceptibly the rest of the family absorb the ' pheasant proper , ' and some , more serious than other , adopt the motto ; old Jolyon , however , refuse to use the latter , say that it be humbug mean nothing , so far as he could see . 
 among the old generation it be perhaps know at bottom from what great historical event they derive their crest ; and if press on the subject , soon than tell a lie - they do not like tell lie , have an impression that only Frenchmen and Russians tell they - they would confess hurriedly that Swithin have get hold of it somehow . 
 among the young generation the matter be wrap in a discretion proper . they do not want to hurt the feeling of their elder , nor to feel ridiculous themselves ; they simply use the crest .... 
 " no , " say Swithin , " he have have an opportunity of see for himself , and what he should say be , that there be nothing in her manner to that young Buccaneer or Bosinney or whatever his name be , different from her manner to himself ; in fact , he should rather say .... " but here the entrance of Frances and Euphemia put an unfortunate stop to the conversation , for this be not a subject which could be discuss before young people . 
 and though Swithin be somewhat upset at be stop like this on the point of say something important , he soon recover his affability . he be rather fond of Frances - Francie , as she be call in the family . she be so smart , and they tell he she make a pretty little pot of pin - money by her song ; he call it very clever of she . 
 he rather pride himself indeed on a liberal attitude towards woman , not see any reason why they should not   paint picture , or write tune , or book even , for the matter of that , especially if they could turn a useful penny by it ; not at all - keep they out of mischief . it be not as if they be man ! 
 ' Little Francie , ' as she be usually call with good - natured contempt , be an important personage , if only as a stand illustration of the attitude of Forsytes towards the Arts . she be not really ' little , ' but rather tall , with dark hair for a Forsyte , which , together with a grey eye , give she what be call ' a celtic appearance . ' she write song with title like ' breathing Sighs , ' or ' kiss I , Mother , ere I die , ' with a refrain like an anthem : 
 ' kiss I , Mother , ere I die ; kiss I - kiss I , Mother , ah ! Kiss , ah ! kiss I e - ere i - kiss I , Mother , ere I d - d - die ! ' 
 she write the word to they herself , and other poem . in light moment she write waltz , one of which , the ' Kensington Coil , ' be almost national to Kensington , have a sweet dip in it . 
 it be very original . then there be her ' song for little People , ' at once educational and witty , especially ' Gran'ma 's Porgie , ' and that ditty , almost prophetically imbue with the come imperial spirit , entitle ' black he in his Little Eye . ' 
 any publisher would take these , and review like ' High living , ' and the ' lady ' Genteel Guide ' go into rapture over : ' another of Miss Francie Forsyte 's spirited ditty , sparkling and pathetic . we ourselves be move to tear and laughter . Miss Forsyte should go far . ' 
 with the true instinct of her breed , Francie have make a point of know the right people - people who would write about she , and talk about she , and people in Society , too - keep a mental register of just where to exert her fascination , and an eye on that steady scale of rise price , which in her mind 's eye represent the future . in this way she cause herself to be universally respect . once , at a time when her emotion be whip by an attachment - for the tenor of Roger 's life , with its whole - hearted collection of house property , have induce in his only daughter a tendency towards passion - she turn to great and sincere work , choose the sonata form , for the violin . this be the only one of her production that trouble the Forsytes . they feel at once that it would not sell . 
 Roger , who like have a clever daughter well enough , and often allude to the amount of pocket - money she make for herself , be upset by this violin sonata . 
 " rubbish like that ! " he call it . Francie have borrow young Flageoletti from Euphemia , to play it in the drawing - room at Prince 's Gardens . 
 as a matter of fact Roger be right . it be rubbish , but - annoying ! the sort of rubbish that would not   sell . as every Forsyte know , rubbish that sell be not rubbish at all - far from it . 
 and yet , in spite of the sound common sense which fix the worth of art at what it would fetch , some of the Forsytes - Aunt Hester , for instance , who have always be musical - could not help regret that Francie 's music be not ' classical ' ; the same with her poem . but then , as Aunt Hester say , they do not   see any poetry nowadays , all the poem be ' little light thing . ' 
 there be nobody who could write a poem like ' Paradise Lost , ' or ' Childe Harold ' ; either of which make you feel that you really have read something . still , it be nice for Francie to have something to occupy she ; while other girl be spend money shopping she be make it ! 
 and both Aunt Hester and Aunt Juley be always ready to listen to the late story of how Francie have get her price increase . 
 they listen now , together with Swithin , who sit pretend not to , for these young people talk so fast and mumble so , he never could catch what they say . 
 " and I can not   think , " say Mrs. Septimus , " how you do it . I should never have the audacity ! " 
 Francie smile lightly . " I would much rather deal with a man than a woman . woman be so sharp ! " 
 " my dear , " cry Mrs. Small , " I be sure we be not . " 
 Euphemia go off into her silent laugh , and , end with the squeak , say , as though be strangle : " oh , you will kill I some day , auntie . " 
 Swithin see no necessity to laugh ; he detest people laugh when he himself perceive no joke . indeed , he detest Euphemia altogether , to whom he always allude as ' Nick 's daughter , what be she call - the pale one ? ' he have just miss be her god - father - indeed , would have be , have he not take a firm stand against her outlandish name . he hat become a godfather . Swithin then say to Francie with dignity : " it be a fine day - er - for the time of year . " but Euphemia , who know perfectly well that he have refuse to be her godfather , turn to Aunt Hester , and begin tell she how she have see Irene - Mrs. Soames - at the Church and Commercial Stores . 
 " and soame be with she ? " say Aunt Hester , to whom Mrs. Small have as yet have no opportunity of relate the incident . 
 " soame with she ? of course not ! " 
 " but be she all alone in London ? " 
 " oh , no ; there be Mr. Bosinney with she . she be perfectly dressed . " 
 but Swithin , hear the name Irene , look severely at Euphemia , who , it be true , never do look well in a dress , whatever she may have do on other occasion , and say : 
 " dress like a lady , I have   no doubt . it be a pleasure to see she . " 
 at this moment James and his daughter be announce . Dartie , feel badly in want of a drink , have plead an appointment with his dentist , and , be put down at the Marble Arch , have get into a hansom , and be already seat in the window of his club in Piccadilly . 
 his wife , he tell his crony , have want to take he to pay some call . it be not in his line - not exactly . haw ! 
 hail the waiter , he send he out to the hall to see what have win the 4.30 race . he be dog - tired , he say , and that be a fact ; have be drivin ' about with his wife to ' show ' all the afternoon . have put his foot down at last . a fellow must live his own life . 
 at this moment , glance out of the bay window - for he love this seat whence he could see everybody pass - his eye unfortunately , or perhaps fortunately , chance to light on the figure of Soames , who be mouse across the road from the Green Park - side , with the evident intention of come in , for he , too , belong to ' the Iseeum . ' 
 Dartie spring to his foot ; grasp his glass , he mutter something about ' that 4.30 race , ' and swiftly withdraw to the card - room , where soame never come . here , in complete isolation and a dim light , he live his own life till half past seven , by which hour he know soame must certainly have leave the club . 
 it would not do , as he keep repeat to himself whenever he feel the impulse to join the gossip in the bay - window get too strong for he - it absolutely would not do , with finance as low as his , and the ' old man '   James   rusty ever since that business over the oil share , which be no fault of his , to risk a row with Winifred . 
 if soame be to see he in the club it would be sure to come round to she that he be not   at the dentist 's at all . he never know a family where thing ' come round ' so . uneasily , amongst the green baize card - table , a frown on his olive coloured face , his check trouser cross , and patent - leather boot shin through the gloom , he sit bite his forefinger , and wonder where the deuce he be to get the money if Erotic fail to win the Lancashire Cup . 
 his thought turn gloomily to the Forsytes . what a set they be ! there be no get anything out of they - at least , it be a matter of extreme difficulty . they be so d - -d particular about money matter ; not a sportsman amongst the lot , unless it be George . that fellow soame , for instance , would have a ft if you try to borrow a tenner from he , or , if he do not   have a fit , he look at you with his cursed supercilious smile , as if you be a lost soul because you be in want of money . 
 and that wife of his   Dartie 's mouth water involuntarily , he have try to be on good term with she , as one naturally would with any pretty sister - in - law , but he would be curse if the   he mentally use a coarse word   - would have anything to say to he - she look at he , indeed , as if he be dirt - and yet she could go far enough , he would not   mind bet . he know woman ; they be not   make with soft eye and figure like that for nothing , as that fellow soame would jolly soon find out , if there be anything in what he have hear about this Buccaneer Johnny . 
 rise from his chair , Dartie take a turn across the room , end in front of the look - glass over the marble chimney - piece ; and there he stand for a long time contemplate in the glass the reflection of his face . it have that look , peculiar to some man , of have be steep in linseed oil , with its wax dark moustache and the little distinguished commencement of side whisker ; and concernedly he feel the promise of a pimple on the side of his slightly curved and fattish nose . 
 in the meantime old Jolyon have find the remain chair in Timothy 's commodious drawing - room . his advent have obviously put a stop to the conversation , decide awkwardness have set in . Aunt Juley , with her well - know kindheartedness , hasten to set people at their ease again . 
 " yes , Jolyon , " she say , " we be just say that you have not   be here for a long time ; but we must not   be surprised . you be busy , of course ? James be just say what a busy time of year .... " 
 " be he ? " say old Jolyon , look hard at James . " it would not   be half so busy if everybody mind their own business . " 
 James , brood in a small chair from which his knee run uphill , shift his foot uneasily , and put one of they down on the cat , which have unwisely take refuge from old Jolyon beside he . 
 " here , you have   get a cat here , " he say in an injure voice , withdraw his foot nervously as he feel it squeeze into the soft , furry body . 
 " several , " say old Jolyon , look at one face and another ; " I trod on one just now . " 
 a silence follow . 
 then Mrs. Small , twist her finger and gaze round with ' pathetic calm ' , ask : " and how be dear June ? " 
 a twinkle of humour shoot through the sternness of old Jolyon 's eye . extraordinary old woman , Juley ! no one quite like she for say the wrong thing ! 
 " Bad ! " he say ; " London do not   agree with she - too many people about , too much clatter and chatter by half . " he lay emphasis on the word , and again look James in the face . 
 nobody speak . 
 a feeling of its be too dangerous to take a step in any direction , or hazard any remark , have fall on they all . something of the sense of the impending , that come over the spectator of a greek tragedy , have enter that upholstered room , fill with those white - haired , frock - coat old man , and fashionably attire woman , who be all of the same blood , between all of whom exist an unseizable resemblance . 
 not that they be conscious of it - the visit of such fateful , bitter spirit be only feel . 
 then Swithin rise . he would not sit there , feel like that - he be not to be put down by anyone ! and , manoeuvre round the room with add pomp , he shake hand with each separately . 
 " you tell Timothy from I , " he say , " that he coddle himself too much ! " then , turn to Francie , whom he consider ' smart , ' he add : " you come with I for a drive one of these day . " but this conjure up the vision of that other eventful drive which have be so much talk about , and he stand quite still for a second , with glassy eye , as though wait to catch up with the significance of what he himself have say ; then , suddenly recollect that he do not   care a damn , he turn to old Jolyon : " well , good - bye , Jolyon ! you should not   go about without an overcoat ; you will be get sciatica or something ! " and , kick the cat slightly with the pointed tip of his patent leather boot , he take his huge form away . 
 when he have go everyone look secretly at the other , to see how they have take the mention of the word ' drive ' - the word which have become famous , and acquire an overwhelming importance , as the only official - so to speak - news in connection with the vague and sinister rumour cling to the family tongue . 
 Euphemia , yield to an impulse , say with a short laugh : " I be glad Uncle Swithin do not   ask I to go for drive . " 
 Mrs. Small , to reassure she and smooth over any little awkwardness the subject might have , reply : " my dear , he like to take somebody well dress , who will do he a little credit . I shall never forget the drive he take I . it be an experience ! " and her chubby round old face be spread for a moment with a strange contentment ; then break into pout , and tear come into her eye . she be think of that long ago drive tour she have once take with Septimus Small . 
 James , who have relapse into his nervous brooding in the little chair , suddenly rouse himself : " he be a funny fellow , Swithin , " he say , but in a half - hearted way . 
 Old Jolyon 's silence , his stern eye , hold they all in a kind of paralysis . he be disconcert himself by the effect of his own word - an effect which seem to deepen the importance of the very rumour he have come to scotch ; but he be still angry . 
 he have not do with they yet - no , no - he would give they another rub or two . 
 he do not wish to rub his niece , he have no quarrel with they - a young and presentable female always appeal to old Jolyon 's clemency - but that fellow James , and , in a less degree perhaps , those other , deserve all they would get . and he , too , ask for Timothy . 
 as though feel that some danger threaten her young brother , Aunt Juley suddenly offer he tea : " there it be , " she say , " all cold and nasty , wait for you in the back drawing room , but Smither shall make you some fresh . " 
 Old Jolyon rise : " thank you , " he say , look straight at James , " but I have   no time for tea , and - scandal , and the rest of it ! it be time I be at home . good - bye , Julia ; good - bye , Hester ; good - bye , winifred . " 
 without more ceremonious adieux , he march out . 
 once again in his cab , his anger evaporate , for so it ever be with his wrath - when he have rap out , it be go . Sadness come over his spirit . he have stop their mouth , maybe , but at what a cost ! at the cost of certain knowledge that the rumour he have be resolve not to believe be true . June be abandon , and for the wife of that fellow 's son ! he feel it be true , and harden himself to treat it as if it be not ; but the pain he hide beneath this resolution begin slowly , surely , to vent itself in a blind resentment against James and his son . 
 the six woman and one man leave behind in the little drawing - room begin talk as easily as might be after such an occurrence , for though each one of they know for a fact that he or she never talk scandal , each one of they also know that the other six do ; all be therefore angry and at a loss . James only be silent , disturb , to the bottom of his soul . 
 presently Francie say : " do you know , I think Uncle Jolyon be terribly change this last year . what do you think , Aunt Hester ? " 
 Aunt Hester make a little movement of recoil : " oh , ask your Aunt Julia ! " she say ; " I know nothing about it . " 
 no one else be afraid of assenting , and James mutter gloomily at the floor : " he be not half the man he be . " 
 " I have   notice it a long time , " go on Francie ; " he be age tremendously . " 
 Aunt Juley shake her head ; her face seem suddenly to have become one immense pout . " poor dear Jolyon , " she say , ' somebody ought to see to it for he ! " 
 there be again silence ; then , as though in terror of be leave solitarily behind , all five visitor rise simultaneously , and take their departure . 
 Mrs. Small , Aunt Hester , and their cat be leave once more alone , the sound of a door close in the distance announce the approach of Timothy . 
 that evening , when Aunt Hester have just get off to sleep in the back bedroom that use to be Aunt Juley 's before Aunt Juley take Aunt Ann 's , her door be open , and Mrs. Small , in a pink night - cap , a candle in her hand , enter : " hester ! " she say . " hester ! " 
 Aunt Hester faintly rustle the sheet . 
 " hester , " repeat Aunt Juley , to make quite sure that she have awaken she , " I be quite troubled about poor dear Jolyon . what , " Aunt Juley dwelt on the word , " do you think ought to be do ? " 
 Aunt Hester again rustle the sheet , her voice be hear faintly plead : " do ? how should I know ? " 
 Aunt Juley turn away satisfied , and close the door with extra gentleness so as not to disturb dear hester , let it slip through her finger and fall to with a ' crack . ' 
 back in her own room , she stand at the window gaze at the moon over the tree in the Park , through a chink in the muslin curtain , close draw lest anyone should see . and there , with her face all round and pouting in its pink cap , and her eye wet , she think of ' dear Jolyon , ' so old and so lonely , and how she could be of some use to he ; and how he would come to love she , as she have never be love since - since poor Septimus go away . 
 CHAPTER VIII - DANCE AT ROGER 'S 
 Roger 's house in Prince 's Gardens be brilliantly alight . large number of wax candle have be collect and place in cut - glass chandelier , and the parquet floor of the long , double drawing - room reflect these constellation . an appearance of real spaciousness have be secure by move out all the furniture on to the upper landing , and enclose the room with those strange appendage of civilization know as ' rout ' seat . in a remote corner , embower in palm , be a cottage piano , with a copy of the ' Kensington Coil ' open on the music - stand . 
 Roger have object to a band . he do not   see in the least what they want with a band ; he would not   go to the expense , and there be an end of it . Francie   her mother , whom Roger have long since reduce to chronic dyspepsia , go to bed on such occasion , have be oblige to content herself with supplement the piano by a young man who play the cornet , and she so arrange with palm that anyone who do not look into the heart of thing might imagine there be several musician secrete there . she make up her mind to tell they to play loud - there be a lot of music in a cornet , if the man would only put his soul into it . 
 in the more cultivate american tongue , she be ' through ' at last - through that tortuous labyrinth of make - shift , which must be traverse before fashionable display can be combine with the sound economy of a Forsyte . thin but brilliant , in her maize - colour frock with much tulle about the shoulder , she go from place to place , fitting on her glove , and cast her eye over it all . 
 to the hire butler   for Roger only keep maid   she speak about the wine . do he quite understand that Mr. Forsyte wish a dozen bottle of the champagne from Whiteley 's to be put out ? but if that be finish   she do not suppose it would be , most of the lady would drink water , no doubt , but if it be , there be the champagne cup , and he must do the good he could with that . 
 she hat have to say this sort of thing to a butler , it be so infra dig . ; but what could you do with father ? Roger , indeed , after make himself consistently disagreeable about the dance , would come down presently , with his fresh colour and bumpy forehead , as though he have be its promoter ; and he would smile , and probably take the prettiest woman in to supper ; and at two o'clock , just as they be get into the swing , he would go up secretly to the musician and tell they to play ' God save the queen , ' and go away . 
 Francie devoutly hop he might soon get tired , and slip off to bed . 
 the three or four devoted girl friend who be stay in the house for this dance have partake with she , in a small , abandon room upstairs , of tea and cold chicken - leg , hurriedly serve ; the man have be send out to dine at Eustace 's Club , it be feel that they must be feed up . 
 punctually on the stroke of nine arrive Mrs. Small alone . she make elaborate apology for the absence of Timothy , omit all mention of Aunt Hester , who , at the last minute , have say she could not be bother . Francie receive she effusively , and place she on a rout seat , where she leave she , pouting and solitary in lavender - colour satin - the first time she have wear colour since Aunt Ann 's death . 
 the devoted maiden friend come now from their room , each by magic arrangement in a differently coloured frock , but all with the same liberal allowance of tulle on the shoulder and at the bosom - for they be , by some fatality , lean to a girl . they be all take up to Mrs. Small . none stay with she more than a few second , but cluster together talk and twist their programme , look secretly at the door for the first appearance of a man . 
 then arrive in a group a number of nicholas , always punctual - the fashion up Ladbroke Grove way ; and close behind they Eustace and his man , gloomy and smell rather of smoke . 
 three or four of Francie 's lover now appear , one after the other ; she have make each promise to come early . they be all clean - shaven and sprightly , with that peculiar kind of young - man sprightliness which have recently invade Kensington ; they do not seem to mind each other 's presence in the least , and wear their tie bunch out at the end , white waistcoat , and sock with clock . all have handkerchief conceal in their cuff . they move buoyantly , each armoured in professional gaiety , as though he have come to do great deed . their face when they dance , far from wear the traditional solemn look of the dancing Englishman , be irresponsible , charming , suave ; they bound , twirl their partner at great pace , without pedantic attention to the rhythm of the music . 
 at other dancer they look with a kind of airy scorn - they , the light brigade , the hero of a hundred Kensington ' hop ' - from whom alone could the right manner and smile and step be hop . 
 after this the stream come fast ; chaperon silt up along the wall face the entrance , the volatile element swell the eddy in the large room . 
 man be scarce , and wallflower wear their peculiar , pathetic expression , a patient , sourish smile which seem to say : " oh , no ! do not   mistake I , I know you be not come up to I . I can hardly expect that ! " and Francie would plead with one of her lover , or with some callow youth : " now , to please I , do let I introduce you to Miss Pink ; such a nice girl , really ! " and she would bring he up , and say : " Miss Pink - Mr. Gathercole . can you spare he a dance ? " then Miss Pink , smile her forced smile , colour a little , answer : " oh ! I think so ! " and screen her empty card , write on it the name of Gathercole , spell it passionately in the district that he propose , about the second extra . 
 but when the youth have murmur that it be hot , and pass , she relapse into her attitude of hopeless expectation , into her patient , sourish smile . 
 mother , slowly fan their face , watch their daughter , and in their eye could be read all the story of those daughter ' fortune . as for themselves , to sit hour after hour , dead tired , silent , or talk spasmodically - what do it matter , so long as the girl be have a good time ! but to see they neglect and pass by ! ah ! they smile , but their eye stab like the eye of an offended swan ; they long to pluck young Gathercole by the slack of his dandified breech , and drag he to their daughter - the jackanape ! 
 and all the cruelty and hardness of life , its pathos and unequal chance , its conceit , self - forgetfulness , and patience , be present on the battle - field of this Kensington ball - room . 
 here and there , too , lover - not lover like Francie 's , a peculiar breed , but simply lover - trembling , blushing , silent , seek each other by fly glance , seek to meet and touch in the maze of the dance , and now and again dance together , strike some beholder by the light in their eye . 
 not a second before ten o'clock come the Jameses - Emily , Rachel , Winifred   Dartie have be leave behind , have on a former occasion drunk too much of Roger 's champagne , and Cicely , the young , make her debut ; behind they , follow in a hansom from the paternal mansion where they have din , Soames and Irene . 
 all these lady have shoulder - strap and no tulle - thus show at once , by a bold exposure of flesh , that they come from the more fashionable side of the Park . 
 soame , sidle back from the contact of the dancer , take up a position against the wall . guard himself with his pale smile , he stand watch . Waltz after waltz begin and end , couple after couple brush by with smile lip , laughter , and snatch of talk ; or with set lip , and eye search the throng ; or again , with silent , part lip , and eye on each other . and the scent of festivity , the odour of flower , and hair , of essence that woman love , rise suffocatingly in the heat of the summer night . 
 Silent , with something of scorn in his smile , soame seem to notice nothing ; but now and again his eye , find that which they seek , would fix themselves on a point in the shift throng , and the smile die off his lip . 
 he dance with no one . some fellow dance with their wife ; his sense of ' form ' have never permit he to dance with Irene since their marriage , and the God of the Forsytes alone can tell whether this be a relief to he or not . 
 she pass , dance with other man , her dress , iris - colour , float away from her foot . she dance well ; he be tired of hear woman say with an acid smile : " how beautifully your wife dance , Mr. Forsyte - it be quite a pleasure to watch she ! " tired of answer they with his sidelong glance : " you think so ? " 
 a young couple close by flirt a fan by turn , make an unpleasant draught . Francie and one of her lover stand near . they be talk of love . 
 he hear Roger 's voice behind , give an order about supper to a servant . everything be very second - class ! he wish that he have not come ! he have ask Irene whether she want he ; she have answer with that madden smile of hers " oh , no ! " 
 why have he come ? for the last quarter of an hour he have not even see she . here be George advance with his Quilpish face ; it be too late to get out of his way . 
 " have you see ' the Buccaneer ' ? " say this license wag ; " he be on the warpath - hair cut and everything ! " 
 soame say he have not , and cross the room , half - empty in an interval of the dance , he go out on the balcony , and look down into the street . 
 a carriage have drive up with late arrival , and round the door hang some of those patient watcher of the London street who spring up to the call of light or music ; their face , pale and upturned above their black and rusty figure , have an air of stolid watch that annoyed soame . why be they allow to hang about ; why do not   the bobby move they on ? 
 but the policeman take no notice of they ; his foot be plant apart on the strip of crimson carpet stretch across the pavement ; his face , under the helmet , wear the same stolid , watch look as theirs . 
 across the road , through the railing , soame could see the branch of tree shin , faintly stir in the breeze , by the gleam of the street lamp ; beyond , again , the upper light of the house on the other side , so many eye look down on the quiet blackness of the garden ; and over all , the sky , that wonderful London sky , dust with the innumerable reflection of countless lamp ; a dome weave over between its star with the refraction of human need and human fancy - immense mirror of pomp and misery that night after night stretch its kindly mock over mile of house and garden , mansion and squalor , over Forsytes , policeman , and patient watcher in the street . 
 soame turn away , and , hide in the recess , gaze into the lighted room . it be cool out there . he see the new arrival , June and her grandfather , enter . what have make they so late ? they stand by the doorway . they look fag . Fancy Uncle Jolyon turn out at this time of night ! why have not   June come to Irene , as she usually do , and it occur to he suddenly that he have see nothing of June for a long time now . 
 watch her face with idle malice , he see it change , grow so pale that he think she would drop , then flame out crimson . turn to see at what she be look , he see his wife on Bosinney 's arm , come from the conservatory at the end of the room . her eye be raise to his , as though answer some question he have ask , and he be gaze at she intently . 
 soame look again at June . her hand rest on old Jolyon 's arm ; she seem to be make a request . he see a surprised look on his uncle 's face ; they turn and pass through the door out of his sight . 
 the music begin again - a waltz - and , still as a statue in the recess of the window , his face unmove , but no smile on his lip , soame wait . presently , within a yard of the dark balcony , his wife and Bosinney pass . he catch the perfume of the gardenias that she wear , see the rise and fall of her bosom , the languor in her eye , her part lip , and a look on her face that he do not know . to the slow , swing measure they dance by , and it seem to he that they cling to each other ; he see she raise her eye , soft and dark , to Bosinney 's , and drop they again . 
 very white , he turn back to the balcony , and lean on it , gaze down on the Square ; the figure be still there look up at the light with dull persistency , the policeman 's face , too , upturned , and star , but he see nothing of they . below , a carriage draw up , two figure get in , and drive away .... 
 that evening June and old Jolyon sit down to dinner at the usual hour . the girl be in her customary high - neck frock , old Jolyon have not dress . 
 at breakfast she have speak of the dance at Uncle Roger 's , she want to go ; she have be stupid enough , she say , not to think of ask anyone to take she . it be too late now . 
 Old Jolyon lift his keen eye . June be use to go to dance with Irene as a matter of course ! and deliberately fix his gaze on she , he ask : " why do not   you get Irene ? " 
 no ! June do not want to ask Irene ; she would only go if - if her grandfather would not   mind just for once for a little time ! 
 at her look , so eager and so worn , old Jolyon have grumblingly consent . he do not know what she want , he say , with go to a dance like this , a poor affair , he would wager ; and she no more fit for it than a cat ! what she want be sea air , and after his general meeting of the Globular Gold Concessions he be ready to take she . she do not   want to go away ? ah ! she would knock herself up ! steal a mournful look at she , he go on with his breakfast . 
 June go out early , and wander restlessly about in the heat . her little light figure that lately have move so languidly about its business , be all on fire . she buy herself some flower . she want - she mean to look she good . he would be there ! she know well enough that he have a card . she would show he that she do not care . but deep down in her heart she resolve that evening to win he back . she come in flushed , and talk brightly all lunch ; old Jolyon be there , and he be deceive . 
 in the afternoon she be overtake by a desperate fit of sobbing . she strangle the noise against the pillow of her bed , but when at last it cease she see in the glass a swollen face with reddened eye , and violet circle round they . she stay in the darken room till dinner time . 
 all through that silent meal the struggle go on within she . 
 she look so shadowy and exhaust that old Jolyon tell ' Sankey ' to countermand the carriage , he would not have she go out .... she be to go to bed ! she make no resistance . she go up to her room , and sit in the dark . at ten o'clock she ring for her maid . 
 " bring some hot water , and go down and tell Mr. Forsyte that I feel perfectly rest . say that if he be too tired I can go to the dance by myself . " 
 the maid look askance , and June turn on she imperiously . " go , " she say , " bring the hot water at once ! " 
 her ball - dress still lie on the sofa , and with a sort of fierce care she array herself , take the flower in her hand , and go down , her small face carry high under its burden of hair . she could hear old Jolyon in his room as she pass . 
 Bewildered and vex , he be dress . it be past ten , they would not get there till eleven ; the girl be mad . but he dare not cross she - the expression of her face at dinner haunt he . 
 with great ebony brush he smooth his hair till it shine like silver under the light ; then he , too , come out on the gloomy staircase . 
 June meet he below , and , without a word , they go to the carriage . 
 when , after that drive which seem to last for ever , she enter Roger 's drawing - room , she disguise under a mask of resolution a very torment of nervousness and emotion . the feeling of shame at what might be call ' run after he ' be smother by the dread that he might not be there , that she might not see he after all , and by that dog resolve - somehow , she do not know how - to win he back . 
 the sight of the ballroom , with its gleam floor , give she a feeling of joy , of triumph , for she love dancing , and when dance she float , so light be she , like a strenuous , eager little spirit . he would surely ask she to dance , and if he dance with she it would all be as it be before . she look about she eagerly . 
 the sight of Bosinney come with Irene from the conservatory , with that strange look of utter absorption on his face , strike she too suddenly . they have not see - no one should see - her distress , not even her grandfather . 
 she put her hand on Jolyon 's arm , and say very low : 
 " I must go home , Gran ; I feel ill . " 
 he hurry she away , grumble to himself that he have know how it would be . 
 to she he say nothing ; only when they be once more in the carriage , which by some fortunate chance have linger near the door , he ask she : " what be it , my darling ? " 
 feel her whole slender body shake by sob , he be terribly alarmed . she must have Blank to - morrow . he would insist upon it . he could not have she like this .... there , there ! 
 June master her sob , and squeeze his hand feverishly , she lie back in her corner , her face muffle in a shawl . 
 he could only see her eye , fix and star in the dark , but he do not cease to stroke her hand with his thin finger . 
 CHAPTER IX - EVENING AT RICHMOND 
 other eye besides the eye of June and of Soames have see ' those two '   as Euphemia have already begin to call they   come from the conservatory ; other eye have notice the look on Bosinney 's face . 
 there be moment when nature reveal the passion hide beneath the careless calm of her ordinary mood - violent spring flash white on almond - blossom through the purple cloud ; a snowy , moonlit peak , with its single star , soar up to the passionate blue ; or against the flame of sunset , an old yew - tree stand dark guardian of some fiery secret . 
 there be moment , too , when in a picture - gallery , a work , note by the casual spectator as ' ...... titian - remarkably fine , ' break through the defence of some Forsyte well lunch perhaps than his fellow , and hold he spellbound in a kind of ecstasy . there be thing , he feel - there be thing here which - well , which be thing . something unreasone , unreasonable , be upon he ; when he try to define it with the precision of a practical man , it elude he , slip away , as the glow of the wine he have drunk be slip away , leave he cross , and conscious of his liver . he feel that he have be extravagant , prodigal of something ; virtue have go out of he . he do not desire this glimpse of what lie under the three star of his catalogue . God forbid that he should know anything about the force of Nature ! God forbid that he should admit for a moment that there be such thing ! once admit that , and where be he ? one pay a shilling for entrance , and another for the programme . 
 the look which June have see , which other Forsytes have see , be like the sudden flashing of a candle through a hole in some imaginary canvas , behind which it be be move - the sudden flaming - out of a vague , erratic glow , shadowy and enticing . it bring home to onlooker the consciousness that dangerous force be at work . for a moment they notice it with pleasure , with interest , then feel they must not notice it at all . 
 it supply , however , the reason of June 's come so late and disappear again without dancing , without even shake hand with her lover . she be ill , it be say , and no wonder . 
 but here they look at each other guiltily . they have no desire to spread scandal , no desire to be ill - natured . who would have ? and to outsider no word be breathe , unwritten law keep they silent . 
 then come the news that June have go to the seaside with old Jolyon . 
 he have carry she off to Broadstairs , for which place there be just then a feeling , yarmouth have lose caste , in spite of Nicholas , and no Forsyte go to the sea without intend to have an air for his money such as would render he bilious in a week . that fatally aristocratic tendency of the first Forsyte to drink Madeira have leave his descendant undoubtedly accessible . 
 so June go to the sea . the family await development ; there be nothing else to do . 
 but how far - how far have ' those two ' go ? how far be they go to go ? could they really be go at all ? nothing could surely come of it , for neither of they have any money . at the most a flirtation , end , as all such attachment should , at the proper time . 
 soame ' sister , Winifred Dartie , who have imbibe with the breeze of Mayfair - she live in Green Street - more fashionable principle in regard to matrimonial behaviour than be current , for instance , in Ladbroke Grove , laugh at the idea of there be anything in it . the ' little thing ' - Irene be tall than herself , and it be real testimony to the solid worth of a Forsyte that she should always thus be a ' little thing ' - the little thing be bore . why should not   she amuse herself ? soame be rather tiring ; and as to Mr. Bosinney - only that buffoon George would have call he the Buccaneer - she maintain that he be very chic . 
 this dictum - that Bosinney be chic - cause quit a sensation . it fail to convince . that he be ' good - look in a way ' they be prepared to admit , but that anyone could call a man with his pronounced cheekbone , curious eye , and soft feel hat chic be only another instance of Winifred 's extravagant way of run after something new . 
 it be that famous summer when extravagance be fashionable , when the very earth be extravagant , chestnut - tree spread with blossom , and flower drench in perfume , as they have never be before ; when rose blow in every garden ; and for the swarm star the night have hardly space ; when every day and all day long the sun , in full armour , swing his brazen shield above the Park , and people do strange thing , lunching and dining in the open air . unprecedented be the tale of cab and carriage that stream across the bridge of the shin river , bear the upper - middle class in thousand to the green glory of Bushey , Richmond , Kew , and Hampton Court . almost every family with any pretension to be of the carriage - class pay one visit that year to the horse - chestnut at Bushey , or take one drive amongst the spanish chestnut of Richmond Park . bowl smoothly , if dustily , along , in a cloud of their own creation , they would stare fashionably at the antlered head which the great slow deer raise out of a forest of bracken that promise to autumn lover such cover as be never see before . and now and again , as the amorous perfume of chestnut flower and of fern be drift too near , one would say to the other : " my dear ! what a peculiar scent ! " 
 and the lime - flower that year be of rare prime , near honey - colour . at the corner of London square they give out , as the sun go down , a perfume sweet than the honey bee have take - a perfume that stir a yearning unnamable in the heart of Forsytes and their peer , take the cool after dinner in the precinct of those garden to which they alone have key . 
 and that yearning make they linger amidst the dim shape of flower - bed in the fail daylight , make they turn , and turn , and turn again , as though lover be wait for they - wait for the last light to die away under the shadow of the branch . 
 some vague sympathy evoke by the scent of the lime , some sisterly desire to see for herself , some idea of demonstrate the soundness of her dictum that there be ' nothing in it ' ; or merely the craving to drive down to Richmond , irresistible that summer , move the mother of the little dartie   of little Publius , of Imogen , Maud , and Benedict   to write the follow note to her sister - in - law : 
 ' DEAR IRENE , ' June 30 . 
 ' I hear that Soames be go to Henley tomorrow for the night . I think it would be great fun if we make up a little party and drive down to , Richmond . will you ask Mr. Bosinney , and I will get young Flippard . 
 ' emily   they call their mother Emily - it be so chic   will lend we the carriage . I will call for you and your young man at seven o'clock . 
 ' your affectionate sister , 
 ' WINIFRED DARTIE . 
 ' Montague believe the dinner at the Crown and Sceptre to be quite eatable . ' 
 Montague be Dartie 's second and well know name - his first be Moses ; for he be nothing if not a man of the world . 
 her plan meet with more opposition from Providence than so benevolent a scheme deserve . in the first place young Flippard write : 
 ' DEAR Mrs. DARTIE , 
 ' awfully sorry . engage two deep . 
 ' your , 
 ' AUGUSTUS FLIPPARD . ' 
 it be late to send into the by - way and hedge to remedy this misfortune . with the promptitude and conduct of a mother , Winifred fall back on her husband . she have , indeed , the decided but tolerant temperament that go with a good deal of profile , fair hair , and greenish eye . she be seldom or never at a loss ; or if at a loss , be always able to convert it into a gain . 
 Dartie , too , be in good feather . Erotic have fail to win the Lancashire Cup . indeed , that celebrated animal , own as he be by a pillar of the turf , who have secretly lay many thousand against he , have not even start . the forty - eight hour that follow his scratching be among the dark in Dartie 's life . 
 vision of James haunt he day and night . black thought about soame mingle with the faint hope . on the Friday night he get drunk , so greatly be he affect . but on Saturday morning the true Stock Exchange instinct triumph within he . owe some hundred , which by no possibility could he pay , he go into town and put they all on Concertina for the Saltown Borough Handicap . 
 as he say to Major Scrotton , with whom he lunch at the Iseeum : " that little Jew boy , Nathans , have give he the tip . he do not   care a cursh . he wash in - a mucker . if it do not   come up - well then , damme , the old man would have to pay ! " 
 a bottle of Pol Roger to his own cheek have give he a new contempt for James . 
 it come up . Concertina be squeeze home by her neck - a terrible squeak ! but , as Dartie say : there be nothing like pluck ! 
 he be by no mean averse to the expedition to Richmond . he would ' stand ' it himself ! he cherish an admiration for Irene , and wish to be on more playful term with she . 
 at half - past five the Park Lane footman come round to say : Mrs. Forsyte be very sorry , but one of the horse be cough ! 
 undaunte by this further blow , winifre at once despatch little Publius   now age seven   with the nursery governess to Montpellier Square . 
 they would go down in hansom and meet at the Crown and Sceptre at 7.45 . 
 Dartie , on be tell , be pleased enough . it be well than go down with your back to the horse ! he have no objection to drive down with Irene . he suppose they would pick up the other at Montpellier Square , and swop hansom there ? 
 inform that the meet be at the Crown and Sceptre , and that he would have to drive with his wife , he turn sulky , and say it be d - -d slow ! 
 at seven o'clock they start , Dartie offer to bet the driver half - a - crown he do not   do it in the three - quarter of an hour . 
 twice only do husband and wife exchange remark on the way . 
 Dartie say : " it will put Master Soames 's nose out of joint to hear his wife 's be drivin ' in a hansom with Master Bosinney ! " 
 Winifred reply : " do not   talk such nonsense , Monty ! " 
 " nonsense ! " repeat Dartie . " you do not   know woman , my fine lady ! " 
 on the other occasion he merely ask : " how be I look ? a bit puffy about the gill ? that fizz old George be so fond of be a windy wine ! " 
 he have be lunch with George Forsyte at the Haversnake . 
 Bosinney and Irene have arrive before they . they be stand in one of the long french window overlook the river . 
 Windows that summer be open all day long , and all night too , and day and night the scent of flower and tree come in , the hot scent of parch grass , and the cool scent of the heavy dew . 
 to the eye of the observant Dartie his two guest do not appear to be make much run , stand there close together , without a word . Bosinney be a hungry - look creature - not much go about he . 
 he leave they to Winifred , however , and busy himself to order the dinner . 
 a Forsyte will require good , if not delicate feeding , but a Dartie will tax the resource of a Crown and Sceptre . live as he do , from hand to mouth , nothing be too good for he to eat ; and he will eat it . his drink , too , will need to be carefully provide ; there be much drink in this country ' not good enough ' for a Dartie ; he will have the good . pay for thing vicariously , there be no reason why he should stint himself . to stint yourself be the mark of a fool , not of a Dartie . 
 the good of everything ! no sounder principle on which a man can base his life , whose father - in - law have a very considerable income , and a partiality for his grandchild . 
 with his not unable eye Dartie have spot this weakness in James the very first year after little Publius 's arrival   an error ; he have profit by his perspicacity . four little dartie be now a sort of perpetual insurance . 
 the feature of the feast be unquestionably the red mullet . this delectable fish , bring from a considerable distance in a state of almost perfect preservation , be first fry , then boned , then serve in ice , with Madeira punch in place of sauce , accord to a recipe know to a few man of the world . 
 nothing else call for remark except the payment of the bill by Dartie . 
 he have make himself extremely agreeable throughout the meal ; his bold , admire stare seldom abandon Irene 's face and figure . as he be oblige to confess to himself , he get no change out of she - she be cool enough , as cool as her shoulder look under their veil of creamy lace . he expect to have catch she out in some little game with Bosinney ; but not a bit of it , she keep up her end remarkably well . as for that architect chap , he be as glum as a bear with a sore head - Winifred could barely get a word out of he ; he eat nothing , but he certainly take his liquor , and his face keep get whiter , and his eye look queer . 
 it be all very amusing . 
 for Dartie himself be in capital form , and talk freely , with a certain poignancy , be no fool . he tell two or three story verge on the improper , a concession to the company , for his story be not use to verge . he propose Irene 's health in a mock speech . nobody drink it , and Winifred say : " do not   be such a clown , Monty ! " 
 at her suggestion they go after dinner to the public terrace overlook the river . 
 " I should like to see the common people make love , " she say , " it be such fun ! " 
 there be number of they walk in the cool , after the day 's heat , and the air be alive with the sound of voice , coarse and loud , or soft as though murmur secret . 
 it be not long before Winifred 's well sense - she be the only forsyte present - secure they an empty bench . they sit down in a row . a heavy tree spread a thick canopy above their head , and the haze darken slowly over the river . 
 Dartie sit at the end , next to he Irene , then Bosinney , then Winifred . there be hardly room for four , and the man of the world could feel Irene 's arm crush against his own ; he know that she could not withdraw it without seem rude , and this amuse he ; he devise every now and again a movement that would bring she close still . he think : ' that Buccaneer Johnny shall not   have it all to himself ! it be a pretty tight fit , certainly ! ' 
 from far down below on the dark river come drift the tinkle of a mandoline , and voice sing the old round : 
 ' a boat , a boat , unto the ferry , for we will go over and be merry ; and laugh , and quaff , and drink brown sherry ! ' 
 and suddenly the moon appear , young and tender , float up on she back from behind a tree ; and as though she have breathe , the air be cool , but down that cool air come always the warm odour of the lime . 
 over his cigar Dartie peer round at Bosinney , who be sit with his arm cross , star straight in front of he , and on his face the look of a man be torture . 
 and Dartie shoot a glance at the face between , so veil by the overhang shadow that it be but like a dark piece of the darkness shape and breathe on ; soft , mysterious , entice . 
 a hush have fall on the noisy terrace , as if all the stroller be think secret too precious to be speak . 
 and Dartie think : ' woman ! ' 
 the glow die above the river , the singing cease ; the young moon hide behind a tree , and all be dark . he press himself against Irene . 
 he be not alarmed at the shuddering that run through the limb he touch , or at the troubled , scornful look of her eye . he feel she try to draw herself away , and smile . 
 it must be confess that the man of the world have drink quite as much as be good for he . 
 with thick lip part under his well - curl moustache , and his bold eye aslant upon she , he have the malicious look of a satyr . 
 along the pathway of sky between the hedge of the tree top the star cluster forth ; like mortal beneath , they seem to shift and swarm and whisper . then on the terrace the buzz break out once more , and Dartie think : ' ah ! he be a poor , hungry - look devil , that Bosinney ! ' and again he press himself against Irene . 
 the movement deserve a well success . she rise , and they all follow she . 
 the man of the world be more than ever determined to see what she be make of . along the terrace he keep close at her elbow . he have within he much good wine . there be the long drive home , the long drive and the warm dark and the pleasant closeness of the hansom cab - with its insulation from the world devise by some great and good man . that hungry architect chap might drive with his wife - he wish he joy of she ! and , conscious that his voice be not too steady , he be careful not to speak ; but a smile have become fix on his thick lip . 
 they stroll along toward the cab await they at the farther end . his plan have the merit of all great plan , an almost brutal simplicity he would merely keep at her elbow till she get in , and get in quickly after she . 
 but when Irene reach the cab she do not get in ; she slip , instead , to the horse 's head . Dartie be not at the moment sufficiently master of his leg to follow . she stand stroke the horse 's nose , and , to his annoyance , Bosinney be at her side first . she turn and speak to he rapidly , in a low voice ; the word ' that man ' reach Dartie . he stand stubbornly by the cab step , wait for she to come back . he know a trick worth two of that ! 
 here , in the lamp - light , his figure   no more than medium height , well square in its white evening waistcoat , his light overcoat fling over his arm , a pink flower in his button - hole , and on his dark face that look of confident , good - humour insolence , he be at his good - a thorough man of the world . 
 Winifred be already in her cab . Dartie reflect that Bosinney would have a poorish time in that cab if he do not   look sharp ! suddenly he receive a push which nearly overturn he in the road . Bosinney 's voice hiss in his ear : " I be take Irene back ; do you understand ? " he see a face white with passion , and eye that glare at he like a wild cat 's . 
 " Eh ? " he stammer . " what ? not a bit . you take my wife ! " 
 " get away ! " hiss Bosinney - " or I will throw you into the road ! " 
 Dartie recoil ; he see as plainly as possible that the fellow mean it . in the space he make Irene have slip by , her dress brush his leg . Bosinney step in after she . 
 " go on ! " he hear the Buccaneer cry . the cabman flick his horse . it spring forward . 
 Dartie stand for a moment dumbfound ; then , dash at the cab where his wife sit , he scramble in . 
 " drive on ! " he shout to the driver , " and do not   you lose sight of that fellow in front ! " 
 seat by his wife 's side , he burst into imprecation . calm himself at last with a supreme effort , he add : " a pretty mess you have   make of it , to let the Buccaneer drive home with she ; why on earth could not   you keep hold of he ? he be mad with love ; any fool can see that ! " 
 he drown Winifred 's rejoinder with fresh call to the Almighty ; nor be it until they reach Barnes that he cease a Jeremiad , in the course of which he have abuse she , her father , her brother , Irene , Bosinney , the name of Forsyte , his own child , and curse the day when he have ever marry . 
 Winifred , a woman of strong character , let he have his say , at the end of which he lapse into sulky silence . his angry eye never desert the back of that cab , which , like a lost chance , haunt the darkness in front of he . 
 fortunately he could not hear Bosinney 's passionate pleading - that plead which the man of the world 's conduct have let loose like a flood ; he could not see Irene shivering , as though some garment have be tear from she , nor her eye , black and mournful , like the eye of a beat child . he could not hear Bosinney entreating , entreating , always entreat ; could not hear she sudden , soft weeping , nor see that poor , hungry - look devil , awed and tremble , humbly touch her hand . 
 in Montpellier Square their cabman , follow his instruction to the letter , faithfully draw up behind the cab in front . the Darties see Bosinney spring out , and Irene follow , and hasten up the step with bent head . she evidently have her key in her hand , for she disappear at once . it be impossible to tell whether she have turn to speak to Bosinney . 
 the latter come walk past their cab ; both husband and wife have an admirable view of his face in the light of a street lamp . it be work with violent emotion . 
 " good - night , Mr. Bosinney ! " call Winifred . 
 Bosinney start , claw off his hat , and hurry on . he have obviously forget their existence . 
 " there ! " say Dartie , " do you see the beast 's face ? what do I say ? fine game ! " he improve the occasion . 
 there have so clearly be a crisis in the cab that Winifred be unable to defend her theory . 
 she say : " I shall say nothing about it . I do not   see any use in make a fuss ! " 
 with that view Dartie at once concur ; look upon James as a private preserve , he disapprove of his be disturb by the trouble of other . 
 " quite right , " he say ; " let soame look after himself . he be jolly well able to ! " 
 thus speak , the dartie enter their habitat in Green Street , the rent of which be pay by James , and seek a well - earn rest . the hour be midnight , and no Forsytes remain abroad in the street to spy out Bosinney 's wandering ; to see he return and stand against the rail of the Square garden , back from the glow of the street lamp ; to see he stand there in the shadow of tree , watch the house where in the dark be hide she whom he would have give the world to see for a single minute - she who be now to he the breath of the lime - tree , the meaning of the light and the darkness , the very beating of his own heart . 
 CHAPTER X - diagnosis of a forsyte 
 it be in the nature of a Forsyte to be ignorant that he be a Forsyte ; but young Jolyon be well aware of be one . he have not know it till after the decisive step which have make he an outcast ; since then the knowledge have be with he continually . he feel it throughout his alliance , throughout all his dealing with his second wife , who be emphatically not a Forsyte . 
 he know that if he have not possess in great measure the eye for what he want , the tenacity to hold on to it , the sense of the folly of waste that for which he have give so big a price - in other word , the ' sense of property ' he could never have retain she   perhaps never would have desire to retain she   with he through all the financial trouble , slight , and misconstruction of those fifteen year ; never have induce she to marry he on the death of his first wife ; never have live it all through , and come up , as it be , thin , but smile . 
 he be one of those man who , seat cross - legged like miniature chinese idol in the cage of their own heart , be ever smile at themselves a doubt smile . not that this smile , so intimate and eternal , interfere with his action , which , like his chin and his temperament , be quite a peculiar blend of softness and determination . 
 he be conscious , too , of be a Forsyte in his work , that painting of water - colour to which he devote so much energy , always with an eye on himself , as though he could not take so unpractical a pursuit quite seriously , and always with a certain queer uneasiness that he do not make more money at it . 
 it be , then , this consciousness of what it mean to be a Forsyte , that make he receive the following letter from old Jolyon , with a mixture of sympathy and disgust : 
 ' SHELDRAKE HOUSE , 
 ' BROADSTAIRS , 
 ' July 1 . ' MY DEAR jo , ' 
  the Dad 's handwriting have alter very little in the thirty odd year that he remember it . 
 ' we have be here now a fortnight , and have have good weather on the whole . the air be brace , but my liver be out of order , and I shall be glad enough to get back to town . I can not say much for June , her health and spirit be very indifferent , and I do not   see what be to come of it . she say nothing , but it be clear that she be harp on this engagement , which be an engagement and no engagement , and - goodness know what . I have grave doubt whether she ought to be allow to return to London in the present state of affair , but she be so self - willed that she might take it into her head to come up at any moment . the fact be someone ought to speak to Bosinney and ascertain what he mean . I be afraid of this myself , for I should certainly rap he over the knuckle , but I think that you , know he at the Club , might put in a word , and get to ascertain what the fellow be about . you will of course in no way commit June . I shall be glad to hear from you in the course of a few day whether you have succeed in gain any information . the situation be very distressing to I , I worry about it at night . 
 with my love to Jolly and Holly . 
 ' I be , 
 ' your affect . father , 
 ' JOLYON FORSYTE . ' 
 Young Jolyon ponder this letter so long and seriously that his wife notice his preoccupation , and ask he what be the matter . he reply : " nothing . " 
 it be a fixed principle with he never to allude to June . she might take alarm , he do not know what she might think ; he hasten , therefore , to banish from his manner all trace of absorption , but in this he be about as successful as his father would have be , for he have inherit all old Jolyon 's transparency in matter of domestic finesse ; and young Mrs. Jolyon , busy herself over the affair of the house , go about with tighten lip , steal at he unfathomable look . 
 he start for the Club in the afternoon with the letter in his pocket , and without have make up his mind . 
 to sound a man as to ' his intention ' be peculiarly unpleasant to he ; nor do his own anomalous position diminish this unpleasantness . it be so like his family , so like all the people they know and mix with , to enforce what they call their right over a man , to bring he up to the mark ; so like they to carry their business principle into their private relation . 
 and how that phrase in the letter - ' you will , of course , in no way commit June ' - give the whole thing away . 
 yet the letter , with the personal grievance , the concern for June , the ' rap over the knuckle , ' be all so natural . no wonder his father want to know what Bosinney mean , no wonder he be angry . 
 it be difficult to refuse ! but why give the thing to he to do ? that be surely quite unbecoming ; but so long as a Forsyte get what he be after , he be not too particular about the mean , provide appearance be save . 
 how should he set about it , or how refuse ? both seem impossible . so , young Jolyon ! 
 he arrive at the Club at three o'clock , and the first person he see be Bosinney himself , seat in a corner , star out of the window . 
 Young Jolyon sit down not far off , and begin nervously to reconsider his position . he look covertly at Bosinney sit there unconscious . he do not know he very well , and study he attentively for perhaps the first time ; an unusual look man , unlike in dress , face , and manner to most of the other member of the Club - young Jolyon himself , however different he have become in mood and temper , have always retain the neat reticence of forsyte appearance . he alone among Forsytes be ignorant of Bosinney 's nickname . the man be unusual , not eccentric , but unusual ; he look worn , too , haggard , hollow in the cheek beneath those broad , high cheekbone , though without any appearance of ill - health , for he be strongly build , with curly hair that seem to show all the vitality of a fine constitution . 
 something in his face and attitude touch young Jolyon . he know what suffering be like , and this man look as if he be suffer . 
 he get up and touch his arm . 
 Bosinney start , but exhibit no sign of embarrassment on see who it be . 
 Young Jolyon sit down . 
 " I have not   see you for a long time , " he say . " how be you get on with my cousin 's house ? " 
 " it will be finish in about a week . " 
 " I congratulate you ! " 
 " thank - I do not   know that it be much of a subject for congratulation . " 
 " no ? " query young Jolyon ; " I should have think you would be glad to get a long job like that off your hand ; but I suppose you feel it much as I do when I part with a picture - a sort of child ? " 
 he look kindly at Bosinney . 
 " yes , " say the latter more cordially , " it go out from you and there be an end of it . I do not   know you paint . " 
 " only water - colour ; I can not   say I believe in my work . " 
 " do not   believe in it ? there - how can you do it ? Work 's no use unless you believe in it ! " 
 " good , " say young Jolyon ; " it be exactly what I have   always say . by - the - bye , have you notice that whenever one say ' good , ' one always add ' it be exactly what I have   always say ' ! but if you ask I how I do it , I answer , because I be a forsyte . " 
 " a Forsyte ! I never think of you as one ! " 
 " a Forsyte , " reply young Jolyon , " be not an uncommon animal . there be hundred among the member of this Club . hundred out there in the street ; you meet they wherever you go ! " 
 " and how do you tell they , may I ask ? " say Bosinney . 
 " by their sense of property . a Forsyte take a practical - one might say a commonsense - view of thing , and a practical view of thing be base fundamentally on a sense of property . a Forsyte , you will notice , never give himself away . " 
 " joking ? " 
 Young Jolyon 's eye twinkle . 
 " not much . as a Forsyte myself , I have no business to talk . but I be a kind of thoroughbred mongrel ; now , there be no mistaking you : you be as different from I as I be from my Uncle James , who be the perfect speciman of a Forsyte . his sense of property be extreme , while you have practically none . without I in between , you would seem like a different specie . I be the miss link . we be , of course , all of we the slave of property , and I admit that it be a question of degree , but what I call a ' Forsyte ' be a man who be decidedly more than less a slave of property . he know a good thing , he know a safe thing , and his grip on property - it do not   matter whether it be wife , house , money , or reputation - be his hall - mark . " 
 " ah ! " murmur Bosinney . " you should patent the word . " 
 " I should like , " say young Jolyon , " to lecture on it : 
 " property and quality of a Forsyte : this little animal , disturb by the ridicule of his own sort , be unaffected in his motion by the laughter of strange creature   you or I . hereditarily dispose to myopia , he recognise only the person of his own specie , amongst which he pass an existence of competitive tranquillity . " 
 " you talk of they , " say Bosinney , " as if they be half England . " 
 " they be , " repeat young Jolyon , " half England , and the well half , too , the safe half , the three per cent . half , the half that count . it be their wealth and security that make everything possible ; make your art possible , make literature , science , even religion , possible . without Forsytes , who believe in none of these thing , and habitat but turn they all to use , where should we be ? my dear sir , the Forsytes be the middleman , the commercial , the pillar of society , the cornerstone of convention ; everything that be admirable ! " 
 " I do not   know whether I catch your drift , " say Bosinney , " but I fancy there be plenty of Forsytes , as you call they , in my profession . " 
 " certainly , " reply young Jolyon . " the great majority of architect , painter , or writer have no principle , like any other Forsytes . art , literature , religion , survive by virtue of the few crank who really believe in such thing , and the many Forsytes who make a commercial use of they . at a low estimate , three - fourth of our Royal Academicians be Forsytes , seven - eighth of our novelist , a large proportion of the press . of science I can not   speak ; they be magnificently represent in religion ; in the House of Commons perhaps more numerous than anywhere ; the aristocracy speak for itself . but I be not laugh . it be dangerous to go against the majority and what a majority ! " he fix his eye on Bosinney : " it be dangerous to let anything carry you away - a house , a picture , a - woman ! " 
 they look at each other . - and , as though he have do that which no Forsyte do - give himself away , young Jolyon draw into his shell . Bosinney break the silence . 
 " why do you take your own people as the type ? " say he . 
 " my people , " reply young Jolyon , " be not very extreme , and they have their own private peculiarity , like every other family , but they possess in a remarkable degree those two quality which be the real test of a Forsyte - the power of never be able to give yourself up to anything soul and body , and the ' sense of property ' . " 
 Bosinney smile : " how about the big one , for instance ? " 
 " do you mean Swithin ? " ask young Jolyon . " ah ! in Swithin there be something primeval still . the town and middle - class life have not   digest he yet . all the old century of farm work and brute force have settle in he , and there they have   stick , for all he be so distinguished . " 
 Bosinney seem to ponder . " well , you have   hit your cousin soame off to the life , " he say suddenly . " he will never blow his brain out . " 
 Young Jolyon shoot at he a penetrate glance . 
 " no , " he say ; " he will not . that be why he be to be reckon with . look out for their grip ! it be easy to laugh , but do not   mistake I . it do not   do to despise a Forsyte ; it do not   do to disregard they ! " 
 " yet you have   do it yourself ! " 
 Young Jolyon acknowledge the hit by lose his smile . 
 " you forget , " he say with a queer pride , " I can hold on , too - I be a Forsyte myself . we be all in the path of great force . the man who leave the shelter of the wall - well - you know what I mean . I do not , " he end very low , as though utter a threat , " recommend every man to - go - my - way . it depend . " 
 the colour rush into Bosinney 's face , but soon recede , leave it sallow - brown as before . he give a short laugh , that leave his lip fix in a queer , fierce smile ; his eye mock young Jolyon . 
 " thank , " he say . " it be deuce kind of you . but you be not the only chap that can hold on . " he rise . 
 Young Jolyon look after he as he walk away , and , rest his head on his hand , sigh . 
 in the drowsy , almost empty room the only sound be the rustle of newspaper , the scraping of match be strike . he stay a long time without move , live over again those day when he , too , have sit long hour watch the clock , wait for the minute to pass - long hour full of the torment of uncertainty , and of a fierce , sweet aching ; and the slow , delicious agony of that season come back to he with its old poignancy . the sight of Bosinney , with his haggard face , and his restless eye always wander to the clock , have rouse in he a pity , with which be mingle strange , irresistible envy . 
 he know the sign so well . Whither be he go - to what sort of fate ? what kind of woman be it who be draw he to she by that magnetic force which no consideration of honour , no principle , no interest could withstand ; from which the only escape be flight . 
 flight ! but why should Bosinney fly ? a man flee when he be in danger of destroy hearth and home , when there be child , when he feel himself trample down ideal , break something . but here , so he have hear , it be all break to his hand . 
 he himself have not flee , nor would he fly if it be all to come over again . yet he have go far than Bosinney , have break up his own unhappy home , not someone else 's : and the old saying come back to he : ' a man 's fate lie in his own heart . ' 
 in his own heart ! the proof of the pudding be in the eating - Bosinney have still to eat his pudding . 
 his thought pass to the woman , the woman whom he do not know , but the outline of whose story he have hear . 
 an unhappy marriage ! no ill - treatment - only that indefinable malaise , that terrible blight which kill all sweetness under Heaven ; and so from day to day , from night to night , from week to week , from year to year , till death should end it . 
 but young Jolyon , the bitterness of whose own feeling time have assuage , see Soames ' side of the question too . whence should a man like his cousin , saturate with all the prejudice and belief of his class , draw the insight or inspiration necessary to break up this life ? it be a question of imagination , of project himself into the future beyond the unpleasant gossip , sneer , and tattle that follow on such separation , beyond the pass pang that the lack of the sight of she would cause , beyond the grave disapproval of the worthy . but few man , and especially few man of Soames ' class , have imagination enough for that . a deal of mortal in this world , and not enough imagination to go round ! and sweet Heaven , what a difference between theory and practice ; many a man , perhaps even soame , hold chivalrous view on such matter , who when the shoe pinch find a distinguish factor that make of himself an exception . 
 then , too , he distrust his judgment . he have be through the experience himself , have taste too the dreg the bitterness of an unhappy marriage , and how could he take the wide and dispassionate view of those who have never be within sound of the battle ? his evidence be too first - hand - like the evidence on military matter of a soldier who have be through much active service , against that of civilian who have not suffer the disadvantage of see thing too close . Most people would consider such a marriage as that of Soames and Irene quite fairly successful ; he have money , she have beauty ; it be a case for compromise . there be no reason why they should not jog along , even if they hat each other . it would not matter if they go their own way a little so long as the decency be observe - the sanctity of the marriage tie , of the common home , respect . half the marriage of the upper class be conduct on these line : do not offend the susceptibility of Society ; do not offend the susceptibility of the Church . to avoid offend these be worth the sacrifice of any private feeling . the advantage of the stable home be visible , tangible , so many piece of property ; there be no risk in the statu quo . to break up a home be at the good a dangerous experiment , and selfish into the bargain . 
 this be the case for the defence , and young Jolyon sigh . 
 ' the core of it all , ' he think , ' be property , but there be many people who would not like it put that way . to they it be " the sanctity of the marriage tie " ; but the sanctity of the marriage tie be dependent on the sanctity of the family , and the sanctity of the family be dependent on the sanctity of property . and yet I imagine all these people be follower of one who never own anything . it be curious ! 
 and again young Jolyon sigh . 
 ' be I go on my way home to ask any poor devil I meet to share my dinner , which will then be too little for myself , or , at all event , for my wife , who be necessary to my health and happiness ? it may be that after all Soames do well to exercise his right and support by his practice the sacred principle of property which benefit we all , with the exception of those who suffer by the process . ' 
 and so he leave his chair , thread his way through the maze of seat , take his hat , and languidly up the hot street crowd with carriage , reek with dusty odour , wend his way home . 
 before reach Wistaria Avenue he remove old Jolyon 's letter from his pocket , and tear it carefully into tiny piece , scatter they in the dust of the road . 
 he let himself in with his key , and call his wife 's name . but she have go out , take Jolly and Holly , and the house be empty ; alone in the garden the dog Balthasar lie in the shade snap at fly . 
 Young Jolyon take his seat there , too , under the pear - tree that bear no fruit . 
 CHAPTER XI - bosinney on PAROLE 
 the day after the evening at Richmond Soames return from Henley by a morning train . not constitutionally interested in amphibious sport , his visit have be one of business rather than pleasure , a client of some importance have ask he down . 
 he go straight to the City , but find thing slack , he leave at three o'clock , glad of this chance to get home quietly . Irene do not expect he . not that he have any desire to spy on her action , but there be no harm in thus unexpectedly survey the scene . 
 after change to Park clothe he go into the drawing - room . she be sit idly in the corner of the sofa , her favourite seat ; and there be circle under her eye , as though she have not sleep . 
 he ask : " how be it you be in ? be you expect somebody ? " 
 " yes that be , not particularly . " 
 " who ? " 
 " Mr. Bosinney say he might come . " 
 " Bosinney . he ought to be at work . " 
 to this she make no answer . 
 " well , " say soame , " I want you to come out to the Stores with I , and after that we will go to the Park . " 
 " I do not   want to go out ; I have a headache . " 
 soame reply : " if ever I want you to do anything , you have   always get a headache . it will do you good to come and sit under the tree . " 
 she do not answer . 
 soame be silent for some minute ; at last he say : " I do not   know what your idea of a wife 's duty be . I never have know ! " 
 he have not expect she to reply , but she do . 
 " I have try to do what you want ; it be not my fault that I have not   be able to put my heart into it . " 
 " whose fault be it , then ? " he watch her askance . 
 " before we be marry you promise to let I go if our marriage be not a success . be it a success ? " 
 soame frown . 
 " success , " he stammer - " it would be a success if you behave yourself properly ! " 
 " I have try , " say Irene . " will you let I go ? " 
 soame turn away . secretly alarm , he take refuge in bluster . 
 " let you go ? you do not   know what you be talk about . let you go ? how can I let you go ? we be married , be not   we ? then , what be you talk about ? for God 's sake , do not   let us have any of this sort of nonsense ! get your hat on , and come and sit in the Park . " 
 " then , you will not   let I go ? " 
 he feel her eye rest on he with a strange , touching look . 
 " let you go ! " he say ; " and what on earth would you do with yourself if I do ? you have   get no money ! " 
 " I could manage somehow . " 
 he take a swift turn up and down the room ; then come and stand before she . 
 " Understand , " he say , " once and for all , I will not   have you say this sort of thing . go and get your hat on ! " 
 she do not move . 
 " I suppose , " say soame , " you do not   want to miss Bosinney if he come ! " 
 Irene get up slowly and leave the room . she come down with her hat on . 
 they go out . 
 in the Park , the motley hour of mid - afternoon , when foreigner and other pathetic folk drive , think themselves to be in fashion , have pass ; the right , the proper , hour have come , be nearly go , before Soames and Irene seat themselves under the Achilles statue . 
 it be some time since he have enjoy her company in the Park . that be one of the past delight of the first two season of his married life , when to feel himself the possessor of this gracious creature before all London have be his great , though secret , pride . how many afternoon have he not sit beside she , extremely neat , with light grey glove and faint , supercilious smile , nod to acquaintance , and now and again remove his hat . 
 his light grey glove be still on his hand , and on his lip his smile sardonic , but where the feeling in his heart ? 
 the seat be empty fast , but still he keep she there , silent and pale , as though to work out a secret punishment . once or twice he make some comment , and she bent her head , or answer " yes " with a tired smile . 
 along the rail a man be walk so fast that people star after he when he pass . 
 " look at that ass ! " say soame ; " he must be mad to walk like that in this heat ! " 
 he turn ; Irene have make a rapid movement . 
 " Hallo ! " he say : " it be our friend the Buccaneer ! " 
 and he sit still , with his sneer smile , conscious that Irene be sit still , and smile too . 
 " will she bow to he ? " he think . 
 but she make no sign . 
 Bosinney reach the end of the rail , and come walk back amongst the chair , quarter his ground like a pointer . when he see they he stop dead , and raise his hat . 
 the smile never leave Soames ' face ; he also take off his hat . 
 Bosinney come up , look exhaust , like a man after hard physical exercise ; the sweat stand in drop on his brow , and Soames ' smile seem to say : " you have   have a try time , my friend ...... what be you do in the Park ? " he ask . " we think you despise such frivolity ! " 
 Bosinney do not seem to hear ; he make his answer to Irene : " I have   be round to your place ; I hop I should find you in . " 
 somebody tap soame on the back , and speak to he ; and in the exchange of those platitude over his shoulder , he miss her answer , and take a resolution . 
 " we be just go in , " he say to Bosinney ; " you would well come back to dinner with we . " into that invitation he put a strange bravado , a stranger pathos : " you , can not   deceive I , " his look and voice seem say , " but see - I trust you - I be not afraid of you ! " 
 they start back to Montpellier Square together , Irene between they . in the crowded street soame go on in front . he do not listen to their conversation ; the strange resolution of trustfulness he have take seem to animate even his secret conduct . like a gambler , he say to himself : ' it be a card I dare not throw away - I must play it for what it be worth . I have not too many chance . ' 
 he dress slowly , hear she leave her room and go downstairs , and , for full five minute after , dawdle about in his dressing - room . then he go down , purposely shut the door loudly to show that he be come . he find they stand by the hearth , perhaps talk , perhaps not ; he could not say . 
 he play his part out in the farce , the long evening through - his manner to his guest more friendly than it have ever be before ; and when at last Bosinney go , he say : " you must come again soon ; Irene like to have you to talk about the house ! " again his voice have the strange bravado and the stranger pathos ; but his hand be cold as ice . 
 loyal to his resolution , he turn away from their parting , turn away from his wife as she stand under the hang lamp to say good - night - away from the sight of her golden head shin so under the light , of her smile mournful lip ; away from the sight of Bosinney 's eye look at she , so like a dog 's look at its master . 
 and he go to bed with the certainty that Bosinney be in love with his wife . 
 the summer night be hot , so hot and still that through every open window come in but hotter air . for long hour he lie listen to her breathing . 
 she could sleep , but he must lie awake . and , lie awake , he harden himself to play the part of the serene and trust husband . 
 in the small hour he slip out of bed , and pass into his dressing - room , lean by the open window . 
 he could hardly breathe . 
 a night four year ago come back to he - the night but one before his marriage ; as hot and stifle as this . 
 he remember how he have lie in a long cane chair in the window of his sitting - room off Victoria Street . down below in a side street a man have bang at a door , a woman have cry out ; he remember , as though it be now , the sound of the scuffle , the slam of the door , the dead silence that follow . and then the early water - cart , cleanse the reek of the street , have approach through the strange - seem , useless lamp - light ; he seem to hear again its rumble , near and nearer , till it pass and slowly die away . 
 he lean far out of the dressing - room window over the little court below , and see the first light spread . the outline of dark wall and roof be blur for a moment , then come out sharp than before . 
 he remember how that other night he have watch the lamp pal all the length of Victoria Street ; how he have hurry on his clothe and go down into the street , down past house and square , to the street where she be stay , and there have stand and look at the front of the little house , as still and grey as the face of a dead man . 
 and suddenly it shoot through his mind ; like a sick man 's fancy : what be he do ? - that fellow who haunt I , who be here this evening , who be in love with my wife - prowl out there , perhaps , look for she as I know he be look for she this afternoon ; watch my house now , for all I can tell ! 
 he steal across the landing to the front of the house , stealthily draw aside a blind , and raise a window . 
 the grey light clung about the tree of the square , as though Night , like a great downy moth , have brush they with her wing . the lamp be still alight , all pale , but not a soul stir - no live thing in sight . 
 yet suddenly , very faint , far off in the deathly stillness , he hear a cry writhe , like the voice of some wandering soul bar out of heaven , and cry for its happiness . there it be again - again ! soame shut the window , shudder . 
 then he think : ' ah ! it be only the peacock , across the water . ' 
 CHAPTER XII - JUNE pay some call 
 Jolyon stand in the narrow hall at Broadstairs , inhale that odour of oilcloth and herring which permeate all respectable seaside lodging - house . on a chair - a shiny leather chair , display its horsehair through a hole in the top left - hand corner - stand a black despatch case . this he be fill with paper , with the Times , and a bottle of Eau - de Cologne . he have meeting that day of the ' Globular Gold Concessions ' and the ' New Colliery Company , Limited , ' to which he be go up , for he never miss a Board ; to ' miss a Board ' would be one more piece of evidence that he be grow old , and this his jealous forsyte spirit could not bear . 
 his eye , as he fill that black despatch case , look as if at any moment they might blaze up with anger . so gleam the eye of a schoolboy , bait by a ring of his companion ; but he control himself , deter by the fearful odd against he . and old Jolyon control himself , keep down , with his masterful restraint now slowly wear out , the irritation foster in he by the condition of his life . 
 he have receive from his son an unpractical letter , in which by ramble generality the boy seem try to get out of answer a plain question . ' I have   see Bosinney , ' he say ; ' he be not a criminal . the more I see of people the more I be convinced that they be never good or bad - merely comic , or pathetic . you probably do not   agree with I ! ' 
 Old Jolyon do not ; he consider it cynical to so express oneself ; he have not yet reach that point of old age when even Forsytes , bereft of those illusion and principle which they have cherish carefully for practical purpose but never believe in , bereft of all corporeal enjoyment , stricken to the very heart by have nothing leave to hope for - break through the barrier of reserve and say thing they would never have believe themselves capable of say . 
 perhaps he do not believe in ' goodness ' and ' badness ' any more than his son ; but as he would have say : he do not   know - could not   tell ; there might be something in it ; and why , by an unnecessary expression of disbelief , deprive yourself of possible advantage ? 
 accustomed to spend his holiday among the mountain , though   like a true Forsyte   he have never attempt anything too adventurous or too foolhardy , he have be passionately fond of they . and when the wonderful view   mention in Baedeker - ' fatigue but repay '   - be disclose to he after the effort of the climb , he have doubtless feel the existence of some great , dignified principle crown the chaotic striving , the petty precipice , and ironic little dark chasm of life . this be as near to religion , perhaps , as his practical spirit have ever go . 
 but it be many year since he have be to the mountain . he have take June there two season run , after his wife die , and have realize bitterly that his walking day be over . 
 to that old mountain - give confidence in a supreme order of thing he have long be a stranger . he know himself to be old , yet he feel young ; and this trouble he . it trouble and puzzle he , too , to think that he , who have always be so careful , should be father and grandfather to such as seem bear to disaster . he have nothing to say against Jo - who could say anything against the boy , an amiable chap ? - but his position be deplorable , and this business of June 's nearly as bad . it seem like a fatality , and a fatality be one of those thing no man of his character could either understand or put up with . 
 in write to his son he do not really hope that anything would come of it . since the ball at Roger 's he have see too clearly how the land lie - he could put two and two together quick than most man - and , with the example of his own son before his eye , know well than any Forsyte of they all that the pale flame sing man 's wing whether they will or no . 
 in the day before June 's engagement , when she and Mrs. Soames be always together , he have see enough of Irene to feel the spell she cast over man . she be not a flirt , not even a coquette - word dear to the heart of his generation , which love to define thing by a good , broad , inadequate word - but she be dangerous . he could not say why . tell he of a quality innate in some woman - a seductive power beyond their own control ! he would but answer : ' Humbug ! ' she be dangerous , and there be an end of it . he want to close his eye to that affair . if it be , it be ; he do not want to hear any more about it - he only want to save June 's position and her peace of mind . he still hop she might once more become a comfort to himself . 
 and so he have write . he get little enough out of the answer . as to what young Jolyon have make of the interview , there be practically only the queer sentence : ' I gather that he be in the stream . ' the stream ! what stream ? what be this new - fangled way of talk ? 
 he sigh , and fold the last of the paper under the flap of the bag ; he know well enough what be mean . 
 June come out of the dining - room , and help he on with his summer coat . from her costume , and the expression of her little resolute face , he see at once what be come . 
 " I be go with you , " she say . 
 " Nonsense , my dear ; I go straight into the City . I can not   have you rackette about ! " 
 " I must see old Mrs. Smeech . " 
 " oh , your precious ' lame duck ! " grumble out old Jolyon . he do not believe her excuse , but cease his opposition . there be no do anything with that pertinacity of her . 
 at Victoria he put she into the carriage which have be order for himself - a characteristic action , for he have no petty selfishness . 
 " now , do not   you go tire yourself , my darling , " he say , and take a cab on into the city . 
 June go first to a back - street in Paddington , where Mrs. Smeech , her ' lame duck , ' live - an aged person , connect with the char interest ; but after half an hour spend in hear she habitually lamentable recital , and dragoon she into temporary comfort , she go on to Stanhope Gate . the great house be closed and dark . 
 she have decide to learn something at all cost . it be well to face the bad , and have it over . and this be her plan : to go first to Phil 's aunt , Mrs. Baynes , and , fail information there , to Irene herself . she have no clear notion of what she would gain by these visit . 
 at three o'clock she be in Lowndes Square . with a woman 's instinct when trouble be to be face , she have put on her good frock , and go to the battle with a glance as courageous as old Jolyon 's itself . her tremor have pass into eagerness . 
 Mrs. Baynes , Bosinney 's aunt   Louisa be her name , be in her kitchen when June be announce , organize the cook , for she be an excellent housewife , and , as Baynes always say , there be ' a lot in a good dinner . ' he do his good work after dinner . it be Baynes who build that remarkably fine row of tall crimson house in Kensington which compete with so many other for the title of ' the ugly in London . ' 
 on hear June 's name , she go hurriedly to her bedroom , and , take two large bracelet from a red morocco case in a locked drawer , put they on her white wrist - for she possess in a remarkable degree that ' sense of property , ' which , as we know , be the touchstone of Forsyteism , and the foundation of good morality . 
 her figure , of medium height and broad build , with a tendency to embonpoint , be reflect by the mirror of her whitewood wardrobe , in a gown make under her own organization , of one of those half - tint , reminiscent of the distempered wall of corridor in large hotel . she raise her hand to her hair , which she wear a la Princesse de Galles , and touch it here and there , settle it more firmly on her head , and her eye be full of an unconscious realism , as though she be look in the face one of life 's sordid fact , and make the good of it . in youth her cheek have be of cream and rose , but they be mottle now by middle - age , and again that hard , ugly directness come into her eye as she dab a powder - puff across her forehead . put the puff down , she stand quite still before the glass , arrange a smile over her high , important nose , she , chin ,   never large , and now grow small with the increase of her neck , her thin - lip , down - droop mouth . quickly , not to lose the effect , she grasp her skirt strongly in both hand , and go downstairs . 
 she have be hop for this visit for some time past . whisper have reach she that thing be not all right between her nephew and his fiancee . neither of they have be near she for week . she have ask Phil to dinner many time ; his invariable answer have be ' too busy . ' 
 her instinct be alarmed , and the instinct in such matter of this excellent woman be keen . she ought to have be a Forsyte ; in young Jolyon 's sense of the word , she certainly have that privilege , and merit description as such . 
 she have marry off her three daughter in a way that people say be beyond their desert , for they have the professional plainness only to be find , as a rule , among the female kind of the more legal calling . her name be upon the committee of numberless charity connect with the Church - dance , theatrical , or bazaar - and she never lend her name unless sure beforehand that everything have be thoroughly organize . 
 she believe , as she often say , in put thing on a commercial basis ; the proper function of the Church , of charity , indeed , of everything , be to strengthen the fabric of ' Society . ' individual action , therefore , she consider immoral . Organization be the only thing , for by organization alone could you feel sure that you be get a return for your money . organization - and again , organization ! and there be no doubt that she be what old Jolyon call she - " a ' dab ' at that " - he go far , he call she " a humbug . " 
 the enterprise to which she lend her name be organize so admirably that by the time the taking be hand over , they be indeed skim milk divest of all cream of human kindness . but as she often justly remark , sentiment be to be deprecate . she be , in fact , a little academic . 
 this great and good woman , so highly thought of in ecclesiastical circle , be one of the principal priestess in the temple of Forsyteism , keep alive day and night a sacred flame to the God of Property , whose altar be inscribe with those inspire word : ' nothing for nothing , and really remarkably little for sixpence . ' 
 when she enter a room it be feel that something substantial have come in , which be probably the reason of her popularity as a patroness . People like something substantial when they have pay money for it ; and they would look at she - surround by her staff in charity ballroom , with her high nose and her broad , square figure , attire in an uniform cover with sequin - as though she be a general . 
 the only thing against she be that she have not a double name . she be a power in upper middle - class society , with its hundred set and circle , all intersect on the common battlefield of charity function , and on that battlefield brushing skirt so pleasantly with the skirt of Society with the capital ' S. ' she be a power in society with the small 's , ' that large , more significant , and more powerful body , where the commercially christian institution , maxim , and ' principle , ' which Mrs. Baynes embody , be real life - blood , circulate freely , real business currency , not merely the sterilize imitation that flow in the vein of small Society with the large ' S. ' People who know she feel she to be sound - a sound woman , who never give herself away , nor anything else , if she could possibly help it . 
 she have be on the bad sort of term with Bosinney 's father , who have not infrequently make she the object of an unpardonable ridicule . she allude to he now that he be go as she ' poor , dear , irreverend brother . ' 
 she greet June with the careful effusion of which she be a mistress , a little afraid of she as far as a woman of her eminence in the commercial and christian world could be afraid - for so slight a girl June have a great dignity , the fearlessness of her eye give she that . and Mrs. Baynes , too , shrewdly recognize that behind the uncompromise frankness of June 's manner there be much of the Forsyte . if the girl have be merely frank and courageous , Mrs. Baynes would have think she ' cranky , ' and despise she ; if she have be merely a Forsyte , like Francie - let we say - she would have patronize she from sheer weight of metal ; but June , small though she be - Mrs. Baynes habitually admire quantity - give she an uneasy feeling ; and she place she in a chair opposite the light . 
 there be another reason for her respect which Mrs. Baynes , too good a churchwoman to be worldly , would have be the last to admit - she often hear her husband describe old Jolyon as extremely well off , and be biassed towards his granddaughter for the sound of all reason . to - day she feel the emotion with which we read a novel describe a hero and an inheritance , nervously anxious lest , by some frightful lapse of the novelist , the young man should be leave without it at the end . 
 her manner be warm ; she have never see so clearly before how distinguished and desirable a girl this be . she ask after old Jolyon 's health . a wonderful man for his age ; so upright , and young looking , and how old be he ? eighty - one ! she would never have think it ! they be at the sea ! very nice for they ; she suppose June hear from Phil every day ? her light grey eye become more prominent as she ask this question ; but the girl meet the glance without flinching . 
 " no , " she say , " he never write ! " 
 Mrs. Baynes 's eye drop ; they have no intention of do so , but they do . they recover immediately . 
 " of course not . that be Phil all over - he be always like that ! " 
 " be he ? " say June . 
 the brevity of the answer cause Mrs. Baynes 's bright smile a moment 's hesitation ; she disguise it by a quick movement , and spread her skirt afresh , say : " why , my dear - he be quite the most harum - scarum person ; one never pay the slight attention to what he do ! " 
 the conviction come suddenly to June that she be waste her time ; even be she to put a question point - blank , she would never get anything out of this woman . 
 ' do you see he ? ' she ask , her face crimson . 
 the perspiration break out on Mrs. Baynes ' forehead beneath the powder . 
 " oh , yes ! I do not   remember when he be here last - indeed , we have not   see much of he lately . he be so busy with your cousin 's house ; I be tell it will be finish directly . we must organize a little dinner to celebrate the event ; do come and stay the night with we ! " 
 " thank you , " say June . again she think : ' I be only waste my time . this woman will tell I nothing . ' 
 she get up to go . a change come over Mrs. Baynes . she rise too ; her lip twitch , she fidget her hand . something be evidently very wrong , and she do not dare to ask this girl , who stand there , a slim , straight little figure , with her decided face , her set jaw , and resentful eye . she be not accustomed to be afraid of ask question 's - all organization be base on the asking of question ! 
 but the issue be so grave that her nerve , normally strong , be fairly shake ; only that morning her husband have say : " Old Mr. Forsyte must be worth well over a hundred thousand pound ! " 
 and this girl stand there , hold out her hand - hold out her hand ! 
 the chance might be slip away - she could not   tell - the chance of keep she in the family , and yet she dare not speak . 
 her eye follow June to the door . 
 it close . 
 then with an exclamation Mrs. Baynes run forward , wobble her bulky frame from side to side , and open it again . 
 too late ! she hear the front door click , and stand still , an expression of real anger and mortification on her face . 
 June go along the Square with her bird - like quickness . she detest that woman now whom in happy day she have be accustom to think so kind . be she always to be put off thus , and force to undergo this torture suspense ? 
 she would go to Phil himself , and ask he what he mean . she have the right to know . she hurry on down Sloane Street till she come to Bosinney 's number . pass the swing - door at the bottom , she run up the stair , her heart thump painfully . 
 at the top of the third flight she pause for breath , and hold on to the bannister , stand listen . no sound come from above . 
 with a very white face she mount the last flight . she see the door , with his name on the plate . and the resolution that have bring she so far evaporate . 
 the full meaning of her conduct come to she . she feel hot all over ; the palm of her hand be moist beneath the thin silk covering of her glove . 
 she draw back to the stair , but do not descend . lean against the rail she try to get rid of a feeling of be choke ; and she gaze at the door with a sort of dreadful courage . no ! she refuse to go down . do it matter what people think of she ? they would never know ! no one would help she if she do not help herself ! she would go through with it . 
 force herself , therefore , to leave the support of the wall , she ring the bell . the door do not open , and all her shame and fear suddenly abandon she ; she ring again and again , as though in spite of its emptiness she could drag some response out of that closed room , some recompense for the shame and fear that visit have cost she . it do not open ; she leave off ring , and , sit down at the top of the stair , bury her face in her hand . 
 presently she steal down , out into the air . she feel as though she have pass through a bad illness , and have no desire now but to get home as quickly as she could . the people she meet seem to know where she have be , what she have be do ; and suddenly - over on the opposite side , go towards his room from the direction of Montpellier Square - she see Bosinney himself . 
 she make a movement to cross into the traffic . their eye meet , and he raise his hat . an omnibus pass , obscure her view ; then , from the edge of the pavement , through a gap in the traffic , she see he walk on . 
 and June stand motionless , look after he . 
 CHAPTER XIII - PERFECTION of the HOUSE 
 ' one mockturtle , clear ; one oxtail ; two glass of port . ' 
 in the upper room at French 's , where a Forsyte could still get heavy english food , James and his son be sit down to lunch . 
 of all eat - place James like well to come here ; there be something unpretentious , well - flavour , and fill about it , and though he have be to a certain extent corrupt by the necessity for be fashionable , and the trend of habit keep pace with an income that would increase , he still hanker in quiet City moment after the tasty fleshpot of his early day . here you be serve by hairy English waiter in apron ; there be sawdust on the floor , and three round gilt looking - glass hang just above the line of sight . they have only recently do away with the cubicle , too , in which you could have your chop , prime chump , with a floury - potato , without see your neighbour , like a gentleman . 
 he tuck the top corner of his napkin behind the third button of his waistcoat , a practice he have be oblige to abandon year ago in the West End . he feel that he should relish his soup - the entire morning have be give to wind up the estate of an old friend . 
 after fill his mouth with household bread , stale , he at once begin : " how be you go down to Robin Hill ? you go to take Irene ? you would well take she . I should think there will be a lot that will want see to . " 
 without look up , soame answer : " she will not   go . " 
 " will not   go ? what be the meaning of that ? she be go to live in the house , be not   she ? " 
 soame make no reply . 
 " I do not   know what be come to woman nowadays , " mumble James ; " I never use to have any trouble with they . she be have too much liberty . she be spoil .... " 
 soame lift his eye : " I will not   have anything say against she , " he say unexpectedly . 
 the silence be only break now by the supping of James 's soup . 
 the waiter bring the two glass of port , but soame stop he . 
 " that be not the way to serve port , " he say ; " take they away , and bring the bottle . " 
 rouse himself from his reverie over the soup , James take one of his rapid shift survey of surround fact . 
 " your mother 's in bed , " he say ; " you can have the carriage to take you down . I should think Irene'd like the drive . this young Bosinney'll be there , I suppose , to show you over . " 
 soame nod . 
 " I should like to go and see for myself what sort of a job he be make finish off , " pursue James . " I will just drive round and pick you both up . " 
 " I be go down by train , " reply soame . " if you like to drive round and see , Irene might go with you , I can not   tell . " 
 he sign to the waiter to bring the bill , which James pay . 
 they part at St. Paul 's , soame branch off to the station , James take his omnibus westward . 
 he have secure the corner seat next the conductor , where his long leg make it difficult for anyone to get in , and at all who pass he he look resentfully , as if they have no business to be use up his air . 
 he intend to take an opportunity this afternoon of speak to Irene . a word in time save nine ; and now that she be go to live in the country there be a chance for she to turn over a new leaf ! he could see that Soames would not   stand very much more of her going on ! 
 it do not occur to he to define what he mean by she ' going on ' ; the expression be wide , vague , and suit to a Forsyte . and James have more than his common share of courage after lunch . 
 on reach home , he order out the barouche , with special instruction that the groom be to go too . he wish to be kind to she , and to give she every chance . 
 when the door of no.62 be open he could distinctly hear her singing , and say so at once , to prevent any chance of be deny entrance . 
 yes , Mrs. Soames be in , but the maid do not know if she be see people . 
 James , move with the rapidity that ever astonish the observer of his long figure and absorb expression , go forthwith into the drawing - room without permit this to be ascertain . he find Irene seat at the piano with her hand arrest on the key , evidently listen to the voice in the hall . she greet he without smile . 
 " your mother - in - law 's in bed , " he begin , hop at once to enlist her sympathy . " I have   get the carriage here . now , be a good girl , and put on your hat and come with I for a drive . it will do you good ! " 
 Irene look at he as though about to refuse , but , seem to change her mind , go upstairs , and come down again with her hat on . 
 " where be you go to take I ? " she ask . 
 " we will just go down to Robin Hill , " say James , splutter out his word very quick ; " the horse want exercise , and I should like to see what they have   be do down there . " 
 Irene hang back , but again change her mind , and go out to the carriage , James brood over she closely , to make quite sure . 
 it be not before he have get she more than half way that he begin : " soame be very fond of you - he will not   have anything say against you ; why do not   you show he more affection ? " 
 Irene flush , and say in a low voice : " I can not   show what I have not   get . " 
 James look at she sharply ; he feel that now he have she in his own carriage , with his own horse and servant , he be really in command of the situation . she could not put he off ; nor would she make a scene in public . 
 " I can not   think what you be about , " he say . " he be a very good husband ! " 
 Irene 's answer be so low as to be almost inaudible among the sound of traffic . he catch the word : " you be not married to he ! " 
 " what be that get to do with it ? he be give you everything you want . he be always ready to take you anywhere , and now he be build you this house in the country . it be not as if you have anything of your own . " 
 " no . " 
 again James look at she ; he could not make out the expression on her face . she look almost as if she be go to cry , and yet .... 
 " I be sure , " he mutter hastily , " we have   all try to be kind to you . " 
 Irene 's lip quiver ; to his dismay James see a tear steal down her cheek . he feel a choke rise in his own throat . 
 " we be all fond of you , " he say , " if you would only " - he be go to say , " behave yourself , " but change it to - " if you would only be more of a wife to he . " 
 Irene do not answer , and James , too , cease speaking . there be something in her silence which disconcert he ; it be not the silence of obstinacy , rather that of acquiescence in all that he could find to say . and yet he feel as if he have not have the last word . he could not understand this . 
 he be unable , however , to long keep silence . 
 " I suppose that young Bosinney , " he say , " will be get marry to June now ? " 
 Irene 's face change . " I do not   know , " she say ; " you should ask she . " 
 " do she write to you ? " no . 
 " how be that ? " say James . " I think you and she be such great friend . " 
 Irene turn on he . " again , " she say , " you should ask she ! " 
 " well , " fluster James , frighten by her look , " it be very odd that I can not   get a plain answer to a plain question , but there it be . " 
 he sit ruminate over his rebuff , and burst out at last : 
 " well , I have   warn you . you will not   look ahead . soame he do not   say much , but I can see he will not   stand a great deal more of this sort of thing . you will have nobody but yourself to blame , and , what be more , you will get no sympathy from anybody . " 
 Irene bend her head with a little smile bow . " I be very much oblige to you . " 
 James do not know what on earth to answer . 
 the bright hot morning have change slowly to a grey , oppressive afternoon ; a heavy bank of cloud , with the yellow tinge of come thunder , have rise in the south , and be creep up . 
 the branch of the tree drop motionless across the road without the small stir of foliage . a faint odour of glue from the heated horse clung in the thick air ; the coachman and groom , rigid and unbending , exchange stealthy murmur on the box , without ever turn their head . 
 to James ' great relief they reach the house at last ; the silence and impenetrability of this woman by his side , whom he have always think so soft and mild , alarm he . 
 the carriage put they down at the door , and they enter . 
 the hall be cool , and so still that it be like pass into a tomb ; a shudder run down James 's spine . he quickly lift the heavy leather curtain between the column into the inner court . 
 he could not restrain an exclamation of approval . 
 the decoration be really in excellent taste . the dull ruby tile that extend from the foot of the wall to the verge of a circular clump of tall iris plant , surround in turn a sunken basin of white marble fill with water , be obviously of the good quality . he admire extremely the purple leather curtain draw along one entire side , frame a huge white - tile stove . the central partition of the skylight have be slide back , and the warm air from outside penetrate into the very heart of the house . 
 he stand , his hand behind he , his head bend back on his high , narrow shoulder , spy the tracery on the column and the pattern of the frieze which run round the ivory - colour wall under the gallery . evidently , no pain have be spar . it be quite the house of a gentleman . he go up to the curtain , and , have discover how they be work , draw they asunder and disclose the picture - gallery , end in a great window take up the whole end of the room . it have a black oak floor , and its wall , again , be of ivory white . he go on throw open door , and peep in . everything be in apple - pie order , ready for immediate occupation . 
 he turn round at last to speak to Irene , and see she stand over in the garden entrance , with her husband and Bosinney . 
 though not remarkable for sensibility , James feel at once that something be wrong . he go up to they , and , vaguely alarmed , ignorant of the nature of the trouble , make an attempt to smooth thing over . 
 " how be you , Mr. Bosinney ? " he say , hold out his hand . " you have   be spend money pretty freely down here , I should say ! " 
 soame turn his back , and walk away . 
 James look from Bosinney 's frown face to Irene , and , in his agitation , speak his thought aloud : " well , I can not   tell what be the matter . nobody tell I anything ! " and , make off after his son , he hear Bosinney 's short laugh , and his " well , thank God ! you look so .... " most unfortunately he lose the rest . 
 what have happen ? he glance back . Irene be very close to the architect , and her face not like the face he know of she . he hasten up to his son . 
 soame be pace the picture - gallery . 
 " what be the matter ? " say James . " what be all this ? " 
 soame look at he with his supercilious calm unbroken , but James know well enough that he be violently angry . 
 " our friend , " he say , " have exceed his instruction again , that be all . so much the bad for he this time . " 
 he turn round and walk back towards the door . James follow hurriedly , edge himself in front . he see Irene take her finger from before her lip , hear she say something in her ordinary voice , and begin to speak before he reach they . 
 " there be a storm come on . we would well get home . we can not   take you , I suppose , Mr. Bosinney ? no , I suppose not . then , good - bye ! " he hold out his hand . Bosinney do not take it , but , turn with a laugh , say : 
 " good - bye , Mr. Forsyte . do not   get catch in the storm ! " and walk away . 
 " well , " begin James , " I do not   know .... " 
 but the ' sight of Irene 's face stop he . take hold of his daughter - in - law by the elbow , he escort she towards the carriage . he feel certain , quite certain , they have be make some appointment or other .... 
 nothing in this world be more sure to upset a Forsyte than the discovery that something on which he have stipulate to spend a certain sum have cost more . and this be reasonable , for upon the accuracy of his estimate the whole policy of his life be order . if he can not rely on definite value of property , his compass be amiss ; he be adrift upon bitter water without a helm . 
 after write to Bosinney in the term that have already be chronicle , Soames have dismiss the cost of the house from his mind . he believe that he have make the matter of the final cost so very plain that the possibility of its being again exceed have really never enter his head . on hear from Bosinney that his limit of twelve thousand pound would be exceed by something like four hundred , he have grow white with anger . his original estimate of the cost of the house complete have be ten thousand pound , and he have often blame himself severely for allow himself to be lead into repeat excess . over this last expenditure , however , Bosinney have put himself completely in the wrong . how on earth a fellow could make such an ass of himself Soames could not conceive ; but he have do so , and all the rancour and hidden jealousy that have be burn against he for so long be now focusse in rage at this crown piece of extravagance . the attitude of the confident and friendly husband be go . to preserve property - his wife - he have assume it , to preserve property of another kind he lose it now . 
 " ah ! " he have say to Bosinney when he could speak , " and I suppose you be perfectly content with yourself . but I may as well tell you that you have   altogether mistaken your man ! " 
 what he mean by those word he do not quite know at the time , but after dinner he look up the correspondence between himself and Bosinney to make quite sure . there could be no two opinion about it - the fellow have make himself liable for that extra four hundred , or , at all event , for three hundred and fifty of it , and he would have to make it good . 
 he be look at his wife 's face when he come to this conclusion . seat in her usual seat on the sofa , she be alter the lace on a collar . she have not once speak to he all the evening . 
 he go up to the mantelpiece , and contemplate his face in the mirror say : " your friend the Buccaneer have make a fool of himself ; he will have to pay for it ! " 
 she look at he scornfully , and answer : " I do not   know what you be talk about ! " 
 " you soon will . a mere trifle , quite beneath your contempt - four hundred pound . " 
 " do you mean that you be go to make he pay that towards this hateful , house ? " 
 " I do . " 
 " and you know he be get nothing ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " then you be mean than I think you . " 
 soame turn from the mirror , and unconsciously take a china cup from the mantelpiece , clasp his hand around it as though pray . he see her bosom rise and fall , her eye darken with anger , and take no notice of the taunt , he ask quietly : 
 " be you carry on a flirtation with Bosinney ? " 
 " no , I be not ! " 
 her eye meet his , and he look away . he neither believe nor disbelieve she , but he know that he have make a mistake in ask ; he never have know , never would know , what she be think . the sight of her inscrutable face , the thought of all the hundred of evening he have see she sit there like that soft and passive , but unreadable , unknown , enrage he beyond measure . 
 " I believe you be make of stone , " he say , clench his finger so hard that he break the fragile cup . the piece fall into the grate . and Irene smile . 
 " you seem to forget , " she say , " that cup be not ! " 
 soame grip her arm . " a good beating , " he say , " be the only thing that would bring you to your sens , " but turn on his heel , he leave the room . 
 CHAPTER XIV - SOAMES sit on the STAIRS 
 soame go upstairs that night that he have go too far . he be prepared to offer excuse for his word . 
 he turn out the gas still burn in the passage outside their room . pausing , with his hand on the knob of the door , he try to shape his apology , for he have no intention of let she see that he be nervous . 
 but the door do not open , nor when he pull it and turn the handle firmly . she must have lock it for some reason , and forget . 
 enter his dressing - room where the gas be also light and burn low , he go quickly to the other door . that too be lock . then he notice that the camp bed which he occasionally use be prepare , and his sleep - suit lay out upon it . he put his hand up to his forehead , and bring it away wet . it dawn on he that he be bar out . 
 he go back to the door , and rattle the handle stealthily , call : " Unlock the door , do you hear ? unlock the door ! " 
 there be a faint rustling , but no answer . 
 " do you hear ? let I in at once - I insist on be let in ! " 
 he could catch the sound of her breathe close to the door , like the breathing of a creature threaten by danger . 
 there be something terrify in this inexorable silence , in the impossibility of get at she . he go back to the other door , and put his whole weight against it , try to burst it open . the door be a new one - he have have they renew himself , in readiness for their come in after the honeymoon . in a rage he lift his foot to kick in the panel ; the thought of the servant restrain he , and he feel suddenly that he be beat . 
 fling himself down in the dressing - room , he take up a book . 
 but instead of the print he seem to see his wife - with her yellow hair flow over her bare shoulder , and her great dark eye - stand like an animal at bay . and the whole meaning of her act of revolt come to he . she mean it to be for good . 
 he could not sit still , and go to the door again . he could still hear she , and he call : " Irene ! Irene ! " 
 he do not mean to make his voice pathetic . 
 in ominous answer , the faint sound cease . he stand with clench hand , think . 
 presently he steal round on tiptoe , and run suddenly at the other door , make a supreme effort to break it open . it creak , but do not yield . he sit down on the stair and bury his face in his hand . 
 for a long time he sit there in the dark , the moon through the skylight above lay a pale smear which lengthen slowly towards he down the stairway . he try to be philosophical . 
 since she have lock her door she have no further claim as a wife , and he would console himself with other woman . 
 it be but a spectral journey he make among such delight - he have no appetite for these exploit . he have never have much , and he have lose the habit . he feel that he could never recover it . his hunger could only be appease by his wife , inexorable and frightened , behind these shut door . no other woman could help he . 
 this conviction come to he with terrible force out there in the dark . 
 his philosophy leave he ; and surly anger take its place . her conduct be immoral , inexcusable , worthy of any punishment within his power . he desire no one but she , and she refuse he ! 
 she must really hate he , then ! he have never believe it yet . he do not believe it now . it seem to he incredible . he feel as though he have lose for ever his power of judgment . if she , so soft and yield as he have always judge she , could take this decide step - what could not happen ? 
 then he ask himself again if she be carry on an intrigue with Bosinney . he do not believe that she be ; he could not afford to believe such a reason for her conduct - the thought be not to be face . 
 it would be unbearable to contemplate the necessity of make his marital relation public property . short of the most convincing proof he must still refuse to believe , for he do not wish to punish himself . and all the time at heart - he do believe . 
 the moonlight cast a greyish tinge over his figure , hunch against the staircase wall . 
 Bosinney be in love with she ! he hat the fellow , and would not spare he now . he could and would refuse to pay a penny piece over twelve thousand and fifty pound - the extreme limit fix in the correspondence ; or rather he would pay , he would pay and sue he for damage . he would go to Jobling and Boulter and put the matter in their hand . he would ruin the impecunious beggar ! and suddenly - though what connection between the thought ? - he reflect that Irene have no money either . they be both beggar . this give he a strange satisfaction . 
 the silence be break by a faint creaking through the wall . she be go to bed at last . ah ! Joy and pleasant dream ! if she throw the door open wide he would not go in now ! 
 but his lip , that be twist in a bitter smile , twitch ; he cover his eye with his hand .... 
 it be late the follow afternoon when soame stand in the dining - room window gaze gloomily into the Square . 
 the sunlight still shower on the plane - tree , and in the breeze their gay broad leaf shine and swing in rhyme to a barrel organ at the corner . it be play a waltz , an old waltz that be out of fashion , with a fateful rhythm in the note ; and it go on and on , though nothing indeed but leaf dance to the tune . 
 the woman do not look too gay , for she be tired ; and from the tall house no one throw she down copper . she move the organ on , and three door off begin again . 
 it be the waltz they have play at Roger 's when Irene have dance with Bosinney ; and the perfume of the gardenia she have wear come back to Soames , drift by the malicious music , as it have be drift to he then , when she pass , her hair glistening , her eye so soft , draw Bosinney on and on down an endless ballroom . 
 the organ woman ply her handle slowly ; she have be grind her tune all day - grind it in Sloane Street hard by , grind it perhaps to Bosinney himself . 
 soame turn , take a cigarette from the carven box , and walk back to the window . the tune have mesmerize he , and there come into his view Irene , her sunshade furl , hasten homeward down the Square , in a soft , rose - coloured blouse with droop sleeve , that he do not know . she stop before the organ , take out her purse , and give the woman money . 
 soame shrink back and stand where he could see into the hall . 
 she come in with her latch - key , put down her sunshade , and stand look at herself in the glass . her cheek be flush as if the sun have burn they ; her lip be part in a smile . she stretch her arm out as though to embrace herself , with a laugh that for all the world be like a sob . 
 soame step forward . 
 " very - pretty ! " he say . 
 but as though shoot she spin round , and would have pass he up the stair . he bar the way . 
 " why such a hurry ? " he say , and his eye fasten on a curl of hair fall loose across her ear .... 
 he hardly recognise she . she seem on fire , so deep and rich the colour of her cheek , her eye , her lip , and of the unusual blouse she wear . 
 she put up her hand and smooth back the curl . she be breathe fast and deep , as though she have be run , and with every breath perfume seem to come from her hair , and from her body , like perfume from an opening flower . 
 " I do not   like that blouse , " he say slowly , " it be a soft , shapeless thing ! " 
 he lift his finger towards her breast , but she dash his hand aside . 
 " do not   touch I ! " she cry . 
 he catch her wrist ; she wrench it away . 
 " and where may you have be ? " he ask . 
 " in heaven - out of this house ! " with those word she flee upstairs . 
 outside - in thanksgiving - at the very door , the organ - grinder be play the waltz . 
 and Soames stand motionless . what prevent he from follow she ? 
 be it that , with the eye of faith , he see Bosinney look down from that high window in Sloane Street , strain his eye for yet another glimpse of Irene 's vanish figure , cool his flushed face , dream of the moment when she fling herself on his breast - the scent of she still in the air around , and the sound of her laugh that be like a sob ? 
 PART III 
 CHAPTER I - MRS . MACANDER 's evidence 
 many people , no doubt , include the editor of the ' Ultra Vivisectionist , ' then in the bloom of its first youth , would say that soame be less than a man not to have remove the lock from his wife 's door , and , after beat she soundly , resume wed happiness . 
 brutality be not so deplorably dilute by humaneness as it use to be , yet a sentimental segment of the population may still be relieve to learn that he do none of these thing . for active brutality be not popular with Forsytes ; they be too circumspect , and , on the whole , too softhearted . and in Soames there be some common pride , not sufficient to make he do a really generous action , but enough to prevent his indulging in an extremely mean one , except , perhaps , in very hot blood . above all this a true Forsyte refuse to feel himself ridiculous . short of actually beat his wife , he perceive nothing to be do ; he therefore accept the situation without another word . 
 throughout the summer and autumn he continue to go to the office , to sort his picture , and ask his friend to dinner . 
 he do not leave town ; Irene refuse to go away . the house at Robin Hill , finish though it be , remain empty and ownerless . soame have bring a suit against the Buccaneer , in which he claim from he the sum of three hundred and fifty pound . 
 a firm of solicitor , Messrs. Freak and Able , have put in a defence on Bosinney 's behalf . admit the fact , they raise a point on the correspondence which , divest of legal phraseology , amount to this : to speak of ' a free hand in the term of this correspondence ' be an irish bull . 
 by a chance , fortuitous but not improbable in the close borough of legal circle , a good deal of information come to Soames ' ear anent this line of policy , the working partner in his firm , Bustard , happen to sit next at dinner at Walmisley 's , the Taxing Master , to young Chankery , of the Common Law Bar . 
 the necessity for talk what be know as ' shop , ' which come on all lawyer with the removal of the lady , cause Chankery , a young and promising advocate , to propound an impersonal conundrum to his neighbour , whose name he do not know , for , seat as he permanently be in the background , Bustard have practically no name . 
 he have , say Chankery , a case come on with a ' ve ry nice point . ' he then explain , preserve every professional discretion , the riddle in Soames ' case . everyone , he say , to whom he have speak , think it a nice point . the issue be small unfortunately , ' though d - - d serious for his client he believe ' - Walmisley 's champagne be bad but plentiful . a Judge would make short work of it , he be afraid . he intend to make a big effort - the point be a nice one . what do his neighbour say ? 
 Bustard , a model of secrecy , say nothing . he relate the incident to Soames however with some malice , for this quiet man be capable of human feeling , end with his own opinion that the point be ' a very nice one . ' 
 in accordance with his resolve , our Forsyte have put his interest into the hand of Jobling and Boulter . from the moment of do so he regret that he have not act for himself . on receive a copy of Bosinney 's defence he go over to their office . 
 Boulter , who have the matter in hand , Jobling have die some year before , tell he that in his opinion it be rather a nice point ; he would like counsel 's opinion on it . 
 soame tell he to go to a good man , and they go to Waterbuck , Q.C. , mark he ten and one , who keep the paper six week and then write as follow : 
 ' in my opinion the true interpretation of this correspondence depend very much on the intention of the party , and will turn upon the evidence give at the trial . I be of opinion that an attempt should be make to secure from the architect an admission that he understand he be not to spend at the outside more than twelve thousand and fifty pound . with regard to the expression , " a free hand in the term of this correspondence , " to which my attention be direct , the point be a nice one ; but I be of opinion that upon the whole the ruling in " Boileau v. the Blasted Cement Co. , Ltd. , " will apply . ' 
 upon this opinion they act , administer interrogatory , but to their annoyance Messrs. Freak and Able answer these in so masterly a fashion that nothing whatever be admit and that without prejudice . 
 it be on October 1 that soame read Waterbuck 's opinion , in the dining - room before dinner . 
 it make he nervous ; not so much because of the case of ' Boileau v. the Blasted Cement Co. , Ltd. , ' as that the point have lately begin to seem to he , too , a nice one ; there be about it just that pleasant flavour of subtlety so attractive to the good legal appetite . to have his own impression confirm by Waterbuck , Q.C. , would have disturb any man . 
 he sit think it over , and star at the empty grate , for though autumn have come , the weather keep as gloriously fine that jubilee year as if it be still high August . it be not pleasant to be disturb ; he desire too passionately to set his foot on Bosinney 's neck . 
 though he have not see the architect since the last afternoon at Robin Hill , he be never free from the sense of his presence - never free from the memory of his worn face with its high cheek bone and enthusiastic eye . it would not be too much to say that he have never get rid of the feeling of that night when he hear the peacock 's cry at dawn - the feeling that Bosinney haunt the house . and every man 's shape that he see in the dark evening walk past , seem that of he whom George have so appropriately name the Buccaneer . 
 Irene still meet he , he be certain ; where , or how , he neither know , nor ask ; deter by a vague and secret dread of too much knowledge . it all seem subterranean nowadays . 
 sometimes when he question his wife as to where she have be , which he still make a point of do , as every Forsyte should , she look very strange . her self - possession be wonderful , but there be moment when , behind the mask of her face , inscrutable as it have always be to he , lurk an expression he have never be use to see there . 
 she have take to lunch out too ; when he ask Bilson if her mistress have be in to lunch , as often as not she would answer : " no , sir . " 
 he strongly disapprove of she gad about by herself , and tell she so . but she take no notice . there be something that anger , amazed , yet almost amuse he about the calm way in which she disregard his wish . it be really as if she be hug to herself the thought of a triumph over he . 
 he rise from the perusal of Waterbuck , Q.C. 's opinion , and , go upstairs , enter her room , for she do not lock her door till bed - time - she have the decency , he find , to save the feeling of the servant . she be brush her hair , and turn to he with strange fierceness . 
 " what do you want ? " she say . " please leave my room ! " 
 he answer : " I want to know how long this state of thing between we be to last ? I have put up with it long enough . " 
 " will you please leave my room ? " 
 " will you treat I as your husband ? " 
 " no . " 
 " then , I shall take step to make you . " 
 " do ! " 
 he star , amazed at the calmness of her answer . her lip be compress in a thin line ; her hair lie in fluffy mass on her bare shoulder , in all its strange golden contrast to her dark eye - those eye alive with the emotion of fear , hate , contempt , and odd , haunt triumph . 
 " now , please , will you leave my room ? " he turn round , and go sulkily out . 
 he know very well that he have no intention of take step , and he see that she know too - know that he be afraid to . 
 it be a habit with he to tell she the doing of his day : how such and such client have call ; how he have arrange a mortgage for Parkes ; how that long - stand suit of Fryer v. Forsyte be get on , which , arise in the preternaturally careful disposition of his property by his great uncle Nicholas , who have tie it up so that no one could get at it at all , seem likely to remain a source of income for several solicitor till the Day of Judgment . 
 and how he have call in at Jobson 's , and see a Boucher sell , which he have just miss buying of Talleyrand and Sons in Pall Mall . 
 he have an admiration for Boucher , Watteau , and all that school . it be a habit with he to tell she all these matter , and he continue to do it even now , talk for long spell at dinner , as though by the volubility of word he could conceal from himself the ache in his heart . 
 often , if they be alone , he make an attempt to kiss she when she say good - night . he may have have some vague notion that some night she would let he ; or perhaps only the feeling that a husband ought to kiss his wife . even if she hat he , he at all event ought not to put himself in the wrong by neglect this ancient rite . 
 and why do she hate he ? even now he could not altogether believe it . it be strange to be hat ! - the emotion be too extreme ; yet he hat Bosinney , that Buccaneer , that prowl vagabond , that night - wanderer . for in his thought soame always see he lie in wait - wandering . ah , but he must be in very low water ! young Burkitt , the architect , have see he come out of a third - rate restaurant , look terribly down in the mouth ! 
 during all the hour he lie awake , think over the situation , which seem to have no end - unless she should suddenly come to her sens - never once do the thought of separate from his wife seriously enter his head .... 
 and the Forsytes ! what part do they play in this stage of Soames ' subterranean tragedy ? 
 truth to say , little or none , for they be at the sea . 
 from hotel , hydropathic , or lodge - house , they be bath daily ; lay in a stock of ozone to last they through the winter . 
 each section , in the vineyard of its own choosing , grow and cull and press and bottle the grape of a pet sea - air . 
 the end of September begin to witness their several return . 
 in rude health and small omnibus , with considerable colour in their cheek , they arrive daily from the various termini . the follow morning see they back at their vocation . 
 on the next Sunday Timothy 's be throng from lunch till dinner . 
 amongst other gossip , too numerous and interesting to relate , Mrs. Septimus Small mention that Soames and Irene have not be away . 
 it remain for a comparative outsider to supply the next evidence of interest . 
 it chance that one afternoon late in September , Mrs. MacAnder , Winifred Dartie 's great friend , take a constitutional , with young Augustus Flippard , on her bicycle in Richmond Park , pass Irene and Bosinney walk from the bracken towards the Sheen Gate . 
 perhaps the poor little woman be thirsty , for she have ride long on a hard , dry road , and , as all London know , to ride a bicycle and talk to young Flippard will try the tough constitution ; or perhaps the sight of the cool bracken grove , whence ' those two ' be come down , excite her envy . the cool bracken grove on the top of the hill , with the oak bough for roof , where the pigeon be raise an endless wedding hymn , and the autumn , humming , whisper to the ear of lover in the fern , while the deer steal by . the bracken grove of irretrievable delight , of golden minute in the long marriage of heaven and earth ! the bracken grove , sacred to stag , to strange tree - stump faun leap around the silver whiteness of a birch - tree nymph at summer dusk . 
 this lady know all the Forsytes , and have be at June 's ' at home , ' be not at a loss to see with whom she have to deal . her own marriage , poor thing , have not be successful , but have have the good sense and ability to force her husband into pronounce error , she herself have pass through the necessary divorce proceeding without incur censure . 
 she be therefore a judge of all that sort of thing , and live in one of those large building , where in small set of apartment , be gather incredible quantity of Forsytes , whose chief recreation out of business hour be the discussion of each other 's affair . 
 poor little woman , perhaps she be thirsty , certainly she be bore , for Flippard be a wit . to see ' those two ' in so unlikely a spot be quite a merciful ' pick - me - up . ' 
 at the MacAnder , like all London , Time pause . 
 this small but remarkable woman merit attention ; her all - see eye and shrewd tongue be inscrutably the mean of further the end of Providence . 
 with an air of be in at the death , she have an almost distressing power of take care of herself . she have do more , perhaps , in her way than any woman about town to destroy the sense of chivalry which still clog the wheel of civilization . so smart she be , and speak of endearingly as ' the little MacAnder ! ' 
 dress tightly and well , she belong to a woman 's Club , but be by no mean the neurotic and dismal type of member who be always think of her right . she take her right unconsciously , they come natural to she , and she know exactly how to make the most of they without exciting anything but admiration amongst that great class to whom she be affiliate , not precisely perhaps by manner , but by birth , breeding , and the true , the secret gauge , a sense of property . 
 the daughter of a Bedfordshire solicitor , by the daughter of a clergyman , she have never , through all the painful experience of be married to a very mild painter with a cranky love of Nature , who have desert she for an actress , lose touch with the requirement , belief , and inner feeling of Society ; and , on attain her liberty , she place herself without effort in the very van of Forsyteism . 
 always in good spirit , and ' full of information , ' she be universally welcome . she excite neither surprise nor disapprobation when encounter on the Rhine or at Zermatt , either alone , or travel with a lady and two gentleman ; it be feel that she be perfectly capable of take care of herself ; and the heart of all Forsytes warm to that wonderful instinct , which enable she to enjoy everything without give anything away . it be generally feel that to such woman as Mrs. MacAnder should we look for the perpetuation and increase of our good type of woman . she have never have any child . 
 if there be one thing more than another that she could not stand it be one of those soft woman with what man call ' charm ' about they , and for Mrs. Soames she always have an especial dislike . 
 Obscurely , no doubt , she feel that if charm be once admit as the criterion , smartness and capability must go to the wall ; and she hat - with a hatred the deeply that at time this so - call charm seem to disturb all calculation - the subtle seductiveness which she could not altogether overlook in Irene . 
 she say , however , that she could see nothing in the woman - there be no ' go ' about she - she would never be able to stand up for herself - anyone could take advantage of she , that be plain - she could not see in fact what man find to admire ! 
 she be not really ill - natured , but , in maintain her position after the try circumstance of her married life , she have find it so necessary to be ' full of information , ' that the idea of hold her tongue about ' those two ' in the Park never occur to she . 
 and it so happen that she be din that very evening at Timothy 's , where she go sometimes to ' cheer the old thing up , ' as she be will not to put it . the same people be always ask to meet she : Winifred Dartie and her husband ; Francie , because she belong to the artistic circle , for Mrs. MacAnder be know to contribute article on dress to ' the Ladies Kingdom come ' ; and for she to flirt with , provide they could be obtain , two of the Hayman boy , who , though they never say anything , be believe to be fast and thoroughly intimate with all that be late in smart Society . 
 at twenty - five minute past seven she turn out the electric light in her little hall , and wrap in her opera cloak with the chinchilla collar , come out into the corridor , pause a moment to make sure she have her latch - key . these little self - contain flat be convenient ; to be sure , she have no light and no air , but she could shut it up whenever she like and go away . there be no bother with servant , and she never feel tie as she use to when poor , dear Fred be always about , in his mooney way . she retain no rancour against poor , dear Fred , he be such a fool ; but the thought of that actress draw from she , even now , a little , bitter , derisive smile . 
 firmly snap the door to , she cross the corridor , with its gloomy , yellow - ochre wall , and its infinite vista of brown , number door . the lift be go down ; and wrap to the ear in the high cloak , with every one of her auburn hair in its place , she wait motionless for it to stop at her floor . the iron gate clank open ; she enter . there be already three occupant , a man in a great white waistcoat , with a large , smooth face like a baby 's , and two old lady in black , with mittened hand . 
 Mrs. MacAnder smile at they ; she know everybody ; and all these three , who have be admirably silent before , begin to talk at once . this be Mrs. MacAnder 's successful secret . she provoke conversation . 
 throughout a descent of five story the conversation continue , the lift boy stand with his back turn , his cynical face protrude through the bar . 
 at the bottom they separate , the man in the white waistcoat sentimentally to the billiard room , the old lady to dine and say to each other : " a dear little woman ! " " such a rattle ! " and Mrs. MacAnder to her cab . 
 when Mrs. MacAnder din at Timothy 's , the conversation   although Timothy himself could never be induce to be present   take that wide , man - of - the - world tone current among Forsytes at large , and this , no doubt , be what put she at a premium there . 
 Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester find it an exhilarate change . " if only , " they say , " Timothy would meet she ! " it be feel that she would do he good . she could tell you , for instance , the late story of Sir Charles Fiste 's son at Monte Carlo ; who be the real heroine of Tynemouth Eddy 's fashionable novel that everyone be hold up their hand over , and what they be do in Paris about wear bloomer . she be so sensible , too , know all about that vex question , whether to send young Nicholas ' eld into the navy as his mother wish , or make he an accountant as his father think would be safe . she strongly deprecate the navy . if you be not exceptionally brilliant or exceptionally well connected , they pass you over so disgracefully , and what be it after all to look forward to , even if you become an admiral - a pittance ! an accountant have many more chance , but let he be put with a good firm , where there be no risk at start ! 
 sometimes she would give they a tip on the Stock Exchange ; not that Mrs. Small or Aunt Hester ever take it . they have indeed no money to invest ; but it seem to bring they into such exciting touch with the reality of life . it be an event . they would ask Timothy , they say . but they never do , know in advance that it would upset he . surreptitiously , however , for week after they would look in that paper , which they take with respect on account of its really fashionable proclivity , to see whether ' Bright 's ruby ' or ' the Woollen Mackintosh Company ' be up or down . sometimes they could not find the name of the company at all ; and they would wait until James or Roger or even Swithin come in , and ask they in voice tremble with curiosity how that ' Bolivia Lime and Speltrate ' be do - they could not find it in the paper . 
 and Roger would answer : " what do you want to know for ? some trash ! you will go burn your finger - invest your money in lime , and thing you know nothing about ! who tell you ? " and ascertain what they have be tell , he would go away , and , make inquiry in the City , would perhaps invest some of his own money in the concern . 
 it be about the middle of dinner , just in fact as the saddle of mutton have be bring in by Smither , that Mrs. MacAnder , look airily round , say : " oh ! and whom do you think I pass to - day in Richmond Park ? you will never guess - Mrs. Soames and - Mr. Bosinney . they must have be down to look at the house ! " 
 Winifred Dartie cough , and no one say a word . it be the piece of evidence they have all unconsciously be wait for . 
 to do Mrs. MacAnder justice , she have be to Switzerland and the italian lake with a party of three , and have not hear of Soames ' rupture with his architect . she could not tell , therefore , the profound impression her word would make . 
 Upright and a little flushed , she move her small , shrewd eye from face to face , try to gauge the effect of her word . on either side of she a Hayman boy , his lean , taciturn , hungry face turn towards his plate , eat his mutton steadily . 
 these two , Giles and Jesse , be so alike and so inseparable that they be know as the Dromios . they never talk , and seem always completely occupy in do nothing . it be popularly suppose that they be cram for an important examination . they walk without hat for long hour in the Gardens attach to their house , book in their hand , a fox - terrier at their heel , never say a word , and smoke all the time . every morning , about fifty yard apart , they trot down Campden Hill on two lean hack , with leg as long as their own , and every morning about an hour later , still fifty yard apart , they canter up again . every evening , wherever they have din , they might be observe about half - past ten , lean over the balustrade of the Alhambra promenade . 
 they be never see otherwise than together ; in this way pass their life , apparently perfectly content . 
 inspire by some dumb stirring within they of the feeling of gentleman , they turn at this painful moment to Mrs. MacAnder , and say in precisely the same voice : " have you see the ... ? " 
 such be her surprise at be thus address that she put down her fork ; and Smither , who be pass , promptly remove her plate . Mrs. MacAnder , however , with presence of mind , say instantly : " I must have a little more of that nice mutton . " 
 but afterwards in the drawing - room she sit down by Mrs. Small , determine to get to the bottom of the matter . and she begin : 
 " what a charming woman , Mrs. Soames ; such a sympathetic temperament ! soame be a really lucky man ! " 
 her anxiety for information have not make sufficient allowance for that inner forsyte skin which refuse to share its trouble with outsider . 
 Mrs. Septimus Small , draw herself up with a creak and rustle of her whole person , say , shiver in her dignity : 
 " my dear , it be a subject we do not talk about ! " 
 CHAPTER II - NIGHT in the PARK 
 although with her infallible instinct Mrs. Small have say the very thing to make her guest ' more intriguee than ever , ' it be difficult to see how else she could truthfully have speak . 
 it be not a subject which the Forsytes could talk about even among themselves - to use the word Soames have invent to characterize to himself the situation , it be ' subterranean . ' 
 yet , within a week of Mrs. MacAnder 's encounter in Richmond Park , to all of they - save Timothy , from whom it be carefully keep - to James on his domestic beat from the Poultry to Park Lane , to George the wild one , on his daily adventure from the bow window at the Haversnake to the billiard room at the ' Red Pottle , ' be it know that ' those two ' have go to extreme . 
 George   it be he who invent many of those striking expression still current in fashionable circle   voice the sentiment more accurately than any one when he say to his brother Eustace that ' the Buccaneer ' be ' go it ' ; he expect Soames be about ' feed up . ' 
 it be feel that he must be , and yet , what could be do ? he ought perhaps to take step ; but to take step would be deplorable . 
 without an open scandal which they could not see their way to recommend , it be difficult to see what step could be take . in this impasse , the only thing be to say nothing to soame , and nothing to each other ; in fact , to pass it over . 
 by display towards Irene a dignified coldness , some impression might be make upon she ; but she be seldom now to be see , and there seem a slight difficulty in seek she out on purpose to show her coldness . sometimes in the privacy of his bedroom James would reveal to Emily the real suffering that his son 's misfortune cause he . 
 " I can not   tell , " he would say ; " it worry I out of my life . there will be a scandal , and that will do he no good . I shall not   say anything to he . there might be nothing in it . what do you think ? she be very artistic , they tell I . what ? oh , you be a ' regular Juley ! well , I do not   know ; I expect the bad . this be what come of have no child . I know how it would be from the first . they never tell I they do not   mean to have any child - nobody tell I anything ! " 
 on his knee by the side of the bed , his eye open and fix with worry , he would breathe into the counterpane . clothe in his nightshirt , his neck poke forward , his back rounded , he resemble some long white bird . 
 " our father- , " he repeat , turn over and over again the thought of this possible scandal . 
 like old Jolyon , he , too , at the bottom of his heart set the blame of the tragedy down to family interference . what business have that lot - he begin to think of the Stanhope Gate branch , include young Jolyon and his daughter , as ' that lot ' - to introduce a person like this Bosinney into the family ?   he have hear George 's soubriquet , ' the buccaneer , ' but he could make nothing of that - the young man be an architect . 
 he begin to feel that his brother Jolyon , to whom he have always look up and on whose opinion he have rely , be not quite what he have expect . 
 not have his eld brother 's force of character , he be more sad than angry . his great comfort be to go to Winifred 's , and take the little dartie in his carriage over to Kensington Gardens , and there , by the Round Pond , he could often be see walk with his eye fix anxiously on little Publius Dartie 's sailing - boat , which he have himself freight with a penny , as though convince that it would never again come to shore ; while little Publius - who , James delight to say , be not a bit like his father skip along under his lee , would try to get he to bet another that it never would , have find that it always do . and James would make the bet ; he always pay - sometimes as many as three or four penny in the afternoon , for the game seem never to pall on little Publius - and always in pay he say : " now , that be for your money - box . why , you be get quite a rich man ! " the thought of his little grandson 's grow wealth be a real pleasure to he . but little Publius know a sweet - shop , and a trick worth two of that . 
 and they would walk home across the Park , James ' figure , with high shoulder and absorb and worried face , exercise its tall , lean protectorship , pathetically unregarde , over the robust child - figure of Imogen and little Publius . 
 but those Gardens and that Park be not sacred to James . forsyte and tramp , child and lover , rest and wander day after day , night after night , seek one and all some freedom from labour , from the reek and turmoil of the street . 
 the leaf brown slowly , linger with the sun and summer - like warmth of the night . 
 on Saturday , October 5 , the sky that have be blue all day deepen after sunset to the bloom of purple grape . there be no moon , and a clear dark , like some velvety garment , be wrap around the tree , whose thin branch , resemble plume , stir not in the still , warm air . all London have pour into the Park , drain the cup of summer to its dreg . 
 couple after couple , from every gate , they stream along the path and over the burn grass , and one after another , silently out of the lighted space , steal into the shelter of the feathery tree , where , blot against some trunk , or under the shadow of shrub , they be lose to all but themselves in the heart of the soft darkness . 
 to fresh - comer along the path , these forerunner form but part of that passionate dusk , whence only a strange murmur , like the confused beating of heart , come forth . but when that murmur reach each couple in the lamp - light their voice waver , and cease ; their arm enlace , their eye begin seek , search , probe the blackness . suddenly , as though draw by invisible hand , they , too , step over the railing , and , silent as shadow , be go from the light . 
 the stillness , enclose in the far , inexorable roar of the town , be alive with the myriad passion , hope , and love of multitude of struggle human atom ; for in spite of the disapproval of that great body of Forsytes , the Municipal Council - to whom Love have long be consider , next to the Sewage Question , the grave danger to the community - a process be go on that night in the Park , and in a hundred other park , without which the thousand factory , church , shop , taxis , and drain , of which they be custodian , be as artery without blood , a man without a heart . 
 the instinct of self - forgetfulness , of passion , and of love , hide under the tree , away from the trustee of their remorseless enemy , the ' sense of property , ' be hold a stealthy revel , and soame , return from bayswater for he have be alone to dine at Timothy 's walk home along the water , with his mind upon that come lawsuit , have the blood drive from his heart by a low laugh and the sound of kiss . he think of write to the Times the next morning , to draw the attention of the Editor to the condition of our park . he do not , however , for he have a horror of see his name in print . 
 but starve as he be , the whisper sound in the stillness , the half - see form in the dark , act on he like some morbid stimulant . he leave the path along the water and steal under the tree , along the deep shadow of little plantation , where the bough of chestnut tree hang their great leaf low , and there be blacker refuge , shape his course in circle which have for their object a stealthy inspection of chair side by side , against tree - trunk , of enlaced lover , who stir at his approach . 
 now he stand still on the rise overlook the Serpentine , where , in full lamp - light , black against the silver water , sit a couple who never move , the woman 's face bury on the man 's neck - a single form , like a carve emblem of passion , silent and unashamed . 
 and , sting by the sight , soame hurry on deeply into the shadow of the tree . 
 in this search , who know what he think and what he seek ? bread for hunger - light in darkness ? who know what he expect to find - impersonal knowledge of the human heart - the end of his private subterranean tragedy - for , again , who know , but that each dark couple , unnamed , unnameable , might not be he and she ? 
 but it could not be such knowledge as this that he be seek - the wife of Soames Forsyte sit in the Park like a common wench ! such thought be inconceivable ; and from tree to tree , with his noiseless step , he pass . 
 once he be swear at ; once the whisper , " if only it could always be like this ! " send the blood fly again from his heart , and he wait there , patient and dog , for the two to move . but it be only a poor thin slip of a shop - girl in her draggle blouse who pass he , cling to her lover 's arm . 
 a hundred other lover too whisper that hope in the stillness of the tree , a hundred other lover clung to each other . 
 but shake himself with sudden disgust , soame return to the path , and leave that seek for he know not what . 
 CHAPTER iii - meeting AT the BOTANICAL 
 Young Jolyon , whose circumstance be not those of a Forsyte , find at time a difficulty in spar the money needful for those country jaunt and research into Nature , without have prosecute which no watercolour artist ever put brush to paper . 
 he be frequently , in fact , oblige to take his colour - box into the Botanical Gardens , and there , on his stool , in the shade of a monkey - puzzler or in the lee of some India - rubber plant , he would spend long hour sketch . 
 an Art critic who have recently be look at his work have deliver himself as follow : 
 " in a way your drawing be very good ; tone and colour , in some of they certainly quite a feeling for Nature . but , you see , they be so scatter ; you will never get the public to look at they . now , if you have take a definite subject , such as ' London by Night , ' or ' the Crystal Palace in the spring , ' and make a regular series , the public would have know at once what they be look at . I can not   lay too much stress upon that . all the man who be make great name in Art , like Crum Stone or Bleeder , be make they by avoid the unexpected ; by specialize and put their work all in the same pigeon - hole , so that the public know pat once where to go . and this stand to reason , for if a man 's a collector he do not   want people to smell at the canvas to find out whom his picture be by ; he want they to be able to say at once , ' a capital forsyte ! ' it be all the more important for you to be careful to choose a subject that they can lay hold of on the spot , since there be no very marked originality in your style . " 
 Young Jolyon , stand by the little piano , where a bowl of dry rose leaf , the only produce of the garden , be deposit on a bit of faded damask , listen with his dim smile . 
 turn to his wife , who be look at the speaker with an angry expression on her thin face , he say : 
 " you see , dear ? " 
 " I do not , " she answer in her staccato voice , that still have a little foreign accent ; " your style have originality . " 
 the critic look at she , smile ' deferentially , and say no more . like everyone else , he know their history . 
 the word bear good fruit with young Jolyon ; they be contrary to all that he believe in , to all that he theoretically hold good in his art , but some strange , deep instinct move he against his will to turn they to profit . 
 he discover therefore one morning that an idea have come to he for make a series of watercolour drawing of London . how the idea have arise he could not tell ; and it be not till the following year , when he have complete and sell they at a very fair price , that in one of his impersonal mood , he find himself able to recollect the art critic , and to discover in his own achievement another proof that he be a Forsyte . 
 he decide to commence with the Botanical Gardens , where he have already make so many study , and choose the little artificial pond , sprinkle now with an autumn shower of red and yellow leaf , for though the gardener long to sweep they off , they could not reach they with their broom . the rest of the garden they sweep bare enough , remove every morning Nature 's rain of leaf ; pile they in heap , whence from slow fire rise the sweet , acrid smoke that , like the cuckoo 's note for spring , the scent of lime tree for the summer , be the true emblem of the fall . the gardener ' tidy soul could not abide the gold and green and russet pattern on the grass . the gravel path must lie unstaine , ordered , methodical , without knowledge of the reality of life , nor of that slow and beautiful decay which fling crown underfoot to star the earth with fall glory , whence , as the cycle roll , will leap again wild spring . 
 thus each leaf that fall be mark from the moment when it flutter a good - bye and drop , slow turning , from its twig . 
 but on that little pond the leaf float in peace , and praise Heaven with their hue , the sunlight haunt over they . 
 and so young Jolyon find they . 
 come there one morning in the middle of October , he be disconcert to find a bench about twenty pace from his stand occupy , for he have a proper horror of anyone see he at work . 
 a lady in a velvet jacket be sit there , with her eye fix on the ground . a flower laurel , however , stand between , and , take shelter behind this , young Jolyon prepare his easel . 
 his preparation be leisurely ; he catch , as every true artist should , at anything that might delay for a moment the effort of his work , and he find himself look furtively at this unknown dame . 
 like his father before he , he have an eye for a face . this face be charming ! 
 he see a rounded chin nestling in a cream ruffle , a delicate face with large dark eye and soft lip . a black ' picture ' hat conceal the hair ; her figure be lightly poise against the back of the bench , her knee be cross ; the tip of a patent - leather shoe emerge beneath her skirt . there be something , indeed , inexpressibly dainty about the person of this lady , but young Jolyon 's attention be chiefly rivet by the look on her face , which remind he of his wife . it be as though its owner have come into contact with force too strong for she . it trouble he , arouse vague feeling of attraction and chivalry . who be she ? and what do there , alone ? 
 two young gentleman of that peculiar breed , at once forward and shy , find in the Regent 's Park , come by on their way to lawn tennis , and he note with disapproval their furtive stare of admiration . a loitering gardener halt to do something unnecessary to a clump of pampas grass ; he , too , want an excuse for peep . a gentleman , old , and , by his hat , a professor of horticulture , pass three time to scrutinize her long and stealthily , a queer expression about his lip . 
 with all these man young Jolyon feel the same vague irritation . she look at none of they , yet be he certain that every man who pass would look at she like that . 
 her face be not the face of a sorceress , who in every look hold out to man the offer of pleasure ; it have none of the ' devil 's beauty ' so highly prized among the first Forsytes of the land ; neither be it of that type , no less adorable , associate with the box of chocolate ; it be not of the spiritually passionate , or passionately spiritual order , peculiar to house - decoration and modern poetry ; nor do it seem to promise to the playwright material for the production of the interesting and neurasthenic figure , who commit suicide in the last act . 
 in shape and colouring , in its soft persuasive passivity , its sensuous purity , this woman 's face remind he of Titian 's ' Heavenly love , ' a reproduction of which hang over the sideboard in his dining - room . and her attraction seem to be in this soft passivity , in the feeling she give that to pressure she must yield . 
 for what or whom be she wait , in the silence , with the tree drop here and there a leaf , and the thrush strut close on grass , touch with the sparkle of the autumn rime ? then her charming face grow eager , and , glance round , with almost a lover 's jealousy , young Jolyon see Bosinney stride across the grass . 
 curiously he watch the meeting , the look in their eye , the long clasp of their hand . they sit down close together , link for all their outward discretion . he hear the rapid murmur of their talk ; but what they say he could not catch . 
 he have row in the galley himself ! he know the long hour of waiting and the lean minute of a half - public meeting ; the torture of suspense that haunt the unhallowed lover . 
 it require , however , but a glance at their two face to see that this be none of those affair of a season that distract man and woman about town ; none of those sudden appetite that wake up ravening , and be surfeit and asleep again in six week . this be the real thing ! this be what have happen to himself ! out of this anything might come ! 
 Bosinney be plead , and she so quiet , so soft , yet immovable in her passivity , sit look over the grass . 
 be he the man to carry she off , that tender , passive being , who would never stir a step for herself ? who have give he all herself , and would die for he , but perhaps would never run away with he ! 
 it seem to young Jolyon that he could hear she say : " but , darling , it would ruin you ! " for he himself have experience to the full the gnawing fear at the bottom of each woman 's heart that she be a drag on the man she love . 
 and he peep at they no more ; but their soft , rapid talk come to his ear , with the stuttering song of some bird who seem try to remember the note of spring : Joy - tragedy ? which - which ? 
 and gradually their talk cease ; long silence follow . 
 ' and where do soame come in ? ' young Jolyon think . ' People think she be concerned about the sin of deceive her husband ! little they know of woman ! she be eat , after starvation - take her revenge ! and Heaven help she - for he will take his . ' 
 he hear the swish of silk , and , spy round the laurel , see they walk away , their hand stealthily join .... 
 at the end of July old Jolyon have take his grand - daughter to the mountain ; and on that visit   the last they ever pay   June recover to a great extent her health and spirit . in the hotel , fill with British Forsytes - for old Jolyon could not bear a ' set of Germans , ' as he call all foreigner - she be look upon with respect - the only grand - daughter of that fine - look , and evidently wealthy , old Mr. Forsyte . she do not mix freely with people - to mix freely with people be not June 's habit - but she form some friendship , and notably one in the Rhone Valley , with a french girl who be die of consumption . 
 determine at once that her friend should not die , she forget , in the institution of a campaign against death , much of her own trouble . 
 Old Jolyon watch the new intimacy with relief and disapproval ; for this additional proof that her life be to be pass amongst ' lame duck ' worry he . would she never make a friendship or take an interest in something that would be of real benefit to she ? 
 ' take up with a parcel of foreigner , ' he call it . he often , however , bring home grape or rose , and present they to ' Mam'zelle ' with an ingratiate twinkle . 
 towards the end of September , in spite of June 's disapproval , Mademoiselle Vigor breathe she last in the little hotel at St. Luc , to which they have move she ; and June take her defeat so deeply to heart that old Jolyon carry she away to Paris . here , in contemplation of the ' Venus de Milo ' and the ' Madeleine , ' she shake off her depression , and when , towards the middle of October , they return to town , her grandfather believe that he have effect a cure . 
 no soon , however , have they establish themselves in Stanhope Gate than he perceive to his dismay a return of her old absorbed and brood manner . she would sit , star in front of she , her chin on her hand , like a little Norse spirit , grim and intent , while all around in the electric light , then just instal , shine the great , drawing - room brocade up to the frieze , full of furniture from Baple and Pullbred 's . and in the huge gilt mirror be reflect those Dresden china group of young man in tight knee breech , at the foot of full - bosom lady nurse on their lap pet lamb , which old Jolyon have buy when he be a bachelor and think so highly of in these day of degenerate taste . he be a man of most open mind , who , more than any Forsyte of they all , have move with the time , but he could never forget that he have buy these group at Jobson 's , and give a lot of money for they . he often say to June , with a sort of disillusioned contempt : 
 " you do not   care about they ! they be not the gimcrack thing you and your friend like , but they cost I seventy pound ! " he be not a man who allow his taste to be warp when he know for solid reason that it be sound . 
 one of the first thing that June do on get home be to go round to Timothy 's . she persuade herself that it be her duty to call there , and cheer he with an account of all her travel ; but in reality she go because she know of no other place where , by some random speech , or roundabout question , she could glean news of Bosinney . 
 they receive she most cordially : and how be her dear grandfather ? he have not be to see they since May . her Uncle Timothy be very poorly , he have have a lot of trouble with the chimney - sweep in his bedroom ; the stupid man have let the soot down the chimney ! it have quite upset her uncle . 
 June sit there a long time , dread , yet passionately hop , that they would speak of Bosinney . 
 but paralyze by unaccountable discretion , Mrs. Septimus Small let fall no word , neither do she question June about he . in desperation the girl ask at last whether Soames and Irene be in town - she have not yet be to see anyone . 
 it be Aunt Hester who reply : oh , yes , they be in town , they have not be away at all . there be some little difficulty about the house , she believe . June have hear , no doubt ! she have well ask her Aunt Juley ! 
 June turn to Mrs. Small , who sit upright in her chair , her hand clasp , her face cover with innumerable pout . in answer to the girl 's look she maintain a strange silence , and when she speak it be to ask June whether she have wear night - sock up in those high hotel where it must be so cold of a night . 
 June answer that she have not , she hat the stuffy thing ; and rise to leave . 
 Mrs. Small 's infallibly choose silence be far more ominous to she than anything that could have be say . 
 before half an hour be over she have drag the truth from Mrs. Baynes in Lowndes Square , that soame be bring an action against Bosinney over the decoration of the house . 
 instead of disturb she , the news have a strangely calm effect ; as though she see in the prospect of this struggle new hope for herself . she learn that the case be expect to come on in about a month , and there seem little or no prospect of Bosinney 's success . 
 " and whatever he will do I can not   think , " say Mrs. Baynes ; " it be very dreadful for he , you know - he be get no money - he be very hard up . and we can not   help he , I be sure . I be tell the money - lender will not   lend if you have no security , and he have none - none at all . " 
 her embonpoint have increase of late ; she be in the full swing of autumn organization , her writing - table literally strew with the menu of charity function . she look meaningly at June , with her round eye of parrot - grey . 
 the sudden flush that rise on the girl 's intent young face - she must have see spring up before she a great hope - the sudden sweetness of her smile , often come back to Lady Baynes in after year   Baynes be knight when he build that public Museum of Art which have give so much employment to official , and so little pleasure to those working class for whom it be design . 
 the memory of that change , vivid and touching , like the breaking open of a flower , or the first sun after long winter , the memory , too , of all that come after , often intrude itself , unaccountably , inopportunely on Lady Baynes , when her mind be set upon the most important thing . 
 this be the very afternoon of the day that young Jolyon witness the meeting in the Botanical Gardens , and on this day , too , old Jolyon pay a visit to his solicitor , Forsyte , Bustard , and Forsyte , in the Poultry . soame be not in , he have go down to Somerset House ; Bustard be bury up to the hilt in paper and that inaccessible apartment , where he be judiciously place , in order that he might do as much work as possible ; but James be in the front office , bite a finger , and lugubriously turn over the pleading in Forsyte v. Bosinney . 
 this sound lawyer have only a sort of luxurious dread of the ' nice point , ' enough to set up a pleasurable feeling of fuss ; for his good practical sense tell he that if he himself be on the Bench he would not pay much attention to it . but he be afraid that this Bosinney would go bankrupt and Soames would have to find the money after all , and cost into the bargain . and behind this tangible dread there be always that intangible trouble , lurk in the background , intricate , dim , scandalous , like a bad dream , and of which this action be but an outward and visible sign . 
 he raise his head as old Jolyon come in , and mutter : " how be you , Jolyon ? have not   see you for an age . you have   be to Switzerland , they tell I . this young Bosinney , he be get himself into a mess . I know how it would be ! " he hold out the paper , regard his eld brother with nervous gloom . 
 Old Jolyon read they in silence , and while he read they James look at the floor , bite his finger the while . 
 Old Jolyon pitch they down at last , and they fall with a thump amongst a mass of affidavit in 're Buncombe , deceased , ' one of the many branch of that parent and profitable tree , ' Fryer v. Forsyte . ' 
 " I do not   know what Soames be about , " he say , " to make a fuss over a few hundred pound . I think he be a man of property . " 
 James ' long upper lip twitch angrily ; he could not bear his son to be attack in such a spot . 
 " it be not the money , " he begin , but meet his brother 's glance , direct , shrewd , judicial , he stop . 
 there be a silence . 
 " I have   come in for my will , " say old Jolyon at last , tug at his moustache . 
 James ' curiosity be rouse at once . perhaps nothing in this life be more stimulating to he than a will ; it be the supreme deal with property , the final inventory of a man 's belonging , the last word on what he be worth . he sound the bell . 
 " bring in Mr. Jolyon 's will , " he say to an anxious , dark - haired clerk . 
 " you go to make some alteration ? " and through his mind there flash the thought : ' now , be I worth as much as he ? ' 
 Old Jolyon put the Will in his breast pocket , and James twist his long leg regretfully . 
 " you have   make some nice purchase lately , they tell I , " he say . 
 " I do not   know where you get your information from , " answer old Jolyon sharply . " when be this action come on ? next month ? I can not   tell what you have   get in your mind . you must manage your own affair ; but if you take my advice , you will settle it out of Court . good - bye ! " with a cold handshake he be go . 
 James , his fix grey - blue eye corkscrew round some secret anxious image , begin again to bite his finger . 
 Old Jolyon take his will to the office of the New Colliery Company , and sit down in the empty Board Room to read it through . he answer ' down - by - the - starn ' hemming so tartly when the latter , see his Chairman seat there , enter with the new Superintendent 's first report , that the Secretary withdraw with regretful dignity ; and send for the transfer clerk , blow he up till the poor youth know not where to look . 
 it be not - by George - as he   down - by - the - starn   would have he know , for a whippersnapper of a young fellow like he , to come down to that office , and think that he be God Almighty . he   down - by - the - starn   have be head of that office for more year than a boy like he could count , and if he think that when he have finish all his work , he could sit there do nothing , he do not know he , Hemmings   down - by - the - starn , and so forth . 
 on the other side of the green baize door old Jolyon sit at the long , mahogany - and - leather board table , his thick , loose - joint , tortoiseshell eye - glass perch on the bridge of his nose , his gold pencil move down the clause of his will . 
 it be a simple affair , for there be none of those vexatious little legacy and donation to charity , which fritter away a man 's possession , and damage the majestic effect of that little paragraph in the morning paper accord to Forsytes who die with a hundred thousand pound . 
 a simple affair . just a bequest to his son of twenty thousand , and ' as to the residue of my property of whatsoever kind whether realty or personalty , or partaking of the nature of either - upon trust to pay the proceed rent annual produce dividend or interest thereof and thereon to my said grand - daughter June Forsyte or her assign during her life to be for her sole use and benefit and without , etc ... and from and after her death or decease upon trust to convey assign transfer or make over the say last - mention land hereditament premise trust money stock fund investment and security or such as shall then stand for and represent the same unto such person or person whether one or more for such intent purpose and use and generally in such manner way and form in all respect as the say June Forsyte notwithstanding coverture shall by her last Will and Testament or any writing or writing in the nature of a Will testament or testamentary disposition to be by she duly make sign and publish direct appoint or make over give and dispose of the same and in default etc .... provide always ... ' and so on , in seven folio of brief and simple phraseology . 
 the Will have be draw by James in his palmy day . he have foresee almost every contingency . 
 Old Jolyon sit a long time read this will ; at last he take half a sheet of paper from the rack , and make a prolong pencil note ; then button up the will , he cause a cab to be call and drive to the office of Paramor and Herring , in Lincoln 's Inn Fields . Jack Herring be dead , but his nephew be still in the firm , and old Jolyon be closet with he for half an hour . 
 he have keep the hansom , and on come out , give the driver the address - 3 , Wistaria Avenue . 
 he feel a strange , slow satisfaction , as though he have score a victory over James and the man of property . they should not poke their nose into his affair any more ; he have just cancel their trusteeship of his will ; he would take the whole of his business out of their hand , and put it into the hand of young Herring , and he would move the business of his Companies too . if that young soame be such a man of property , he would never miss a thousand a year or so ; and under his great white moustache old Jolyon grimly smile . he feel that what he be do be in the nature of retributive justice , richly deserve . 
 slowly , surely , with the secret inner process that work the destruction of an old tree , the poison of the wound to his happiness , his will , his pride , have corrode the comely edifice of his philosophy . life have wear he down on one side , till , like that family of which he be the head , he have lose balance . 
 to he , bear northward towards his son 's house , the thought of the new disposition of property , which he have just set in motion , appear vaguely in the light of a stroke of punishment , level at that family and that Society , of which James and his son seem to he the representative . he have make a restitution to young Jolyon , and restitution to young Jolyon satisfy his secret craving for revenge - revenge against Time , sorrow , and interference , against all that incalculable sum of disapproval that have be bestow by the world for fifteen year on his only son . it present itself as the one possible way of assert once more the domination of his will ; of force James , and soame , and the family , and all those hide mass of Forsytes - a great stream roll against the single dam of his obstinacy - to recognise once and for all that he would be master . it be sweet to think that at last he be go to make the boy a rich man by far than that son of James , that ' man of property . ' and it be sweet to give to Jo , for he love his son . 
 neither young Jolyon nor his wife be in   young Jolyon indeed be not back from the Botanical , but the little maid tell he that she expect the master at any moment : 
 " he be always at ' ome to tea , sir , to play with the child . " 
 Old Jolyon say he would wait ; and sit down patiently enough in the fade , shabby drawing room , where , now that the summer chintz be remove , the old chair and sofa reveal all their threadbare deficiency . he long to send for the child ; to have they there beside he , their supple body against his knee ; to hear Jolly 's : " Hallo , Gran ! " and see his rush ; and feel Holly 's soft little hand steal up against his cheek . but he would not . there be solemnity in what he have come to do , and until it be over he would not play . he amuse himself by think how with two stroke of his pen he be go to restore the look of caste so conspicuously absent from everything in that little house ; how he could fill these room , or other in some large mansion , with triumph of art from Baple and Pullbred 's ; how he could send little Jolly to Harrow and Oxford   he no long have faith in Eton and Cambridge , for his son have be there ; how he could procure little Holly the good musical instruction , the child have a remarkable aptitude . 
 as these vision crowd before he , cause emotion to swell his heart , he rise , and stand at the window , look down into the little walled strip of garden , where the pear - tree , bare of leaf before its time , stand with gaunt branch in the slow - gather mist of the autumn afternoon . the dog Balthasar , his tail curl tightly over a piebald , furry back , be walk at the farth end , sniff at the plant , and at interval place his leg for support against the wall . 
 and old Jolyon muse . 
 what pleasure be there leave but to give ? it be pleasant to give , when you could find one who would be thankful for what you give - one of your own flesh and blood ! there be no such satisfaction to be have out of give to those who do not belong to you , to those who have no claim on you ! such giving as that be a betrayal of the individualistic conviction and action of his life , of all his enterprise , his labour , and his moderation , of the great and proud fact that , like ten of thousand of Forsytes before he , ten of thousand in the present , ten of thousand in the future , he have always make his own , and hold his own , in the world . 
 and , while he stand there look down on the smut - cover foliage of the laurel , the black - stain grass - plot , the progress of the dog Balthasar , all the suffering of the fifteen year during which he have be baulk of legitimate enjoyment mingle its gall with the sweetness of the approach moment . 
 Young Jolyon come at last , pleased with his work , and fresh from long hour in the open air . on hear that his father be in the drawing room , he inquire hurriedly whether Mrs. Forsyte be at home , and be inform that she be not , heave a sigh of relief . then put his painting material carefully in the little coat - closet out of sight , he go in . 
 with characteristic decision old Jolyon come at once to the point . " I have   be alter my arrangement , Jo , " he say . " you can cut your coat a bit long in the future - I be settle a thousand a year on you at once . June will have fifty thousand at my death ; and you the rest . that dog of yours be spoil the garden . I should not   keep a dog , if I be you ! " 
 the dog Balthasar , seat in the centre of the lawn , be examine his tail . 
 Young Jolyon look at the animal , but see he dimly , for his eye be misty . 
 " your will not   come short of a hundred thousand , my boy , " say old Jolyon ; " I think you would well know . I have not   much long to live at my age . I shall not   allude to it again . how be your wife ? and - give she my love . " 
 Young Jolyon put his hand on his father 's shoulder , and , as neither speak , the episode close . 
 have see his father into a hansom , young Jolyon come back to the drawing - room and stand , where old Jolyon have stand , look down on the little garden . he try to realize all that this mean to he , and , Forsyte that he be , vista of property be open out in his brain ; the year of half ration through which he have pass have not sap his natural instinct . in extremely practical form , he think of travel , of his wife 's costume , the child 's education , a pony for Jolly , a thousand thing ; but in the midst of all he think , too , of Bosinney and his mistress , and the broken song of the thrush . Joy - tragedy ! which ? which ? 
 the old past - the poignant , suffering , passionate , wonderful past , that no money could buy , that nothing could restore in all its burn sweetness - have come back before he . 
 when his wife come in he go straight up to she and take she in his arm ; and for a long time he stand without speak , his eye close , press she to he , while she look at he with a wonder , adoring , doubt look in her eye . 
 CHAPTER IV - VOYAGE into THE INFERNO 
 the morning after a certain night on which soame at last assert his right and act like a man , he breakfast alone . 
 he breakfast by gaslight , the fog of late November wrap the town as in some monstrous blanket till the tree of the Square even be barely visible from the dining - room window . 
 he eat steadily , but at time a sensation as though he could not swallow attack he . have he be right to yield to his overmaster hunger of the night before , and break down the resistance which he have suffer now too long from this woman who be his lawful and solemnly constitute helpmate ? 
 he be strangely haunt by the recollection of her face , from before which , to soothe she , he have try to pull her hand - of her terrible smothered sobbing , the like of which he have never hear , and still seem to hear ; and he be still haunt by the odd , intolerable feeling of remorse and shame he have feel , as he stand look at she by the flame of the single candle , before silently slink away . 
 and somehow , now that he have act like this , he be surprised at himself . 
 two night before , at Winifred Dartie 's , he have take Mrs. MacAnder into dinner . she have say to he , look in his face with her sharp , greenish eye : " and so your wife be a great friend of that Mr. Bosinney 's ? " 
 not deign to ask what she mean , he have brood over her word . 
 they have rouse in he a fierce jealousy , which , with the peculiar perversion of this instinct , have turn to fiercer desire . 
 without the incentive of Mrs. MacAnder 's word he might never have do what he have do . without their incentive and the accident of find his wife 's door for once unlocked , which have enable he to steal upon her asleep . 
 Slumber have remove his doubt , but the morning bring they again . one thought comfort he : no one would know - it be not the sort of thing that she would speak about . 
 and , indeed , when the vehicle of his daily business life , which need so imperatively the grease of clear and practical thought , start roll once more with the reading of his letter , those nightmare - like doubt begin to assume less extravagant importance at the back of his mind . the incident be really not of great moment ; woman make a fuss about it in book ; but in the cool judgment of right - think man , of man of the world , of such as he recollect often receive praise in the Divorce Court , he have but do his good to sustain the sanctity of marriage , to prevent she from abandon her duty , possibly , if she be still see Bosinney , from .... 
 no , he do not regret it . 
 now that the first step towards reconciliation have be take , the rest would be comparatively - comparatively .... 
 he , rise and walk to the window . his nerve have be shake . the sound of smothered sobbing be in his ear again . he could not get rid of it . 
 he put on his fur coat , and go out into the fog ; have to go into the City , he take the underground railway from Sloane Square station . 
 in his corner of the first - class compartment fill with City man the smother sobbing still haunt he , so he open the Times with the rich crackle that drown all less sound , and , barricade behind it , set himself steadily to con the news . 
 he read that a recorder have charge a grand jury on the previous day with a more than usually long list of offence . he read of three murder , five manslaughter , seven arson , and as many as eleven rape - a surprisingly high number - in addition to many less conspicuous crime , to be try during a come session ; and from one piece of news he go on to another , keep the paper well before his face . 
 and still , inseparable from his reading , be the memory of Irene 's tear - stain face , and the sound from her broken heart . 
 the day be a busy one , include , in addition to the ordinary affair of his practice , a visit to his broker , Messrs. Grin and Grinning , to give they instruction to sell his share in the New Colliery Co. , Ltd. , whose business he suspect , rather than know , be stagnate   this enterprise afterwards slowly decline , and be ultimately sell for a song to an american syndicate ; and a long conference at Waterbuck , Q.C. 's chamber , attend by Boulter , by Fiske , the junior counsel , and Waterbuck , Q.C. , himself . 
 the case of Forsyte v. Bosinney be expect to be reach on the morrow , before Mr. Justice Bentham . 
 Mr. Justice Bentham , a man of common - sense rather than too great legal knowledge , be consider to be about the good man they could have to try the action . he be a ' strong ' Judge . 
 Waterbuck , Q.C. , in please conjunction with an almost rude neglect of Boulter and Fiske pay to soame a good deal of attention , by instinct or the sounder evidence of rumour , feel he to be a man of property . 
 he hold with remarkable consistency to the opinion he have already express in writing , that the issue would depend to a great extent on the evidence give at the trial , and in a few well direct remark he advise soame not to be too careful in give that evidence . " a little bluffness , Mr. Forsyte , " he say , " a little bluffness , " and after he have speak he laugh firmly , close his lip tight , and scratch his head just below where he have push his wig back , for all the world like the gentleman - farmer for whom he love to be take . he be consider perhaps the lead man in breach of promise case . 
 soame use the underground again in go home . 
 the fog be bad than ever at Sloane Square station . through the still , thick blur , man grope in and out ; woman , very few , grasp their reticule to their bosom and handkerchief to their mouth ; crown with the weird excrescence of the driver , haloe by a vague glow of lamp - light that seem to drown in vapour before it reach the pavement , cab loom dim - shaped ever and again , and discharged citizen , bolt like rabbit to their burrow . 
 and these shadowy figure , wrap each in his own little shroud of fog , take no notice of each other . in the great warren , each rabbit for himself , especially those clothe in the more expensive fur , who , afraid of carriage on foggy day , be drive underground . 
 one figure , however , not far from soame , wait at the station door . 
 some buccaneer or lover , of whom each Forsyte think : ' poor devil ! look as if he be have a bad time ! ' their kind heart beat a stroke fast for that poor , wait , anxious lover in the fog ; but they hurry by , well know that they have neither time nor money to spare for any suffering but their own . 
 only a policeman , patrol slowly and at interval , take an interest in that waiting figure , the brim of whose slouch hat half hide a face redden by the cold , all thin , and haggard , over which a hand steal now and again to smooth away anxiety , or renew the resolution that keep he wait there . but the wait lover   if lover he be   be use to policeman 's scrutiny , or too absorb in his anxiety , for he never flinch . a hardened case , accustom to long tryst , to anxiety , and fog , and cold , if only his mistress come at last . foolish lover ! fog last until the spring ; there be also snow and rain , no comfort anywhere ; gnaw fear if you bring she out , gnaw fear if you bid her stay at home ! 
 " serve he right ; he should arrange his affair well ! " 
 so any respectable Forsyte . yet , if that sounder citizen could have listen at the wait lover 's heart , out there in the fog and the cold , he would have say again : " yes , poor devil he be have a bad time ! " 
 soame get into his cab , and , with the glass down , creep along Sloane Street , and so along the Brompton Road , and home . he reach his house at five . 
 his wife be not in . she have go out a quarter of an hour before . out at such a time of night , into this terrible fog ! what be the meaning of that ? 
 he sit by the dining - room fire , with the door open , disturb to the soul , try to read the evening paper . a book be no good - in daily paper alone be any narcotic to such worry as his . from the customary event record in the journal he draw some comfort . ' suicide of an actress ' - ' grave indisposition of a Statesman '   that chronic sufferer   - ' divorce of an army officer ' - ' Fire in a colliery ' - he read they all . they help he a little - prescribed by the great of all doctor , our natural taste . 
 it be nearly seven when he hear she come in . 
 the incident of the night before have long lose its importance under stress of anxiety at her strange sortie into the fog . but now that Irene be home , the memory of her break - hearted sobbing come back to he , and he feel nervous at the thought of face she . 
 she be already on the stair ; her grey fur coat hang to her knee , its high collar almost hide her face , she wear a thick veil . 
 she neither turn to look at he nor speak . no ghost or strange could have pass more silently . 
 Bilson come to lay dinner , and tell he that Mrs. Forsyte be not come down ; she be have the soup in her room . 
 for once soame do not ' change ' ; it be , perhaps , the first time in his life that he have sit down to dinner with soiled cuff , and , not even notice they , he brood long over his wine . he send Bilson to light a fire in his picture - room , and presently go up there himself . 
 turn on the gas , he heave a deep sigh , as though amongst these treasure , the back of which confront he in stack , around the little room , he have find at length his peace of mind . he go straight up to the great treasure of they all , an undoubted turner , and , carry it to the easel , turn its face to the light . there have be a movement in Turners , but he have not be able to make up his mind to part with it . he stand for a long time , his pale , clean - shaven face poke forward above his stand - up collar , look at the picture as though he be add it up ; a wistful expression come into his eye ; he find , perhaps , that it come to too little . he take it down from the easel to put it back against the wall ; but , in cross the room , stop , for he seem to hear sob . 
 it be nothing - only the sort of thing that have be bother he in the morning . and soon after , put the high guard before the blaze fire , he steal downstairs . 
 Fresh for the morrow ! be his thought . it be long before he go to sleep .... 
 it be now to George Forsyte that the mind must turn for light on the event of that fog - engulfed afternoon . 
 the witty and most sportsmanlike of the Forsytes have pass the day read a novel in the paternal mansion at Princes ' Gardens . since a recent crisis in his financial affair he have be keep on parole by Roger , and compel to reside ' at home . ' 
 towards five o'clock he go out , and take train at South Kensington Station   for everyone to - day go underground . his intention be to dine , and pass the evening playing billiard at the Red Pottle - that unique hostel , neither club , hotel , nor good gilt restaurant . 
 he get out at Charing Cross , choose it in preference to his more usual St. James 's Park , that he might reach Jermyn Street by well light way . 
 on the platform his eye - for in combination with a composed and fashionable appearance , George have sharp eye , and be always on the look - out for fillip to his sardonic humour - his eye be attract by a man , who , leap from a first - class compartment , stagger rather than walk towards the exit . 
 ' so ho , my bird ! ' say George to himself ; ' why , it be " the Buccaneer ! " ' and he put his big figure on the trail . nothing afford he great amusement than a drunken man . 
 Bosinney , who wear a slouch hat , stop in front of he , spin around , and rush back towards the carriage he have just leave . he be too late . a porter catch he by the coat ; the train be already move on . 
 George 's practised glance catch sight of the face of a lady clothe in a grey fur coat at the carriage window . it be Mrs. Soames - and George feel that this be interesting ! 
 and now he follow Bosinney more closely than ever - up the stair , past the ticket collector into the street . in that progress , however , his feeling undergo a change ; no long merely curious and amuse , he feel sorry for the poor fellow he be shadow . ' the Buccaneer ' be not drunk , but seem to be act under the stress of violent emotion ; he be talk to himself , and all that George could catch be the word " oh , God ! " nor do he appear to know what he be do , or where go ; but star , hesitate , move like a man out of his mind ; and from be merely a joker in search of amusement , George feel that he must see the poor chap through . 
 he have ' take the knock ' - ' take the knock ! ' and he wonder what on earth Mrs. Soames have be say , what on earth she have be tell he in the railway carriage . she have look bad enough herself ! it make George sorry to think of she travel on with her trouble all alone . 
 he follow close behind Bosinney 's elbow - tall , burly figure , say nothing , dodge warily - and shadow he out into the fog . 
 there be something here beyond a jest ! he keep his head admirably , in spite of some excitement , for in addition to compassion , the instinct of the chase be rouse within he . 
 Bosinney walk right out into the thoroughfare - a vast muffled blackness , where a man could not see six pace before he ; where , all around , voice or whistle mock the sense of direction ; and sudden shape come roll slow upon they ; and now and then a light show like a dim island in an infinite dark sea . 
 and fast into this perilous gulf of night walk Bosinney , and fast after he walk George . if the fellow mean to put his ' twopenny ' under a ' bus , he would stop it if he could ! across the street and back the hunt creature strode , not grope as other man be grope in that gloom , but drive forward as though the faithful George behind wield a knout ; and this chase after a haunted man begin to have for George the strange fascination . 
 but it be now that the affair develop in a way which ever afterwards cause it to remain green in his mind . bring to a stand - still in the fog , he hear word which throw a sudden light on these proceeding . what Mrs. Soames have say to Bosinney in the train be now no long dark . George understand from those muttering that soame have exercise his right over an estranged and unwilling wife in the great - the supreme act of property . 
 his fancy wander in the field of this situation ; it impress he ; he guess something of the anguish , the sexual confusion and horror in Bosinney 's heart . and he think : ' yes , it be a bit thick ! I do not   wonder the poor fellow be half - crack ! ' 
 he have run his quarry to earth on a bench under one of the lion in Trafalgar Square , a monster sphynx astray like themselves in that gulf of darkness . here , rigid and silent , sit Bosinney , and George , in whose patience be a touch of strange brotherliness , take his stand behind . he be not lack in a certain delicacy - a sense of form - that do not permit he to intrude upon this tragedy , and he wait , quiet as the lion above , his fur collar hitch above his ear conceal the fleshy redness of his cheek , conceal all but his eye with their sardonic , compassionate stare . and man keep pass back from business on the way to their club - man whose figure shroud in cocoon of fog come into view like spectre , and like spectre vanish . then even in his compassion George 's Quilpish humour break forth in a sudden longing to pluck these spectre by the sleeve , and say : 
 " hi , you johnny ! you do not   often see a show like this ! here be a poor devil whose mistress have just be tell he a pretty little story of her husband ; walk up , walk up ! he be take the knock , you see . " 
 in fancy he see they gap round the torture lover ; and grin as he think of some respectable , newly - marry spectre enable by the state of his own affection to catch an inkling of what be go on within Bosinney ; he fancy he could see his mouth get wide and wide , and the fog go down and down . for in George be all that contempt of the of the married middle - class - peculiar to the wild and sportsmanlike spirit in its rank . 
 but he begin to be bore . wait be not what he have bargain for . 
 ' after all , ' he think , ' the poor chap will get over it ; not the first time such a thing have happen in this little city ! ' but now his quarry again begin mutter word of violent hate and anger . and follow a sudden impulse George touch he on the shoulder . 
 Bosinney spin round . 
 " who be you ? what do you want ? " 
 George could have stand it well enough in the light of the gas lamp , in the light of that everyday world of which he be so hardy a connoisseur ; but in this fog , where all be gloomy and unreal , where nothing have that matter - of - fact value associate by Forsytes with earth , he be a victim to strange qualm , and as he try to stare back into the eye of this maniac , he think : 
 ' if I see a bobby , I will hand he over ; he be not fit to be at large . ' 
 but wait for no answer , Bosinney stride off into the fog , and George follow , keep perhaps a little far off , yet more than ever set on track he down . 
 ' he can not   go on long like this , ' he think . ' it be God 's own miracle he be not be run over already . ' he brood no more on policeman , a sportsman 's sacred fire alive again within he . 
 into a dense gloom than ever Bosinney hold on at a furious pace ; but his pursuer perceive more method in his madness - he be clearly make his way westward . 
 ' he be really go for Soames ! ' think George . the idea be attractive . it would be a sporting end to such a chase . he have always dislike his cousin . 
 the shaft of a pass cab brush against his shoulder and make he leap aside . he do not intend to be kill for the Buccaneer , or anyone . yet , with hereditary tenacity , he stick to the trail through vapour that blot out everything but the shadow of the hunted man and the dim moon of the near lamp . 
 then suddenly , with the instinct of a town - stroller , George know himself to be in Piccadilly . here he could find his way blindfold ; and free from the strain of geographical uncertainty , his mind return to Bosinney 's trouble . 
 down the long avenue of his man - about - town experience , burst , as it be , through a smirch of doubtful amour , there stalk to he a memory of his youth . a memory , poignant still , that bring the scent of hay , the gleam of moonlight , a summer magic , into the reek and blackness of this London fog - the memory of a night when in the dark shadow of a lawn he have overhear from a woman 's lip that he be not her sole possessor . and for a moment George walk no long in black Piccadilly , but lie again , with hell in his heart , and his face to the sweet - smell , dewy grass , in the long shadow of poplar that hide the moon . 
 a longing seize he to throw his arm round the Buccaneer , and say , " come , old boy . time cure all . let us go and drink it off ! " 
 but a voice yell at he , and he start back . a cab roll out of blackness , and into blackness disappear . and suddenly George perceive that he have lose Bosinney . he run forward and back , feel his heart clutch by a sicken fear , the dark fear which live in the wing of the fog . Perspiration start out on his brow . he stand quite still , listen with all his might . 
 " and then , " as he confide to Dartie the same evening in the course of a game of billiard at the Red Pottle , " I lose he . " 
 Dartie twirl complacently at his dark moustache . he have just put together a neat break of twenty - three , - fail at a ' Jenny . ' " and who be she ? " he ask . 
 George look slowly at the ' man of the world 's ' fattish , sallow face , and a little grim smile lurk about the curve of his cheek and his heavy - lidde eye . 
 ' no , no , my fine fellow , ' he think , ' I be not go to tell you . ' for though he mix with Dartie a good deal , he think he a bit of a cad . 
 " oh , some little love - lady or other , " he say , and chalk his cue . 
 " a love - lady ! " exclaim Dartie - he use a more figurative expression . " I make sure it be our friend Soa .... " 
 " do you ? " say George curtly . " then damme you have   make an error . " 
 he miss his shot . he be careful not to allude to the subject again till , towards eleven o'clock , have , in his poetic phraseology , ' look upon the drink when it be yellow , ' he draw aside the blind , and gaze out into the street . the murky blackness of the fog be but faintly break by the lamp of the ' Red Pottle , ' and no shape of mortal man or thing be in sight . 
 " I can not   help think of that poor Buccaneer , " he say . " he may be wander out there now in that fog . if he be not a corpse , " he add with strange dejection . 
 " Corpse ! " say Dartie , in whom the recollection of his defeat at Richmond flare up . " he be all right . ten to one if he be not   tight ! " 
 George turn on he , look really formidable , with a sort of savage gloom on his big face . 
 " dry up ! " he say . " do not   I tell you he be ' take the knock ! " ' 
 CHAPTER V - THE trial 
 in the morning of his case , which be second in the list , soame be again oblige to start without see Irene , and it be just as well , for he have not as yet make up his mind what attitude to adopt towards she . 
 he have be request to be in court by half - past ten , to provide against the event of the first action   a breach of promise   collapsing , which however it do not , both side show a courage that afford Waterbuck , Q.C. , an opportunity for improve his already great reputation in this class of case . he be oppose by Ram , the other celebrate breach of promise man . it be a battle of giant . 
 the court deliver judgment just before the luncheon interval . the jury leave the box for good , and soame go out to get something to eat . he meet James stand at the little luncheon - bar , like a pelican in the wilderness of the gallery , bend over a sandwich with a glass of sherry before he . the spacious emptiness of the great central hall , over which father and son brood as they stand together , be mar now and then for a fleeting moment by barrister in wig and gown hurriedly bolt across , by an occasional old lady or rusty - coat man , look up in a frightened way , and by two person , bold than their generation , seat in an embrasure arguing . the sound of their voice arise , together with a scent as of neglected well , which , mingle with the odour of the gallery , combine to form the savour , like nothing but the emanation of a refined cheese , so indissolubly connect with the administration of British Justice . 
 it be not long before James address his son . 
 " when be your case come on ? I suppose it will be on directly . I should not   wonder if this Bosinney'd say anything ; I should think he would have to . he will go bankrupt if it go against he . " he take a large bite at his sandwich and a mouthful of sherry . " your mother , " he say , " want you and Irene to come and dine to - night . " 
 a chill smile play round Soames ' lip ; he look back at his father . anyone who have see the look , cold and furtive , thus interchange , might have be pardon for not appreciate the real understanding between they . James finish his sherry at a draught . 
 " how much ? " he ask . 
 on return to the court Soames take at once his rightful seat on the front bench beside his solicitor . he ascertain where his father be seat with a glance so sidelong as to commit nobody . 
 James , sit back with his hand clasp over the handle of his umbrella , be brood on the end of the bench immediately behind counsel , whence he could get away at once when the case be over . he consider Bosinney 's conduct in every way outrageous , but he do not wish to run up against he , feel that the meeting would be awkward . 
 next to the Divorce Court , this court be , perhaps , the favourite emporium of justice , libel , breach of promise , and other commercial action be frequently decide there . quite a sprinkling of person unconnecte with the law occupy the back bench , and the hat of a woman or two could be see in the gallery . 
 the two row of seat immediately in front of James be gradually fill by barrister in wig , who sit down to make pencil note , chat , and attend to their tooth ; but his interest be soon divert from these less light of justice by the entrance of Waterbuck , Q.C. , with the wing of his silk gown rustling , and his red , capable face support by two short , brown whisker . the famous Q.C. look , as James freely admit , the very picture of a man who could heckle a witness . 
 for all his experience , it so happen that he have never see Waterbuck , Q.C. , before , and , like many Forsytes in the low branch of the profession , he have an extreme admiration for a good cross - examiner . the long , lugubrious fold in his cheek relax somewhat after see he , especially as he now perceive that soame alone be represent by silk . 
 Waterbuck , Q.C. , have barely screw round on his elbow to chat with his Junior before Mr. Justice Bentham himself appear - a thin , rather hen - like man , with a little stoop , clean - shaven under his snowy wig . like all the rest of the court , Waterbuck rise , and remain on his foot until the judge be seat . James rise but slightly ; he be already comfortable , and have no opinion of Bentham , have sit next but one to he at dinner twice at the Bumley Tomms ' . Bumley Tomm be rather a poor thing , though he have be so successful . James himself have give he his first brief . he be excited , too , for he have just find out that Bosinney be not in court . 
 ' now , what be he mean by that ? ' he keep on think . 
 the case have be call on , Waterbuck , Q.C. , push back his paper , hitch his gown on his shoulder , and , with a semi - circular look around he , like a man who be go to bat , arise and address the Court . 
 the fact , he say , be not in dispute , and all that his Lordship would be ask be to interpret the correspondence which have take place between his client and the defendant , an architect , with reference to the decoration of a house . he would , however , submit that this correspondence could only mean one very plain thing . after briefly recite the history of the house at Robin Hill , which he describe as a mansion , and the actual fact of expenditure , he go on as follow : 
 " my client , Mr. Soames Forsyte , be a gentleman , a man of property , who would be the last to dispute any legitimate claim that might be make against he , but he have meet with such treatment from his architect in the matter of this house , over which he have , as your lordship have hear , already spend some twelve - some twelve thousand pound , a sum considerably in advance of the amount he have originally contemplate , that as a matter of principle - and this I can not too strongly emphasize - as a matter of principle , and in the interest of other , he have feel himself compel to bring this action . the point put forward in defence by the architect I will suggest to your lordship be not worthy of a moment 's serious consideration . " he then read the correspondence . 
 his client , " a man of recognise position , " be prepared to go into the box , and to swear that he never do authorize , that it be never in his mind to authorize , the expenditure of any money beyond the extreme limit of twelve thousand and fifty pound , which he have clearly fix ; and not far to waste the time of the court , he would at once call Mr. Forsyte . 
 soame then go into the box . his whole appearance be strike in its composure . his face , just supercilious enough , pale and clean - shaven , with a little line between the eye , and compress lip ; his dress in unostentatious order , one hand neatly glove , the other bare . he answer the question put to he in a somewhat low , but distinct voice . his evidence under cross - examination savoured of taciturnity . 
 have he not use the expression , " a free hand " ? no . 
 " come , come ! " 
 the expression he have use be ' a free hand in the term of this correspondence . ' 
 " would you tell the Court that that be English ? " 
 " yes ! " 
 " what do you say it mean ? " 
 " what it say ! " 
 " be you prepared to deny that it be a contradiction in term ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " you be not an Irishman ? " 
 " no . " 
 " be you a well - educate man ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " and yet you persist in that statement ? " 
 " yes . " 
 throughout this and much more cross - examination , which turn again and again around the ' nice point , ' James sit with his hand behind his ear , his eye fix upon his son . 
 he be proud of he ! he could not but feel that in similar circumstance he himself would have be tempt to enlarge his reply , but his instinct tell he that this taciturnity be the very thing . he sigh with relief , however , when soame , slowly turn , and without any change of expression , descend from the box . 
 when it come to the turn of Bosinney 's Counsel to address the Judge , James redouble his attention , and he search the Court again and again to see if Bosinney be not somewhere conceal . 
 Young Chankery begin nervously ; he be place by Bosinney 's absence in an awkward position . he therefore do his good to turn that absence to account . 
 he could not but fear - he say - that his client have meet with an accident . he have fully expect he there to give evidence ; they have send round that morning both to Mr. Bosinney 's office and to his room   though he know they be one and the same , he think it be as well not to say so , but it be not know where he be , and this he consider to be ominous , know how anxious Mr. Bosinney have be to give his evidence . he have not , however , be instruct to apply for an adjournment , and in default of such instruction he conceive it his duty to go on . the plea on which he somewhat confidently rely , and which his client , have he not unfortunately be prevent in some way from attend , would have support by his evidence , be that such an expression as a ' free hand ' could not be limit , fettered , and render unmeaning , by any verbiage which might follow it . he would go far and say that the correspondence show that whatever he might have say in his evidence , Mr. Forsyte have in fact never contemplate repudiate liability on any of the work order or execute by his architect . the defendant have certainly never contemplate such a contingency , or , as be demonstrate by his letter , he would never have proceed with the work - a work of extreme delicacy , carry out with great care and efficiency , to meet and satisfy the fastidious taste of a connoisseur , a rich man , a man of property . he feel strongly on this point , and feel strongly he use , perhaps , rather strong word when he say that this action be of a most unjustifiable , unexpected , indeed - unprecedented character . if his Lordship have have the opportunity that he himself have make it his duty to take , to go over this very fine house and see the great delicacy and beauty of the decoration execute by his client - an artist in his most honourable profession - he feel convinced that not for one moment would his Lordship tolerate this , he would use no strong word than dare attempt to evade legitimate responsibility . 
 take the text of Soames ' letter , he lightly touch on ' Boileau v. the Blasted Cement Company , Limited . ' " it be doubtful , " he say , " what that authority have decide ; in any case I would submit that it be just as much in my favour as in my friend 's . " he then argue the ' nice point ' closely . with all due deference he submit that Mr. Forsyte 's expression nullify itself . his client not be a rich man , the matter be a serious one for he ; he be a very talented architect , whose professional reputation be undoubtedly somewhat at stake . he conclude with a perhaps too personal appeal to the Judge , as a lover of the art , to show himself the protector of artist , from what be occasionally - he say occasionally - the too iron hand of capital . " what , " he say , " will be the position of the artistic profession , if man of property like this Mr. Forsyte refuse , and be allow to refuse , to carry out the obligation of the commission which they have give . " he would now call his client , in case he should at the last moment have find himself able to be present . 
 the name Philip Baynes Bosinney be call three time by the Ushers , and the sound of the calling echo with strange melancholy throughout the Court and Galleries . 
 the crying of this name , to which no answer be return , have upon James a curious effect : it be like call for your lose dog about the street . and the creepy feeling that it give he , of a man miss , grate on his sense of comfort and security - on his cosiness . though he could not have say why , it make he feel uneasy . 
 he look now at the clock - a quarter to three ! it would be all over in a quarter of an hour . where could the young fellow be ? 
 it be only when Mr. Justice Bentham deliver judgment that he get over the turn he have receive . 
 behind the wooden erection , by which he be fence from more ordinary mortal , the learn Judge lean forward . the electric light , just turn on above his head , fall on his face , and mellow it to an orange hue beneath the snowy crown of his wig ; the amplitude of his robe grow before the eye ; his whole figure , face the comparative dusk of the Court , radiate like some majestic and sacred body . he clear his throat , take a sip of water , break the nib of a quill against the desk , and , fold his bony hand before he , begin . 
 to James he suddenly loom much large than he have ever think Bentham would loom . it be the majesty of the law ; and a person endow with a nature far less matter - of - fact than that of James might have be excuse for fail to pierce this halo , and disinter therefrom the somewhat ordinary Forsyte , who walk and talk in every - day life under the name of Sir Walter Bentham . 
 he deliver judgment in the following word : 
 " the fact in this case be not in dispute . on May 15 last the defendant write to the plaintiff , request to be allow to withdraw from his professional position in regard to the decoration of the plaintiff 's house , unless he be give ' a free hand . ' the plaintiff , on May 17 , write back as follow : ' in give you , in accordance with your request , this free hand , I wish you to clearly understand that the total cost of the house as hand over to I completely decorate , inclusive of your fee   as arrange between we   must not exceed twelve thousand pound . ' to this letter the defendant reply on May 18 : ' if you think that in such a delicate matter as decoration I can bind myself to the exact pound , I be afraid you be mistaken . ' on May 19 the plaintiff write as follow : ' I do not mean to say that if you should exceed the sum name in my letter to you by ten or twenty or even fifty pound there would be any difficulty between we . you have a free hand in the term of this correspondence , and I hope you will see your way to complete the decoration . ' on May 20 the defendant reply thus shortly : ' very well . ' 
 " in complete these decoration , the defendant incur liability and expense which bring the total cost of this house up to the sum of twelve thousand four hundred pound , all of which expenditure have be defray by the plaintiff . this action have be bring by the plaintiff to recover from the defendant the sum of three hundred and fifty pound expend by he in excess of a sum of twelve thousand and fifty pound , allege by the plaintiff to have be fix by this correspondence as the maximum sum that the defendant have authority to expend . 
 " the question for I to decide be whether or no the defendant be liable to refund to the plaintiff this sum . in my judgment he be so liable . 
 " what in effect the plaintiff have say be this ' I give you a free hand to complete these decoration , provide that you keep within a total cost to I of twelve thousand pound . if you exceed that sum by as much as fifty pound , I will not hold you responsible ; beyond that point you be no agent of mine , and I shall repudiate liability . ' it be not quite clear to I whether , have the plaintiff in fact repudiate liability under his agent 's contract , he would , under all the circumstance , have be successful in so do ; but he have not adopt this course . he have accept liability , and fall back upon his right against the defendant under the term of the latter 's engagement . 
 " in my judgment the plaintiff be entitle to recover this sum from the defendant . 
 " it have be seek , on behalf of the defendant , to show that no limit of expenditure be fix or intend to be fix by this correspondence . if this be so , I can find no reason for the plaintiff 's importation into the correspondence of the figure of twelve thousand pound and subsequently of fifty pound . the defendant 's contention would render these figure meaningless . it be manifest to I that by his letter of May 20 he assent to a very clear proposition , by the term of which he must be hold to be bind . 
 " for these reason there will be judgment for the plaintiff for the amount claim with cost . " 
 James sigh , and stoop , pick up his umbrella which have fall with a rattle at the word ' importation into this correspondence . ' 
 untangle his leg , he rapidly leave the Court ; without wait for his son , he snap up a hansom cab   it be a clear , grey afternoon   and drive straight to Timothy 's where he find Swithin ; and to he , Mrs. Septimus Small , and Aunt Hester , he recount the whole proceeding , eat two muffin not altogether in the interval of speech . 
 " soame do very well , " he end ; " he be get his head screw on the right way . this will not   please Jolyon . it be a bad business for that young Bosinney ; he will go bankrupt , I should not   wonder , " and then after a long pause , during which he have star disquietly into the fire , he add : 
 " he be not   there - now why ? " 
 there be a sound of footstep . the figure of a thick - set man , with the ruddy brown face of robust health , be see in the back drawing - room . the forefinger of his upraised hand be outline against the black of his frock coat . he speak in a grudging voice . 
 " well , James , " he say , " I can not   - I can not   stop , " and turn round , he walk out . 
 it be Timothy . 
 James rise from his chair . " there ! " he say , " there ! I know there be something wro .... " he check himself , and be silent , star before he , as though he have see a portent . 
 CHAPTER vi - soames BREAKS the news 
 in leave the Court Soames do not go straight home . he feel disinclined for the City , and draw by need for sympathy in his triumph , he , too , make his way , but slowly and on foot , to Timothy 's in the Bayswater Road . 
 his father have just leave ; Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester , in possession of the whole story , greet he warmly . they be sure he be hungry after all that evidence . Smither should toast he some more muffin , his dear father have eat they all . he must put his leg up on the sofa ; and he must have a glass of prune brandy too . it be so strengthen . 
 Swithin be still present , have linger later than his will not , for he feel in want of exercise . on hear this suggestion , he ' pishe . ' a pretty pass young man be come to ! his own liver be out of order , and he could not bear the thought of anyone else drink prune brandy . 
 he go away almost immediately , say to soame : " and how be your wife ? you tell she from I that if she be dull , and like to come and dine with I quietly , I will give she such a bottle of champagne as she do not   get every day . " star down from his height on Soames he contract his thick , puffy , yellow hand as though squeeze within it all this small fry , and throw out his chest he waddle slowly away . 
 Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester be leave horrified . Swithin be so droll ! 
 they themselves be long to ask Soames how Irene would take the result , yet know that they must not ; he would perhaps say something of his own accord , to throw some light on this , the present burn question in their life , the question that from necessity of silence torture they almost beyond bear ; for even Timothy have now be tell , and the effect on his health be little short of alarming . and what , too , would June do ? this , also , be a most exciting , if dangerous speculation ! 
 they have never forget old Jolyon 's visit , since when he have not once be to see they ; they have never forget the feeling it give all who be present , that the family be no long what it have be - that the family be break up . 
 but Soames give they no help , sit with his knee cross , talk of the Barbizon school of painter , whom he have just discover . these be the come man , he say ; he should not wonder if a lot of money be make over they ; he have his eye on two picture by a man call Corot , charming thing ; if he could get they at a reasonable price he be go to buy they - they would , he think , fetch a big price some day . 
 interest as they could not but be , neither Mrs. Septimus Small nor Aunt Hester could entirely acquiesce in be thus put off . 
 it be interesting - most interesting - and then Soames be so clever that they be sure he would do something with those picture if anybody could ; but what be his plan now that he have win his case ; be he go to leave London at once , and live in the country , or what be he go to do ? 
 soame answer that he do not know , he think they should be move soon . he rise and kiss his aunt . 
 no soon have Aunt Juley receive this emblem of departure than a change come over she , as though she be be visit by dreadful courage ; every little roll of flesh on her face seem try to escape from an invisible , confining mask . 
 she rise to the full extent of she more than medium height , and say : " it have be on my mind a long time , dear , and if nobody else will tell you , I have make up my mind that .... " 
 Aunt Hester interrupt she : " Mind , Julia , you do it .... " she gasp - " on your own responsibility ! " 
 Mrs. Small go on as though she have not hear : " I think you ought to know , dear , that Mrs. MacAnder see Irene walk in Richmond Park with Mr. Bosinney . " 
 Aunt Hester , who have also rise , sink back in her chair , and turn she face away . really Juley be too - she should not do such thing when she - Aunt Hester , be in the room ; and , breathless with anticipation , she wait for what soame would answer . 
 he have flush the peculiar flush which always centre between his eye ; lift his hand , and , as it be , select a finger , he bite a nail delicately ; then , drawl it out between set lip , he say : " Mrs. MacAnder be a cat ! " 
 without wait for any reply , he leave the room . 
 when he go into Timothy 's he have make up his mind what course to pursue on get home . he would go up to Irene and say : 
 " well , I have   win my case , and there be an end of it ! I do not   want to be hard on Bosinney ; I will see if we can not   come to some arrangement ; he shall not   be press . and now let us turn over a new leaf ! we will let the house , and get out of these fog . we will go down to Robin Hill at once . I - I never mean to be rough with you ! let us shake hand - and - " perhaps she would let he kiss she , and forget ! 
 when he come out of Timothy 's his intention be no long so simple . the smoulder jealousy and suspicion of month blaze up within he . he would put an end to that sort of thing once and for all ; he would not have she drag his name in the dirt ! if she could not or would not love he , as be her duty and his right - she should not play he trick with anyone else ! he would tax she with it ; threaten to divorce she ! that would make she behave ; she would never face that . but - but - what if she do ? he be stagger ; this have not occur to he . 
 what if she do ? what if she make he a confession ? how would he stand then ? he would have to bring a divorce ! 
 a divorce ! thus close , the word be paralyze , so utterly at variance with all the principle that have hitherto guide his life . its lack of compromise appal he ; he feel - like the captain of a ship , go to the side of his vessel , and , with his own hand throw over the most precious of his bale . this jettison of his property with his own hand seem uncanny to soame . it would injure he in his profession : he would have to get rid of the house at Robin Hill , on which he have spend so much money , so much anticipation - and at a sacrifice . and she ! she would no long belong to he , not even in name ! she would pass out of his life , and he - he should never see she again ! 
 he traverse in the cab the length of a street without get beyond the thought that he should never see she again ! 
 but perhaps there be nothing to confess , even now very likely there be nothing to confess . be it wise to push thing so far ? be it wise to put himself into a position where he might have to eat his word ? the result of this case would ruin Bosinney ; a ruined man be desperate , but - what could he do ? he might go abroad , ruin man always go abroad . what could they do - if indeed it be ' they ' - without money ? it would be well to wait and see how thing turn out . if necessary , he could have she watch . the agony of his jealousy   for all the world like the crisis of an ache tooth   come on again ; and he almost cry out . but he must decide , fix on some course of action before he get home . when the cab draw up at the door , he have decide nothing . 
 he enter , pale , his hand moist with perspiration , dread to meet she , burn to meet she , ignorant of what he be to say or do . 
 the maid Bilson be in the hall , and in answer to his question : " where be your mistress ? " tell he that Mrs. Forsyte have leave the house about noon , take with she a trunk and bag . 
 snatch the sleeve of his fur coat away from her grasp , he confront she : 
 " what ? " he exclaim ; " what be that you say ? " suddenly recollect that he must not betray emotion , he add : " what message do she leave ? " and notice with secret terror the startled look of the maid 's eye . 
 " Mrs. Forsyte leave no message , sir . " 
 " no message ; very well , thank you , that will do . I shall be din out . " 
 the maid go downstairs , leave he still in his fur coat , idly turn over the visit card in the porcelain bowl that stand on the carved oak rug chest in the hall . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Bareham Culcher . Mrs. Septimus Small . Mrs. Baynes . Mr. Solomon Thornworthy . Lady Bellis . Miss Hermione Bellis . Miss Winifred Bellis . Miss Ella Bellis . 
 who the devil be all these people ? he seem to have forget all familiar thing . the word ' no message - a trunk , and a bag , ' play a hide - and - seek in his brain . it be incredible that she have leave no message , and , still in his fur coat , he run upstairs two step at a time , as a young married man when he come home will run up to his wife 's room . 
 everything be dainty , fresh , sweet - smelling ; everything in perfect order . on the great bed with its lilac silk quilt , be the bag she have make and embroider with her own hand to hold her sleep thing ; her slipper ready at the foot ; the sheet even turn over at the head as though expect she . 
 on the table stand the silver - mount brush and bottle from her dress bag , his own present . there must , then , be some mistake . what bag have she take ? he go to the bell to summon Bilson , but remember in time that he must assume knowledge of where Irene have go , take it all as a matter of course , and grope out the meaning for himself . 
 he lock the door , and try to think , but feel his brain go round ; and suddenly tear force themselves into his eye . 
 hurriedly pull off his coat , he look at himself in the mirror . 
 he be too pale , a greyish tinge all over his face ; he pour out water , and begin feverishly washing . 
 her silver - mount brush smell faintly of the perfumed lotion she use for her hair ; and at this scent the burn sickness of his jealousy seize he again . 
 struggle into his fur , he run downstairs and out into the street . 
 he have not lose all command of himself , however , and as he go down Sloane Street he frame a story for use , in case he should not find she at Bosinney 's . but if he should ? his power of decision again fail ; he reach the house without know what he should do if he do find she there . 
 it be after office hour , and the street door be close ; the woman who open it could not say whether Mr. Bosinney be in or no ; she have not see he that day , not for two or three day ; she do not attend to he now , nobody attend to he , he .... 
 soame interrupt she , he would go up and see for himself . he go up with a dog , white face . 
 the top floor be unlighte , the door close , no one answer his ringing , he could hear no sound . he be oblige to descend , shiver under his fur , a chill at his heart . hail a cab , he tell the man to drive to Park Lane . 
 on the way he try to recollect when he have last give she a cheque ; she could not have more than three or four pound , but there be her jewel ; and with exquisite torture he remember how much money she could raise on these ; enough to take they abroad ; enough for they to live on for month ! he try to calculate ; the cab stop , and he get out with the calculation unmade . 
 the butler ask whether Mrs. Soames be in the cab , the master have tell he they be both expect to dinner . 
 soame answer : " no . Mrs. Forsyte have a cold . " 
 the butler be sorry . 
 soame think he be look at he inquisitively , and remember that he be not in dress clothe , ask : " anybody here to dinner , Warmson ? " 
 " nobody but Mr. and Mrs. Dartie , sir . " 
 again it seem to Soames that the butler be look curiously at he . his composure give way . 
 " what be you look at ? " he say . " what be the matter with I , eh ? " 
 the butler blush , hang up the fur coat , murmur something that sound like : " nothing , sir , I be sure , sir , " and stealthily withdraw . 
 soame walk upstairs . pass the drawing - room without a look , he go straight up to his mother 's and father 's bedroom . 
 James , standing sideways , the concave line of his tall , lean figure display to advantage in shirt - sleeve and evening waistcoat , his head bent , the end of his white tie peep askew from underneath one white dundreary whisker , his eye peer with intense concentration , his lip pouting , be hook the top hook of his wife 's bodice . soame stop ; he feel half - choke , whether because he have come upstairs too fast , or for some other reason . he - he himself have never - never be ask to .... 
 he hear his father 's voice , as though there be a pin in his mouth , say : " who be that ? who be there ? what d'you want ? " his mother 's : " here , Felice , come and hook this ; your master'll never get do . " 
 he put his hand up to his throat , and say hoarsely : 
 " it be I - Soames ! " 
 he notice gratefully the affectionate surprise in Emily 's : " well , my dear boy ? " and James ' , as he drop the hook : " what , soame ! what be bring you up ? be not   you well ? " 
 he answer mechanically : " I be all right , " and look at they , and it seem impossible to bring out his news . 
 James , quick to take alarm , begin : " you do not   look well . I expect you have   take a chill - it be liver , I should not   wonder . your mother'll give you .... " 
 but Emily break in quietly : " have you bring Irene ? " 
 soame shake his head . 
 " no , " he stammer , ' she - she be leave I ! " 
 Emily desert the mirror before which she be stand . her tall , full figure lose its majesty and become very human as she come run over to Soames . 
 " my dear boy ! my dear boy ! " 
 she put her lip to his forehead , and stroke his hand . 
 James , too , have turn full towards his son ; his face look old . 
 " left you ? " he say . " what d'you mean - leave you ? you never tell I she be go to leave you . " 
 soame answer surlily : " how could I tell ? what be to be do ? " 
 James begin walk up and down ; he look strange and stork - like without a coat . " what be to be do ! " he mutter . " how should I know what be to be do ? what be the good of ask I ? nobody tell I anything , and then they come and ask I what be to be do ; and I should like to know how I be to tell they ! here be your mother , there she stand ; she do not   say anything . what I should say you have   get to do be to follow she .. " 
 soame smile ; his peculiar , supercilious smile have never before look pitiable . 
 " I do not   know where she be go , " he say . 
 " do not   know where she be go ! " say James . " how d'you mean , do not   know where she be go ? where d'you suppose she be go ? she be go after that young Bosinney , that be where she be go . I know how it would be . " 
 soame , in the long silence that follow , feel his mother press his hand . and all that pass seem to pass as though his own power of think or do have go to sleep . 
 his father 's face , dusky red , twitch as if he be go to cry , and word break out that seem rent from he by some spasm in his soul . 
 " there will be a scandal ; I always say so . " then , no one say anything : " and there you stand , you and your mother ! " 
 and Emily 's voice , calm , rather contemptuous : " come , now , James ! soame will do all that he can . " 
 and James , star at the floor , a little brokenly : " well , I can not   help you ; I be get old . do not   you be in too great a hurry , my boy . " 
 and his mother 's voice again : " soame will do all he can to get she back . we will not   talk of it . it will all come right , I dare say . " 
 and James : " well , I can not   see how it can come right . and if she have not   go off with that young Bosinney , my advice to you be not to listen to she , but to follow she and get she back . " 
 once more soame feel his mother stroke his hand , in token of her approval , and as though repeat some form of sacred oath , he mutter between his tooth : " I will ! " 
 all three go down to the drawing - room together . there , be gather the three girl and Dartie ; have Irene be present , the family circle would have be complete . 
 James sink into his armchair , and except for a word of cold greeting to Dartie , whom he both despise and dread , as a man likely to be always in want of money , he say nothing till dinner be announce . soame , too , be silent ; Emily alone , a woman of cool courage , maintain a conversation with Winifred on trivial subject . she be never more composed in her manner and conversation than that evening . 
 a decision have be come to not to speak of Irene 's flight , no view be express by any other member of the family as to the right course to be pursue ; there can be little doubt , from the general tone adopt in relation to event as they afterwards turn out , that James 's advice : " do not   you listen to she , follow - she and get she back ! " would , with here and there an exception , have be regard as sound , not only in Park Lane , but amongst the Nicholases , the Rogers , and at Timothy 's . just as it would surely have be endorse by that wide body of Forsytes all over London , who be merely exclude from judgment by ignorance of the story . 
 in spite then of Emily 's effort , the dinner be serve by Warmson and the footman almost in silence . Dartie be sulky , and drink all he could get ; the girl seldom talk to each other at any time . James ask once where June be , and what she be do with herself in these day . no one could tell he . he sink back into gloom . only when Winifred recount how little Publius have give his bad penny to a beggar , do he brighten up . 
 " ah ! " he say , " that be a clever little chap . I do not   know what will become of he , if he go on like this . an intelligent little chap , I call he ! " but it be only a flash . 
 the course succeed one another solemnly , under the electric light , which glare down onto the table , but barely reach the principal ornament of the wall , a so - call ' Sea Piece by Turner , ' almost entirely compose of cordage and drown man . 
 Champagne be hand , and then a bottle of James ' prehistoric port , but as by the chill hand of some skeleton . 
 at ten o'clock soame leave ; twice in reply to question , he have say that Irene be not well ; he feel he could no long trust himself . his mother kiss he with her large soft kiss , and he press her hand , a flush of warmth in his cheek . he walk away in the cold wind , which whistle desolately round the corner of the street , under a sky of clear steel - blue , alive with star ; he notice neither their frosty greeting , nor the crackle of the curl - up plane - leaf , nor the night - woman hurry in their shabby fur , nor the pinch face of vagabond at street corner . winter be come ! but Soames hasten home , oblivious ; his hand tremble as he take the late letter from the gilt wire cage into which they have be thrust through the slit in the door . ' 
 none from Irene ! 
 he go into the dining - room ; the fire be bright there , his chair draw up to it , slipper ready , spirit case , and carven cigarette box on the table ; but after star at it all for a minute or two , he turn out the light and go upstairs . there be a fire too in his dressing - room , but her room be dark and cold . it be into this room that Soames go . 
 he make a great illumination with candle , and for a long time continue pace up and down between the bed and the door . he could not get use to the thought that she have really leave he , and as though still search for some message , some reason , some reading of all the mystery of his married life , he begin open every recess and drawer . 
 there be her dress ; he have always like , indeed insist , that she should be well - dress - she have take very few ; two or three at most , and drawer after drawer ; full of linen and silk thing , be untouched . 
 perhaps after all it be only a freak , and she have go to the seaside for a few day ' change . if only that be so , and she be really come back , he would never again do as he have do that fatal night before last , never again run that risk - though it be her duty , her duty as a wife ; though she do belong to he - he would never again run that risk ; she be evidently not quite right in her head ! 
 he stoop over the drawer where she keep her jewel ; it be not lock , and come open as he pull ; the jewel box have the key in it . this surprise he until he remember that it be sure to be empty . he open it . 
 it be far from empty . divide , in little green velvet compartment , be all the thing he have give she , even her watch , and stick into the recess that contain - the watch be a three - cornered note address ' Soames Forsyte , ' in Irene 's handwriting : 
 ' I think I have take nothing that you or your people have give I . ' and that be all . 
 he look at the clasp and bracelet of diamond and pearl , at the little flat gold watch with a great diamond set in sapphire , at the chain and ring , each in its nest , and the tear rush up in his eye and drop upon they . 
 nothing that she could have do , nothing that she have do , bring home to he like this the inner significance of her act . for the moment , perhaps , he understand nearly all there be to understand - understand that she loathe he , that she have loathe he for year , that for all intent and purpose they be like people live in different world , that there be no hope for he , never have be ; even , that she have suffer - that she be to be pity . 
 in that moment of emotion he betray the Forsyte in he - forget himself , his interest , his property - be capable of almost anything ; be lift into the pure ether of the selfless and unpractical . 
 such moment pass quickly . 
 and as though with the tear he have purge himself of weakness , he get up , lock the box , and slowly , almost tremble , carry it with he into the other room . 
 CHAPTER VII - JUNE 's VICTORY 
 June have wait for her chance , scan the dull column of the journal , morning and evening with an assiduity which at first puzzle old Jolyon ; and when her chance come , she take it with all the promptitude and resolute tenacity of her character . 
 she will always remember good in her life that morning when at last she see amongst the reliable Cause List of the Times newspaper , under the heading of Court XIII , Mr. Justice Bentham , the case of Forsyte v. Bosinney . 
 like a gambler who stake his last piece of money , she have prepare to hazard she all upon this throw ; it be not her nature to contemplate defeat . how , unless with the instinct of a woman in love , she know that Bosinney 's discomfiture in this action be assure , can not be tell - on this assumption , however , she lay her plan , as upon a certainty . 
 half past eleven find she at watch in the gallery of Court XIII . , and there she remain till the case of Forsyte v. Bosinney be over . Bosinney 's absence do not disquiet she ; she have feel instinctively that he would not defend himself . at the end of the judgment she hasten down , and take a cab to his room . 
 she pass the open street - door and the office on the three low floor without attract notice ; not till she reach the top do her difficulty begin . 
 her ring be not answer ; she have now to make up her mind whether she would go down and ask the caretaker in the basement to let she in to await Mr. Bosinney 's return , or remain patiently outside the door , trust that no one would , come up . she decide on the latter course . 
 a quarter of an hour have pass in freeze vigil on the landing , before it occur to she that Bosinney have be use to leave the key of his room under the door - mat . she look and find it there . for some minute she could not decide to make use of it ; at last she let herself in and leave the door open that anyone who come might see she be there on business . 
 this be not the same June who have pay the trembling visit five month ago ; those month of suffering and restraint have make she less sensitive ; she have dwell on this visit so long , with such minuteness , that its terror be discount beforehand . she be not there to fail this time , for if she fail no one could help she . 
 like some mother beast on the watch over her young , her little quick figure never stand still in that room , but wander from wall to wall , from window to door , finger now one thing , now another . there be dust everywhere , the room could not have be clean for week , and June , quick to catch at anything that should buoy up her hope , see in it a sign that he have be oblige , for economy 's sake , to give up his servant . 
 she look into the bedroom ; the bed be roughly make , as though by the hand of man . listen intently , she dart in , and peer into his cupboard . a few shirt and collar , a pair of muddy boot - the room be bare even of garment . 
 she steal back to the sitting - room , and now she notice the absence of all the little thing he have set store by . the clock that have be his mother 's , the field - glass that have hang over the sofa ; two really valuable old print of Harrow , where his father have be at school , and last , not least , the piece of japanese pottery she herself have give he . all be go ; and in spite of the rage rouse within her championing soul at the thought that the world should treat he thus , their disappearance augur happily for the success of her plan . 
 it be while look at the spot where the piece of japanese pottery have stand that she feel a strange certainty of be watch , and , turning , see Irene in the open doorway . 
 the two stand gaze at each other for a minute in silence ; then June walk forward and hold out her hand . Irene do not take it . 
 when her hand be refuse , June put it behind she . her eye grow steady with anger ; she wait for Irene to speak ; and thus wait , take in , with who - know - what rage of jealousy , suspicion , and curiosity , every detail of her friend 's face and dress and figure . 
 Irene be clothe in her long grey fur ; the travel cap on her head leave a wave of gold hair visible above her forehead . the soft fullness of the coat make her face as small as a child 's . 
 unlike June 's cheek , her cheek have no colour in they , but be ivory white and pinch as if with cold . dark circle lie round her eye . in one hand she hold a bunch of violet . 
 she look back at June , no smile on her lip ; and with those great dark eye fasten on she , the girl , for all her startled anger , feel something of the old spell . 
 she speak first , after all . 
 " what have you come for ? " but the feeling that she herself be be ask the same question , make she add : " this horrible case . I come to tell he - he have lose it . " 
 Irene do not speak , her eye never move from June 's face , and the girl cry : 
 " do not   stand there as if you be make of stone ! " 
 Irene laugh : " I wish to God I be ! " 
 but June turn away : " stop ! " she cry , " do not   tell I ! I do not   want to hear ! I do not   want to hear what you have   come for . I do not   want to hear ! " and like some uneasy spirit , she begin swiftly walk to and fro . suddenly she break out : 
 " I be here first . we can not   both stay here together ! " 
 on Irene 's face a smile wander up , and die out like a flicker of firelight . she do not move . and then it be that June perceive under the softness and immobility of this figure something desperate and resolve ; something not to be turn away , something dangerous . she tear off her hat , and , put both hand to her brow , press back the bronze mass of her hair . 
 " you have no right here ! " she cry defiantly . 
 Irene answer : " I have no right anywhere ! 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 " I have leave soame . you always want I to ! " 
 June put her hand over her ear . 
 " do not ! I do not   want to hear anything - I do not   want to know anything . it be impossible to fight with you ! what make you stand like that ? why do not   you go ? " 
 Irene 's lip move ; she seem to be say : " where should I go ? " 
 June turn to the window . she could see the face of a clock down in the street . it be nearly four . at any moment he might come ! she look back across her shoulder , and her face be distort with anger . 
 but Irene have not move ; in her gloved hand she ceaselessly turn and twist the little bunch of violet . 
 the tear of rage and disappointment roll down June 's cheek . 
 " how could you come ? " she say . " you have be a false friend to I ! " 
 again Irene laugh . June see that she have play a wrong card , and break down . 
 " why have you come ? " she sob . " you have   ruin my life , and now you want to ruin his ! " 
 Irene 's mouth quiver ; her eye meet June 's with a look so mournful that the girl cry out in the midst of her sobbing , " no , no ! " 
 but Irene 's head bent till it touch her breast . she turn , and go quickly out , hide her lip with the little bunch of violet . 
 June run to the door . she hear the footstep go down and down . she call out : " come back , Irene ! come back ! " 
 the footstep die away .... 
 Bewildered and tear , the girl stand at the top of the stair . why have Irene go , leave her mistress of the field ? what do it mean ? have she really give he up to she ? or have she ... ? and she be the prey of a gnawing uncertainty .... Bosinney do not come .... 
 about six o'clock that afternoon old Jolyon return from Wistaria Avenue , where now almost every day he spend some hour , and ask if his grand - daughter be upstairs . on be tell that she have just come in , he send up to her room to request she to come down and speak to he . 
 he have make up his mind to tell she that he be reconcile with her father . in future bygone must be bygone . he would no long live alone , or practically alone , in this great house ; he be go to give it up , and take one in the country for his son , where they could all go and live together . if June do not like this , she could have an allowance and live by herself . it would not   make much difference to she , for it be a long time since she have show he any affection . 
 but when June come down , her face be pinch and piteous ; there be a strained , pathetic look in her eye . she snuggle up in her old attitude on the arm of his chair , and what he say compare but poorly with the clear , authoritative , injure statement he have think out with much care . his heart feel sore , as the great heart of a mother - bird feel sore when its youngle fly and bruise its wing . his word halt , as though he be apologize for have at last deviate from the path of virtue , and succumb , in defiance of sounder principle , to his more natural instinct . 
 he seem nervous lest , in thus announce his intention , he should be set his granddaughter a bad example ; and now that he come to the point , his way of put the suggestion that , if she do not   like it , she could live by herself and lump it , be delicate in the extreme . ' 
 " and if , by any chance , my darling , " he say , " you find you do not   get on - with they , why , I could make that all right . you could have what you like . we could find a little flat in London where you could set up , and I could be run to continually . but the child , " he add , " be dear little thing ! " 
 then , in the midst of this grave , rather transparent , explanation of change policy , his eye twinkle . " this will astonish Timothy 's weak nerve . that precious young thing will have something to say about this , or I be a Dutchman ! " 
 June have not yet speak . perch thus on the arm of his chair , with her head above he , her face be invisible . but presently he feel her warm cheek against his own , and know that , at all event , there be nothing very alarming in her attitude towards his news . he begin to take courage . 
 " you will like your father , " he say - " an amiable chap . never be much push about he , but easy to get on with . you will find he artistic and all that . " 
 and old Jolyon bethink he of the dozen or so water - colour drawing all carefully lock up in his bedroom ; for now that his son be go to become a man of property he do not think they quite such poor thing as heretofore . 
 " as to your - your stepmother , " he say , use the word with some little difficulty , " I call she a refined woman - a bit of a Mrs. Gummidge , I should not   wonder - but very fond of Jo . and the child , " he repeat - indeed , this sentence run like music through all his solemn self - justification - " be sweet little thing ! " 
 if June have know , those word but reincarnate that tender love for little child , for the young and weak , which in the past have make he desert his son for her tiny self , and now , as the cycle roll , be take he from she . 
 but he begin to get alarmed at her silence , and ask impatiently : " well , what do you say ? " 
 June slide down to his knee , and she in her turn begin her tale . she think it would all go splendidly ; she do not see any difficulty , and she do not care a bit what people think . 
 Old Jolyon wriggle . H'm ! then people would think ! he have think that after all these year perhaps they would not ! well , he could not   help it ! nevertheless , he could not approve of his granddaughter 's way of put it - she ought to mind what people think ! 
 yet he say nothing . his feeling be too mixed , too inconsistent for expression . 
 no - go on June he do not care ; what business be it of theirs ? there be only one thing - and with her cheek press against his knee , old Jolyon know at once that this something be no trifle : as he be go to buy a house in the country , would he not - to please she - buy that splendid house of Soames ' at Robin Hill ? it be finish , it be perfectly beautiful , and no one would live in it now . they would all be so happy there . 
 Old Jolyon be on the alert at once . be not   the ' man of property ' go to live in his new house , then ? he never allude to Soames now but under this title . 
 " no " - June say - " he be not ; she know that he be not ! " 
 how do she know ? 
 she could not tell he , but she know . she know nearly for certain ! it be most unlikely ; circumstance have change ! Irene 's word still ring in her head : " I have leave soame . where should I go ? " 
 but she keep silence about that . 
 if her grandfather would only buy it and settle that wretched claim that ought never to have be make on Phil ! it would be the very good thing for everybody , and everything - everything might come straight . 
 and June put her lip to his forehead , and press they close . 
 but old Jolyon free himself from her caress , his face wear the judicial look which come upon it when he deal with affair . he ask : what do she mean ? there be something behind all this - have she be see Bosinney ? 
 June answer : " no ; but I have be to his room . " 
 " be to his room ? who take you there ? " 
 June face he steadily . " I go alone . he have lose that case . I do not   care whether it be right or wrong . I want to help he ; and I will ! " 
 Old Jolyon ask again : " have you see he ? " his glance seem to pierce right through the girl 's eye into her soul . 
 again June answer : " no ; he be not there . I wait , but he do not come . " 
 Old Jolyon make a movement of relief . she have rise and look down at he ; so slight , and light , and young , but so fix , and so determine ; and disturb , vex , as he be , he could not frown away that fix look . the feeling of be beat , of the rein have slip , of be old and tired , master he . 
 " ah ! " he say at last , " you will get yourself into a mess one of these day , I can see . you want your own way in everything . " 
 visit by one of his strange burst of philosophy , he add : " like that you be bear ; and like that you will stay until you die ! " 
 and he , who in his dealing with man of business , with Boards , with Forsytes of all description , with such as be not Forsytes , have always have his own way , look at his indomitable grandchild sadly - for he feel in she that quality which above all other he unconsciously admire . 
 " do you know what they say be go on ? " he say slowly . 
 June crimson . 
 " yes - no ! I know - and I do not   know - I do not   care ! " and she stamp her foot . 
 " I believe , " say old Jolyon , drop his eye , " that you would have he if he be dead ! " 
 there be a long silence before he speak again . 
 " but as to buy this house - you do not   know what you be talk about ! " 
 June say that she do . she know that he could get it if he want . he would only have to give what it cost . 
 " what it cost ! you know nothing about it . I will not   go to Soames - I will have nothing more to do with that young man . " 
 " but you need not ; you can go to Uncle James . if you can not   buy the house , will you pay his lawsuit claim ? I know he be terribly hard up - I have   see it . you can stop it out of my money ! " 
 a twinkle come into old Jolyon 's eye . 
 " stop it out of your money ! a pretty way . and what will you do , pray , without your money ? " 
 but secretly , the idea of wrest the house from James and his son have begin to take hold of he . he have hear on Forsyte ' change much comment , much rather doubtful praise of this house . it be ' too artistic , ' but a fine place . to take from the ' man of property ' that on which he have set his heart , would be a crown triumph over James , practical proof that he be go to make a man of property of Jo , to put he back in his proper position , and there to keep he secure . justice once for all on those who have choose to regard his son as a poor , penniless outcast . 
 he would see , he would see ! it might be out of the question ; he be not go to pay a fancy price , but if it could be do , why , perhaps he would do it ! 
 and still more secretly he know that he could not refuse she . 
 but he do not commit himself . he would think it over - he say to June . 
 CHAPTER VIII - BOSINNEY 's DEPARTURE 
 Old Jolyon be not give to hasty decision ; it be probable that he would have continue to think over the purchase of the house at Robin Hill , have not June 's face tell he that he would have no peace until he act . 
 at breakfast next morning she ask he what time she should order the carriage . 
 " Carriage ! " he say , with some appearance of innocence ; " what for ? I be not go out ! " 
 she answer : " if you do not   go early , you will not   catch Uncle James before he go into the City . " 
 " James ! what about your Uncle James ? " 
 " the house , " she reply , in such a voice that he no long pretend ignorance . 
 " I have   not make up my mind , " he say . 
 " you must ! you must ! oh ! Gran - think of I ! " 
 Old Jolyon grumble out : " think of you - I be always think of you , but you do not   think of yourself ; you do not   think what you be let yourself in for . well , order the carriage at ten ! " 
 at a quarter past he be place his umbrella in the stand at Park Lane - he do not choose to relinquish his hat and coat ; tell Warmson that he want to see his master , he go , without be announce , into the study , and sit down . 
 James be still in the dining - room talk to Soames , who have come round again before breakfast . on hear who his visitor be , he mutter nervously : " now , what be he want , I wonder ? " 
 he then get up . 
 " well , " he say to Soames , " do not   you go do anything in a hurry . the first thing be to find out where she be - I should go to Stainer 's about it ; they be the good man , if they can not   find she , nobody can . " and suddenly move to strange softness , he mutter to himself , " poor little thing , I can not   tell what she be think about ! " and go out blow his nose . 
 Old Jolyon do not rise on see his brother , but hold out his hand , and exchange with he the clasp of a Forsyte . 
 James take another chair by the table , and lean his head on his hand . 
 " well , " he say , " how be you ? we do not   see much of you nowadays ! " 
 Old Jolyon pay no attention to the remark . 
 " how be Emily ? " he ask ; and wait for no reply , go on " I have   come to see you about this affair of young Bosinney 's . I be tell that new house of his be a white elephant . " 
 " I do not   know anything about a white elephant , " say James , " I know he be lose his case , and I should say he will go bankrupt . " 
 Old Jolyon be not slow to seize the opportunity this give he . 
 " I should not   wonder a bit ! " he agree ; " and if he go bankrupt , the ' man of property ' - that be , Soames'll be out of pocket . now , what I be think be this : if he be not go to live there .... " 
 see both surprise and suspicion in James ' eye , he quickly go on : " I do not   want to know anything ; I suppose Irene 's put her foot down - it be not material to I . but I be think of a house in the country myself , not too far from London , and if it suit I I do not   say that I might not   look at it , at a price . " 
 James listen to this statement with a strange mixture of doubt , suspicion , and relief , merge into a dread of something behind , and ting with the remain of his old undoubted reliance upon his eld brother 's good faith and judgment . there be anxiety , too , as to what old Jolyon could have hear and how he have hear it ; and a sort of hopefulness arise from the thought that if June 's connection with Bosinney be completely at an end , her grandfather would hardly seem anxious to help the young fellow . altogether he be puzzle ; as he do not like either to show this , or to commit himself in any way , he say : 
 " they tell I you be alter your Will in favour of your son . " 
 he have not be tell this ; he have merely add the fact of have see old Jolyon with his son and grandchild to the fact that he have take his Will away from Forsyte , Bustard and Forsyte . the shot go home . 
 " who tell you that ? " ask old Jolyon . 
 " I be sure I do not   know , " say James ; " I can not   remember name - I know somebody tell I Soames spend a lot of money on this house ; he be not likely to part with it except at a good price . " 
 " well , " say old Jolyon , " if , he think I be go to pay a fancy price , he be mistaken . I have   not get the money to throw away that he seem to have . let he try and sell it at a forced sale , and see what he will get . it be not every man 's house , I hear ! " 
 James , who be secretly also of this opinion , answer : " it be a gentleman 's house . soame be here now if you would like to see he . " 
 " no , " say old Jolyon , " I have not   get as far as that ; and I be not likely to , I can see that very well if I be meet in this manner ! " 
 James be a little cow ; when it come to the actual figure of a commercial transaction he be sure of himself , for then he be deal with fact , not with man ; but preliminary negotiation such as these make he nervous - he never know quite how far he could go . 
 " well , " he say , " I know nothing about it . soame , he tell I nothing ; I should think he would entertain it - it be a question of price . " 
 " oh ! " say old Jolyon , " do not   let he make a favour of it ! " he place his hat on his head in dudgeon . 
 the door be open and soame come in . 
 " there be a policeman out here , " he say with his half smile , " for Uncle Jolyon . " 
 Old Jolyon look at he angrily , and James say : " a policeman ? I do not   know anything about a policeman . but I suppose you know something about he , " he add to old Jolyon with a look of suspicion : " I suppose you would well see he ! " in the hall an Inspector of Police stand stolidly regard with heavy - lidde pale - blue eye the fine old English furniture pick up by James at the famous Mavrojano sale in Portman Square . " you will find my brother in there , " say James . 
 the Inspector raise his finger respectfully to his peaked cap , and enter the study . 
 James see he go in with a strange sensation . 
 " well , " he say to Soames , " I suppose we must wait and see what he want . your uncle 's be here about the house ! " 
 he return with soame into the dining - room , but could not rest . 
 " now what do he want ? " he murmur again . 
 " who ? " reply soame : " the Inspector ? they send he round from Stanhope Gate , that be all I know . that ' nonconformist ' of Uncle Jolyon 's have be pilfer , I should not   wonder ! " 
 but in spite of his calmness , he too be ill at ease . 
 at the end of ten minute old Jolyon come in . he walk up to the table , and stand there perfectly silent pull at his long white moustache . James gaze up at he with open mouth ; he have never see his brother look like this . 
 Old Jolyon raise his hand , and say slowly : 
 " Young Bosinney have be run over in the fog and kill . " 
 then stand above his brother and his nephew , and look down at he with his deep eye : 
 " there be - some - talk - of - suicide , " he say . 
 James ' jaw drop . " Suicide ! what should he do that for ? " 
 Old Jolyon answer sternly : " God know , if you and your son do not ! " 
 but James do not reply . 
 for all man of great age , even for all Forsytes , life have have bitter experience . the passer - by , who see they wrap in cloak of custom , wealth , and comfort , would never suspect that such black shadow have fall on their road . to every man of great age - to Sir Walter Bentham himself - the idea of suicide have once at least be present in the ante - room of his soul ; on the threshold , wait to enter , hold out from the inmost chamber by some chance reality , some vague fear , some painful hope . to Forsytes that final renunciation of property be hard . oh ! it be hard ! seldom - perhaps never - can they achieve , it ; and yet , how near have they not sometimes be ! 
 so even with James ! then in the medley of his thought , he break out : " why I see it in the paper yesterday : ' run over in the fog ! ' they do not   know his name ! " he turn from one face to the other in his confusion of soul ; but instinctively all the time he be reject that rumour of suicide . he dare not entertain this thought , so against his interest , against the interest of his son , of every Forsyte . he strove against it ; and as his nature ever unconsciously reject that which it could not with safety accept , so gradually he overcome this fear . it be an accident ! it must have be ! 
 Old Jolyon break in on his reverie . 
 " death be instantaneous . he lie all day yesterday at the hospital . there be nothing to tell they who he be . I be go there now ; you and your son have well come too . " 
 no one oppose this command he lead the way from the room . 
 the day be still and clear and bright , and drive over to Park Lane from Stanhope Gate , old Jolyon have have the carriage open . sit back on the pad cushion , finish his cigar , he have notice with pleasure the keen crispness of the air , the bustle of the cab and people ; the strange , almost parisian , alacrity that the first fine day will bring into London street after a spell of fog or rain . and he have feel so happy ; he have not feel like it for month . his confession to June be off his mind ; he have the prospect of his son 's , above all , of his grandchild 's company in the future -   he have appoint to meet young Jolyon at the Hotch Potch that very manning to - discuss it again ; and there be the pleasurable excitement of a come encounter , a come victory , over James and the ' man of property ' in the matter of the house . 
 he have the carriage close now ; he have no heart to look on gaiety ; nor be it right that Forsytes should be see drive with an Inspector of Police . 
 in that carriage the Inspector speak again of the death : 
 " it be not so very thick - just there . the driver say the gentleman must have have time to see what he be about , he seem to walk right into it . it appear that he be very hard up , we find several pawn ticket at his room , his account at the bank be overdrawn , and there be this case in to - day 's paper ; " his cold blue eye travel from one to another of the three Forsytes in the carriage . 
 Old Jolyon watch from his corner see his brother 's face change , and the brooding , worried , look deepen on it . at the inspector 's word , indeed , all James ' doubt and fear revive . hard - up - pawn - ticket - an overdrawn account ! these word that have all his life be a far - off nightmare to he , seem to make uncannily real that suspicion of suicide which must on no account be entertain . he seek his son 's eye ; but lynx - eye , taciturn , immovable , soame give no answering look . and to old Jolyon watching , divine the league of mutual defence between they , there come an overmaster desire to have his own son at his side , as though this visit to the dead man 's body be a battle in which otherwise he must single - handed meet those two . and the thought of how to keep June 's name out of the business keep whir in his brain . James have his son to support he ! why should he not send for Jo ? 
 take out his card - case , he pencil the follow message : 
 ' come round at once . I have   send the carriage for you . ' 
 on get out he give this card to his coachman , tell he to drive - as fast as possible to the Hotch Potch Club , and if Mr. Jolyon Forsyte be there to give he the card and bring he at once . if not there yet , he be to wait till he come . 
 he follow the other slowly up the step , lean on his umbrella , and stand a moment to get his breath . the Inspector say : " this be the mortuary , sir . but take your time . " 
 in the bare , white - walled room , empty of all but a streak of sunshine smear along the dustless floor , lie a form cover by a sheet . with a huge steady hand the Inspector take the hem and turn it back . a sightless face gaze up at they , and on either side of that sightless defiant face the three Forsytes gaze down ; in each one of they the secret emotion , fear , and pity of his own nature rise and fall like the rise , fall wave of life , whose wish those white wall bar out now for ever from Bosinney . and in each one of they the trend of his nature , the odd essential spring , which move he in fashion minutely , unalterably different from those of every other human being , force he to a different attitude of thought . far from the other , yet inscrutably close , each stand thus , alone with death , silent , his eye lower . 
 the Inspector ask softly : 
 " you identify the gentleman , sir ? " 
 Old Jolyon raise his head and nod . he look at his brother opposite , at that long lean figure brood over the dead man , with face dusky red , and strained grey eye ; and at the figure of soame white and still by his father 's side . and all that he have feel against those two be go like smoke in the long white presence of death . whence come it , how come it - death ? sudden reverse of all that go before ; blind set forth on a path that lead to where ? dark quenching of the fire ! the heavy , brutal crushing - out that all man must go through , keep their eye clear and brave unto the end ! small and of no import , insect though they be ! and across old Jolyon 's face there flit a gleam , for Soames , murmur to the Inspector , creep noiselessly away . 
 then suddenly James raise his eye . there be a queer appeal in that suspicious troubled look : " I know I be no match for you , " it seem to say . and , hunt for handkerchief he wipe his brow ; then , bend sorrowful and lank over the dead man , he too turn and hurry out . 
 Old Jolyon stand , still as death , his eye fix on the body . who shall tell of what he be think ? of himself , when his hair be brown like the hair of that young fellow dead before he ? of himself , with his battle just begin , the long , long battle he have love ; the battle that be over for this young man almost before it have begin ? of his grand - daughter , with her broken hope ? of that other woman ? of the strangeness , and the pity of it ? and the irony , inscrutable , and bitter of that end ? justice ! there be no justice for man , for they be ever in the dark ! 
 or perhaps in his philosophy he think : well to be out of , it all ! well to have do with it , like this poor youth .... 
 some one touch he on the arm . 
 a tear start up and wet his eyelash . " well , " he say , " I be no good here . I would well be go . you will come to I as soon as you can , Jo , " and with his head bow he go away . 
 it be young Jolyon 's turn to take his stand beside the dead man , round whose fallen body he seem to see all the Forsytes breathless , and prostrate . the stroke have fall too swiftly . 
 the force underlie every tragedy - force that take no denial , work through cross current to their ironical end , have meet and fuse with a thunder - clap , fling out the victim , and flatten to the ground all those that stand around . 
 or so at all event young Jolyon seem to see they , lie around Bosinney 's body . 
 he ask the Inspector to tell he what have happen , and the latter , like a man who do not every day get such a chance , again detail such fact as be know . 
 " there be more here , sir , however , " he say , " than meet the eye . I do not   believe in suicide , nor in pure accident , myself . it be more likely I think that he be suffer under great stress of mind , and take no notice of thing about he . perhaps you can throw some light on these . " 
 he take from his pocket a little packet and lay it on the table . carefully undo it , he reveal a lady 's handkerchief , pin through the fold with a pin of discolour venetian gold , the stone of which have fall from the socket . a scent of dry violet rise to young Jolyon 's nostril . 
 " find in his breast pocket , " say the Inspector ; " the name have be cut away ! " 
 Young Jolyon with difficulty answer : " I be afraid I can not help you ! " but vividly there rise before he the face he have see light up , so tremulous and glad , at Bosinney 's coming ! of she he think more than of his own daughter , more than of they all - of she with the dark , soft glance , the delicate passive face , wait for the dead man , wait even at that moment , perhaps , still and patient in the sunlight . 
 he walk sorrowfully away from the hospital towards his father 's house , reflect that this death would break up the forsyte family . the stroke have indeed slip past their defence into the very wood of their tree . they might flourish to all appearance as before , preserve a brave show before the eye of London , but the trunk be dead , wither by the same flash that have stricken down Bosinney . and now the sapling would take its place , each one a new custodian of the sense of property . 
 good forest of Forsytes ! think young Jolyon - sound timber of our land ! 
 concern the cause of this death - his family would doubtless reject with vigour the suspicion of suicide , which be so compromising ! they would take it as an accident , a stroke of fate . in their heart they would even feel it an intervention of Providence , a retribution - have not Bosinney endanger their two most priceless possession , the pocket and the hearth ? and they would talk of ' that unfortunate accident of young Bosinney 's , ' but perhaps they would not talk - silence might be well ! 
 as for himself , he regard the bus - driver 's account of the accident as of very little value . for no one so madly in love commit suicide for want of money ; nor be Bosinney the sort of fellow to set much store by a financial crisis . and so he too reject this theory of suicide , the dead man 's face rise too clearly before he . go in the heyday of his summer - and to believe thus that an accident have cut Bosinney off in the full sweep of his passion be more than ever pitiful to young Jolyon . 
 then come a vision of Soames ' home as it now be , and must be hereafter . the streak of lightning have flash its clear uncanny gleam on bare bone with grin space between , the disguising flesh be go .... 
 in the dining - room at Stanhope Gate old Jolyon be sit alone when his son come in . he look very wan in his great armchair . and his eye travel round the wall with their picture of still life , and the masterpiece ' dutch fishing - boat at Sunset ' seem as though pass their gaze over his life with its hope , its gain , its achievement . 
 " ah ! Jo ! " he say , " be that you ? I have   tell poor little June . but that be not all of it . be you go to soame ' ? she be bring it on herself , I suppose ; but somehow I can not   bear to think of she , shut up there - and all alone . " and hold up his thin , veined hand , he clench it . 
 CHAPTER IX - IRENE 's RETURN 
 after leave James and old Jolyon in the mortuary of the hospital , soame hurry aimlessly along the street . 
 the tragic event of Bosinney 's death alter the complexion of everything . there be no long the same feeling that to lose a minute would be fatal , nor would he now risk communicate the fact of his wife 's flight to anyone till the inquest be over . 
 that morning he have rise early , before the postman come , have take the first - post letter from the box himself , and , though there have be none from Irene , he have make an opportunity of tell Bilson that her mistress be at the sea ; he would probably , he say , be go down himself from Saturday to Monday . this have give he time to breathe , time to leave no stone unturned to find she . 
 but now , cut off from take step by Bosinney 's death - that strange death , to think of which be like put a hot iron to his heart , like lift a great weight from it - he do not know how to pass his day ; and he wander here and there through the street , look at every face he meet , devour by a hundred anxiety . 
 and as he wander , he think of he who have finish his wandering , his prowling , and would never haunt his house again . 
 already in the afternoon he pass poster announce the identity of the dead man , and buy the paper to see what they say . he would stop their mouth if he could , and he go into the City , and be closet with Boulter for a long time . 
 on his way home , pass the step of Jobson 's about half past four , he meet George Forsyte , who hold out an evening paper to soame , say : 
 " here ! have you see this about the poor Buccaneer ? " 
 soame answer stonily : " yes . " 
 George star at he . he have never like soame ; he now hold he responsible for Bosinney 's death . soame have do for he - do for he by that act of property that have send the Buccaneer to run amok that fatal afternoon . 
 ' the poor fellow , ' he be think , ' be so crack with jealousy , so crack for his vengeance , that he hear nothing of the omnibus in that infernal fog . ' 
 soame have do for he ! and this judgment be in George 's eye . 
 " they talk of suicide here , " he say at last . " that cat will not   jump . " 
 soame shake his head . " an accident , " he mutter . 
 clench his fist on the paper , George cram it into his pocket . he could not resist a parting shot . 
 " H'mm ! all flourish at home ? any little Soameses yet ? " 
 with a face as white as the step of Jobson 's , and a lip raise as if snarl , soame brush past he and be go .... 
 on reach home , and enter the little light hall with his latchkey , the first thing that catch his eye be his wife 's gold - mount umbrella lie on the rug chest . fling off his fur coat , he hurry to the drawing - room . 
 the curtain be draw for the night , a bright fire of cedar - log burn in the grate , and by its light he see Irene sit in her usual corner on the sofa . he shut the door softly , and go towards she . she do not move , and do not seem to see he . 
 " so you have   come back ? " he say . " why be you sit here in the dark ? " 
 then he catch sight of her face , so white and motionless that it seem as though the blood must have stop flow in her vein ; and her eye , that look enormous , like the great , wide , startled brown eye of an owl . 
 huddle in her grey fur against the sofa cushion , she have a strange resemblance to a captive owl , bunch fir its soft feather against the wire of a cage . the supple erectness of her figure be go , as though she have be break by cruel exercise ; as though there be no long any reason for be beautiful , and supple , and erect . 
 " so you have   come back , " he repeat . 
 she never look up , and never speak , the firelight play over her motionless figure . 
 suddenly she try to rise , but he prevent she ; it be then that he understand . 
 she have come back like an animal wound to death , not know where to turn , not know what she be do . the sight of her figure , huddle in the fur , be enough . 
 he know then for certain that Bosinney have be her lover ; know that she have see the report of his death - perhaps , like himself , have buy a paper at the draughty corner of a street , and read it . 
 she have come back then of her own accord , to the cage she have pin to be free of - and take in all the tremendous significance of this , he long to cry : " take your hat body , that I love , out of my house ! take away that pitiful white face , so cruel and soft - before I crush it . get out of my sight ; never let I see you again ! " 
 and , at those unspoken word , he seem to see her rise and move away , like a woman in a terrible dream , from which she be fight to awake - rise and go out into the dark and cold , without a thought of he , without so much as the knowledge of his presence . 
 then he cry , contradict what he have not yet speak , " no ; stay there ! " and turn away from she , he sit down in his accustomed chair on the other side of the hearth . 
 they sit in silence . 
 and Soames think : ' why be all this ? why should I suffer so ? what have I do ? it be not my fault ! ' 
 again he look at she , huddle like a bird that be shoot and die , whose poor breast you see pant as the air be take from it , whose poor eye look at you who have shoot it , with a slow , soft , unseeing look , take farewell of all that be good - of the sun , and the air , and its mate . 
 so they sit , by the firelight , in the silence , one on each side of the hearth . 
 and the fume of the burn cedar log , that he love so well , seem to grip Soames by the throat till he could bear it no long . and go out into the hall he fling the door wide , to gulp down the cold air that come in ; then without hat or overcoat go out into the Square . 
 along the garden rail a half - starve cat come rub her way towards he , and Soames think : ' suffer ! when will it cease , my suffering ? ' 
 at a front door across the way be a man of his acquaintance name Rutter , scrap his boot , with an air of ' I be master here . ' and Soames walk on . 
 from far in the clear air the bell of the church where he and Irene have be marry be peal in ' practice ' for the advent of Christ , the chime ring out above the sound of traffic . he feel a craving for strong drink , to lull he to indifference , or rouse he to fury . if only he could burst out of himself , out of this web that for the first time in his life he feel around he . if only he could surrender to the thought : ' divorce she - turn she out ! she have forget you . forget she ! ' 
 if only he could surrender to the thought : ' let she go - she have suffer enough ! ' 
 if only he could surrender to the desire : ' make a slave of she - she be in your power ! ' 
 if only even he could surrender to the sudden vision : ' what do it all matter ? ' forget himself for a minute , forget that it matter what he do , forget that whatever he do he must sacrifice something . 
 if only he could act on an impulse ! 
 he could forget nothing ; surrender to no thought , vision , or desire ; it be all too serious ; too close around he , an unbreakable cage . 
 on the far side of the square newspaper boy be call their evening ware , and the ghoulish cry mingle and jangle with the sound of those church bell . 
 soame cover his ear . the thought flash across he that but for a chance , he himself , and not Bosinney , might be lie dead , and she , instead of crouch there like a shot bird with those die eye .... 
 something soft touch his leg , the cat be rub herself against they . and a sob that shake he from head to foot burst from Soames ' chest . then all be still again in the dark , where the house seem to stare at he , each with a master and mistress of its own , and a secret story of happiness or sorrow . 
 and suddenly he see that his own door be open , and black against the light from the hall a man stand with his back turn . something slide too in his breast , and he steal up close behind . 
 he could see his own fur coat fling across the carve oak chair ; the persian rug ; the silver bowl , the row of porcelain plate arrange along the wall , and this unknown man who be stand there . 
 and sharply he ask : " what be it you want , sir ? " 
 the visitor turn . it be young Jolyon . 
 " the door be open , " he say . " might I see your wife for a minute , I have a message for she ? " 
 soame give he a strange , sidelong stare . 
 " my wife can see no one , " he mutter doggedly . 
 Young Jolyon answer gently : " I should not   keep she a minute . " 
 soame brush by he and bar the way . 
 " she can see no one , " he say again . 
 Young Jolyon 's glance shoot past he into the hall , and Soames turn . there in the drawing - room doorway stand Irene , her eye be wild and eager , her lip be part , her hand outstretche . in the sight of both man that light vanish from her face ; her hand drop to her side ; she stand like stone . 
 soame spin round , and meet his visitor 's eye , and at the look he see in they , a sound like a snarl escape he . he draw his lip back in the ghost of a smile . 
 " this be my house , " he say ; " I manage my own affair . I have   tell you once - I tell you again ; we be not at home . " 
 and in young Jolyon 's face he slam the door . 
 213 
