SAINTS PROGRESS 


 by John Galsworthy 



 PART I 




 I 

 such a day make glad the heart . all the flag of July be wave ; the 
 sun and the poppy flame ; white butterfly spire up and twining , 
 and the bee busy on the snapdragon . the lime - tree be come 
 into flower . tall white lily in the garden bed already rival the 
 delphinium ; the York and Lancaster rose be full - blow round their 
 golden heart . there be a gentle breeze , and a swish and stir and hum 
 rise and fall above the head of Edward Pierson , come back from his 
 lonely ramble over Tintern Abbey . he have arrive at Kestrel , his brother 
 Robert 's home on the bank of the Wye only that morning , have stay 
 at Bath on the way down ; and now he have get his face burn in that 
 parti - colour way peculiar to the face of those who have be too long 
 in London . as he come along the narrow , rather overgrown avenue , the 
 sound of a waltz thrum out on a piano fall on his ear , and he 
 smile , for music be the great passion he have . his dark grizzle 
 hair be push back off his hot brow , which he fan with his straw 
 hat . though not broad , that brow be the broad part of a narrow 
 oval face whose length be increase by a short , dark , point beard - a 
 visage such as Vandyk might have paint , grave and gentle , but for its 
 bright grey eye , cinder - lash and crow' - footed , and its strange look 
 of not see what be before it . he walk quickly , though he be tired 
 and hot ; tall , upright , and thin , in a grey parsonical suit , on whose 
 black kerseymere vest a little gold cross dangle . 

 above his brother 's house , whose slop garden run down to the railway 
 line and river , a large room have be build out apart . Pierson stand 
 where the avenue fork , enjoy the sound of the waltz , and the cool 
 whipping of the breeze in the sycamore and birch . a man of fifty , 
 with a sense of beauty , bear and breed in the country , suffer fearfully 
 from nostalgia during a long unbroken spell of London ; so that his 
 afternoon in the old Abbey have be almost holy . he have let his sens 
 sink into the sunlit greenery of the tower wood opposite ; he have 
 watch the spider and the little shin beetle , the flycatcher , 
 and sparrow in the ivy ; touch the moss and the lichen ; look 
 the speedwell in the eye ; dream of he know not what . a hawk have be 
 wheel up there above the wood , and he have be up there with it in 
 the blue . he have take a real spiritual bath , and wash the dusty fret 
 of London off his soul . 

 for a year he have be work his parish single - handed - no joke - for 
 his curate have go for a chaplain ; and this be his first real holiday 
 since the war begin , two year ago ; his first visit , too , to his 
 brother 's home . he look down at the garden , and up at the tree of the 
 avenue . Bob have find a perfect retreat after his quarter of a century 
 in Ceylon . dear old Bob ! and he smile at the thought of his elder 
 brother , whose burn face and fierce grey whisker somewhat recall a 
 bengal tiger ; the kind fellow that ever breathe ! yes , he have find 
 a perfect home for Thirza and himself . and Edward Pierson sigh . he too 
 have once have a perfect home , a perfect wife ; the wound of whose 
 death , fifteen year ago , still bleed a little in his heart . their two 
 daughter , Gratian and Noel , have not " take after " she ; Gratian be like 
 his own mother , and Noel 's fair hair and big grey eye always remind 
 he of his cousin Leila , who - poor thing ! - have make that sad mess of her 
 life , and now , he have hear , be sing for a living , in South Africa . 
 ah ! what a pretty girl she have be ! 

 draw by that eternal waltz tune he reach the doorway of the 
 music - room . a chintz curtain hang there , and to the sound of foot 
 slip on polished board , he see his daughter Noel waltzing slowly 
 in the arm of a young officer in khaki : round and round they go , 
 circling , backing , move sideways with curious step which seem to 
 have come in recently , for he do not recognise they . at the piano sit 
 his niece Eve , with a teasing smile on her rosy face . but it be at his 
 young daughter that Edward Pierson look . her eye be half - closed , 
 her cheek rather pale , and her fair hair , cut quite short , curl into 
 her slim round neck . quite cool she seem , though the young man in 
 whose arm she be glide along look fiery hot ; a handsome boy , 
 with blue eye and a little golden down on the upper lip of his sunny 
 red - cheeked face . Edward Pierson think : ' nice couple ! ' and have a 
 moment 's vision of himself and Leila , dance at that long - ago Cambridge 
 May week - on her seventeenth birthday , he remember , so that she must 
 have be a year young than Nollie be now ! this would be the young 
 man she have talk of in her letter during the last three week . be 
 they never go to stop ? 

 he pass into view of those within , and say : 

 " be not   you very hot , Nollie ? " 

 she blow he a kiss ; the young man look startled and self - conscious , 
 and Eve call out : 

 " it be a bet , Uncle . they have   get to dance I down . " 

 Pierson say mildly : 

 " a bet ? my dear ! " 

 Noel murmur over her shoulder : 

 " it be all right , Daddy ! " and the young man gasp : 

 " she be bet we one of her puppy against one of mine , sir ! " 

 Pierson sit down , a little hypnotize by the sleepy strumming , the slow 
 giddy movement of the dancer , and those half - close swimming eye of 
 his young daughter , look at he over her shoulder as she go by . he 
 sit with a smile on his lip . Nollie be grow up ! now that Gratian 
 be marry , she have become a great responsibility . if only his dear 
 wife have live ! the smile fade from his lip ; he look suddenly very 
 tired . the struggle , physical and spiritual , he have be through , these 
 fifteen year , sometimes weigh he almost to the ground : Most man 
 would have marry again , but he have always feel it would be sacrilege . 
 real union be for ever , even though the Church permit remarriage . 

 he watch his young daughter with a mixture of aesthetic pleasure and 
 perplexity . could this be good for she ? to go on dance indefinitely 
 with one young man could that possibly be good for she ? but they look 
 very happy ; and there be so much in young creature that he do 
 not understand . Noel , so affectionate , and dreamy , seem sometimes 
 possess of a little devil . Edward Pierson be naif ; attribute those 
 outburst of demonic possession to the loss of her mother when she be 
 such a mite ; Gratian , but two year old , have never take a mother 's 
 place . that have be leave to himself , and he be more or less conscious 
 of failure . 

 he sit there look up at she with a sort of whimsical distress . and , 
 suddenly , in that dainty voice of her , which seem to spurn each word 
 a little , she say : 

 " I be go to stop ! " and , sit down beside he , take up his hat to 
 fan herself . 

 Eve strike a triumphant chord . " Hurrah I have   win ! " 

 the young man mutter : 

 " I say , Noel , we be not   half do ! " 

 " I know ; but daddy be get bore , be not   you , dear ? this be Cyril 
 Morland . " 

 Pierson shake the young man 's hand . 

 " Daddy , your nose be burn ! " 

 " my dear ; I know . " 

 " I can give you some white stuff for it . you have to sleep with it on 
 all night . Uncle and Auntie both use it . " 

 " Nollie ! " 

 " well , Eve say so . if you be go to bathe , Cyril , look out for that 
 current ! " 

 the young man , gaze at she with undisguised adoration , mutter : 

 " rather ! " and go out . 

 Noel 's eye linger after he ; Eve break a silence . 

 " if you be go to have a bath before tea , Nollie , you would well hurry 
 up . " 

 " all right . be it jolly in the Abbey , daddy ? " 

 " lovely ; like a great piece of music . " 

 " daddy always put everything into music . you ought to see it by 
 moonlight ; it be gorgeous then . all right , Eve ; I be come . " but she do 
 not get up , and when Eve be go , cuddle her arm through her father 's 
 and murmur : 

 " what d'you think of Cyril ? " 

 " my dear , how can I tell ? he seem a nice - looking young man . " 

 " all right , daddy ; do not   strain yourself . it be jolly down here , be not 
 it ? " she get up , stretch herself a little , and move away , look 
 like a very tall child , with her short hair curl in round her head . 

 Pierson , watch she vanish past the curtain , think : ' what a lovely 
 thing she be ! ' and he get up too , but instead of follow , go to the 
 piano , and begin to play Mendelssohn 's Prelude and Fugue in E minor . he 
 have a fine touch , and play with a sort of dreamy passion . it be his 
 way out of perplexity , regret , and longing ; a way which never quite 
 fail he . 

 at Cambridge , he have intend to take up music as a profession , but 
 family tradition have destine he for Holy Orders , and an emotional 
 Church revival of that day have catch he in its stream . he have always 
 have private mean , and those early year before he marry have pass 
 happily in an East - end parish . to have not only opportunity but power to 
 help in the life of the poor have be fascinating ; simple himself , the 
 simple folk of his parish have take hold of his heart . when , however , he 
 marry Agnes Heriot , he be give a parish of his own on the border 
 of East and West , where he have be ever since , even after her death have 
 nearly kill he . it be well to go on where work and all remind 
 he of one whom he have resolve never to forget in other tie . but he 
 know that his work have not the z it use to have in her day , or even 
 before her day . it may well be doubt whether he , who have be in Holy 
 Orders twenty - six year , quite know now what he believe . everything have 
 become circumscribed , and fix , by thousand of his own utterance ; to 
 have take fresh stock of his faith , to have go deep into its root , 
 would have be like take up the foundation of a still - stand 
 house . some man naturally root themselves in the inexpressible - for 
 which one formula be much the same as another ; though Edward Pierson , 
 gently dogmatic , undoubtedly prefer his high - church statement of 
 the inexpressible to that of , say , the Zoroastrians . the subtlety of 
 change , the modification by science , leave little sense of inconsistency 
 or treason on his soul . sensitive , charitable , and only combative deep 
 down , he instinctively avoid discussion on matter where he might hurt 
 other or they hurt he . and , since explanation be the last thing which 
 o could be expect of one who do not base himself on Reason , he have 
 find but scant occasion ever to examine anything . just as in the old 
 Abbey he have soar off into the infinite with the hawk , the beetle , 
 and the grass , so now , at the piano , by these sound of his own 
 making , he be catch away again into emotionalism , without realise 
 that he be in one of his , most religious mood . 

 " be not   you come to tea , Edward ? " 

 the woman stand behind he , in a lilac - colour gown , have one of 
 those face which remain innocent to the end of the chapter , in spite of 
 the complete knowledge of life which appertain to mother . in day of 
 suffering and anxiety , like these of the great war , Thirza Pierson be 
 a valuable person . without ever express an opinion on cosmic matter , 
 she reconfirm certain cosmic truth , such as that though the whole 
 world be at war , there be such a thing as peace ; that though all 
 the son of mother be be kill , there remain such a thing as 
 motherhood ; that while everybody be live for the future , the present 
 still exist . her tranquil , tender , matter - of - fact busyness , and the 
 dew in her eye , have be proof against twenty - three year of life on a 
 tea - plantation in the hot part of Ceylon ; against Bob Pierson ; against 
 the anxiety of have two son at the front , and the confidence of 
 nearly every one she come across . nothing disturb she . she be like a 
 painting of " Goodness " by an Old Master , restore by Kate Greenaway . she 
 never go to meet life , but when it come , make the good of it . this be 
 her secret , and Pierson always feel rest in her presence . 

 he rise , and move by her side , over the lawn , towards the big tree at 
 the bottom of the garden . 

 " how d'you think Noel be look , Edward ? " 

 " very pretty . that young man , Thirza ? " 

 " yes ; I be afraid he be over head and ear in love with she . " 

 at the dismayed sound he utter , she slip her soft round arm within 
 his . " he be go to the front soon , poor boy ! " 

 " have they talk to you ? " 

 " he have . Nollie have not   yet . " 

 " Nollie be a queer child , Thirza . " 

 " Nollie be a darling , but rather a desperate character , Edward . " 

 Pierson sigh . 

 in a swing under the tree , where the tea - thing be set out , the 
 " rather desperate character " be sway . " what a picture she be ! " he 
 say , and sigh again . 

 the voice of his brother come to they , - high and steamy , as though 
 corrupt by the climate of Ceylon : 

 " you incorrigible dreamy chap , Ted ! we have   eat all the raspberry . 
 Eve , give he some jam ; he must be dead ! Phew ! the heat ! come on , my 
 dear , and pour out his tea . Hallo , Cyril ! have a good bathe ? by George , 
 wish my head be wet ! Squattez - vous down over there , by Nollie ; she will 
 swing , and keep the fly off you . " 

 " give I a cigarette , Uncle Bob - " 

 " what ! your father do not   - " 

 " just for the fly . you do not   mind , daddy ? " 

 " not if it be necessary , my dear . " 

 Noel smile , show her upper tooth , and her eye seem to swim under 
 their long lash . 

 " it be not   necessary , but it be nice . " 

 " ah , ha ! " say Bob Pierson . " here you be , Nollie ! " 

 but Noel shake her head . at that moment she strike her father as 
 startlingly grow - up - so composed , sway above that young man at 
 her foot , whose sunny face be all adoration . ' no long a child ! ' he 
 think . ' Dear Nollie ! ' 




 II 


 1 

 awaken by that daily cruelty , the advent of hot water , Edward Pierson 
 lie in his chintz - curtain room , fancy himself back in London . a 
 wild bee hunt honey from the bowl of flower on the window - sill , and 
 the scent of sweetbri , shatter that illusion . he draw the curtain , 
 and , kneel on the window - seat thrust his head out into the morning . 
 the air be intoxicatingly sweet . haze clung over the river and the 
 wood beyond ; the lawn sparkle with dew , and two wagtail strut in 
 the dewy sunshine . ' thank God for loveliness ! ' he think . ' those poor 
 boy at the front ! ' and kneel with his elbow on the sill , he begin 
 to say his prayer . the same feeling which make he beautify his church , 
 use vestment , good music , and incense , fill he now . God be in the 
 loveliness of his world , as well as in his church . one could worship 
 he in a grove of beech tree , in a beautiful garden , on a high hill , 
 by the bank of a bright river . God be in the rustle of the leaf , and 
 the hum of a bee , in the dew on the grass , and the scent of flower ; 
 God be in everything ! and he add to his usual prayer this whisper : " I 
 give Thee thank for my sens , o Lord . in all of we , keep they bright , 
 and grateful for beauty . " then he remain motionless , prey to a sort 
 of happy yearning very near , to melancholy . great beauty ever have that 
 effect on he . one could capture so little of it - could never enjoy it 
 enough ! who be it have say not long ago : " love of beauty be really only 
 the sex instinct , which nothing but complete union satisfie . " ah ! yes , 
 George - Gratian 's husband . George Laird ! and a little frown come between 
 his brow , as though at some thorn in the flesh . poor George ! but then , 
 all doctor be materialist at heart - splendid fellow , though ; a fine 
 fellow , George , work himself to death out there in France . one must 
 not take they too seriously . he pluck a bit of sweetbri and put it 
 to his nose , which still retain the shine of that bleach ointment 
 Noel have insist on his using . the sweet smell of those little rough 
 leaf stir up an acute aching . he drop they , and draw back . no 
 longing , no melancholy ; one ought to be out , this beautiful morning ! 

 it be Sunday ; but he have not to take three service and preach at least 
 one sermon ; this day of rest be really to be his own , for once . it be 
 almost disconcert ; he have so long feel like the cab horse who could 
 not be take out of the shaft lest he should fall down . he dress with 
 extraordinary deliberation , and have not quite finish when there come a 
 knock on his door , and Noel 's voice say : " can I come in , daddy ? " 

 in her flax - blue frock , with a Gloire de Dijon rise pin where it meet 
 on her faintly brown neck , she seem to her father a perfect vision 
 of freshness . 

 " here be a letter from Gratian ; George have be send home ill , and he be 
 go to our house . she be get leave from her hospital to come home and 
 nurse he . " 

 Pierson read the letter . " Poor George ! " 

 " when be you go to let I be a nurse , daddy ? " 

 " we must wait till you be eighteen , Nollie . " 

 " I could easily say I be . it be only a month ; and I look much more . " 

 Pierson smile . 

 " do not   I ? " 

 " you might be anything from fifteen to twenty - five , my dear , accord 
 as you behave . " 

 " I want to go out as near the front as possible . " 

 her head be poise so that the sunlight frame her face , which be 
 rather broad - the brow rather too broad - under the wave light - brown 
 hair , the nose short and indeterminate ; cheek still round from youth , 
 almost waxen - pale , and faintly hollow under the eye . it be her lip , 
 dainty yet love , and above all her grey eye , big and dreamily alive , 
 which make she a swan . he could not imagine she in nurse 's garb . 

 " this be new , be not   it , Nollie ? " 

 " Cyril Morland 's sister be both out ; and he will be go soon . 
 everybody go . " 

 " Gratian have not   get out yet : it take a long time to get train . " 

 " I know ; all the more reason to begin . " 

 she get up , look at he , look at her hand , seem about to speak , 
 but do not . a little colour have come into her cheek . then , obviously 
 make conversation , she ask : 

 " be you go to church ? it be worth anything to hear Uncle Bob read the 
 Lessons , especially when he lose his place . no ; you be not to put on 
 your long coat till just before church time . I will not   have it ! " 

 Obediently Pierson resign his long coat . 

 " now , you see , you can have my rose . your nose be well ! " she kiss 
 his nose , and transfer she rise to the buttonhole of his short coat . 
 " that be all . come along ! " and with her arm through his , they go down . 
 but he know she have come to say something which she have not say . 



 2 

 Bob Pierson , in virtue of great wealth than the rest of the 
 congregation , always read the Lessons , in his high steamy voice , his 
 breathing never adjust to the length of any period . the congregation , 
 accustom , hear nothing peculiar ; he be the necessary gentry with the 
 necessary finger in the pie . it be his own family whom he perturb . in 
 the second row , Noel , star solemnly at the profile of her father in 
 the front row , be think : ' poor daddy ! his eye look as if they be 
 come out . oh , Daddy ! smile ! or it will hurt you ! ' Young Morland beside 
 she , rigid in his tunic , be think : ' she be not   think of I ! ' 
 and just then her little finger crook into his . Edward Pierson be 
 think : ' oh ! my dear old Bob ! oh ! ' and , beside he , Thirza think : 
 ' poor dear Ted I how nice for he to be have a complete rest ! I must 
 make he eat he be so thin ! ' and Eve be think : ' oh , Father ! mercy ! ' 
 but Bob Pierson be think : ' cheer oh ! only another three verse ! ' 
 Noel 's little finger unhook itself , but her eye steal round to young 
 Morland 's eye , and there be a light in they which linger through 
 the singing and the prayer . at last , in the reverential rustle of the 
 settling congregation , a surplice figure mount the pulpit . 

 " I come not to bring Peace , but a sword . " 

 Pierson look up . he feel deep restfulness . there be a pleasant light 
 in this church ; the hum of a country bluebottle make all the difference 
 to the quality of silence . no critical thought stir within he , nor 
 any excitement . he be think : ' now I shall hear something for my 
 good ; a fine text ; when do I preach from it last ? ' turn a little away 
 from the other , he see nothing but the preacher 's homely face up there 
 above the carve oak ; it be so long since he have be preach to , 
 so long since he have have a rest ! the word come forth , drop on 
 his forehead , penetrate , meet something which absorb they , and 
 disappear . ' a good plain sermon ! ' he think . ' I suppose I be stale ; I 
 do not   seem - ' " let we not , dear brother , " drone the preacher 's earnest 
 voice , " think that our dear Lord , in say that he bring a sword , 
 refer to a physical sword . it be the sword of the spirit to which he 
 be undoubtedly refer , that bright sword of the spirit which in all 
 age have cleave its way through the fetter impose on man themselves 
 by their own desire , impose by man on other man in gratification of 
 their ambition , as we have have so strike an example in the invasion 
 by our cruel enemy of a little neighbouring country which have do 
 they no harm . dear brother , we may all bring sword . " Pierson 's chin 
 jerk ; he raise his hand quickly and pass it over his face . ' all 
 bring sword , ' he think , ' sword - I be not   asleep - surely ! ' " but let 
 we be sure that our sword be bright ; bright with hope , and bright with 
 faith , that we may see they flash among the carnal desire of this 
 mortal life , carve a path for we towards that heavenly kingdom where 
 alone be peace , perfect peace . let we pray . " 

 Pierson do not shut his eye ; he open they as he fall on his knee . 
 in the seat behind , Noel and young Morland have also fall on their 
 knee their face cover each with a single hand ; but her left hand 
 and his right hang at their side . they pray a little long than any 
 other and , on rise , sing the hymn a little louder . 



 3 

 no paper come on Sundays - not even the local paper , which have so 
 long and so nobly do its bit with headline to win the war . no news 
 whatever come , of man blow up , to enliven the hush of the hot July 
 afternoon , or the sense of drug - which follow Aunt Thirza 's Sunday 
 lunch . some sleep , some think they be awake ; but Noel and young 
 Morland walk upward through the wood towards a high common of heath 
 and furze , crown by what be know as Kestrel rock . between these two 
 young people no actual word of love have yet be speak . their lovering 
 have advance by glance and touch alone . 

 Young Morland be a school and college friend of the two Pierson boy 
 now at the front . he have no home of his own , for his parent be dead ; 
 and this be not his first visit to Kestrel . arrive three week ago , 
 for his final leave before he should go out , he have find a girl sit 
 in a little wagonette outside the station , and have know his fate at 
 once . but who know when Noel fall in love ? she be - one suppose - just 
 ready for that sensation . for the last two year she have be at one of 
 those high - class finishing establishment where , in spite of the healthy 
 curriculum , perhaps because of it , there be ever an undercurrent of 
 interest in the oppose sex ; and not even the grave effort to 
 eliminate instinct be quite successful . the disappearance of every 
 young male thing into the maw of the military machine put a premium on 
 instinct . the thought of Noel and her school companion be turn , 
 perforce , to that which , in pre - war freedom of opportunity they could 
 afford to regard as of secondary interest . love and Marriage and 
 Motherhood , fix as the lot of woman by the countless age , be 
 threaten for these young creature . they not unnaturally pursue what 
 they feel to be recede . 

 when young Morland show , by follow she about with his eye , what 
 be happen to he , Noel be pleased . from be please , she become a 
 little excited ; from be excited she become dreamy . then , about a week 
 before her father 's arrival , she secretly begin to follow the young man 
 about with her eye ; become capricious too , and a little cruel . if 
 there have be another young man to favour - but there be not ; and she 
 favour Uncle Bob 's red setter . Cyril Morland grow desperate . during 
 those three day the demon her father dread certainly possess 
 she . and then , one evening , while they walk back together from the 
 hay - field , she give he a sidelong glance ; and he gasp out : " oh ! 
 Noel , what have I do ? " she catch his hand , and give it a quick 
 squeeze . what a change ! what blissful alteration ever since ! 

 through the wood young Morland mount silently , screw himself up to 
 put thing to the touch . Noel too mount silently , think : ' I will 
 kiss he if he kiss I ! ' Eagerness , and a sort of languor , be 
 run in her vein ; she do not look at he from under her shady 
 hat . Sun light pour down through every chink in the foliage ; make the 
 greenness of the steep wood marvellously vivid and alive ; flash on 
 beech leave , ash leaf , birch leaf ; fall on the ground in little 
 runlet ; paint bright patch on trunk and grass , the beech mast , the 
 fern ; butterfly chase each other in that sunlight , and myriad of 
 ant and gnat and fly seem possess by a frenzy of life . the whole 
 wood seem possess , as if the sunshine be a happy being which have 
 come to dwell therein . at a half - way spot , where the tree open and 
 they could see , far below they , the gleam of the river , she sit down on 
 the bole of a beech - tree , and young Morland stand look at she . why 
 should one face and not an other , this voice and not that , make a heart 
 beat ; why should a touch from one hand awaken rapture , and a touch from 
 another awaken nothing ? he kneel down and press his lip to her 
 foot . her eye grow very bright ; but she get up and run on - she have not 
 expect he to kiss her foot . she hear he hurry after she , and 
 stop , lean against a birch trunk . he rush to she , and , without 
 a word speak , his lip be on her lip . the moment in life , which 
 no word can render , have come for they . they have find their enchant 
 spot , and they move no far , but sit with their arm round 
 each other , while the happy being of the wood watch . a marvellous 
 speeder - up of Love be War . what might have take six month , be thus 
 accomplish in three week . 

 a short hour pass , then Noel say : 

 " I must tell Daddy , Cyril . I mean to tell he something this morning , 
 only I think I would well wait , in case you do not . " 

 Morland answer : " oh , Noel ! " it be the staple of his conversation 
 while they sit there . 

 again a short hour pass , and Morland say : 

 " I shall go off my chump if we be not married before I go out . " 

 " how long do it take ? " 

 " no time , if we hurry up . I have   get six day before I rejoin , and perhaps 
 the Chief will give I another week , if I tell he . " 

 " poor daddy ! kiss I again ; a long one . " 

 when the long one be over , she say : 

 " then I can come and be near you till you go out ? oh , Cyril ! " 

 " oh , Noel ! " 

 " perhaps you will not   go so soon . do not   go if you can help it ! " 

 " not if I can help it , darling ; but I shall not   be able . " 

 " no , of course not ; I know . " 

 Young Morland clutch his hair . " everyone be in the same boat , but it 
 can not   last for ever ; and now we be engaged we can be together all the 
 time till I have   get the licence or whatever it be . and then - ! " 

 " daddy will not   like our not be marry in a church ; but I do not   care ! " 

 look down at her closed eye , and their lash rest on her cheek , 
 young Morland think : 

 ' my God ! I be in heaven ! ' 

 another short hour pass before she free herself . 

 " we must go , Cyril . kiss I once more ! " 

 it be nearly dinner - time , and they run down . 4 

 Edward Pierson , return from the Evening Service , where he have read 
 the Lessons , see they in the distance , and compress his lip . their 
 long absence have vex he . what ought he to do ? in the presence of 
 Love 's young dream , he feel strange and helpless . that night , when he 
 open the door of his room , he see Noel on the window - seat , in she 
 dressing - gown , with the moonlight stream in on she . 

 " do not   light up , daddy ; I have   get something to say . " 

 she take hold of the little gold cross on his vest , and turn it over . 

 " I be engaged to Cyril ; we want to be marry this week . " 

 it be exactly as if someone have punch he in the rib ; and at the 
 sound he make she hurry on : 

 " you see , we must be ; he may be go out any day . " 

 in the midst of his ache consternation , he admit a kind of reason 
 in her word . but he say : 

 " my dear , you be only a child . marriage be the most serious thing in 
 life ; you have   only know he three week . " 

 " I know all that , daddy " her voice sound so ridiculously calm ; " but 
 we can not   afford to wait . he might never come back , you see , and then I 
 should have miss he . " 

 " but , Noel , suppose he never do come back ; it would only be much bad 
 for you . " 

 she drop the little cross , and take hold of his hand , press it 
 against her heart . but still her voice be calm : 

 " no ; much well , daddy ; you think I do not   know my own feeling , but I 
 do . " ' 

 the man in Pierson soften ; the priest harden . 

 " Nollie , true marriage be the union of soul ; and for that , time be 
 want . time to know that you feel and think the same , and love the same 
 thing . " 

 " yes , I know ; but we do . " 

 " you can not   tell that , my dear ; no one could in three week . " 

 " but these be not   ordinary time , be they ? People have to do thing in 
 a hurry . oh , daddy ! be an angel ! mother would have understand , and let 
 I , I know ! " 

 Pierson draw away his hand ; the word hurt , from reminder of his loss , 
 from reminder of the poor substitute he be . 

 " look , Nollie ! " he say . " after all these year since she leave we , I be 
 as lonely as ever , because we be really one . if you marry this young 
 man without know more of your own heart than you can in such a 
 little time , you may regret it dreadfully ; you may find it turn out , 
 after all , nothing but a little empty passion ; or again , if anything 
 happen to he before you have   have any real married life together , you will 
 have a much great grief and sense of loss to put up with than if you 
 simply stay engaged till after the war . besides , my child , you be much 
 too young . " 

 she sit so still that he look at she in alarm . " but I must ! " 

 he bite his lip , and say sharply : " you can not , Nollie ! " 

 she get up , and before he could stop she , be go . with the closing of 
 the door , his anger evaporate , and distress take its place . poor child ! 
 what to do with this wayward chicken just out of the egg , and want to 
 be full - fledged at once ? the thought that she would be lie miserable , 
 crying , perhaps , beset he so that he go out into the passage and 
 tap on her door . get no answer , he go in . it be dark but for 
 a streak of moonlight , and in that he see she , lie on her bed , face 
 down ; and steal up lay his hand on her head . she do not move ; and , 
 stroke her hair , he say gently : 

 " Nollie dear , I do not   mean to be harsh . if I be your mother , I should 
 know how to make you see , but I be only an old bumble - daddy . " 

 she roll over , scramble into a cross - legged posture on the bed . he 
 could see her eye shin . but she do not speak ; she seem to know 
 that in silence be her strength . 

 he say with a sort of despair : 

 " you must let I talk it over with your aunt . she have a lot of good 
 sense . " 

 " yes . " 

 he bend over and kiss her hot forehead . 

 " good night , my dear ; do not   cry . promise I ! " 

 she nod , and lift her face ; he feel her hot soft lip on his 
 forehead , and go away a little comfort . 

 but Noel sit on her bed , hug her knee , listen to the night , 
 to the emptiness and silence ; each minute so much lose of the little , 
 little time leave , that she might have be with he . 




 III 

 Pierson wake after a troubled and dreamful night , in which he have 
 think himself wander in heaven like a lost soul . 

 after regain his room last night nothing have strike he more forcibly 
 than the needlessness of his word : " do not   cry , Nollie ! " for he have 
 realise with uneasiness that she have not be near cry . no ; there 
 be in she some emotion very different from the tearful . he keep see 
 her cross - legged figure on the bed in that dim light ; tense , enigmatic , 
 almost Chinese ; keep feel the feverish touch of her lip . a good 
 girlish burst of tear would have do she good , and be a guarantee . 
 he have the uncomfortable conviction that his refusal have pass she by , 
 as if unspoken . and , since he could not go and make music at that time 
 of night , he have end on his knee , in a long search for guidance , 
 which be not vouchsafe he . 

 the culprit be demure at breakfast ; no one could have tell that for 
 the last hour they have be sit with their arm round each other , 
 watch the river flow by , talk but little , through lip too busy . 
 Pierson pursue his sister - in - law to the room where she do her flower 
 every morning . he watch she for a minute divide rambler from 
 pansy , cornflower from sweet pea , before he say : 

 " I be very troubled , Thirza . Nollie come to I last night . imagine ! they 
 want to get marry - those two ! " 

 accept life as it come , Thirza show no dismay , but her cheek grow 
 a little pinker , and her eye a little rounder . she take up a sprig of 
 mignonette , and say placidly : 

 " oh , my dear ! " 

 " think of it , Thirza - that child ! why , it be only a year or two since she 
 use to sit on my knee and tickle my face with her hair . " 

 Thirza go on arrange her flower . 

 " Noel be old than you think , Edward ; she be more than her age . and 
 real married life would not   begin for they till after - if it ever begin . " 

 Pierson experience a sort of shock . his sister - in - law 's word seem 
 criminally light - hearted . 

 " but - but - " he stammer ; " the union , Thirza ! who can tell what will 
 happen before they come together again ! " 

 she look at his quivering face , and say gently : 

 " I know , Edward ; but if you refuse , I should be afraid , in these day , 
 of what Noel might do . I tell you there be a streak of desperation in 
 she . " 

 " Noel will obey I . " 

 " I wonder ! there be so many of these war marriage now . " 

 Pierson turn away . 

 " I think they be dreadful . what do they mean - just a momentary 
 gratification of passion . they might just as well not be . " 

 " they mean pension , as a rule , " say Thirza calmly . 

 " Thirza , that be cynical ; besides , it do not   affect this case . I can not 
 bear to think of my little Nollie give herself for a moment which may 
 come to nothing , or may turn out the beginning of an unhappy marriage . 
 who be this boy - what be he ? I know nothing of he . how can I give she 
 to he - it be impossible ! if they have be engage some time and I 
 know something of he - yes , perhaps ; even at her age . but this hasty 
 passionateness - it be not   right , it be not   decent . I do not   understand , 
 I really do not   - how a child like that can want it . the fact be , she 
 do not   know what she be ask , poor little Nollie . she can not   know the 
 nature of marriage , and she can not   realise its sacredness . if only her 
 mother be here ! talk to she , Thirza ; you can say thing that I can not ! " 

 Thirza look after the retreating figure . in spite of his cloth , 
 perhaps a little because of it , he seem to she like a child who have 
 come to show she his sore finger . and , have finish the arrangement 
 of her flower , she go out to find her niece . she have not far to go ; 
 for Noel be stand in the hall , quite evidently lie in wait . they 
 go out together to the avenue . 

 the girl begin at once : 

 " it be not   any use talk to I , Auntie ; Cyril be go to get a 
 license . " 

 " oh ! so you have   make up your mind ? " 

 " quite . " 

 " do you think that be fair by I , Nollie ? should I have ask he here if 
 I would think this be go to happen ? " 

 Noel only smile . 

 " have you the least idea what marriage mean ? " 

 Noel nod . 

 " really ? " 

 " of course . Gratian be marry . besides , at school - " 

 " your father be dead against it . this be a sad thing for he . he be a 
 perfect saint , and you ought not   to hurt he . can not   you wait , at least 
 till Cyril 's next leave ? " 

 " he might never have one , you see . " 

 the heart of she whose boy be out there too , and might also never 
 have another leave ; could not but be responsive to those word . she 
 look at her niece , and a dim appreciation of this revolt of life 
 menace by death , of youth threaten with extinction , stir in she . 
 Noel 's tooth be clench , her lip draw back , and she be star in 
 front of she . 

 " daddy ought not   to mind . old people have not   to fight , and get kill ; 
 they ought not   to mind we take what we can . they have   have their good 
 time . " 

 it be such a just little speech that Thirza answer : 

 " yes ; perhaps he have not   quite realise that . " 

 " I want to make sure of Cyril , Auntie ; I want everything I can have 
 with he while there be the chance . I do not   think it be much to ask , when 
 perhaps I will never have any more of he again . " 

 Thirza slip her hand through the girl 's arm . 

 " I understand , " she say . " only , Nollie , suppose , when all this be over , 
 and we breathe and live naturally once more , you find you would make a 
 mistake ? " 

 Noel shake her head . " I have not . " 

 " we all think that , my dear ; but thousand of mistake be make by 
 people who no more dream they be make they than you do now ; and then 
 it be a very horrible business . it would be especially horrible for you ; 
 your father believe heart and soul in marriage be for ever . " 

 " daddy be a darling ; but I do not   always believe what he believe , you 
 know . besides , I be not make a mistake , Auntie ! I love Cyril ever so . " 

 Thirza give her waist a squeeze . 

 " you must not   make a mistake . we love you too much , Nollie . I wish we have 
 Gratian here . " 

 " Gratian would back I up , " say Noel ; ' she know what the war be . and 
 you ought to , Auntie . if Rex or Harry want to be marry , I be sure 
 you would never oppose they . and they be no old than Cyril . you must 
 understand what it mean to I Auntie dear , to feel that we belong to 
 each other properly before - before it all begin for he , and - and 
 there may be no more . daddy do not   realise . I know he be awfully good , 
 but - he be forget . " 

 " my dear , I think he remember only too well . he be desperately 
 attach to your mother . " 

 Noel clench her hand . 

 " be he ? well , so be I to Cyril , and he to I . we would not   be 
 unreasonable if it be not   - be not   necessary . talk , to Cyril , Auntie ; 
 then you will understand . there he be ; only , do not   keep he long , because 
 I want he . oh ! auntie ; I want he so badly ! " 

 she turn ; and slip back into the house ; and Thirza , conscious of 
 have be decoy to this young man , who stand there with his arm 
 fold , like Napoleon before a battle , smile and say : 

 " well , Cyril , so you have   betray I ! " 

 even in speak she be conscious of the really momentous change 
 in this sunburnt , blue - eye , lazily impudent youth since the day he 
 arrive , three week ago , in their little wagonette . he take her arm , 
 just as Noel have , and make she sit down beside he on the rustic bench , 
 where he have evidently be tell to wait . 

 " you see , Mrs. Pierson , " he say , " it be not as if Noel be an ordinary 
 girl in an ordinary time , be it ? Noel be the sort of girl one would 
 knock one 's brain out for ; and to send I out there know that I 
 could have be married to she and be not , will take all the heart out 
 of I . of course I mean to come back , but chap do get knock over , and 
 I think it be cruel that we can not   take what we can while we can . besides , 
 I have   get money ; and that would be hers anyway . so , do be a darling , 
 will not   you ? " he put his arm round her waist , just as if he have be her 
 son , and her heart , which want her own boy so badly , feel warm 
 within she . 

 " you see , I do not   know Mr. Pierson , but he seem awfully gentle and 
 jolly , and if he could see into I he would not   mind , I know . we do not 
 mind risk our life and all that , but we do think we ought to have 
 the run of they while we be alive . I will give he my die oath or 
 anything , that I could never change towards Noel , and she will do the 
 same . oh ! Mrs. Pierson , do be a jolly brick , and put in a word for I , 
 quick ! we have   get so few day ! " 

 " but , my dear boy , " say Thirza feebly , " do you think it be fair to such 
 a child as Noel ? " 

 " yes , I do . you do not   understand ; she be simply have to grow up . she be 
 grow - up - all in this week ; she be quite as old as I be , really - and 
 I be twenty - two . and you know it be go to be - it be get to be - a young 
 world , from now on ; people will begin do thing much early . what be 
 the use of pretend it be like what it be , and be cautious , and all 
 that ? if I be go to be kill , I think we have   get a right to be marry 
 first ; and if I be not , then what do it matter ? " 

 " you have   know each other twenty - one day , Cyril . " 

 " no ; twenty - one year ! every day 's a year when - oh ! Mrs. Pierson , this 
 be not   like you , be it ? you never go to meet trouble , do you ? " 

 at that shrewd remark , Thirza put her hand on the hand which still 
 clasp her waist , and press it close . 

 " well , my dear , " she say softly , " we must see what can be do . " 

 Cyril Morland kiss her cheek . " I will bless you for ever , " he say . " I 
 have not   get any people , you know , except my two sister . " 

 and something like tear start up on Thirza 's eyelash . they seem 
 to she like the babe in the wood - those two ! 




 iv 

 1 

 in the dining - room of her father 's house in that old London Square 
 between East and West , Gratian Laird , in the outdoor garb of a nurse , 
 be write a telegram : " Reverend Edward Pierson , Kestrel , Tintern , 
 Monmouthshire . George terribly ill . please come if you can . Gratian . " 
 give it to a maid , she take off her long coat and sit down for a 
 moment . she have be travel all night , after a full day 's work , and 
 have only just arrive , to find her husband between life and death . 
 she be very different from Noel ; not quite so tall , but of a strong 
 build ; with dark chestnut - colour hair , clear hazel eye , and a broad 
 brow . the expression of her face be earnest , with a sort of constant 
 spiritual enquiry ; and a singularly truthful look : she be just twenty ; 
 and of the year that she have be marry , have only spend six week 
 with her husband ; they have not even a house of their own as yet . after 
 rest five minute , she pass her hand vigorously over her face , 
 throw back her head , and walk up stair to the room where he lay . he 
 be not conscious , and there be nothing to be do but sit and watch 
 he . 

 ' if he die , ' she think , ' I shall hate God for his cruelty . I have have 
 six week with George ; some people have sixty year . ' she fix her eye 
 on his face , short and broad , with bump of " observation " on the brow . 
 he have be sunburnt . the dark lash of his closed eye lay on deathly 
 yellow cheek ; his thick hair grow rather low on his broad forehead . 
 the lip be just open and show strong white tooth . he have a little 
 clip moustache , and hair have grow on his clean - cut jaw . his pyjama 
 jacket have fall open . Gratian draw it close . it be curiously still , 
 for a London day , though the window be wide open . anything to break 
 this heavy stupor , which be not only George 's , but her own , and the 
 very world 's ! the cruelty of it - when she might be go to lose he for 
 ever , in a few hour or day ! she think of their last parting . it have 
 not be very loving , have come too soon after one of those argument 
 they be inclined to have , in which they could not as yet disagree with 
 suavity . George have say there be no future life for the individual ; 
 she have maintain there be . they have grow hot and impatient . even 
 in the cab on the way to his train they have pursue the wretched 
 discussion , and the last kiss have be from lip on lip yet warm from 
 disagreement . 

 ever since , as if in compunction , she have be waver towards his 
 point of view ; and now , when he be perhaps to solve the problem - find 
 out for certain - she have come to feel that if he die , she would never 
 see he after . it be cruel that such a blight should have come on her 
 belief at this , of all moment . 

 she lay her hand on his . it be warm , feel strong , although so 
 motionless and helpless . George be so vigorous , so alive , and 
 strong - willed ; it seem impossible that life might be go to play he 
 false . she recall the unflinche look of his steel - bright eye , his 
 deep , queerly vibrate voice , which have no trace of self - consciousness 
 or pretence . she slip her hand on to his heart , and begin very 
 slowly , gently rub it . he , as doctor , and she , as nurse , have both 
 see so much of death these last two year ! yet it seem suddenly as if 
 she have never see death , and that the young face she have see , empty 
 and white , in the hospital ward , have just be a show . death would 
 appear to she for the first time , if this face which she love be to 
 be drain for ever of light and colour and movement and meaning . 

 a humblebee from the Square Garden boom in and buzz idly round the 
 room . she catch her breath in a little sob .... 


 2 

 Pierson receive that telegram at midday , return from a lonely walk 
 after his talk with Thirza . come from Gratian so self - reliant - it 
 mean the bad . he prepare at once to catch the next train . Noel be 
 out , no one know where : so with a sick feeling he write : 


 " DEAREST CHILD , 

 " I be go up to Gratian ; poor George be desperately ill . if it go 
 badly you should be with your sister . I will wire to - morrow morning 
 early . I leave you in your aunt 's hand , my dear . be reasonable and 
 patient . God bless you . 

 " your devoted 

 " DADDY . " 


 he be alone in his third - class compartment , and , lean forward , 
 watch the ruin Abbey across the river till it be out of sight . 
 those old monk have live in an age surely not so sad as this . they must 
 have have peaceful life , remote down here , in day when the Church be 
 great and lovely , and man lay down their life for their belief in she , 
 and build everlaste fane to the glory of God ! what a change to this 
 age of rush and hurry , of science , trade , material profit , and this 
 terrible war ! he try to read his paper , but it be full of horror and 
 hate . ' when will it end ? ' he think . and the train with its rhythmic 
 jolting seem grind out the answer : " never - never ! " 

 at Chepstow a soldier get in , follow by a woman with a very flushed 
 face and curious , swimmy eye ; her hair be in disorder , and her lip 
 bleeding , as if she have bite it through . the soldier , too , look 
 strained and desperate . they sit down , far apart , on the seat opposite . 
 Pierson , feel that he be in their way , try to hide himself behind 
 his paper ; when he look again , the soldier have take off his tunic and 
 cap and be lean out of the window . the woman , on the seat 's edge , 
 sniff and wipe her face , meet his glance with resentful eye , then , 
 get up , she pull the man 's sleeve . 

 " sit dahn ; do not   ' ang out o ' there . " 

 the soldier fling himself back on the seat and look at Pierson . 

 " the wife an ' me be ' ad a bit of a row , " he say companionably . " git on 
 me nerve ; I be not use to it . she be in a raid , and ' er nerve be 
 all go funny ; be not   they , old girl ? make I feel I ' ead . I have   be 
 wound there , you know ; can not   stand much now . I might do something if 
 she be to go on like this for long . " 

 Pierson look at the woman , but her eye still meet his resentfully . the 
 soldier hold out a packet of cigarette . " take one , " he say . Pierson 
 take one and , feel that the soldier want he to speak , murmur : 
 " we all have these trouble with those we be fond of ; the fonder we be 
 of people , the more we feel they , do not   we ? I have one with my daughter 
 last night . " 

 " ah ! " say the soldier ; " that be right . the wife and me'll make it up . 
 ' Ere , come orf it , old girl . " 

 from behind his paper he soon become conscious of the sound of 
 reconciliation - reproach because someone have be offer a drink , 
 kiss mix with mild slapping , and abuse . when they get out at 
 Bristol the soldier shake his hand warmly , but the woman still give he 
 her resentful stare , and he think dreamily : ' the war ! how it affect 
 everyone ! ' his carriage be invade by a swarm of soldier , and the 
 rest of the journey be pass in make himself small . when at last he 
 reach home , Gratian meet he in the hall . 

 " just the same . the doctor say we shall know in a few hour now . how 
 sweet of you to come ! you must be tired , in this heat . it be dreadful 
 to spoil your holiday . " 

 " my dear ! as if - may I go up and see he ? " 

 George Laird be still lie in that stupor . and Pierson stand 
 gaze down at he compassionately . like most parson , he have a wide 
 acquaintance with the sick and die ; and one remorseless fellowship 
 with death . death ! the commonest thing in the world , now - commoner than 
 life ! this young doctor must have see many die in these last two year , 
 save many from death ; and there he lay , not able to lift a finger to 
 save himself . Pierson look at his daughter ; what a strong , promise 
 young couple they be ! and put his arm round she , he lead she away 
 to the sofa , whence they could see the sick man . 

 " if he die , Dad - " she whisper . 

 " he will have die for the Country , my love , as much as ever our 
 soldier do . " 

 " I know ; but that be no comfort . I have   be watch here all day ; I have 
 be think ; man will be just as brutal afterwards - more brutal . the 
 world will go on the same . " 

 " we must hope not . shall we pray , gracie ? " 

 Gratian shake her head . 

 " if I could believe that the world - if I could believe anything ! I have 
 lose the power , Dad ; I do not   even believe in a future life . if George 
 die , we shall never meet again . " 

 Pierson star at she without a word . 

 Gratian go on : " the last time we talk , I be angry with George 
 because he laugh at my belief ; now that I really want belief , I feel 
 that he be right . " 

 Pierson say tremulously : 

 " no , no , my dear ; it be only that you be overwrought . God in his mercy 
 will give you back belief . " 

 " there be no God , Dad " 

 " my darling child , what be you say ? " 

 " no God who can help we ; I feel it . if there be any God who could take 
 part in our life , alter anything without our will , know or care what 
 we do - he would not   let the world go on as it do . " 

 " but , my dear , his purpose be inscrutable . we dare not say he should 
 not do this or that , or try to fathom to what end he be work . " 

 " then he be no good to we . it be the same as if he do not   exist . why 
 should I pray for George 's life to one whose end be just his own ? I 
 know George ought not   to die . if there be a God who can help , it will be 
 a wicked shame if George die ; if there be a God who can help , it be a 
 wicked shame when baby die , and all these million of poor boy . I 
 would rather think there be no God than a helpless or a wicked God - " 

 her father have suddenly throw up his hand to his ear . she move 
 close , and put her arm round he . 

 " Dad dear , I be sorry . I do not   mean to hurt you . " 

 Pierson press her face down to his shoulder ; and say in a dull voice : 

 " what do you think would have happen to I , Gracie , if I have lose 
 belief when your mother die ? I have never lose belief . pray God I never 
 shall ! " 

 Gratian murmur : 

 " George would not wish I to pretend I believe - he would want I to be 
 honest . if I be not honest , I shall not   deserve that he should live . I do not 
 believe , and I can not   pray . " 

 " my darling , you be overtire . " 

 " no , Dad . " she raise her head from his shoulder and , clasp she 
 hand round her knee , look straight before she . " we can only help 
 ourselves ; and I can only bear it if I rebel . " 

 Pierson sit with trembling lip , feel that nothing he could say would 
 touch she just then . the sick man 's face be hardly visible now in the 
 twilight , and Gratian go over to his bed . she stand look down at 
 he a long time . 

 " go and rest , Dad ; the doctor be come again at eleven . I will call you if 
 I want anything . I shall lie down a little , beside he . " 

 Pierson kiss she , and go out . to lie there beside he would be the 
 great comfort she could get . he go to the bare narrow little room 
 he have occupy ever since his wife die ; and , take off his boot , 
 walk up and down , with a feeling of almost crush loneliness . both 
 his daughter in such trouble , and he of no use to they ! it be as 
 if Life be push he utterly aside ! he feel confused , helpless , 
 bewilder . surely if Gratian love George , she have not leave God 's side , 
 whatever she might say . then , conscious of the profound heresy of this 
 thought , he stand still at the open window . 

 earthly love - heavenly love ; be there any analogy between they ? 

 from the Square Gardens the indifferent whisper of the leaf answer ; 
 and a newsvendor at the far end , bawl his nightly tale of murder . 3 

 George Laird pass the crisis of his illness that night , and in the 
 morning be pronounce out of danger . he have a splendid constitution , 
 and - Scotsman on his father 's side - a fight character . he come back 
 to life very weak , but avid of recovery ; and his first word be : " I have 
 be hang over the edge , Gracie ! " 

 a very high cliff , and his body half over , balance ; one inch , the 
 mere fraction of an inch more , and over he would have go . deuce rum 
 sensation ! but not so horrible as it would have be in real life . with 
 the slip of that last inch he feel he would have pass at once into 
 oblivion , without the long horror of a fall . so this be what it be for 
 all the poor fellow he have see slip in the past two year ! mercifully , 
 at the end , one be not alive enough to be conscious of what one be 
 leave , not alive enough even to care . if he have be able to take in 
 the presence of his young wife , able to realise that he be look at 
 her face , touch she for the last time - it would have be hell ; if he 
 have be up to realise sunlight , moonlight , the sound of the world 's 
 life outside , the softness of the bed he lie on - it would have mean the 
 most poignant anguish of defraudment . life be a rare good thing , and 
 to be squash out of it with your power at full , a wretched mistake in 
 Nature 's arrangement , a wretched villainy on the part of man - for his 
 own death , like all those other million of premature death , would have 
 be due to the idiocy and brutality of man ! he could smile now , with 
 Gratian look down at he , but the experience have heap fuel on a 
 fire which have always smoulder in his doctor 's soul against that half 
 emancipate breed of ape , the human race . well , now he would get a few 
 day off from his death - carnival ! and he lay , feast his return 
 sens on his wife . she make a pretty nurse , and his practised eye 
 judge she a good one - firm and quiet . 

 George Laird be thirty . at the opening of the war he be in an East - End 
 practice , and have volunteer at once for service with the Army . for the 
 first nine month he have be right up in the thick of it . a poisoned 
 arm ; rather than the authority , have send he home . during that leave 
 he marry Gratian . he have know the Piersons some time ; and , make 
 conscious of the instability of life , have resolve to marry she at the 
 first chance he get . for his father - in - law he have respect and liking , 
 ever mix with what be not quite contempt and not quite pity . the 
 blend of authority with humility , cleric with dreamer , monk with artist , 
 mystic with man of action , in Pierson , excited in he an interested , but 
 often irritated , wonder . he see thing so differently himself , and have 
 little of the humorous curiosity which enjoy what be strange simply 
 because it be strange . they could never talk together without soon 
 reach a point when he want to say : " if we be not to trust our 
 reason and our sens for what they be worth , sir - will you kindly tell 
 I what we be to trust ? how can we exert they to the utmost in some 
 matter , and in other suddenly turn our back on they ? " once , in one 
 of their discussion , which often border on acrimony , he have expound 
 himself at length . 

 " I grant , " he have say , " that there be a great ultimate Mystery , that we 
 shall never know anything for certain about the origin of life and 
 the principle of the Universe ; but why should we suddenly shut up our 
 enquiring apparatus and deny all the evidence of our reason - say , about 
 the story of Christ , or the question of a future life , or our moral 
 code ? if you want I to enter a temple of little mystery , leave my 
 reason and sens behind - as a Mohammedan leave his shoe - it will not   do 
 to say to I simply : ' there it be ! enter ! ' you must show I the door ; 
 and you can not ! and I will tell you why , sir . because in your brain there be 
 a little twist which be not in mine , or the lack of a little twist which 
 be in mine . nothing more than that divide we into the two main specie 
 of mankind , one of whom worship , and one of whom do not . oh , yes ! 
 I know ; you will not   admit that , because it make your religion natural 
 instead of what you call supernatural . but I assure you there be nothing 
 more to it . your eye look up or they look down - they never look 
 straight before they . well , mine do just the opposite . " 

 that day Pierson have be feel very tired , and though to meet 
 this attack be vital , he have be unable to meet it . his brain have 
 stammer . he have turn a little away , lean his cheek on his hand , 
 as if to cover that momentary break in his defence . some day later he 
 have say : 

 " I be able now to answer your question , George . I think I can make you 
 understand . " 

 Laird have answer : " all right , sir ; go ahead . " 

 " you begin by assume that the human reason be the final test of all 
 thing . what right have you to assume that ? suppose you be an ant . you 
 would take your ant 's reason as the final test , would not   you ? would that 
 be the truth ? " and a smile have fix itself on his lip above his little 
 grave beard . 

 George Laird also have smile . 

 " that seem a good point , sir , " he say , " until you recognise that I 
 do not   take , the human reason as final test in any absolute sense . I only 
 say it be the high test we can apply ; and that , behind that test all 
 be quite dark and unknowable . " 

 " Revelation , then , mean nothing to you ? " 

 " nothing , sir . " 

 " I do not   think we can usefully go on , George . " 

 " I do not   think we can , sir . in talk with you , I always feel like 
 fight a man with one hand tie behind his back . " 

 " and I , perhaps , feel that I be argue with one who be blind from 
 birth . " 

 for all that , they have often argue since ; but never without those 
 peculiar smile come on their face . still , they respect each other , 
 and Pierson have not oppose his daughter 's marriage to this heretic , 
 whom he know to be an honest and trustworthy man . it have take place 
 before Laird 's arm be well , and the two have snatch a month 's 
 honeymoon before he go back to France , and she to her hospital in 
 Manchester . since then , just one February fortnight by the sea have be 
 all their time together .... 

 in the afternoon he have ask for beef tea , and , have drink a cup , 
 say : 

 " I have   get something to tell your father . " 

 but warn by the pallor of his smile lip , Gratian answer : 

 " tell I first , George . " 

 " our last talk , Gracie ; well - there be nothing - on the other side . I 
 look over ; it be as black as your hat . " 

 Gratian shiver . 

 " I know . while you be lie here last night , I tell father . " 

 he squeeze her hand , and say : " I also want to tell he . " 

 " Dad will say the motive for life be go . " 

 " I say it leap out all the more , gracie . what a mess we make of it - we 
 angel - ape ! when shall we be man , I wonder ? you and I , Gracie , will 
 fight for a decent life for everybody . no hand - up about that ! bend 
 down ! it be good to touch you again ; everything be good . I be go to have 
 a sleep .... " 

 after the relief of the doctor 's report in the early morning Pierson have 
 go through a hard struggle . what should he wire to Noel ? he long to 
 get she back home , away from temptation to the burn indiscretion of 
 this marriage . but ought he to suppress reference to George 's progress ? 
 would that be honest ? at last he send this telegram : " George out of 
 danger but very weak . come up . " by the afternoon post , however , he 
 receive a letter from Thirza : 

 " I have have two long talk with Noel and Cyril . it be impossible to 
 budge they . and I really think , dear Edward , that it will be a mistake 
 to oppose it rigidly . he may not go out as soon as we think . how would 
 it be to consent to their have bann publish ? - that would mean 
 another three week anyway , and in absence from each other they might be 
 influence to put it off . I be afraid this be the only chance , for if you 
 simply forbid it , I feel they will run off and get married somewhere at 
 a registrar 's . " 

 Pierson take this letter out with he into the Square Garden , for 
 painful cogitation . no man can hold a position of spiritual authority 
 for long year without develop the habit of judgment . he judge 
 Noel 's conduct to be headlong and undisciplined , and the vein of 
 stubbornness in his character fortify the father and the priest within 
 he . Thirza disappoint he ; she do not seem to see the irretrievable 
 gravity of this hasty marriage . she seem to look on it as something 
 much light than it be , to consider that it might be leave to Chance , 
 and that if Chance turn out unfavourable , there would still be a way 
 out . to he there would be no way out . he look up at the sky , as if 
 for inspiration . it be such a beautiful day , and so bitter to hurt his 
 child , even for her good ! what would her mother have advise ? surely 
 Agnes have feel at least as deeply as himself the utter solemnity of 
 marriage ! and , sit there in the sunlight , he painfully harden 
 his heart . he must do what he think right , no matter what the 
 consequence . so he go in and write that he could not agree , and 
 wish Noel to come back home at once . 




 V 

 1 

 but on the same afternoon , just about that hour , Noel be sit on the 
 river - bank with her arm fold tight across her chest , and by her side 
 Cyril Morland , with despair in his face , be twist a telegram " Rejoin 
 tonight . regiment leave to - morrow . " 

 what consolation that a million such telegram have be read and 
 sorrow over these last two year ! what comfort that the sun be daily 
 blot dim for hundred of bright eye ; the joy of life pour out and 
 sop up by the sand of desolation ! 

 " how long have we get , Cyril ? " 

 " I have   engage a car from the Inn , so I need not   leave till midnight . I have 
 pack already , to have more time . " 

 " let us have it to ourselves , then . let us go off somewhere . I have   get some 
 chocolate . " 

 Morland answer miserably : 

 " I can send the car up here for my thing , and have it pick I up at the 
 Inn , if you will say goodbye to they for I , afterwards . we will walk down 
 the line , then we shall not   meet anyone . " 

 and in the bright sunlight they walk hand in hand on each side of a 
 shin rail . about six they reach the Abbey . 

 " let us get a boat , " say Noel . " we can come back here when it be 
 moonlight . I know a way of get in , after the gate 's shut . " 

 they hire a boat , row over to the far bank , and sit on the stern 
 seat , side by side under the tree where the water be stain deep 
 green by the high wood . if they talk , it be but a word of love 
 now and then , or to draw each other 's attention to a fish , a bird , a 
 dragon - fly . what use make plan - for lover the chief theme ? longing 
 paralyse their brain . they could do nothing but press close to each 
 other , their hand enlace , their lip meet now and then . on Noel 's 
 face be a strange fix stillness , as if she be wait - expect ! 
 they eat their chocolate . the sun set , dew begin to fall ; the river 
 change , and grow whiter ; the sky pal to the colour of an amethyst ; 
 shadow lengthen , dissolve slowly . it be past nine already ; a 
 water - rat come out , a white owl fly over the river , towards the Abbey . 
 the moon have come up , but shed no light as yet . they see no beauty in 
 all this - too young , too passionate , too unhappy . 

 Noel say : " when she be over those tree , Cyril , let us go . it will be half 
 dark . " 

 they wait , watch the moon , which creep with infinite slowness up 
 and up , brighten ever so little every minute . 

 " now ! " say Noel . and Morland row across . 

 they leave the boat , and she lead the way past an empty cottage , to a shed 
 with a roof slop up to the Abbey 's low outer wall . 

 " we can get over here , " she whisper . 

 they clamber up , and over , to a piece of grassy courtyard , and pass 
 on to an inner court , under the black shadow of the high wall . 

 " what be the time ? " say Noel . 

 " half - past ten . " 

 " already ! let us sit here in the dark , and watch for the moon . " 

 they sit down close together . Noel 's face still have on it that strange 
 look of waiting ; and Morland sit obedient , with his hand on her heart , 
 and his own heart beat almost to suffocation . they sit , still as 
 mouse , and the moon creep up . it lay a first vague greyness on the high 
 wall , which spread slowly down , and brighten till the lichen and the 
 grass up there be visible ; then creep on , silver the dark above 
 their head . Noel pull his sleeve , and whisper : " see ! " there come 
 the white owl , soft as a snowflake , drift across in that unearthly 
 light , as if fly to the moon . and just then the top of the moon 
 itself look over the wall , a shaving of silvery gold . it grow , became 
 a bright spread fan , then balance there , full and round , the colour of 
 pale honey . 

 " Ours ! " Noel whisper . 


 2 

 from the side of the road Noel listen till the sound of the car be 
 lose in the fold of the valley . she do not cry , but pass her hand 
 over her face , and begin to walk home , keep to the shadow of the 
 tree . how many year have be add to her age in those six hour since 
 the telegram come ! several time in that mile and a half she step 
 into a patch of bright moonlight , to take out and kiss a little 
 photograph , then slip it back next her heart , heedless that so warm a 
 place must destroy any effigy . she feel not the faint compunction 
 for the recklessness of her love - it be her only comfort against the 
 crush loneliness of the night . it keep she up , make she walk on with 
 a sort of pride , as if she have get the good of Fate . he be her for 
 ever now , in spite of anything that could be do . she do not even 
 think what she would say when she get in . she come to the avenue , and 
 pass up it still in a sort of dream . her uncle be stand before the 
 porch ; she could hear his muttering . she move out of the shadow of the 
 tree , go straight up to he , and , look in his perturbed face , say 
 calmly : 

 " Cyril ask I to say good - bye to you all , Uncle . good night ! " 

 " but , I say , Nollie look here you ! " 

 she have pass on . she go up to her room . there , by the door , her aunt 
 be stand , and would have kiss she . she draw back : 

 " no , Auntie . not to - night ! " and , slip by , she lock her door . 

 Bob and Thirza Pierson , meet in their own room , look at each other 
 askance . relief at their niece 's safe return be confuse by other 
 emotion . Bob Pierson express his first : 

 " Phew ! I be begin to think we should w have to drag the river . what 
 girl be come to ! " 

 " it be the war , Bob . " 

 " I do not   like her face , old girl . I do not   know what it be , but I 
 do not   like her face . " 

 neither do Thirza , but she would not admit it , and encourage Bob to 
 take it to heart . he take thing so hardly , and with such a noise ! 

 she only say : " poor young thing ! I suppose it will be a relief to 
 Edward ! " 

 " I love Nollie ! " say Bob Pierson suddenly . " she be an affectionate 
 creature . D - nit , I be sorry about this . it be not so bad for young 
 Morland ; he be get the excitement - though I should not   like to be leave 
 Nollie , if I be young again . thank God , neither of our boy be 
 engage . by George ! when I think of they out there , and myself here , I 
 feel as if the top of my head would come off . and those politician chap 
 spout away in every country - how they can have the cheek ! " 

 Thirza look at he anxiously . 

 " and no dinner ! " he say suddenly . " what d'you think they have   be do 
 with themselves ? " 

 " hold each other 's hand , poor dear ! d'you know what time it be , 
 Bob ? nearly one o'clock . " 

 " well , all I can say be , I have   have a wretched evening . get to bed , old 
 girl . you will be fit for nothing . " 

 he be soon asleep , but Thirza lie awake , not exactly worrying , for that 
 be not her nature , but see Noel 's face , pale , languid , passionate , 
 possess by memory . 




 VI 

 1 

 Noel reach her father 's house next day late in the afternoon . there 
 be a letter in the hall for she . she tear it open , and read : 


 " MY DARLING LOVE , 

 " I get back all right , and be post this at once to tell you we shall 
 pass through London , and go from Charing Cross , I expect about nine 
 o'clock to - night . I shall look out for you , there , in case you be up in 
 time . every minute I think of you , and of last night . oh ! Noel ! 

 " your devoted lover , 

 " C. " 


 she look at the wrist - watch which , like every other little patriot , 
 she possess . past seven ! if she wait , Gratian or her father would 
 seize on she . 

 " take my thing up , Dinah . I have   get a headache from travel ; I be 
 go to walk it off . perhaps I shall not   be in till past nine or so . give 
 my love to they all . " 

 " oh , Miss Noel , you can not , - " 

 but Noel be go . she walk towards Charing Cross ; and , to kill time , 
 go into a restaurant and have that simple repast , coffee and a bun , 
 which those in love would always take if Society do not forcibly feed 
 they on other thing . food be ridiculous to she . she sit there in the 
 midst of a perfect hive of creature eat hideously . the place be 
 shape like a modern prison , have tier of gallery round an open 
 space , and in the air be the smell of viand and the clatter of plate 
 and the music of a band . man in khaki everywhere , and Noel glance from 
 form to form to see if by chance one might be that which represent , 
 for she , Life and the british Army . at half - past eight she go out and 
 make her way : through the crowd , still mechanically search " khaki " 
 for what she want ; and it be perhaps fortunate that there be about 
 her face and walk something which touch people . at the station she 
 go up to an old porter , and , put a shilling into his astonished 
 hand , ask he to find out for her whence Morland 's regiment would 
 start . he come back presently , and say : 

 " come with I , miss . " 

 Noel go . he be rather lame , have grey whisker , and a ghostly thin 
 resemblance to her uncle Bob , which perhaps have be the reason why she 
 have choose he . 64 

 " brother go out , miss ? " 

 Noel nod . 

 " ah ! it be a crool war . I shall not   be sorry when it be over . go out and 
 comin ' in , we see some sad sight ' ere . wonderful spirit they have   get , 
 too . I never look at the clock now but what I think : ' there you go , 
 slow - coach ! I would like to set you on to the day the boy come back ! ' when 
 I put a bag in : ' another for ' ell ' I think . and so it be , miss , from 
 all I can ' ear . I have   get a son out there meself . it be ' ere they will come 
 along . you stand quiet and keep a lookout , and you will get a few minute 
 with he when he be do with ' be man . I would not   move , if I be you ; 
 he will come to you , all right - can not   miss you , there . ' and , look at 
 her face , he think : ' Astonishin ' what a lot o ' brother go . wot oh ! 
 poor little missy ! a little lady , too . wonderful collect she be . it be 
 ' ard ! ' " and try to find something console to say , he mumble out : 
 " you could not   be in a well place for seen'im off . good night , miss ; 
 anything else I can do for you ? " 

 " no , thank you ; you be very kind . " 

 he look back once or twice at her blue - clothe figure stand very 
 still . he have leave she against a little oasis of pile - up empty 
 milk - can , far down the platform where a few civilian in similar case 
 be scatter . the trainway be empty as yet . in the grey immensity of 
 the station and the turmoil of its noise , she feel neither lonely nor 
 conscious of other wait ; too absorb in the one thought of see 
 he and touch he again . the empty train begin back in , stop , 
 and telescope with a series of little clattering bang , back on 
 again , and subside to rest . Noel turn her eye towards the station 
 arch way . already she feel tremulous , as though the regiment be 
 send before it the vibration of its march . 

 she have not as yet see a troop - train start , and vague image of brave 
 array , of a flag fluttering , and the stir of drum , beset she . suddenly 
 she see a brown swirling mass down there at the very edge , out of which 
 a thin brown trickle emerge towards she ; no sound of music , no waved 
 flag . she have a longing to rush down to the barrier , but remember 
 the word of the porter , stay where she be , with her hand tightly 
 squeeze together . the trickle become a stream , a flood , the head of 
 which begin to reach she . with a turbulence of voice , sunburnt man , 
 burden up to the nose , pass , with rifle jutting at all angle ; she 
 strain her eye , star into that stream as one might into a walking 
 wood , to isolate a single tree . her head reel with the strain of it , 
 and the effort to catch his voice among the hubbub of all those cheery , 
 common , happy - go - lucky sound . some who see she cluck their tongue , 
 some go by silent , other seem to scan she as though she might be 
 what they be look for . and ever the stream and the hubbub 
 melt into the train , and yet come pour on . and still she wait 
 motionless , with an awful fear . how could he ever find she , or she he ? 
 then she see that other of those wait have find their man . and the 
 longing to rush up and down the platform almost overcome she ; but still 
 she wait . and suddenly she see he with two other officer boy , close 
 to the carriage , come slowly down towards she . she stand with her 
 eye fix on his face ; they pass , and she nearly cry out . then he 
 turn , break away from the other two , and come straight to she . he 
 have see she before she have see he . he be very flushed , have a little 
 fix frown between his blue eye and a set jaw . they stand look 
 at each other , their hand hard grip ; all the emotion of last night 
 well up within they , so that to speak would have be to break down . 
 the milk - can form a kind of shelter , and they stand so close together 
 that none could see their face . Noel be the first to master her power 
 of speech ; her word come out , dainty as ever , through tremble lip : 

 " write to I as much as ever you can , Cyril . I be go to be a nurse at 
 once . and the first leave you get , I shall come to you - do not   forget . " 

 " forget ! move a little back , darling ; they can not   see we here . kiss I ! " 
 she move back , thrust her face forward so that he need not stoop , and 
 put her lip up to his . then , feel that she might swoon and fall over 
 among the can , she withdraw her mouth , leave her forehead against his 
 lip . he murmur : 

 " be it all right when you get in last night ? " 

 " yes ; I say good - bye for you . " 

 " oh ! Noel - I have   be afraid - I ought not   - I ought not   - " 

 " yes , yes ; nothing can take you from I now . " 

 " you have get pluck . More than ! " 

 along whistle sound . Morland grasp her hand convulsively : 

 " good - bye , my little wife ! do not   fret . goodbye ! I must go . God bless 
 you , Noel ! " 

 " I love you . " 

 they look at each other , just another moment , then she take her hand 
 from his and stand back in the shadow of the milk - can , rigid , follow 
 he with her eye till he be lose in the train . 

 every carriage window be full of those brown figure and red - brown 
 face , hand be wave vaguely , voice call vaguely , here and 
 there one cheer ; someone lean far out start to sing : " if 
 auld acquaintance - " but Noel stand quite still in the shadow of the 
 milk - can , her lip draw in , her hand hard clench in front of she ; 
 and young Morland at his window gaze back at she . 


 2 

 how she come to be sit in Trafalgar Square she do not know . tear 
 have form a mist between she and all that seethe , summer - evening 
 crowd . her eye mechanically follow the wander search - light , those 
 new milky way , quarter the heaven and lead nowhere . all be 
 wonderfully beautiful , the sky a deep dark blue , the moonlight whiten 
 the spire of St. Martin 's , and everywhere endow the great black - out 
 building with dream - life . even the lion have come to life , and star 
 out over this moonlit desert of little human figure too small to be 
 worth the stretching out of a paw . she sit there , ache dreadfully , as 
 if the longing of every bereaved heart in all the town have settle in 
 she . she feel it tonight a thousand time bad ; for last night she have 
 be drug on the new sensation of love triumphantly fulfil . now 
 she feel as if life have place she in the corner of a huge silent room , 
 blow out the flame of joy , and lock the door . a little dry sob come 
 from she . the hay - field and Cyril , with shirt unbutton at the neck , 
 pitch hay and gaze at she while she dabble her fork in the thin 
 leaving . the bright river , and their boat ground on the shallow , and 
 the swallow flit over they . and that long dance , with the feel of 
 his hand between her shoulder - blade ! memory so sweet and sharp that 
 she almost cry out . she see again their dark grassy courtyard in the 
 Abbey , and the white owl fly over they . the white owl ! fly there 
 again to - night , with no lover on the grass below ! she could only 
 picture Cyril now as a brown atom in that swirl brown flood of man , 
 flow to a huge brown sea . those cruel minute on the platform , when 
 she have search and search the walk wood for she , one tree , seem 
 to have burn themselves into her eye . Cyril be lose , she could 
 not single he out , all blur among those thousand other shape . and 
 suddenly she think : ' and I - I be lose to he ; he be never see I at 
 home , never see I in London ; he will not   be able to imagine I . it be 
 all in the past , only the past - for both of we . be there anybody so 
 unhappy ? ' and the town 's voice - wheel , and pass foot , whistle , 
 talk , laughter - seem to answer callously : ' not one . ' she look at 
 her wrist - watch ; like his , it have luminous hand : ' half - past ten ' be 
 greenishly imprint there . she get up in dismay . they would think she 
 be lose , or run over , or something silly ! she could not find an empty 
 taxi , and begin to walk , uncertain of her way at night . at last she 
 stop a policeman , and say : 

 " which be the way towards Bloomsbury , please ? I can not   find a taxi . " the 
 man look at she , and take time to think it over ; then he say : 

 " they be linin ' up for the theatre , " and look at she again . something 
 seem to move in his mechanism : 

 " I be go that way , miss . if you like , you can step along with I . " 
 Noel step along . 

 " the street be not   what they ought to be , " the policeman say . " what 
 with the darkness , and the war turn the girl head - you would be 
 surprised the number of they that come out . it be the soldier , of 
 course . " 

 Noel feel her cheek burn . 

 " I daresay you would not   have notice it , " the policeman go on : " but 
 this war 's a funny thing . the street be gayer and more crowded at 
 night than I have   ever see they ; it be a fair picnic all the time . what 
 we be go to settle down to when peace come , I do not   know . I suppose 
 you find it quiet enough up your way , miss ? " 

 " yes , " say Noel ; " quite quiet . " 

 " no soldier up in Bloomsbury . you get anyone in the Army , miss ? " 

 Noel nod . 

 " ah ! it be anxious time for lady . what with the Zeps , and their 
 brother and all in France , it be ' arassin ' . I have   lose a brother meself , 
 and I have   get a boy out there in the Garden of Eden ; his mother carry 
 on dreadful about he . what we shall think of it when it be all over , I 
 can not   tell . these Huns be a wicked tough lot ! " 

 Noel look at he ; a tall man , regular and orderly , with one of those 
 perfectly decent face so often see in the London police . 

 " I be sorry you have   lose someone , " she say . " I have not   lose anyone very 
 near , yet . " 

 " well , let us ' ope you will not , miss . these time make you feel for other , 
 an ' that be something . I have   notice a great change in folk you would never 
 think would feel for anyone . and yet I have   see some wicked thing 
 too ; we do , in the police . some of these english wife of alien , and 
 ' armless little german baker , an ' Austrians , and what - not : they get a 
 crool time . it be their misfortune , not their fault , that be what I think ; 
 and the way they get serve - well , it make you ashamed o ' bein ' English 
 sometimes - it do straight : and the woman be the bad . I say to my 
 wife only last night , I say : ' they call themselves Christians , ' I say , 
 ' but for all the charity that be in them they might as well be Huns . ' 
 she could not   see it - not she ! ' well , why do they drop bomb ? ' she say . 
 ' what ! ' I say , ' those english wife and baker drop bomb ? do not   be 
 silly , ' I say . ' they be as innocent as we . ' it be the innocent that 
 get punish for the guilty . ' but they be all spy , ' she say . ' oh ! ' I 
 say , ' old lady ! now really ! at your time of life ! ' but there it be ; you 
 can not   get a woman to see reason . it be readin ' the paper . I often think 
 they must be write by woman - beggin ' your pardon , miss - but reely , 
 the ' ysteric and the ' atre - they be a fair knockout . d'you find much 
 hatred in your household , miss ? " 

 Noel shake her head . " no ; my father 's a clergyman , you see . " 

 " ah ! " say the policeman . and in the glance he bestow on she could be 
 see an add respect . 

 " of course , " he go on , " you be bind to have a sense of justice 
 against these Huns ; some of their way of go on have be above 
 the limit . but what I always think be - of course I do not   say these 
 thing - no use to make yourself unpopular - but to meself I often think : 
 take them man for man , and you would find them much the same as we be , I 
 daresay . it be the vicious way they be bring up , of actin ' in the 
 mass , that be make them such a crool lot . I see a good bit of crowd in 
 my profession , and I have   a very low opinion of they . crowd be the most 
 blunderin ' blighted thing that ever be . they be like an angry woman 
 with a bandage over her eye , an ' you can not   have anything more dangerous 
 than that . these Germans , it seem , be always in a crowd . they get a 
 state o ' mind read out to they by Bill Kaser and all that bloody - minded 
 lot , an ' they never stop to think for themselves . " 

 " I suppose they would be shoot if they do , " say Noel . 

 " well , there be that , " say the policeman reflectively . " they have   bring 
 discipline to an ' igh pitch , no doubt . an ' if you ask I , " - he lower 
 his voice till it be almost lose in his chin - strap , " we will be runnin ' 
 them a good second ' ere , before long . the thing we ' ave to protect now 
 be gettin ' beyond a joke . there be the City against light , there be the 
 street against darkness , there be the alien , there be the alien ' shop , 
 there be the Belgians , there be the british wife , there be the soldier 
 against the woman , there be the woman against the soldier , there be the 
 Peace Party , there be ' orse against croolty , there be a Cabinet Minister 
 every now an ' then ; and now we have   get these Conchies . and , mind you , 
 they have not   raise our pay ; no war wage in the police . so far as I can 
 see , there be only one good result of the war - the burglary be off . 
 but there again , you wait a bit and see if we do not   have a prize crop of 
 ' m , or my name be not ' Arris . " 

 " you must have an awfully exciting life ! " say Noel . 

 the policeman look down at her sideway , without lower his face , as 
 only a policeman can , and say indulgently : 

 " we be use to it , you see ; there be no excitement in what you be use 
 to . they find that in the trench , I be tell . take our seamen - there be 
 lot of them be blow up over and over again , and there they go and 
 sign on again next day . that be where the Germans make their mistake ! 
 England in war - time ! I think a lot , you know , on my go ; you can not 
 ' elp it - the mind will work - an ' the more I think , the more I see the 
 fightin ' spirit in the people . we do not   make a fuss about it like Bill 
 Kaser . but you watch a little shopman , one o ' those fellow who be 
 have his house bomb ; you watch the way he look at the mess - sort of 
 disgusted . you watch his face , and you see he be get his tooth into it . 
 you watch one of our tommie on ' be crutch , with the sweat pourin ' off 
 his forehead an ' ' be eye all strainy , stumpin ' along - that give you 
 an idea ! I pity these Peace fellow , reely I pity they ; they do not   know 
 what they be up against . I expect there be time when you wish you be a 
 man , do not   you , miss ? I be sure there be time when I feel I would like to 
 go in the trench . that be the bad o ' my job ; you can not   be a human 
 bein ' - not in the full sense of the word . you must not   let your passion 
 rise , you must not   drink , you must not   talk ; it be a narrow walk o ' life . 
 well , here you be , miss ; your Square 's the next turnin ' to the right . 
 good night and thank you for your conversation . " 

 Noel hold out her hand . " good night ! " she say . 

 the policeman take her hand with a queer , flatter embarrassment . 

 " good night , miss , " he say again . " I see you have   get a trouble ; and I be 
 sure I hope it will turn out for the good . " 

 Noel give his huge hand a squeeze ; her eye have fill with tear , and 
 she turn quickly up towards the Square , where a dark figure be come 
 towards she , in whom she recognise her father . his face be wear and 
 harass ; he walk irresolutely , like a man who have lose something . 

 " Nollie ! " he say . " thank God ! " in his voice be an infinite relief . " my 
 child , where have you be ? " 

 " it be all right , daddy . Cyril have just go to the front . I have   be 
 see he off from Charing Cross . " 

 Pierson slip his arm round she . they enter the house without 
 speak .... 


 3 

 by the rail of his transport , as far - about two foot - as he could get 
 from anyone , Cyril Morland stand watch Calais , a dream city , brighten 
 out of the heat and grow solid . he could hear the gun already , the 
 voice of his new life - talk in the distance . it come with its strange 
 excitement into a being hold by soft and marvellous memory , by one 
 long vision of Noel and the moonlit grass , under the dark Abbey wall . 
 this moment of passage from wonder to wonder be quite too much for a 
 boy unused to introspection , and he stand star stupidly at Calais , 
 while the thunder of his new life come roll in on that passionate 
 moonlit dream . 




 VII 

 after the emotion of those last three day Pierson wake with the 
 feel a ship must have when it make landfall . such relief be 
 natural , and as a rule delusive ; for event be as much the parent of 
 the future as they be the child of the past . to be at home with 
 both his girl , and rest - for his holiday would not be over for ten 
 day - be like old time . now George be go on so well Gratian would 
 be herself again ; now Cyril Morland be go Noel would lose that sudden 
 youthful love fever . perhaps in two or three day if George continue to 
 progress , one might go off with Noel somewhere for one 's last week . in 
 the meantime the old house , wherein be gather so much remembrance 
 of happiness and pain , be just as restful as anywhere else , and the 
 companionship of his girl would be as sweet as on any of their past 
 ramble holiday in Wales or Ireland . and that first morning of perfect 
 idleness - for no one know he be back in London - pottering , and play 
 the piano in the homely drawing - room where nothing to speak of be 
 change since his wife 's day , be very pleasant . he have not yet see 
 the girl , for Noel do not come down to breakfast , and Gratian be with 
 George . 

 Discovery that there be still a barrier between he and they come but 
 slowly in the next two day . he would not acknowledge it , yet it 
 be there , in their voice , in their movement - rather an absence of 
 something old than the presence of something new . it be as if each have 
 say to he : " we love you , but you be not in our secret - and you must 
 not be , for you would try to destroy they . " they show no fear of he , 
 but seem to be push he unconsciously away , lest he should restrain 
 or alter what be very dear to they . they be both fond of he , but 
 their nature have set foot on definitely diverge path . the close 
 the affection , the more watchful they be against interference by that 
 affection . Noel have a look on her face , half daze , half proud , 
 which touch , yet vex he . what have he do to forfeit her 
 confidence - surely she must see how natural and right his opposition 
 have be ! he make one great effort to show the real sympathy he feel for 
 she . but she only say : " I can not   talk of Cyril , Daddy ; I simply can not ! " 
 and he , who easily shrink into his shell , could not but acquiesce in her 
 reserve . 

 with Gratian it be different . he know that an encounter be before he ; 
 a struggle between he and her husband - for characteristically he set 
 the change in she , the defection of her faith , down to George , not to 
 spontaneous thought and feel in herself . he dread and yet look 
 forward to this encounter . it come on the third day , when Laird be up , 
 lie on that very sofa where Pierson have sit listen to Gratian 's 
 confession of disbelief . except for put in his head to say good 
 morning , he have not yet see his son - in - law : the young doctor could 
 not look fragile , the build of his face , with that law and those heavy 
 cheekbone be too much against it , but there be about he enough of 
 the look of have come through a hard fight to give Pierson 's heart a 
 squeeze . 

 " well , George , " he say , " you give we a dreadful fright ! I thank God 's 
 mercy . " with that half - mechanical phrase he have fling an unconscious 
 challenge . Laird look up whimsically . 

 " so you really think God merciful , sir ? " 

 " do not   let we argue , George ; you be not strong enough . " 

 " oh ! I be pin for something to bite on . " 

 Pierson look at Gratian , and say softly : 

 " God 's mercy be infinite , and you know it be . " 

 Laird also look at Gratian , before he answer : 

 " God 's mercy be surely the amount of mercy man have succeed in arrive 
 at . how much that be , this war tell you , sir . " 

 Pierson flush . " I do not   follow you , " he say painfully . " how can you 
 say such thing , when you yourself be only just - no ; I refuse to argue , 
 George ; I refuse . " 

 Laird stretch out his hand to his wife , who come to he , and stand 
 clasp it with her own . " well , I be go to argue , " he say ; " I be 
 simply burst with it . I challenge you , sir , to show I where 
 there be any sign of altruistic pity , except in man . mother love do not 
 count - mother and child be too much one . " 

 the curious smile have come already , on both their face . 

 " my dear George , be not man the high work of God , and mercy the 
 high quality in man ? " 

 " not a bit . if geological time be take as twenty - four hour , man 's 
 existence on earth so far equal just two second of it ; after a few 
 more second , when man have be freeze off the earth , geological time 
 will stretch for as long again , before the earth bump into something , 
 and become nebula once more . God 's hand have not   be particularly 
 full , sir , have they - two second out of twenty - four hour - if man be 
 his pet concern ? and as to mercy be the high quality in , man , 
 that be only a modern fashion of talk . Man 's high quality be 
 the sense of proportion , for that be what keep he alive ; and mercy , 
 logically pursue , would kill he off . it be a sort of a luxury or 
 by - product . " 

 " George ! you can have no music in your soul ! science be such a little 
 thing , if you could only see . " 

 " show I a big , sir . " 

 " faith . " 

 " in what ? " 

 " in what have be reveal to we . " 

 " ah ! there it be again ! by whom - how ? 

 " by God himself - through our Lord . " 

 a faint flush rose in Laird 's yellow face , and his eye brighten . 

 " Christ , " he say ; " if he exist , which some people , as you know , 
 doubt , be a very beautiful character ; there have be other . but to 
 ask we to believe in his supernaturalness or divinity at this time of 
 day be to ask we to walk through the world blindfold . and that be what 
 you do , do not   you ? " 

 again Pierson look at his daughter 's face . she be stand quite 
 still , with her eye fix on her husband . somehow he be aware that all 
 these word of the sick man 's be for her benefit . Anger , and a sort of 
 despair rise within he , and he say painfully : 

 " I can not explain . there be thing that I can not   make clear , because you 
 be wilfully blind to all that I believe in . for what do you imagine we 
 be fight this great war , if it be not to reestablish the belief in 
 love as the guide principle of life ? " 

 Laird shake his head . " we be fight to redress a balance , which be 
 in danger of be lose . " 

 " the balance of power ? " 

 " Heavens ! - no ! the balance of philosophy . " 

 Pierson smile . " that sound very clever , George ; but again , I do not 
 follow you . " 

 " the balance between the saying : ' might be right , ' and ' right be 
 Might . ' they be both half - truth , but the first be beat the other out 
 of the field . all the rest of it be can not , you know . and by the way , 
 sir , your Church be solid for punishment of the evildoer . where 's mercy 
 there ? either its God be not merciful , or else it do not   believe in its 
 God . " 

 " just punishment do not preclude mercy , George . " 

 " it do in Nature . " 

 " ah ! nature , George - always Nature . God transcend Nature . " 

 " then why do he give it a free rein ? a man too fond of drink , or 
 woman - how much mercy do he get from Nature ? his overindulgence bring 
 its exact equivalent of penalty ; let he pray to God as much as he 
 like - unless he alter his way he get no mercy . if he do alter 
 his way , he get no mercy either ; he just get Nature 's due reward . we 
 English who have neglect brain and education - how much mercy be 
 we get in this war ? Mercy be a man - make ornament , disease , or 
 luxury - call it what you will . except that , I have   nothing to say against 
 it . on the contrary , I be all for it . " 

 once more Pierson look at his daughter . something in her face hurt 
 he - the silent intensity with which she be hang on her husband 's 
 word , the eager search of her eye . and he turn to the door , say : 

 " this be bad for you , George . " 

 he see Gratian put her hand on her husband 's forehead , and 
 think - jealously : ' how can I save my poor girl from this infidelity ? 
 be my twenty year of care to go for nothing , against this modern 
 spirit ? ' 

 down in his study , the word go through his mind : " holy , holy , holy , 
 merciful and mighty ! " and go to the little piano in the corner , he 
 open it , and begin play the hymn . he play it softly on the shabby 
 key of this thirty - year old friend , which have be with he since 
 College day ; and sing it softly in his worn voice . 

 a sound make he look up . Gratian have come in . she put her hand on his 
 shoulder , and say : 

 " I know it hurt you , Dad . but we have   get to find out for ourselves , 
 have not   we ? all the time you and George be talk , I feel that you 
 do not   see that it be I who have   change . it be not what he think , but what 
 I have   come to think of my own accord . I wish you would understand that I have 
 get a mind of my own , Dad . " 

 Pierson look up with amazement . 

 " of course you have a mind . " 

 Gratian shake her head . " no , you think my mind be your ; and now you 
 think it be George 's . but it be my own . when you be my age be not   you 
 try hard to find the truth yourself , and differ from your father ? " 

 Pierson do not answer . he could not remember . it be like stir 
 a stick amongst a drift of last year 's leaf , to awaken but a dry 
 rustling , a vague sense of unsubstantiality . search ? no doubt he have 
 search , but the process have bring he nothing . Knowledge be all 
 smoke ! emotional faith alone be truth - reality ! 

 " ah , Gracie ! " he say , ' search if you must , but where will you find 
 bottom ? the well be too deep for we . you will come back to God , my 
 child , when you be tired out ; the only rest be there . " 

 " I do not   want to rest . some people search all their life , and die 
 search . why should not   I. 

 " you will be most unhappy , my child . " 

 " if I be unhappy , Dad , it will be because the world 's unhappy . I do not 
 believe it ought to be ; I think it only be , because it shut its eye . " 

 Pierson get up . " you think I shut my eye ? " 

 Gratian nod . 

 " if I do , it be because there be no other way to happiness . " 

 " be you happy ; Dad ? " 

 " as happy as my nature will let I be . I miss your mother . if I lose you 
 and Noel - " 

 " oh , but we will not   let you ! " 

 Pierson smile . " my dear , " he say , " I think I have ! " 




 viii 

 1 

 some wag , with a bit of chalk , have write the word " peace " on three 
 successive door of a little street opposite Buckingham Palace . 

 it catch the eye of Jimmy Fort , limp home to his room from a very 
 late discussion at his Club , and twist his lean shaven lip into a 
 sort of smile . he be one of those roll - stone Englishmen , whose early 
 life be spend in all part of the world , and in all kind of physical 
 conflict - a man like a hickory stick , tall , thin , bolt - upright , knotty , 
 hard as nail , with a curved fighting back to his head and a straight 
 fight front to his brown face . his be the type which become , in 
 a generation or so , typically colonial or american ; but no one could 
 possibly have take Jimmy Fort for anything but an Englishman . though 
 he be nearly forty , there be still something of the boy in his face , 
 something frank and curly - head , gallant and full of steam , and his 
 small steady grey eye look out on life with a sort of combative 
 humour . he be still in uniform , though they have give he up as a bad 
 job after keep he nine month try to mend a wound leg which 
 would never be sound again ; and he be now in the War Office in 
 connection with horse , about which he know . he do not like it , have 
 live too long with all sort and condition of man who be neither 
 English nor official , a combination which he find try . his life 
 indeed , just now , bore he to distraction , and he would ten time 
 rather have be back in France . this be why he find the word " peace " 
 so exceptionally tantalising . 

 reach his room , he throw off his tunic , to whose stiff regularity he 
 still have a rooted aversion ; and , pull out a pipe , fill it and sit 
 down at his window . 

 Moonshine could not cool the hot town , and it seem sleep badly - the 
 seven million sleeper in their million home . Sound linger on , never 
 quite cease ; the stale odour clung in the narrow street below , though 
 a little wind be creep about to sweeten the air . ' curse the war ! ' 
 he think . ' what would not   I give to be sleep out , instead of in this 
 damned city ! ' they who sleep in the open , neglecting morality , would 
 certainly have the good of it tonight , for no more dew be fall than 
 fall into Jimmy Fort 's heart to cool the fret of that ceaseless think : 
 ' the war ! the cursed war ! ' in the unending row of little grey house , 
 in huge caravanserais , and the mansion of the great , in villas , and 
 high slum tenement ; in the government office , and factory , and 
 railway station where they work all night ; in the long hospital 
 where they lay in row ; in the camp prison of the interned ; in bar 
 rack , work - house , palace - no head , sleep or wake , would be 
 free of that thought : ' the cursed war ! ' a spire catch his eye , rise 
 ghostly over the roof . ah ! church alone , void of the human soul , 
 would be unconscious ! but for the rest , even sleep would not free they ! 
 here a mother would be whisper the name of her boy ; there a merchant 
 would snore and dream he be drown , weight with gold ; and a wife 
 would be turn to stretch out her arm to - no one ; and a wound 
 soldier wake out of a dream trench with sweat on his brow ; and a 
 newsvendor in his garret mutter hoarsely . by thousand the bereaved 
 would be toss , stifle their moan ; by thousand the ruin would 
 be gaze into the dark future ; and housewife struggle with sum ; 
 and soldier sleep like log - for to morrow they die ; and child 
 dreaming of they ; and prostitute lie in stale wonder at the busyness 
 of their life ; and journalist sleep the sleep of the just . and over 
 they all , in the moonlight that think ' the cursed war ! ' flap its 
 black wing , like an old crow ! " if Christ be real , " he muse , " he would 
 reach that moon down , and go chalk ' peace ' with it on every door of 
 every house , all over Europe . but Christ 's not real , and Hindenburg and 
 Harmsworth be ! " as real they be as two great bull he have once see 
 in South Africa , fight . he seem to hear again the stamp and snort 
 and crash of those thick skull , to see the beast recoil and drive 
 at each other , and the little red eye of they . and pull a letter out 
 of his pocket , he read it again by the light of the moon : 


 " 15 , Camelot Mansions , 

 " St. John 's Wood . 

 " DEAR MR . FORT , " I come across your Club address to - night , look at 
 some old letter . do you know that I be in London ? I leave Steenbok 
 when my husband die , five year ago . I have   have a simply terrific time 
 since . while the German South West campaign be on I be nurse out 
 there , but come back about a year ago to lend a hand here . it would be 
 awfully nice to meet you again , if by any chance you be in England . 
 I be work in a V. A. D. hospital in these part , but my evening be 
 usually free . do you remember that moonlit night at grape harvest ? the 
 night here be not   scent quite like that . Listerine ! oh ! this war ! 
 " with all good remembrance , 

 " LEILA LYNCH . " 


 a terrific time ! if he do not mistake , Leila Lynch have always have a 
 terrific time . and he smile , see again the stoep of an old Dutch 
 house at High Constantia , and a woman sit there under the white 
 flower of a sweet - scented creeper - a pretty woman , with eye which 
 could put a spell on you , a woman he would have get entangle with if 
 he have not cut and run for it ! ten year ago , and here she be again , 
 refresh he out of the past . he sniff the fragrance of the little 
 letter . how everybody always manage to work into a letter what they 
 be do in the war ! if he answer she he would be sure to say : 
 " since I get lamed , I have   be at the War Office , work on remount , 
 and a dull job it be ! " Leila Lynch ! woman do not   get young , and he 
 suspect she of be old than himself . but he remember agreeably 
 her white shoulder and that turn of her neck when she look at you 
 with those big grey eye of her . only a five - day acquaintanceship , but 
 they have crowd much into it as one do in a strange land . the episode 
 have be a green and dangerous spot , like one of those bright mossy bit 
 of bog when you be snipe - shooting , to set foot on which be to let you 
 down up to the neck , at least . well , there be none of that danger now , 
 for her husband be dead - poor chap ! it would be nice , in these dismal 
 day , when nobody spend any time whatever except in the service of the 
 country , to improve his power of service by a few hour ' recreation in 
 her society . ' what humbug we be ! ' he think : ' to read the newspaper 
 and the speech you would believe everybody think of nothing but how to 
 get kill for the sake of the future . drunk on verbiage ! what head and 
 mouth we shall all have when we wake up some fine morning with peace 
 shin in at the window ! ah ! if only we could ; and enjoy ourselves 
 again ! ' and he gaze at the moon . she be dip already , reel away 
 into the dawn . water cart and street sweeper have come out into the 
 glimmer ; sparrow twitter in the eave . the city be raise a strange 
 unknown face to the grey light , shutter and desert as Babylon . Jimmy 
 Fort tap out his pipe , sigh , and get into bed . 


 2 

 come off duty at that very moment , Leila Lynch decide to have she 
 hour 's walk before she go home . she be in charge of two ward , and 
 as a rule take the day watch ; but some slight upset have give she this 
 extra spell . she be , therefore , at she bad , or perhaps at her good , 
 after eighteen hour in hospital . her cheek be pale , and about her 
 eye be little line , normally in hiding . there be in this face a 
 puzzle blend of the soft and hard , for the eye , the rather full lip , 
 and pale cheek , be naturally soft ; but they be harden by 
 the self - containment which grow on woman who have to face life for 
 themselves , and , conscious of beauty , intend to keep it , in spite of 
 age . her figure be contradictory , also ; its soft modelling a little too 
 rigidify by stay . in this desert of the dawn she let she long 
 blue overcoat flap loose , and swing her hat on a finger , so that 
 her light - brown , touch - up hair take the morning breeze with fluffy 
 freedom . though she could not see herself , she appreciate she 
 appearance , sway along like that , past lonely tree and house . a 
 pity there be no one to see she in that round of Regent 's Park , which 
 take she the good part of an hour , walk in meditation , enjoy the 
 colour come back into the world , as if especially for she . 

 there be character in Leila Lynch , and she have live an interesting 
 life from a certain point of view . in her girlhood she have flutter the 
 heart of many besides Cousin Edward Pierson , and at eighteen have make 
 a passionate love match with a good - look young indian civilian , name 
 Fane . they have love each other to a standstill in twelve month . then 
 have begin five year of petulance , boredom , and grow cynicism , with 
 increase spell of Simla , and voyage home for her health which be 
 really harm by the heat . all have culminate , of course , in another 
 passion for a rifleman call Lynch . Divorce have follow , remarriage , 
 and then the Boer War , in which he have be badly wound . she have go 
 out and nurse he back to half his robust health , and , at twenty - eight , 
 take up life with he on an up - country farm in Cape Colony . this middle 
 period have last ten year , between the lonely farm and an old Dutch 
 house at High Constantia . Lynch be not a bad fellow , but , like most 
 soldier of the old Army , have be quite carefully divest of an 
 aesthetic sense . and it be Leila 's misfortune to have moment when 
 aesthetic sense seem necessary . she have struggle to overcome 
 this weakness , and that other weakness of her - a liking for man 's 
 admiration ; but there have certainly be interval when she have not 
 properly succeed . her acquaintance with Jimmy Fort have occur during 
 one of these interval , and when he go back to England so abruptly , 
 she have be feel very tenderly towards he . she still remember he 
 with a certain pleasure . before Lynch die , these " interval " have be 
 interrupt by a spell of return warmth for the invalided man to whom 
 she have join her life under the romantic condition of divorce . he have 
 fail , of course , as a farmer , and his death leave she with nothing but 
 her own settle income of a hundred and fifty pound a year . face by 
 the prospect of have almost to make her living , at thirty - eight , she 
 feel but momentary dismay - for she have real pluck . like many who have 
 play with amateur theatrical , she fancy herself as an actress ; 
 but , after much effort , find that only her voice and the perfect 
 preservation of her leg be appreciate by the discerning manager 
 and public of South Africa ; and for three chequer year she make face 
 against fortune with the help of they , under an assumed name . what she 
 do - keep a certain bloom of refinement , be far well than the 
 achievement of many more respectable lady in her shoe . at least 
 she never bemoan her " reduced circumstance , " and if her life be 
 irregular and have at least three episode , it be very human . she 
 bravely take the rough with the smooth , never lose the power of enjoy 
 herself , and grow in sympathy with the hardship of other . but she 
 become deadly tired . when the war break out , remember that she be a 
 good nurse , she take her real name again and a change of occupation . 
 for one who like to please man , and to be pleased by they , there be a 
 certain attraction about that life in war - time ; and after two year of 
 it she could still appreciate the way her tommie turn their head 
 to look at she when she pass their bed . but in a hard school she 
 have learn perfect self - control ; and though the sour and puritanical 
 perceive her attraction , they know she to be forty - three . besides , the 
 soldier like she ; and there be little trouble in her ward . the war 
 move she in simple way ; for she be patriotic in the direct fashion of 
 her class . her father have be a sailor , her husband an official and a 
 soldier ; the issue for she be uncomplicated by any abstract meditation . 
 the Country before everything ! and though she have tend during those 
 two year so many young wreck body , she have take it as all in the 
 a day 's work , lavish her sympathy on the individual , without much 
 general sense of pity and waste . yes , she have work really hard , have 
 " do she bit " ; but of late she have feel rise within she the old 
 vague craving for " life , " for pleasure , for something more than the 
 mere negative admiration bestow on she by her " tommie . " those old 
 letter - to look they through they have be a sure sign of this vague 
 craving - have sharpen to poignancy the feeling that life be slip 
 away from she while she be still comely . she have be long out of 
 England , and so hard - worked since she come back that there be not 
 many thread she could pick up suddenly . two letter out of that little 
 budget of the past , with a far cry between they , have awaken within her 
 certain sentimental longing . 


 " DEAR lady of the STARRY flower , 

 " Exiturus   sic   to saluto ! the tender carry you this message of 
 good - bye . simply speak , I hate leave South Africa . and of all my 
 memory , the last will live the long . grape harvest at Constantia , 
 and you sing : ' if I could be the fall dew : if ever you and your 
 husband come to England , do let I know , that I may try and repay a 
 little the happy five day I have   spend out here . 

 " your very faithful servant , 

 " TIMMY fort . " 


 she remember a very brown face , a tall slim figure , and something 
 gallant about the whole of he . what be he like after ten year ? 
 grizzle , marry , with a large family ? an odious thing - time ! and 
 Cousin Edward 's little yellow letter . 

 good heaven ! twenty - six year ago - before he be a parson , or marry 
 or anything ! such a good partner , really musical ; a queer , dear fellow , 
 devoted , absentminded , easily shock , yet with flame burn in he 
 somewhere . 


 ' DEAR LEILA , 

 " after our last dance I go straight off ' - I could not   go in . I go 
 down to the river , and walk along the bank ; it be beautiful , all 
 grey and hazy , and the tree whisper , and the cow look holy ; and I 
 walk along and think of you . and a farmer take I for a lunatic , in 
 my dress clothe . Dear Leila , you be so pretty last night , and I do 
 love our dance . I hope you be not tired , and that I shall see you soon 
 again : 

 " your affectionate cousin , 

 " EDWARD PIERSON . " 


 and then he have go and become a parson , and marry , and be a 
 widower fifteen year . she remember the death of his wife , just before 
 she leave for South Africa , at that period of disgrace when she have so 
 shock her family by her divorce . poor Edward - quite the nice of her 
 cousin ! the only one she would care to see again . he would be very old 
 and terribly good and proper , by now . 

 her wheel of Regent 's Park be come full circle , and the sun be up 
 behind the house , but still no sound of traffic stir . she stop 
 before a flower - bed where be some heliotrope , and take a long , 
 luxurious sniff : she could not resist pluck a sprig , too , and hold 
 it to her nose . a sudden want of love have run through every nerve and 
 fibre of she ; she shiver , stand there with her eye half close , 
 above the pale violet blossom . then , note by her wrist - watch that it 
 be four o'clock , she hurry on , to get to her bed , for she would have 
 to be on duty again at noon . oh ! the war ! she be tired ! if only it be 
 over , and one could live ! ... 

 somewhere by Twickenham the moon have float down ; somewhere up from 
 Kentish Town the sun come soar ; wheel roll again , and the seven 
 million sleeper in their million house wake from morning sleep to that 
 same thought .... 




 IX 

 Edward Pierson , dream over an egg at breakfast , open a letter in a 
 handwriting which he do not recognise . 


 " V. A. D. Hospital , 

 " Mulberry Road , St. John 's Wood N. W. 

 " DEAR COUSIN EDWARD , 

 " do you remember I , or have I go too far into the shade of night ? I 
 be Leila Pierson once upon a time , and I often think of you and wonder 
 what you be like now , and what your girl be like . I have be here 
 nearly a year , work for our wound , and for a year before that 
 be nurse in South Africa . my husband die five year ago out there . 
 though we have not   meet for I dare not think how long , I should awfully 
 like to see you again . would you care to come some day and look over my 
 hospital ? I have two ward under I ; our man be rather dear . 

 " your forgotten but still affectionate cousin 

 " LEILA LYNCH . " 

 " P. S. I come across a little letter you once write I ; it bring back 
 old day . " 


 no ! he have not forget . there be a reminder in the house . and he 
 look up at Noel sit opposite . how like the eye be ! and he 
 think : ' I wonder what Leila have become . one must not   be uncharitable . 
 that man be dead ; she have be nurse two year . she must be greatly 
 change ; I should certainly like to see she . I will go ! ' again he look 
 at Noel . only yesterday she have renew her request to be allow to 
 begin her training as a nurse . 

 " I be go to see a hospital to - day , Nollie , " he say ; " if you like , 
 I will make enquiry . I be afraid it will mean you have to begin by washing 
 up . " 

 " I know ; anything , so long as I do begin . " 

 " very well ; I will see about it . " and he go back to his egg . 

 Noel 's voice rouse he . " do you feel the war much , daddy ? do it 
 hurt you here ? " she have put her hand on her heart . " perhaps it do not , 
 because you live half in the next world , do not   you ? " 

 the word : " God forbid , " spring to Pierson 's lip ; he do not speak 
 they , but put his egg - spoon down , hurt and bewilder . what do the 
 child mean ? not feel the war ! he smile . 

 " I hope I be able to help people sometimes , Nollie , " and be conscious 
 that he have answer his own thought , not her word . he finish his 
 breakfast quickly , and very soon go out . he cross the Square , and 
 pass East , down two crowded street to his church . in the traffic of 
 those street , all slipshod and confused , his black - clothe figure and 
 grave face , with its Vandyk beard , have a curious remote appearance , like 
 a move remnant of a past civilisation . he go in by the side door . 
 only five day he have be away , but they have be so full of emotion 
 that the empty familiar building seem almost strange to he . he have 
 come there unconsciously , grope for anchorage and guidance in this 
 sudden change of relationship between he and his daughter . he stand by 
 the pale brazen eagle , star into the chancel . the choir be want 
 new hymn - books - he must not forget to order they ! his eye seek the 
 stain - glass window he have put in to the memory of his wife . the sun , 
 too high to slant , be burnish its base , till it glow of a deep 
 sherry colour . " in the next world ! " what strange word of Noel 's ! his 
 eye catch the glimmer of the organ - pipe ; and , mount to the loft , 
 he begin to play soft chord wander into each other . he finish , 
 and stand gaze down . this space within high wall , under high vault 
 roof , where light be tone to a perpetual twilight , break here and 
 there by a little glow of colour from glass and flower , metal , and dark 
 wood , be his home , his charge , his refuge . nothing move down there , 
 and yet - be not emptiness mysteriously live , the closed - in air 
 imprint in strange sort , as though the drone of music and voice 
 in prayer and praise clung there still ? have not sanctity a presence ? 
 outside , a barrel - organ drive its tune along ; a wagon stagger on the 
 paved street , and the driver shout to his horse ; some distant gun 
 boom out in practice , and the rolling of wheel on wheel form a net 
 of sound . but those invade noise be transmute to a mere murmuring 
 in here ; only the silence and the twilight be real to Pierson , 
 stand there , a little black figure in a great empty space . 

 when he leave the church , it be still rather early to go to Leila 's 
 hospital ; and , have order the new hymn - book , he call in at the 
 house of a parishioner whose son have be kill in France . he find she 
 in her kitchen ; an oldish woman who live by charing . she wipe a seat 
 for the Vicar . 

 " I be just makin ' meself a cup o ' tea , sir . " 

 " ah ! what a comfort tea be , Mrs. Soles ! " and he sit down , so that she 
 should feel " at home . " 

 " yes ; it give I ' eart - burn ; I take eight or ten cup a day , now . I 
 take them strong , too . I do not   seem able to get on without it . I ' ope the 
 young lady be well , sir ? " 

 " very well , thank you . Miss Noel be go to begin nursing , too . " 

 " deary - I ! she be very young ; but all the young gell be do something 
 these day . I have   get a niece in munition - makin ' a pretty penny she be . 
 I have   be meanin ' to tell you - I do not   come to church now ; since my son 
 be kill , I do not   seem to ' ave the ' eart to go anywhere - ' aven't 
 be to a picture - palace these three month . any excitement start I 
 cryin ' . " 

 " I know ; but you would find rest in church . " 

 Mrs. Soles shake her head , and the small twisted bob of her discolour 
 hair wobble vaguely . 

 " I can not   take any recreation , " she say . " I would rather sit ' ere , or be at 
 work . my son be a real son to I . this tea be the only thing that do 
 I any good . I can make you a fresh cup in a minute . " 

 " thank you , Mrs. Soles , but I must be get on . we must all look 
 forward to meet our beloved again , in God 's mercy . and one of these 
 day soon I shall be see you in church , shall not   I. " 

 Mrs. Soles shift her weight from one slippere foot to the other . 

 " well ! let us ' ope so , " she say . " but I dunno when I shall ' ave the 
 spirit . good day , sir , and thank you kindly for call , I be sure . " 

 Pierson walk away with a very faint smile . poor queer old soul ! - she 
 be no old than himself , but he think of she as ancient - cut off 
 from her son , like so many - so many ; and how good and patient ! the 
 melody of an anthem begin run in his head . his finger move on the 
 air beside he , and he stand still , wait for an omnibus to take he 
 to St. John 's Wood . a thousand people go by while he be wait , but 
 he do not notice they , think of that anthem , of his daughter , and 
 the mercy of God ; and on the top of his ' bus , when it come along , he 
 look lonely and apart , though the man beside he be so fat that 
 there be hardly any seat leave to sit on . get down at Lord 's 
 cricket - ground , he ask his way of a lady in a nurse 's dress . 

 " if you will come with I , " she say , " I be just go there . " 

 " oh ! do you happen to know a Mrs. Lynch who nurse " 

 " I be Mrs. Lynch . why , you be Edward Pierson ! " 

 he look into her face , which he have not yet observe . 

 " Leila ! " he say . 

 " yes , Leila ! how awfully nice of you to come , Edward ! " 

 they continue to stand , search each for the other 's youth , till she 
 murmur : 

 " in spite of your beard , I should have know you anywhere ! " but she 
 think : ' Poor Edward ! he be old , and monk - like ! ' 

 and Pierson , in answer , murmur : 

 " you be very little change , Leila ! we have not , see each other since my 
 young girl be bear . she be just a little like you . " but he think : 
 ' my Nollie ! so much more dewy ; poor Leila ! ' 

 they walk on , talk of his daughter , till they reach the 
 hospital . 

 " if you will wait here a minute , I will take you over my ward . " 

 she have leave he in a bare hall , hold his hat in one hand and 
 touch his gold cross with the other ; but she soon come hack , and a 
 little warmth creep about his heart . how work of mercy suit woman ! 
 she look so different , so much soft , beneath the white coif , with a 
 white apron over the bluish frock . 

 at the change in his face , a little warmth creep about Leila , too , just 
 where the bib of her apron stop ; and her eye slide round at he while 
 they go towards what have once be a billiard - room . 

 " my man be dear , " she say ; " they love to be talk to . " 

 under a skylight six bed jut out from a green distempered wall , 
 opposite to six bed jut out from another green distempered wall , 
 and from each bed a face be turn towards they young face , with but 
 little expression in they . a nurse , at the far end , look round , and 
 go on with her work . the sight of the ward be no more new to Pierson 
 than to anyone else in these day . it be so familiar , indeed , that it 
 have practically no significance . he stand by the first bed , and Leila 
 stand alongside . the man smile up when she speak , and do not smile 
 when he speak , and that again be familiar to he . they pass from bed 
 to bed , with exactly the same result , till she be call away , and he 
 sit down by a young soldier with a long , very narrow head and face , and 
 a heavily bandaged shoulder . touch the bandage reverently , Pierson 
 say : 

 " well , my dear fellow - still bad ? " 

 " ah ! " reply the soldier . " shrapnel wound : it be cut the flesh 
 properly . " 

 " but not the spirit , I can see ! " 

 the young soldier give he a quaint look , as much as to say : " not ' arf 
 bad ! " and a gramophone close to the last bed begin to play : " God bless 
 daddy at the war ! " 

 " be you fond of music ? " 

 " I like it well enough . pass the time . " 

 " I be afraid the time hang heavy in hospital . " 

 " yes ; it hang a bit ' eavy ; it be just ' orspital life . I have   be wound 
 before , you see . it be well than bein ' out there . I expect I will lose 
 the proper use o ' this arm . I do not   worry ; I will get my discharge . " 

 " you have   get some good nurse here . " 

 " yes ; I like Mrs. Lynch ; she be the lady I like . " 

 " my cousin . " 

 " I see you come in together . I see everything ' ere . I think a lot , too . 
 pass the time . " 

 " do they let you smoke ? " 

 " oh , yes ! they let we smoke . " 

 " have one of mine ? " 

 the young soldier smile for the first time . " thank you ; I have   get 
 plenty . " 

 the nurse come by , and smile at Pierson . 

 " he be one of our blase one ; be in before , have not   you , Simson ? " 

 Pierson look at the young man , whose long , narrow face ; where one 
 sandy - lash eyelid droop just a little , seem armoured with a sort 
 of limited omniscience . the gramophone have whir and grunt into 
 " Sidi Brahim . " the nurse pass on . 

 " ' Seedy Abram , ' " say the young soldier . " the Frenchies sing it ; they 
 take it up one after the other , ye know . " 

 " ah ! " murmur Pierson ; " it be pretty . " and his finger drum on the 
 counterpane , for the tune be new to he . something seem to move in 
 the young man 's face , as if a blind have be draw up a little . 

 " I do not   mind France , " he say abruptly ; " I do not   mind the shell and 
 that ; but I can not   stick the mud . there be a lot o ' wound die in 
 the mud ; can not   get up - smother . " his unwounded arm make a restless 
 movement . " I be nearly smother myself . just manage to keep I nose 
 up . " 

 Pierson shudder . " thank God you do ! " 

 " yes ; I do not   like that . I tell Mrs. Lynch about that one day when 
 I have the fever . she be a nice lady ; she be see a lot of we boy : that 
 mud 's not right , you know . " and again his unwounded arm make that 
 restless movement ; while the gramophone strike up : " the boy in brown . " 
 the movement of the arm affect Pierson horribly ; he rise and , touch 
 the bandaged shoulder , say : 

 " Good - bye ; I hope you will soon be quite recover . " 

 the young soldier 's lip twist in the semblance of a smile ; his 
 droop eyelid seem to try and raise itself . 

 " good day , sir , " he say ; " and thank you . " 

 Pierson go back to the hall . the sunlight fall in a pool just inside 
 the open door , and an uncontrollable impulse make he move into it , so 
 that it warm he up to the waist . the mud ! how ugly life be ! life and 
 Death ! both ugly ! poor boy ! poor boy ! 

 a voice behind he say : 

 " oh ! there you be , Edward ! would you like to see the other ward , or 
 shall I show you our kitchen ? " 

 Pierson take her hand impulsively . " you be do a noble work , Leila . 
 I want to ask you : could you arrange for Noel to come and get train 
 here ? she want to begin at once . the fact be , a boy she be attract to 
 have just go out to the Front . " 

 " ah ! " murmur Leila , and her eye look very soft . " poor child ! we 
 shall be want an extra hand next week . I will see if she could come 
 now . I will speak to our Matron , and let you know to - night . " she squeeze 
 his hand hard . 

 " Dear Edward , I be so glad to see you again . you be the first of our 
 family I have   see for sixteen year . I wonder if you would bring Noel to have 
 supper at my flat to - night - just nothing to eat , you know ! it be a tiny 
 place . there be a Captain Fort come ; a nice man . " 

 Pierson accept , and as he walk away he think : ' Dear Leila ! I 
 believe it be Providence . she want sympathy . she want to feel the 
 past be the past . how good woman be ! ' 

 and the sun , blaze suddenly out of a cloud , shine on his black figure 
 and the little gold cross , in the middle of Portland Place . 




 x 

 Men , even if they be not artistic , who have be in strange place 
 and know many nook of the world , get the scenic habit , become open 
 to pictorial sensation . it be as a picture or series of picture that 
 Jimmy Fort ever afterwards remember his first supper at Leila 's . he 
 happen to have be all day in the open , motor about to horse 
 farm under a hot sun ; and Leila 's hock cup possess a bland and subtle 
 strength . the scenic sense derive therefrom have a certain poignancy , 
 the more so because the tall child whom he meet there do not drink it , 
 and her father seem but to wet his lip , so that Leila and he have 
 all the rest . rather a wonderful little scene it make in his mind , 
 very warm , glow , yet with a strange dark sharpness to it , which come 
 perhaps from the black wall . 

 the flat have belong to an artist who be at the war . it be but a 
 pocket dwelling on the third floor . the two window of the little square 
 sitting - room look out on some tree and a church . but Leila , who hat 
 dining by daylight , have soon draw curtain of a deep blue over they . 
 the picture which Fort remember be this : a little four - square table 
 of dark wood , with a chinese mat of vivid blue in the centre , whereon 
 stand a silver lustre bowl of clove carnation ; some greenish glass 
 with hock cup in they ; on his left , Leila in a low lilac frock , her neck 
 and shoulder very white , her face a little powdered , her eye large , 
 her lip smile ; opposite he a black - clothe padre with a little 
 gold cross , over whose thin darkish face , with its grave point beard , 
 pass little gentle smile , but whose deep sink grey eye be burn 
 and bright ; on his right , a girl in a high grey frock , almost white , 
 just hollow at the neck , with full sleeve to the elbow , so that she 
 slim arm escape ; her short fair hair a little tumbled ; her big grey 
 eye grave ; her full lip shape with a strange daintiness round every 
 word - and they not many ; brilliant red shade over golden light dot 
 the black wall ; a blue divan ; a little black piano flush with the wall ; 
 a dark polished floor ; four japanese print ; a white ceiling . he be 
 conscious that his own khaki spoil something as curious and rare as 
 some old chinese tea - chest . he even remember what they ate ; lobster ; 
 cold pigeon pie ; asparagus ; St. Ivel cheese ; raspberry and cream . 
 he do not remember half so well what they talk of , except that he 
 himself tell they story of the Boer War , in which he have serve in 
 the Yeomanry , and while he be tell they , the girl , like a child 
 listen to a fairy - tale , never move her eye from his face . he 
 remember that after supper they all smoke cigarette , even the tall 
 child , after the padre have say to she mildly , " my dear ! " and she have 
 answer : " I simply must , Daddy , just one . " he remember Leila brewing 
 turkish coffee - very good , and how beautiful her white arm look , 
 hover about the cup . he remember she make the padre sit down at 
 the piano , and play to they . and she and the girl on the divan together , 
 side by side , a strange contrast ; with just as strange a likeness to 
 each other . he always remember how fine and rare that music sound 
 in the little room , flood he with a dreamy beatitude . then - he 
 remember - Leila sing , the padre standing - by ; and the tall child on 
 the divan bend forward over her knee , with her chin on her hand . he 
 remember rather vividly how Leila turn her neck and look up , now 
 at the padre , now at himself ; and , all through , the delightful sense 
 of colour and warmth , a sort of glamour over all the evening ; and the 
 linger pressure of Leila 's hand when he say good - bye and they go 
 away , for they all go together . he remember talk a great deal to 
 the padre in the cab , about the public school they have both be at , and 
 think : ' it be a good padre - this ! ' he remember how their taxi take 
 they to an old square which he do not know , where the garden tree 
 look densely black in the starshine . he remember that a man outside 
 the house have engage the padre in earnest talk , while the tall child 
 and himself stand in the open doorway , where the hall beyond be dark . 
 very exactly he remember the little conversation which then take place 
 between they , while they wait for her father . 

 " be it very horrid in the trench , Captain Fort ? " 

 " yes , Miss Pierson ; it be very horrid , as a rule . " 

 " be it dangerous all the time ? " 

 " pretty well . " 

 " do officer run more risk than the man ? " 

 " not unless there be an attack . " 

 " be there attack very often ? " 

 it have seem to he so strangely primitive a little catechism , that he 
 have smile . and , though it be so dark , she have see that smile , for she 
 face go proud and close all of a sudden . he have curse himself , and 
 say gently : 

 " have you a brother out there ? " 

 she shake her head . 

 " but someone ? " 

 " yes . " 

 someone ! he have hear that answer with a little shock . this child - this 
 fairy princess of a child already to have someone ! he wonder if she 
 go about ask everyone these question , with that someone in her 
 thought . poor child ! and quickly he say : 

 " after all , look at I ! I be out there a year , and here I be with only 
 half a game leg ; time be a lot bad , then , too . I often wish I be 
 back there . anything be well than London and the War Office . " but 
 just then he see the padre come , and take her hand . " good night , Miss 
 Pierson . do not   worry . that do no good , and there be not   half the risk 
 you think . " 

 her hand stir , squeeze his gratefully , as a child 's would squeeze . 

 " good night , " she murmur ; " thank you awfully . " 

 and , in the dark cab again , he remember think : ' fancy that child ! a 
 jolly lucky boy , out there ! too bad ! poor little fairy princess ! ' 




 PART II 




 I 


 1 

 to wash up be not an exciting operation . to wash up in August become for 
 Noel a process which tax her strength and enthusiasm . she combine it 
 with other form of instruction in the art of nursing , have very little 
 leisure , and in the evening at home would often fall asleep curl up 
 in a large chintz - cover chair . 

 George and Gratian have long go back to their respective hospital , 
 and she and her father have the house to themselves . she receive many 
 letter from Cyril which she carry about with she and read on her way 
 to and from the hospital ; and every other day she write to he . he be 
 not yet in the firing line ; his letter be descriptive of his man , 
 his food , or the native , or reminiscent of Kestrel ; her descriptive of 
 wash up , or reminiscent of Kestrel . but in both there be always some 
 little word of the longing within they . 

 it be towards the end of August when she have the letter which say that 
 he have be move up . from now on he would be in hourly danger ! that 
 evening after dinner she do not go to sleep in the chair , but sit under 
 the open window , clench her hand , and read " Pride and Prejudice " 
 without understand a word . while she be so engage her father come 
 up and say : 

 " Captain Fort , Nollie . will you give he some coffee ? I be afraid I must 
 go out . " 

 when he have go , Noel look at her visitor drink his coffee . he 
 have be out there , too , and he be alive ; with only a little limp . the 
 visitor smile and say : 

 " what be you think about when we come in ? " 

 " only the war . " 

 " any news of he ? " 

 Noel frown , she hat to show her feeling . 

 " yes ! he be go to the Front . will not   you have a cigarette ? " 

 " thank . will you ? " 

 " I want one awfully . I think sit still and wait be more dreadful 
 than anything in the world . " 

 " except , know that other be wait . when I be out there I use 
 to worry horribly over my mother . she be ill at the time . the cruel 
 thing in war be the anxiety of people about each other - nothing touch 
 that . " 

 the word exactly sum up Noel 's hourly thought . he say nice thing , 
 this man with the long leg and the thin brown bumpy face ! 

 " I wish I be a man , " she say , " I think woman have much the bad time 
 in the war . be your mother old ? " but of course she be old why he be 
 old himself ! 

 " she die last Christmas . " 

 " oh ! I be so sorry ! " 

 " you lose your mother when you be a babe , do not   you ? " 

 " yes . that be her portrait . " at the end of the room , hang on a strip 
 of black velvet be a pastel , very faint in colour , as though fade , 
 of a young woman , with an eager , sweet face , dark eye , and bend a 
 little forward , as if question her painter . Fort go up to it . 

 " it be not a bit like you . but she must have be a very sweet woman . " 

 " it be a sort of presence in the room . I wish I be like she ! " 

 Fort turn . " no , " he say ; " no . well as you be . it would only have 
 spoil a complete thing . " 

 " she be good . " 

 " and be not   you ? " 

 " oh ! no . I get a devil . " 

 " you ! why , you be out of a fairy - tale ! " 

 " it come from Daddy - only he do not   know , because he be a perfect 
 saint ; but I know he be have a devil somewhere , or he could not   be the 
 saint he be . " 

 " H'm ! " say Fort . " that be very deep : and I believe it be true - the saint 
 do have devil . " 

 " poor Daddy 's devil have be dead age . it be be starve out of he , I 
 think . " 

 " do your devil ever get away with you ? " 

 Noel feel her cheek grow red under his stare , and she turn to the 
 window : 

 " yes . it be a real devil . " 

 vividly there have come before she the dark Abbey , and the moon balancing 
 over the top of the crumble wall , and the white owl fly across . 
 and , speak to the air , she say : 

 " it make you do thing that you want to do . " 

 she wonder if he would laugh - it sound so silly . but he do not . 

 " and damn the consequence ? I know . it be rather a jolly thing to have . " 

 Noel shake her head . " here be daddy come back ! " 

 Fort hold out his hand . 

 " I will not   stay . good night ; and do not   worry too much , will you ? " 

 he keep her hand rather a long time , and give it a hard squeeze . 

 do not   worry ! what advice ! ah ! if she could see Cyril just for a minute ! 


 2 

 in September , 1916 , Saturday still come before Sunday , in spite of the 
 war . for Edward Pierson this Saturday have be a strenuous day , and even 
 now , at nearly midnight , he be still con his just - complete sermon . 

 a patriot of patriot , he have often a passionate longing to resign his 
 parish , and go like his curate for a chaplain at the Front . it seem to 
 he that people must think his life idle and sheltered and useless . even 
 in time of peace he have be sensitive enough to feel the cold draughty 
 blast which the Church encounter in a material age . he know that nine 
 people out of ten look on he as something of a parasite , with no real 
 work in the world . and since he be nothing if not conscientious , he 
 always work himself to the bone . 

 to - day he have rise at half - past six , and after his bath and exercise , 
 have sit down to his sermon - for , even now , he write a new sermon once 
 a month , though he have the fruit of twenty - six year to choose from . 
 true , these new sermon be rather compile than write , because , 
 bereft of his curate , he have not time enough for fresh thought on old 
 subject . at eight he have breakfast with Noel , before she go off to 
 her hospital , whence she would return at eight in the evening . nine to 
 ten be his hour for see parishioner who have trouble , or want 
 help or advice , and he have receive three to - day who all want help , 
 which he have give . from ten to eleven he have go back to his sermon , 
 and have spend from eleven to one at his church , attend to small 
 matter , write notice , fix hymn , hold the daily half - hour 
 Service institute during wartime , to which but few ever come . he have 
 hurry back to lunch , scamp it so that he might get to his piano for 
 an hour of forgetfulness . at three he have christen a very noisy baby , 
 and be detain by its parent who wish for information on a variety 
 of topic . at half - past four he have snatch a cup of tea , read the 
 paper ; and have spend from five to seven visit two Parish Clubs , and 
 those whose war - pension matter he have in hand , and fill up form 
 which would be keep in official place till such time as the system 
 should be change and a fresh set of form issue . from seven to eight 
 he be at home again , in case his flock want to see he ; to - day four 
 sheep have come , and go away , he be afraid , but little the wiser . 
 from half - past eight to half - past nine he have spend in choir practice , 
 because the organist be on his holiday . slowly in the cool of the 
 evening he have walk home , and fall asleep in his chair on get 
 in . at eleven he have wake with a start , and , harden his heart , have 
 go back to his sermon . and now , at nearly midnight , it be still less 
 than twenty minute long . he light one of his rare cigarette , and 
 let thought wander . how beautiful those pale pink rose be in that old 
 silver bowl - like a little strange poem , or a piece of Debussy music , or 
 a Mathieu Maris picture - remind he oddly of the word Leila . be 
 he wrong in let Noel see so much of Leila ? but then she be so 
 improved - dear Leila ! ... the pink rose be just go to fall ! and 
 yet how beautiful ! ... it be quiet to - night ; he feel very drowsy .... do 
 Nollie still think of that young man , or have it pass ? she have never 
 confide in he since ! after the war , it would be nice to take she 
 to Italy , to all the little town . they would see the Assisi of St. 
 Francis . the little Flowers of St. Francis . the little Flowers ! ... his 
 hand drop , the cigarette go out . he sleep with his face in shadow . 
 slowly into the silence of his sleep little sinister sound intrude . 
 short concussion , drag he back out of that deep slumber . he 
 start up . Noel be stand at the door , in a long coat . she say in 
 her calm voice : 

 " zep , Daddy ! " 

 " yes , my dear . where be the maid ? " 

 an irish voice answer from the hall : " here , sir ; trustin ' in God ; but 
 ' tis well on the ground floor . " 

 he see a huddle of three figure , queerly costume , against the stair . 

 " yes , yes , Bridgie ; you be safe down here . " then he notice that Noel 
 be go . he follow she out into the Square , alive with face faintly 
 luminous in the darkness , and find she against the garden railing . 

 " you must come back in , Nollie . " 

 " oh , no ! Cyril have this every day . " 

 he stand beside she ; not loth , for excitement have begin to stir his 
 blood . they stay there for some minute , strain their eye for 
 sight of anything save the little zagge splash of burst shrapnel , 
 while voice buzz , and mutter : " look ! there ! there ! there it be ! " 

 but the seer have eye of great faith than Pierson 's , for he see 
 nothing : he take her arm at last , and lead she in . in the hall she break 
 from he . 

 " let us go up on the roof , Daddy ! " and run upstairs . 

 again he follow , mount by a ladder , through a trapdoor on to the 
 roof . 

 " it be splendid up here ! " she cry . 

 he could see her eye blaze , and think : ' how my child do love 
 excitement - it be almost terrible ! ' 

 over the wide , dark , star - strew sky travel searchlight , be 
 light up the few little cloud ; the dome and spire rise from among 
 the spread - out roof , all fine and ghostly . the gun have cease firing , 
 as though puzzle . one distant bang rumble out . 

 " a bomb ! oh ! if we could only get one of the Zeps ! " 

 a furious outburst of firing follow , last perhaps a minute , then 
 cease as if by magic . they see two searchlight converge and meet right 
 overhead . 

 " it be above we ! " murmur Noel . 

 Pierson put his arm round her waist . ' she feel no fear ! ' he think . 
 the search - light switch apart ; and suddenly , from far away , come a 
 confusion of weird sound . 

 " what be it ? they be cheer . oh ! daddy , look ! " there in the heaven , 
 towards the east , hang a dull red thing , lengthen as they gaze . 

 " they have   get it . it be on fire ! Hurrah ! " 

 through the dark firmament that fiery orange shape begin cant 
 downward ; and the cheering swell in a savage frenzy of sound . and 
 Pierson 's arm tighten on her waist . 

 " thank God ! " he mutter . 

 the bright oblong seem to break and spread , tilt down below the 
 level of the roof ; and suddenly the heavens flare , as if some huge jug 
 of crimson light have be fling out on they . something turn over in 
 Pierson 's heart ; he fling up his hand to his eye . 

 " the poor man in it ! " he say . " how terrible ! " 

 Noel 's voice answer , hard and pitiless : 

 " they need not   have come . they be murderer ! " 

 yes , they be murderer - but how terrible ! and he stand quiver , 
 with his hand press to his face , till the cheering have die out into 
 silence . 

 " let us pray , Nollie ! " he whisper . " o God , who in Thy great mercy hath 
 deliver we from peril , take into Thy keep the soul of these our 
 enemy , consume by Thy wrath before our eye ; give we the power to 
 pity they - man like ourselves . " 

 but even while he pray he could see Noel 's face flame - white in the 
 darkness ; and , as that glow in the sky fade out , he feel once more the 
 thrill of triumph . 

 they go down to tell the maid , and for some time after sit up 
 together , talk over what they have see , eat biscuit and drink 
 milk , which they warm on an etna . it be nearly two o'clock before 
 they go to bed . Pierson fall asleep at once , and never turn till 
 awaken at half - past six by his alarum . he have Holy Communion to 
 administer at eight , and he hurry to get early to his church and 
 see that nothing untoward have happen to it . there it stand in the 
 sunlight ; tall , grey , quiet , unharmed , with bell gently ring . 


 3 

 and at that hour Cyril Morland , under the parapet of his trench , 
 tighten his belt , be look at his wrist - watch for the hundredth 
 time , calculate exactly where he mean to put foot and hand for the 
 go over : ' I absolutely must not   let those chap get in front of I , ' 
 he think . so many yard before the first line of trench , so many 
 yard to the second line , and there stop . so his rehearsal have go ; 
 it be the performance now ! another minute before the terrific racket of 
 the drum - fire should become the curtain - fire , which would advance before 
 they . he run his eye down the trench . the man next he be lick his 
 two first finger , as if he might be go to bowl at cricket . far 
 down , a man be feel his puttee . a voice say : " wot price the 
 orchestra nah ! " he see tooth gleam in face burn almost black . then he 
 look up ; the sky be blue beyond the brownish film of dust raise by 
 the strike shell . Noel ! Noel ! Noel ! ... he dig his finger deep 
 into the left side of his tunic till he could feel the outline of her 
 photograph between his dispatch - case and his heart . his heart flutter 
 just as it use when he be stretch out with hand touch the ground , 
 before the start of the " hundred yard " at school . out of the corner of 
 his eye he catch the flash of a man 's " briquet " light a cigarette . 
 all right for those chap , but not for he ; he want all his 
 breath - this rifle , and kit be handicap enough ! two day ago he have 
 be read in some paper how man feel just before an attack . and now 
 he know . he just feel nervous . if only the moment would come , and get 
 itself over ! for all the thought he give to the enemy there might have 
 be none - nothing but shell and bullet , with life of their own . he 
 hear the whistle ; his foot be on the spot he have mark down ; his hand 
 where he have see it ; he call out : " now , boy ! " his head be over the 
 top , his body over ; he be conscious of someone fall , and two man 
 neck and neck beside he . not to try and run , not to break out of a 
 walk ; to go steady , and yet keep ahead ! D - n these hole ! a bullet tore 
 through his sleeve , graze his arm - a red - hot sensation , like the touch 
 of an iron . a british shell from close over his head burst sixty yard 
 ahead ; he stumble , fall flat , pick himself up . three ahead of he 
 now ! he walk fast , and draw alongside . two of they fall . ' what 
 luck ! ' he think ; and grip his rifle hard , pitch headlong into 
 a declivity . dead body lay there ! the first german trench line , 
 and nothing alive in it , nothing to clean up , nothing of it leave ! he 
 stop , get his wind ; watch the man pant and stumble in . 
 the roar of the gun be loud than ever again , barrage the second 
 line . so far , good ! and here be his captain ! 

 " ready , boy ? on , then ! " 

 this time he move more slowly still , over terrible going , all hole and 
 hummock . half consciously he take cover all he could . the air be 
 alive with the whistle from machine - gun fire storm across zigzag 
 fashion - alive it be with bullet , dust , and smoke . ' how shall I tell 
 she ? ' he think . there would be nothing to tell but just a sort of 
 jagged brown sensation . he keep his eye steadily before he , not 
 want to seethe man fall , not want anything to divert he from 
 get there . he feel the faint fanning of the pass bullet . the 
 second line must be close now . why do not   that barrage lift ? be this 
 new dodge of firing till the last second go to do they in ? another 
 hundred yard and he would be bang into it . he fling himself flat and 
 wait ; look at his wrist - watch he note that his arm be soak with 
 blood . he think : ' a wound ! now I shall go home . thank God ! oh , Noel ! ' 
 the pass bullet whirl above he ; he could hear they even through 
 the screech and thunder of the shell - fire . ' the beastly thing ! ' he 
 think : a voice beside he gasp out : 

 " it be lift , sir . " 

 he call : " come on , boy ! " and go forward , stoop . a bullet 
 strike his rifle . the shock make he stagg and send an electric shock 
 spin up his arm . ' luck again ! ' he think . ' now for it ! I have not 
 see a german yet ! ' he leap forward , spin round , fling up his arm , 
 and fall on his back , shoot through and through .... 

 the position be consolidated , as they say , and in the darkness 
 stretcher - bearer be out over the half - mile . like will - o'-the - wisps , 
 with their shaded lantern , they move , hour after hour , slowly 
 quarter the black honeycomb which lie behind the new british 
 line . now and then in the light of some star - shell their figure be 
 disclose , bend and raise the form of the wound , or wield 
 pick and shovel . 

 " Officer . " 

 " dead ? " 

 " sure . " 

 " search . " 

 from the shade lantern , lower to just above the body , a yellowish 
 glare fall on face and breast . the hand of the searcher move in that 
 little pool of light . the bearer who be take note bend down . 

 " another boy , " he say . " that all he have ? " 

 the searcher raise himself . 

 " just those , and a photo . " 

 " dispatch - case ; pound loose ; cigarette - case ; wristwatch ; photo . let us 
 see it . " 

 the searcher place the photo in the pool of light . the tiny face of a 
 girl star up at they , unmoved , from its short hair . 

 " Noel , " say the searcher , read . 

 " H'm ! take care of it . stick it in his case . come on ! " 

 the pool of light dissolve , and darkness for ever cover Cyril 
 Morland . 




 II 

 when those four take their seat in the Grand Circle at Queen 's Hall the 
 programme be already at the second number , which , in spite of all the 
 effort of patriotism , be of german origin - a Brandenburg concerto by 
 Bach . more curious still , it be encore . Pierson do not applaud , he 
 be too far go in pleasure , and sit with a rapt smile on his face , 
 oblivious of his surrounding . he remain thus remove from mortal joy 
 and sorrow till the last applause have die away , and Leila 's voice say 
 in his ear : 

 " be not   it a wonderful audience , Edward ? look at all that khaki . who would 
 have think those young man care for music - good music - german music , 
 too ? " 

 Pierson look down at the patient mass of stand figure in straw 
 hat and military cap , with face turn all one way , and sigh . 

 " I wish I could get an audience like that in my church . " 

 a smile creep out at the corner of Leila 's lip . she be think : ' ah ! 
 your Church be out of date , my dear , and so be you ! your Church , with 
 its smell of mould and incense , its stain - glass , and narrow length 
 and drone organ . Poor Edward , so out of the world ! ' but she only 
 press his arm , and whisper : 

 " look at Noel ! " 

 the girl be talk to Jimmy Fort . her cheek be gush , and she 
 look pretty than Pierson have see she look for a long time now , ever 
 since Kestrel , indeed . he hear Leila sigh . 

 " do she get news of her boy ? do you remember that May Week , Edward ? we 
 be very young then ; even you be young . that be such a pretty little 
 letter you write I . I can see you still - wander in your dress clothe 
 along the river , among the ' holy ' cow . " 

 but her eye slide round again , watch her other neighbour and the 
 girl . a violinist have begin to play the Cesar Franck Sonata . it be 
 Pierson 's favourite piece of music , bring he , as it be , a view 
 of heaven , of devotional blue air where devout star be shin in a 
 sunlit noon , above ecstatic tree and water where ecstatic swan be 
 swim . 

 " queer world , Mr. Pierson ! Fancy those boy have to go back to barrack 
 life after listen to that ! what be your feeling ? be we move back to 
 the ape ? do we touch top note with that sonata ? " 

 Pierson turn and contemplate his questioner shrewdly . 

 " no , Captain Fort , I do not think we be move back to the ape ; if we 
 ever come from they . those boy have the soul of hero ! " 

 " I know that , sir , perhaps well than you do . " 

 " ah ! yes , " say Pierson humbly , " I forgot , of course . " but he still 
 look at his neighbour doubtfully . this Captain Fort , who be a friend 
 of Leila 's , and who have twice be to see they , puzzle he . he have 
 a frank face , a frank voice , but queer opinion , or so it seem to , 
 Pierson - little bit of Moslemism , little bit of the backwood , and the 
 veldt ; queer unexpected cynicism , all sort of side view on England 
 have lodge in he , and he do not hide they . they come from he like 
 bullet , in that frank voice , and drill little hole in the listener . 
 those critical saying fly so much more poignantly from one who have 
 be through the same educational mill as himself , than if they have 
 merely come from some rough diamond , some artist , some foreigner , even 
 from a doctor like George . and they always make he uncomfortable , like 
 the touch of a prickly leaf ; they do not amuse he . certainly Edward 
 Pierson shrink from the rough touch of a knock - about philosophy . after 
 all , it be but natural that he should . 

 he and Noel leave after the first part of the concert , part from 
 the other two at the door . he slip his hand through her arm ; and , 
 follow out those thought of his in the concert - hall , ask : 

 " do you like Captain Fort , Nollie ? " 

 " yes ; he be a nice man . " 

 " he seem a nice man , certainly ; he have a nice smile , but strange view , 
 I be afraid . " 

 " he think the Germans be not much bad than we be ; he say that a 
 good many of we be bully too . " 

 " yes , that be the sort of thing I mean . " 

 " but be we , daddy ? " 

 " surely not . " 

 " a policeman I talk to once say the same . Captain Fort say that 
 very few man can stand have power put into their hand without 
 be spoil . he tell I some dreadful story . he say we have no 
 imagination , so that we often do thing without see how brutal they 
 be . " 

 " we be not perfect , Nollie ; but on the whole I think we be a kind 
 people . " 

 Noel be silent a moment , then say suddenly : 

 " kind people often think other be kind too , when they really be not . 
 Captain Fort do not   make that mistake . " 

 " I think he be a little cynical , and a little dangerous . " 

 " be all people dangerous who do not   think like other , daddy ? " 

 Pierson , incapable of mockery , be not incapable of see when he be 
 be mock . he look at his daughter with a smile . 

 " not quite so bad as that , Nollie ; but Mr. Fort be certainly subversive . 
 I think perhaps he have see too many queer side of life . " 

 " I like he the well for that . " 

 " well , well , " Pierson answer absently . he have work to do in 
 preparation for a Confirmation Class , and seek his study on get 
 in . 

 Noel go to the dining - room to drink her hot milk . the curtain be 
 not draw , and bright moonlight be come in . without light up , she 
 set the etna go , and stand look at the moon - full for the second 
 time since she and Cyril have wait for it in the Abbey . and press 
 her hand to her breast , she shiver . if only she could summon he from 
 the moonlight out there ; if only she be a witch - could see he , know 
 where he be , what do ! for a fortnight now she have receive no 
 letter . every day since he have leave she have read the casualty list , 
 with the superstitious feeling that to do so would keep he out of they . 
 she take up the Times . there be just enough light , and she read the 
 roll of honour - till the moon shine in on she , lie on the floor , with 
 the drop journal .... 

 but she be proud , and soon take grief to her room , as on that night 
 after he leave she , she have take love . no sign betray to the house 
 her disaster ; the journal on the floor , and the smell of the burn milk 
 which have boil over , reveal nothing . after all , she be but one of 
 a thousand heart which spend that moonlit night in agony . each night , 
 year in , year out , a thousand face be bury in pillow to smother 
 that first awful sense of desolation , and grope for the secret 
 spirit - place where bereaved soul go , to receive some feeble touch of 
 healing from knowledge of each other 's trouble .... 

 in the morning she get up from her sleepless bed , seem to eat she 
 breakfast , and go off to her hospital . there she wash up plate and 
 dish , with a stony face , dark under the eye . 

 the news come to Pierson in a letter from Thirza , receive at 
 lunch - time . he read it with a dreadful aching . poor , poor little Nollie ! 
 what an awful trouble for she ! and he , too , go about his work with 
 the nightmare think that he have to break the news to she that evening . 
 never have he feel more lonely , more dreadfully in want of the mother of 
 his child . she would have know how to soothe , how to comfort . on her 
 heart the child could have sob away grief . and all that hour , from 
 seven to eight , when he be usually in readiness to fulfil the function 
 of God 's substitute to his parishioner , he spend in prayer of his own , 
 for guidance how to inflict and heal this blow . when , at last , Noel 
 come , he open the door to her himself , and , put back the hair 
 from her forehead , say : " come in here a moment , my darling ! " Noel 
 follow he into the study , and sit down . " I know already , Daddy . " 
 Pierson be more dismayed by this stoicism than he would have be by 
 any natural out burst . he stand , timidly stroke her hair , murmur 
 to she what he have say to Gratian , and to so many other in these day : 
 " there be no death ; look forward to see he again ; God be merciful " 
 and he marvel at the calmness of that pale face - so young . 

 " you be very brave , my child ! " he say . 

 " there be nothing else to be , be there ? " 

 " be not   there anything I can do for you , Nollie ? " 

 " no , Daddy . " 

 " when do you see it ? " 

 " last night . " she have already know for twenty - four hour without 
 tell he ! 

 " have you pray , my darling ? " 

 " no . " 

 " try , Nollie ! " 

 " no . " 

 " ah , try ! " 

 " it would be ridiculous , daddy ; you do not   know . " 

 Grievously upset and bewilder , Pierson move away from she , and say : 

 " you look dreadfully tired . would you like a hot bath , and your dinner 
 in bed ? " 

 " I would like some tea ; that be all . " and she go out . 

 when he have see that the tea have go up to she , he too go out ; and , 
 move by a longing for woman 's help , take a cab to Leila 's flat . 




 III 


 on leave the concert Leila and Jimmy Fort have secure a taxi ; a 
 vehicle which , at night , in wartime , have certain advantage for those 
 who desire to become well acquaint . vibration , sufficient noise , 
 darkness , be guarantee ; and all that be lack for the furtherance 
 of emotion be the scent of honeysuckle and rose , or even of the white 
 flowering creeper which on the stoep at High Constantia have smell so 
 much sweet than petrol . 

 when Leila find herself with Fort in that loneliness to which she have 
 be look forward , she be overcome by an access of nervous silence . 
 she have be pass through a strange time for week past . every night 
 she examine her sensation without quite understand they as yet . 
 when a woman come to her age , the world - force be liable to take 
 possession , say : 

 " you be young , you be beautiful , you still have beauty , you be not , 
 can not be , old . cle to youth , cle to beauty ; take all you can get , 
 before your face get line and your hair grey ; it be impossible that 
 you have be love for the last time . " 

 to see Jimmy Fort at the concert , talk to Noel , have bring this 
 emotion to a head . she be not of a grudging nature , and could genuinely 
 admire Noel , but the idea that Jimmy Fort might also admire disturb 
 she greatly . he must not ; it be not fair ; he be too old - besides , the 
 girl have her boy ; and she have take care that he should know it . so , 
 lean towards he , while a bare - shoulder young lady sang , she have 
 whisper : 

 " Penny ? " 

 and he have whisper back : 

 " tell you afterwards . " 

 that have comfort she . she would make he take her home . it be time 
 she show her heart . 

 and now , in the cab , resolve to make her feeling know , in sudden 
 shyness she find it very difficult . love , to which for quite three 
 year she have be a stranger , be come to life within she . the 
 knowledge be at once so sweet , and so disturbing , that she sit with 
 face avert , unable to turn the precious minute to account . they 
 arrive at the flat without have do more than agree that the 
 street be dark , and the moon bright . she get out with a sense of 
 bewilderment , and say rather desperately : 

 " you must come up and have a cigarette . it be quite early , still . " 

 he go up . 

 " wait just a minute , " say Leila . 

 sit there with his drink and his cigarette , he star at some 
 sunflower in a bowl - Famille Rose - and wait just ten ; smile a 
 little , recall the nose of the fairy princess , and the dainty way 
 her lip shape the word she speak . if she have not have that lucky young 
 devil of a soldier boy , one would have want to buckle her shoe , lay 
 one 's coat in the mud for she , or whatever they do in fairytale . one 
 would have want - ah ! what would one not have want ! hang that soldier 
 boy ! Leila say he be twenty - two . by George ! how old it make a man feel 
 who be rise forty , and tender on the off - fore ! no fairy princess 
 for he ! then a whiff of perfume come to his nostril ; and , look up , 
 he see Leila stand before he , in a long garment of dark silk , whence 
 her white arm peep out . 

 " another penny ? do you remember these thing , Jimmy ? the malay woman 
 use to wear they in Cape Town . you can not   think what a relief it be to 
 get out of my slave 's dress . oh ! I be so sick of nursing ! Jimmy , I want 
 to live again a little ! " 

 the garment have take fifteen year off her age , and a gardenia , just 
 where the silk cross on her breast , seem no whiter than her skin . he 
 wonder whimsically whether it have drop to she out of the dark ! 

 " live ? " he say . " why ! do not   you always ? " 

 she raise her hand so that the dark silk fall , back from the whole 
 length of those white arm . 

 " I have not   live for two year . oh , Jimmy ! help I to live a little ! 
 Life 's so short , now . " 

 her eye disturb he , strained and pathetic ; the sight of her arm ; 
 the scent of the flower disturb he ; he feel his cheek grow warm , 
 and look down . 

 she slip suddenly forward on to her knee at his foot , take his hand , 
 press it with both of her , and murmur : 

 " love I a little ! what else be there ? oh ! Jimmy , what else be there ? " 

 and with the scent of the flower , crush by their hand , stir his 
 sens , Fort think : ' ah , what else be there , in these forsake day ? ' 

 to Jimmy Fort , who have a sense of humour , and be in some sort a 
 philosopher , the haphazard way life settle thing seldom fail to seem 
 amusing . but when he walk away from Leila 's he be pensive . she be 
 a good sort , a pretty creature , a sportswoman , an enchantress ; but - she 
 be decidedly mature . and here he be - involved in help she to 
 " live " ; involve almost alarmingly , for there have be no mistake the 
 fact that she have really fall in love with he . 

 this be flattering and sweet . time be sad , and pleasure scarce , 
 but - ! the roving instinct which have keep he , from his youth up , 
 roll about the world , shy instinctively at bond , however pleasant , 
 the strength and thickness of which he could not gauge ; or , be it 
 that perhaps for the first time in his life he have be peep into 
 fairyland of late , and this affair with Leila be by no mean fairyland ? 
 he have another reason , more unconscious , for uneasiness . his heart , for 
 all his wandering , be soft , he have always find it difficult to hurt 
 anyone , especially anyone who do he the honour to love he . a sort of 
 presentiment weigh on he while he walk the moonlit street at this 
 most empty hour , when even the late taxi have cease to run . would she 
 want he to marry she ? would it be his duty , if she do ? and then he 
 find himself think of the concert , and that girl 's face , listen 
 to the tale he be tell she . ' deuced queer world , ' he think , ' the 
 way thing go ! I wonder what she would think of we , if she know - and 
 that good padre ! Phew ! ' 

 he make such very slow progress , for fear of give way in his leg , and 
 have to spend the night on a door - step , that he have plenty of time for 
 rumination ; but since it bring he no confidence whatever , he begin 
 at last to feel : ' well ; it might be a lot bad . take the good the 
 god send you and do not   fuss ! ' and suddenly he remember with extreme 
 vividness that night on the stoep at High Constantia , and think with 
 dismay : ' I could have plunge in over head and ear then ; and now - I 
 can not ! that be life all over ! Poor Leila ! I miserum , too , perhaps - who 
 know ! ' 




 IV 

 when Leila open her door to Edward Pierson , her eye be smile , and 
 her lip be soft . she seem to smile and be soft all over , and she 
 take both his hand . everything be a pleasure to she that day , even 
 the sight of this sad face . she be in love and be love again ; have a 
 present and a future once more , not only her own full past ; and she must 
 finish with Edward in half an hour , for Jimmy be come . she sit down 
 on the divan , take his hand in a sisterly way , and say : 

 " tell I , Edward ; I can see you be in trouble . what be it ? " 

 " Noel . the boy she be fond of have be kill . " 

 she drop his hand . 

 " oh , no ! poor child ! it be too cruel ! " tear start up in her grey eye , 
 and she touch they with a tiny handkerchief . " poor , poor little Noel ! 
 be she very fond of he ? " 

 " a very sudden , short engagement ; but I be afraid she take it 
 desperately to heart . I do not   know how to comfort she ; only a woman 
 could . I come to ask you : do you think she ought to go on with her work ? 
 what do you think , Leila ? I feel lost ! " 

 Leila , gaze at he , think : ' lose ? yes , you look lose , my poor 
 Edward ! ' 

 " I should let she go on , " she say : " it help ; it be the only thing that 
 do help . I will see if I can get they to let she come into the ward . 
 she ought to be in touch with suffering and the man ; that kitchen work 
 will try she awfully just now : be he very young ? " 

 " yes . they want to get marry . I be oppose to it . " 

 Leila 's lip curl ever so little . ' you would be ! ' she think . 

 " I could not   bear to think of Nollie give herself hastily , like that ; 
 they have only know each other three week . it be very hard for I , 
 Leila . and then suddenly he be send to the front . " 

 Resentment well up in Leila . the kill - joy ! as if life do not   kill joy 
 fast enough ! her cousin 's face at that moment be almost abhorrent to 
 she , its gentle perplexed goodness darken and warp by that monkish 
 look . she turn away , glance at the clock over the hearth , and 
 think : ' yes , and he would stop Jimmy and I ! he would say : " oh , no ! 
 dear Leila - you must not   love - it be sin ! " how I hate that word ! ' 

 " I think the most dreadful thing in life , " she say abruptly , " be the 
 way people suppress their natural instinct ; what they suppress in 
 themselves they make other people suppress too , if they can ; and that be 
 the cause of half the misery in this world . " 

 then at the surprise on his face at this little outburst , whose cause 
 he could not know , she add hastily : " I hope Noel will get over it 
 quickly , and find someone else . " 

 " yes . if they have be marry - how much bad it would have be . thank 
 God , they be not ! " 

 " I do not   know . they would have have an hour of bliss . even an hour of 
 bliss be worth something in these day . " 

 " to those who only believe in this ' life - perhaps . " 

 ' ten minute more ! ' she think : ' oh , why do not   he go ? ' but at that 
 very moment he get up , and instantly her heart go out to he again . 

 " I be so sorry , Edward . if I can help in any way - I will try my good with 
 Noel to - morrow ; and do come to I whenever you feel inclined . " 

 she take his hand in her ; afraid that he would sit down again , she yet 
 could not help a soft glance into his eye , and a little rush of pitying 
 warmth in the pressure of her hand . 

 Pierson smile ; the smile which always make she sorry for he . 

 " good - bye , Leila ; you be very good and kind to I . good - bye . " 

 her bosom swell with relief and compassion ; and - she let he out . 

 run upstairs again she think : ' I have   just time . what shall I put 
 on ? Poor Edward , poor Noel ! what colour do Jimmy like ? oh ! why do not 
 I keep he those ten year ago - what utter waste ! ' and , feverishly 
 adorn herself , she come back to the window , and stand there in the 
 dark to watch , while some jasmine which grow below send up its scent to 
 she . ' would I marry he ? ' she think , ' if he ask I ? but he will not 
 ask I - why should he now ? besides , I could not   bear he to feel I want 
 position or money from he . I only want love - love - love ! ' the silent 
 repetition of that word give she a wonderful sense of solidity and 
 comfort . so long as she only want love , surely he would give it . 

 a tall figure turn down past the church , come towards she . it be 
 he ! and suddenly she bethink herself . she go to the little black 
 piano , sit down , and begin to sing the song she have sing to he ten 
 year ago : " if I could be the fall dew and fall on thee all day ! " she 
 do not even look round when he come in , but continue to croon out the 
 word , conscious of he just behind her shoulder in the dark . but when 
 she have finish , she get up and throw her arm round he , strain he 
 to she , and burst into tear on his shoulder ; think of Noel and that 
 dead boy , think of the million of other boy , think of her own 
 happiness , think of those ten year waste , of how short be life , 
 and love ; think - hardly know what she think ! and Jimmy Fort , 
 very move by this emotion which he only half understand , press she 
 tightly in his arm , and kiss her wet cheek and her neck , pale and 
 warm in the darkness . 




 V 

 1 

 Noel go on with her work for a month , and then , one morning , faint 
 over a pile of dish . the noise attract attention , and Mrs. Lynch be 
 summon . 

 the sight of she lie there so deadly white tax Leila 's nerve 
 severely . but the girl revive quickly , and a cab be send for . Leila 
 go with she , and tell the driver to stop at Camelot Mansions . why take 
 her home in this state , why not save the jolting , and let she recover 
 properly ? they go upstairs arm in arm . Leila make her lie down on the 
 divan , and put a hot - water bottle to her foot . Noel be still so passive 
 and pale that even to speak to she seem a cruelty . and , go to 
 her little sideboard , Leila stealthily extract a pint bottle of some 
 champagne which Jimmy Fort have send in , and take it with two glass and 
 a corkscrew into her bedroom . she drink a little herself , and come out 
 bear a glass to the girl . Noel shake her head , and her eye seem 
 to say : " do you really think I be so easily mend ? " but Leila have be 
 through too much in her time to despise earthly remedy , and she hold 
 it to the girl 's lip until she drink . it be excellent champagne , and , 
 since Noel have never yet touch alcohol , have an instantaneous effect . 
 her eye brighten ; little red spot come up in her cheek . and 
 suddenly she roll over and bury her face deep in a cushion . with 
 her short hair , she look so like a child lie there , that Leila kneel 
 down , stroke her head , and say : " there , there ; my love ! there , 
 there ! " 

 at last the girl raise herself ; now that the pallid , masklike despair 
 of the last month be break , she seem on fire , and her face have a 
 wild look . she withdraw herself from Leila 's touch , and , cross she 
 arm tightly across her chest , say : 

 " I can not   bear it ; I can not   sleep . I want he back ; I hate life - I hate 
 the world . we have not   do anything - only just love each other . God 
 like punish ; just because we love each other ; we have only one day 
 to love each other - only one day - only one ! " 

 Leila could see the long white throat above those rigid arm strain 
 and swallow ; it give she a choky feeling to watch it . the voice , 
 uncannily dainty for all the wildness of the word and face , go on : 

 " I will not   - I do not   want to live . if there be another life , I shall go to 
 he . and if there be not   - it be just sleep . " 

 Leila put out her hand to ward of these wild wandering . like most woman 
 who live simply the life of their sens and emotion , she be orthodox ; 
 or rather never speculate on such thing . 

 " tell I about yourself and he , " she say . 

 Noel fasten her great eye on her cousin . " we love each other ; and 
 child be bear , be not   they , after you have   love ? but mine will not   be ! " 
 from the look on her face rather than from her word , the full reality 
 of her meaning come to Leila , vanish , come again . nonsense ! but - what 
 an awful thing , if true ! that which have always seem to she such an 
 exaggerated occurrence in the common walk of life - why ! now , it be 
 a tragedy ! instinctively she raise herself and put her arm round the 
 girl . 

 " my poor dear ! " she say ; " you be fancy thing ! " 

 the colour have fade out of Noel 's face , and , with her head throw back 
 and her eyelid half - closed , she look like a scornful young ghost . 

 " if it be - I shall not   live . I do not   mean to - it be easy to die . I do not 
 mean daddy to know . " 

 " oh ! my dear , my dear ! " be all Leila could stammer . 

 " be it wrong , Leila ? " 

 " Wrong ? I do not   know - wrong ? if it really be so - it be - unfortunate . 
 but surely , surely - you be mistaken ? " 

 Noel shake her head . " I do it so that we should belong to each other . 
 nothing could have take he from I . " 

 Leila catch at the girl 's word . 

 " then , my dear - he have not   quite go from you , you see ? " 

 Noel 's lip form a " no " which be inaudible . " but daddy ! " she 
 whisper . 

 Edward 's face come before Leila so vividly that she could hardly see 
 the girl for the tortured shape of it . then the hedonist in she revolt 
 against that ascetic vision . her worldly judgment condemn and deplore 
 this calamity , her instinct could not help applaud that hour of life 
 and love , snatch out of the jaw of death . " need he ever know ? " she 
 say . 

 " I could never lie to daddy . but it do not   matter . why should one go on 
 living , when life be rotten ? " 

 outside the sun be shin brightly , though it be late October . Leila 
 get up from her knee . she stand at the window thinking hard . 

 " my dear , " she say at last , " you must not   get morbid . look at I ! I have 
 have two husband , and - and - well , a pretty stormy up and down time of 
 it ; and I daresay I have   get lot of trouble before I . but I be not go 
 to cave in . nor must you . the Piersons have plenty of pluck ; you must not 
 be a traitor to your blood . that be the last thing . your boy would have 
 tell you to stick it . these be your ' trench , ' and you be not go to 
 be down , be you ? " 

 after she have speak there be a long silence , before Noel say : 

 " give I a cigarette , Leila . " 

 Leila produce the little flat case she carry . 

 " that be brave , " she say . " nothing be incurable at your age . only one 
 thing 's incurable - get old . " 

 Noel laugh . " that be curable too , be not   it ? " 

 " not without surrender . " 

 again there be a silence , while the blue fume from two cigarette 
 fast - smoke , rise towards the low ceiling . then Noel get up from the 
 divan , and go over to the piano . she be still in her hospital dress 
 of lilac - coloured linen , and while she stand there touch the 
 key , play a chord now , and then , Leila 's heart feel hollow from 
 compassion ; she be so happy herself just now , and this child so very 
 wretched ! 

 " play to I , " she say ; " no - do not ; I will play to you . " and sit down , 
 she begin to play and sing a little french song , whose first line run : 
 " si on est jolie , jolie comme vous . " it be soft , gay , charming . if 
 the girl cry , so much the well . but Noel do not cry . she seem 
 suddenly to have recover all her self - possession . she speak calmly , 
 answer Leila 's question without emotion , and say she would go home . 
 Leila go out with she , and walk some way in the direction of her 
 home ; distressed , but frankly at a loss . at the bottom of Portland 
 Place Noel stop and say : " I be quite all right now , Leila ; thank you 
 awfully . I shall just go home and lie down . and I shall come to - morrow , 
 the same as usual . goodbye ! " Leila could only grasp the girl 's hand , 
 and say : " my dear , that be splendid . there be many a slip - besides , it be 
 war - time . " 

 with that saying , enigmatic even to herself , she watch the girl 
 move slowly away ; and turn back herself towards her hospital , with a 
 disturbed and compassionate heart . 


 2 

 but Noel do not go east ; she walk down Regent Street . she have 
 receive a certain measure of comfort , be steady by her experienced 
 cousin 's vitality , and the new thought suggest by those word : " he 
 have not   quite go from you , have he ? " " besides , it be war - time . " Leila 
 have speak freely , too , and the physical ignorance in which the girl have 
 be grope these last week be now remove . like most proud nature , 
 she do not naturally think much about the opinion of other people ; 
 besides , she know nothing of the world , its feeling and judgment . she 
 nightmare be the thought of her father 's horror and grief . she try to 
 lessen that nightmare by remember his opposition to her marriage , and 
 the resentment she have feel . he have never realise , never understand , 
 how she and Cyril love . now , if she be really go to have a 
 child , it would be Cyril 's - Cyril 's son - Cyril over again . the instinct 
 strong than reason , refinement , tradition , upbringing , which have 
 push she on in such haste to make sure of union - the irrepressible 
 pulse of life face with annihilation - seem to revive within she , 
 and make her terrible secret almost precious . she have read about 
 " war baby " in the paper , read with a dull curiosity ; but now the 
 atmosphere , as it be , of those writing be illumine for she . these 
 baby be wrong , be a " problem , " and yet , behind all that , she 
 seem now to know that people be glad of they ; they make up , they 
 fill the gap . perhaps , when she have one , she would be proud , secretly 
 proud , in spite of everyone , in spite of her father ! they have try to 
 kill Cyril - God and everyone ; but they have not   be able , he be alive 
 within she ! a glow come into her face , walk among the busy shopping 
 crowd , and people turn to look at she ; she have that appearance of 
 see no one , nothing , which be strange and attractive to those who 
 have a moment to spare from contemplation of their own affair . fully 
 two hour she wander thus , before go in , and only lose that exalt 
 feeling when , in her own little room , she have take up his photograph , 
 and be sit on her bed gaze at it . she have a bad breakdown then . 
 lock in there , she lie on her bed , crying , dreadfully lonely , till she 
 fall asleep exhaust , with the tear - stain photograph clutched in her 
 twitch finger . she wake with a start . it be dark , and someone be 
 knock on her door . 

 " Miss Noel ! " 

 childish perversity keep she silent . why could not   they leave she alone ? 
 they would leave she alone if they know . then she hear another kind of 
 knock , and her father 's voice : 

 " Nollie ! Nollie ! " 

 she scramble up , and open . he look scared , and her heart smite she . 

 " it be all right , daddy ; I be asleep . " 

 " my dear , I be sorry , but dinner 's ready . " 

 " I do not   want any dinner ; I think I will go to bed . " 

 the frown between his brow deepen . 

 " you should not   lock your door , Nollie : I be quite frightened . I go 
 round to the hospital to bring you home , and they tell I about your 
 fainting . I want you to see a doctor . " 

 Noel shake her head vigorously . " oh , no ! it be nothing ! " 

 " nothing ? to faint like that ? come , my child . to please I . " he take she 
 face in his hand . Noel shrink away . 

 " no , Daddy . I will not   see a doctor . Extravagance in wartime ! I will not . it be 
 no good try to make I . I will come down if you like ; I shall be all 
 right to - morrow . " 

 with this Pierson have to be content ; but , often that evening , she see 
 he look at her anxiously . and when she go up , he come out of his 
 study , follow to her room , and insist on light her fire . kiss 
 she at the door , he say very quietly : 

 " I wish I could be a mother to you , my child ! " 

 for a moment it flash through Noel : ' he know ! ' then , by the puzzle 
 look on his face , she know that he do not . if only he do know ; what 
 a weight it would be off her mind ! but she answer quietly too ; " good 
 night , daddy dear ! " kiss he , and shut the door . 

 she sit down before the little new fire , and spread her hand out to it ; 
 all be so cold and wintry in her heart . and the firelight flicker on 
 her face , where shadow lay thick under her eye , for all the roundness 
 of her cheek , and on her slim pale hand , and the supple grace of her 
 young body . and out in the night , cloud race over the moon , which have 
 come full once more . 




 VI 


 1 

 Pierson go back to his study , and write to Gratian . 


 " if you can get leave for a few day , my dear , I want you at home . I be 
 trouble about Nollie . ever since that disaster happen to she she have 
 be get pale ; and to - day she faint . she will not   see a doctor , but 
 perhaps you could get she to see George . if you come up , he will surely 
 be able to run up to we for a day or two . if not , you must take she 
 down to he at the sea . I have just see the news of your second cousin 
 Charlie Pierson 's death ; he be kill in one of the last attack on 
 the Somme ; he be nephew of my cousin Leila whom , as you know , Noel see 
 every day at her hospital . Bertram have the D. S. O. I have be less 
 hard - press lately ; Lauder have be home on leave and have take some 
 Services for I . and now the colder weather have come , I be feel much 
 fresher . try your good to come . I be seriously concerned for our beloved 
 child . 

 " your affectionate father 

 " EDWARD PIERSON . " 


 Gratian answer that she could get week - end leave , and would come on 
 Friday . he meet she at the station , and they drive thence straight to the 
 hospital , to pick up Noel . Leila come to they in the waiting - room , and 
 Pierson , think they would talk more freely about Noel 's health if 
 he leave they alone , go into the recreation room , and stand watch 
 a game of bagatelle between two convalescent . when he return to the 
 little sitting - room they be still stand by the hearth , talk in 
 low voice . Gratian must surely have be stoop over the fire , for 
 her face be red , almost swollen , and her eye look as if she have 
 scorch they . 

 Leila say lightly : 

 " well , Edward , be not   the man delightful ? when be we go to another 
 concert together ? " 

 she , too , be flushed and look almost young . 

 " ah ! if we could do the thing we want to . 

 " that be very pretty , Edward ; but you should , you know - for a tonic . " he 
 shake his head and smile . 

 " you be a temptress , Leila . will you let Nollie know , please , that we 
 can take she back with we ? can you let she off to - morrow ? " 

 " for as long as you like ; she want a rest . I have   be talk to 
 Gratian . we ought not   to have let she go on after a shock like that - my 
 fault , I be afraid . I think that work might be good . " 

 Pierson be conscious of Gratian walk past he out of the room . he 
 hold out his hand to Leila , and follow . a small noise occur behind 
 he such as a woman make when she have put a foot through her own skirt , 
 or have other powerful cause for dismay . then he see Noel in the hall , 
 and be vaguely aware of be the centre of a triangle of woman whose 
 eye be play catch - glance . his daughter kiss each other ; and he 
 become seat between they in the taxi . the most unobservant of man , he 
 part from they in the hall without have perceive anything except 
 that they be rather silent ; and , go to his study , he take up a life 
 of Sir Thomas more . there be a passage therein which he itch to show 
 George Laird , who be come up that evening . 

 Gratian and Noel have mount the stair with lip tight set , and eye 
 avert ; both be very pale . when they reach the door of Gratian 's 
 room the room which have be their mother 's - Noel be for pass on , 
 but Gratian catch she by the arm , and say : " come in . " the fire be 
 burn brightly in there , and the two sister stand in front of it , 
 one on each side , their hand clutch the mantel - shelf , star at the 
 flame . at last Noel put one hand in front of her eye , and say : 

 " I ask she to tell you . " 

 Gratian make the movement of one who be grip by two strong emotion , 
 and long to surrender to one or to the other . 

 " it be too horrible , " be all she say . 

 Noel turn towards the door . 

 " Stop , Nollie ! " 

 Noel stop with her hand on the door knob . " I do not   want to be 
 forgive and sympathise with . I just want to be let alone . " 

 " how can you be let alone ? " 

 the tide of misery surge up in Noel , and she cry out passionately : 

 " I hate sympathy from people who can not   understand . I do not   want 
 anyone 's . I can always go away , and lose myself . " 

 the word " can not   understand " give Gratian a shock . 

 " I can understand , " she say . 

 " you can not ; you never see he . you never see - " her lip quiver so 
 that she have to stop and bite they , to keep back a rush of tear . 

 " besides you would never have do it yourself . " 

 Gratian go towards she , but stop , and sit down on the bed . it be 
 true . she would never have do it herself ; it be just that which , 
 for all her longing to help her sister , ice her love and sympathy . how 
 terrible , wretched , humiliating ! her own sister , her only sister , in 
 the position of all those poor , badly bring up girl , who forget 
 themselves ! and her father - their father ! till that moment she have 
 hardly think of he , too preoccupy by the shock to her own pride . 
 the word : " Dad ! " be force from she . 

 Noel shudder . 

 " that boy ! " say Gratian suddenly ; " I can not   forgive he . if you do not 
 know - he do . it be - it be - " she stop at the sight of Noel 's face . 

 " I do know , " she say . " it be I. he be my husband , as much as your 
 be . if you say a word against he , I will never speak to you again : 
 I be glad , and you would be , if you be go to have one . what be the 
 difference , except that you have   have luck , and I - have not . " her lip 
 quiver again , and she be silent . 

 Gratian star up at she . she have a longing for George - to know what he 
 think and feel . 

 " do you mind if I tell George ? " she say . 

 Noel shake her head . " no ! not now . tell anybody . " and suddenly the 
 misery behind the mask of her face go straight to Gratian 's heart . she 
 get up and put her arm round her sister . 

 " Nollie dear , do not   look like that ! " 

 Noel suffer the embrace without response , but when it be over , go 
 to her own room . 

 Gratian stay , sorry , sore and vex , uncertain , anxious . her pride be 
 deeply wound , her heart tear ; she be angry with herself . why could not 
 she have be more sympathetic ? and yet , now that Noel be no long 
 there , she again condemn the dead . what he have do be unpardonable . 
 Nollie be such - a child ! he have commit sacrilege . if only George 
 would come , and she could talk it all out with he ! she , who have marry 
 for love and known passion , have insight enough to feel that Noel 's love 
 have be deep - so far as anything , of course , could be deep in such a 
 child . Gratian be at the mature age of twenty . but to have forget 
 herself like that ! and this boy ! if she have know he , that feeling 
 might have be mitigate by the personal element , so important to all 
 human judgment ; but never have see he , she think of his conduct as 
 " caddish . " and she know that this be , and would be , the trouble between 
 she and her sister . however she might disguise it , Noel would feel that 
 judgment underneath . 

 she strip off her nurse 's garb , put on an evening frock , and fidget 
 about the room . anything rather than go down and see her father again 
 before she must . this , which have happen , be beyond word terrible for 
 he ; she dread the talk with he about Noel 's health which would have 
 to come . she could say nothing , of course , until Noel wish ; and , very 
 truthful by nature , the idea , of have to act a lie distress she . 

 she go down at last , and find they both in the drawing - room already ; 
 Noel in a frilly evening frock , sit by the fire with her chin on 
 her hand , while her father be read out the war news from the evening 
 paper . at sight of that cool , dainty , girlish figure brood over the 
 fire , and of her father 's worn face , the tragedy of this business thrust 
 itself on she with redoubled force . poor Dad ! Poor Nollie ! Awful ! then 
 Noel turn , and give a little shake of her head , and her eye say , 
 almost as plainly as lip could have say it : ' silence ! ' Gratian nod , 
 and come forward to the fire . and so begin one of those calm , domestic 
 evening , which cover sometimes such depth of heartache . 


 2 

 Noel stay up until her father go to bed , then go upstairs at 
 once . she have evidently determine that they should not talk about she . 
 Gratian sit on alone , wait for her husband ! it be nearly midnight 
 when he come , and she do not tell he the family news till next 
 morning . he receive it with a curious little grunt . Gratian see his 
 eye contract , as they might have , perhaps , look at some bad and 
 complicated wound , and then stare steadily at the ceiling . though they 
 have be marry over a year , she do not yet know what he think about 
 many thing , and she wait with a queer sinking at her heart . this 
 skeleton in the family cupboard be a test of his affection for herself , 
 a test of the quality of the man she have marry . he do not speak for 
 a little , and her anxiety grow . then his hand seek her , and give it a 
 hard squeeze . 

 " poor little Nollie ! this be a case for Mark Tapleyism . but cheer up , 
 Gracie ! we will get she through somehow . " 

 " but father ! it be impossible to keep it from he , and impossible to 
 tell he ! oh George ! I never know what family pride be till now . it be 
 incredible . that wretched boy ! " 

 " ' De mortuis . ' come , Gracie ! in the midst of death we be in life ! 
 Nollie be a plumb little idiot . but it be the war - the war ! your father 
 must get use to it ; it be a rare chance for his Christianity . " 

 " Dad will be as sweet as anything - that be what make it so horrible ! " 

 George Laird redouble his squeeze . " quite right ! the old - fashioned 
 father could let himself go . but need he know ? we can get she away from 
 London , and later on , we must manage somehow . if he do hear , we must 
 make he feel that Nollie be ' do her bit . ' " 

 Gratian withdraw her hand . " do not ! " she say in a muffled voice . 

 George Laird turn and look at she . he be greatly upset himself , 
 realise perhaps more truly than his young wife the violence of this 
 disaster ; he be quite capable , too , of feel how deeply she be 
 stir and hurt ; but , a bear pragmatist , confront life always in the 
 experimental spirit , he be impatient of the : " how awful ! " attitude . 
 and this streak of her father 's ascetic traditionalism in Gratian always 
 rouse in he a wish to break it up . if she have not be his wife he 
 would have admit at once that he might just as well try and alter the 
 bone - formation of her head , as break down such a fundamental trait of 
 character , but , be his wife , he naturally consider alteration as 
 possible as put a new staircase in a house , or throw two room 
 into one . and , take she in his arm , he say : " I know ; but it will all 
 come right , if we put a good face on it . shall I talk to Nollie ? " 

 Gratian assent , from the desire to be able to say to her father : 
 " George be see she ! " and so stay the need for a discussion . but the 
 whole thing seem to she more and more a calamity which nothing could 
 lessen or smooth away . 

 George Laird have plenty of cool courage , invaluable in man who have to 
 inflict as well as to alleviate pain , but he do not like his mission 
 " a little bit " as he would have say ; and he propose a walk because he 
 dread a scene . Noel accept for the same reason . she like George , 
 and with the disinterested detachment of a sister - in - law , and the 
 shrewdness of extreme youth , know he perhaps well than do his wife . 
 she be sure , at all event , of be neither condemn nor sympathise 
 with . 

 they might have go , of course , in any direction , but choose to make for 
 the City . such deep decision be subconscious . they seek , no doubt , 
 a dry , unemotional region ; or perhaps one where George , who be in 
 uniform , might rest his arm from the automatic - toy game which the 
 military play . they have reach Cheapside before he be conscious to 
 the full of the bizarre nature of this walk with his pretty young 
 sister - in - law among all the bustling , black - coat mob of money - maker . 
 ' I wish the devil we have not   come out ! ' he think ; ' it would have be 
 easy indoor , after all . ' 

 he clear his throat , however , and squeeze her arm gently , begin : 
 " Gratian 's tell I , Nollie . the great thing be to keep your spirit up , 
 and not worry . " 

 " I suppose you could not   cure I . " 

 the word , in that delicate spurning voice , absolutely stagger George ; 
 but he say quickly : 

 " out of the question , Nollie ; impossible ! what be you think of ? " 

 " daddy . " 

 the word : " D - n daddy ! " rise to his tooth ; he bite they off , and say : 
 " bless he ! we shall have to see to all that . do you really want to keep 
 it from he ? it must be one way or the other ; no use conceal it , if 
 it be to come out later . " 

 " no . " 

 he steal a look at she . she be gaze straight before she . how damnably 
 young she be , how pretty ! a lump come up in his throat . 

 " I should not   do anything yet , " he say ; " too early . later on , if you would 
 like I to tell he . but that be entirely up to you , my dear ; he need 
 never know . " 

 " no . " 

 he could not follow her thought . then she say : 

 " Gratian condemn Cyril . do not   let she . I will not   have he badly think 
 of . it be my doing . I want to make sure of he . " 

 George answer stoutly : 

 " Gracie 's upset , of course , but she will soon be all right . you must not 
 let it come between you . the thing you have   get to keep steadily before 
 you be that life be a huge wide adaptable thing . look at all these 
 people ! there be hardly one of they who have not   get now , or have not   have , 
 some personal difficulty or trouble before they as big as yours almost ; 
 big perhaps . and here they be as lively as flea . that be what make 
 the fascination of life - the jolly irony of it all . it would do you good 
 to have a turn in France , and see yourself in proportion to the whole . " 
 he feel her finger suddenly slip under his arm , and go on with 
 great confidence : 

 " Life be go to be the important thing in the future , Nollie ; not 
 comfort and cloister virtue and security ; but living , and pressure to 
 the square inch . do you twig ? all the old hard - and - fast tradition and 
 drag on life be in the melting - pot . death 's boil their bone , and 
 they will make excellent stock for the new soup . when you prune and dock 
 thing , the sap flow quick . regret and repining and repression 
 be go out of fashion ; we shall have no time or use for they in the 
 future . you be go to make life - well , that be something to be thankful 
 for , anyway . you have   keep Cyril Morland alive . and - well , you know , we have 
 all be bear ; some of we properly , and some improperly , and there be not 
 a ha'porth of difference in the value of the article , or the trouble of 
 bring it into the world . the cheerier you be the well your child 
 will be , and that be all you have   get to think about . you need not   begin to 
 trouble at all for another couple of month , at least ; after that , just 
 let we know where you would like to go , and I will arrange it somehow . " 

 she look round at he , and under that young , clear , brood gaze he 
 have the sudden uncomfortable feeling of have speak like a charlatan . 
 have he really touch the heart of the matter ? what good be his 
 generality to this young , fastidiously nurture girl , bring up 
 to tell the truth , by a father so old - fashioned and devote , whom she 
 love ? it be George 's nature , too , to despise word ; and the condition 
 of his life these last two year have give he a sort of horror of those 
 who act by talk . he feel inclined to say : ' do not   pay the slight 
 attention to I ; it be all humbug ; what will be will be , and there be an 
 end of it : 

 then she say quietly : 

 " shall I tell Daddy or not ? " 

 he want to say : " no , " but somehow could not . after all , the 
 straightforward course be probably the good . for this would have to be 
 a lifelong concealment . it be impossible to conceal a thing for ever ; 
 soon or later he would find out . but the doctor rise up in he , and he 
 say : 

 " do not   go to meet trouble , Nollie ; it will be time enough in two month . 
 then tell he , or let I . " 

 she shake her head . " no ; I will , if it be to be do . " 

 he put his hand on her , within his arm , and give it a squeeze . 

 " what shall I do till then ? " she ask . 

 " take a week 's complete rest , and then go on where you be . " 

 Noel be silent a minute , then say : " yes ; I will . " 

 they speak no more on the subject , and George exert himself to talk 
 about hospital experience , and that phenomenon , the british soldier . 
 but just before they reach home he say : 

 " look here , Nollie ! if you be not ashamed of yourself , no one will be 
 ashamed of you . if you put ash on your own head , your fellow - being 
 will , assist you ; for of such be their charity . " 

 and , receive another of those clear , brood look , he leave she with 
 the thought : ' a lonely child ! ' 




 VII 

 Noel go back to her hospital after a week 's rest . George have do more 
 for she than he suspect , for his saying : " life be a huge wide adaptable 
 thing ! " have stick in her mind . do it matter what happen to she ? and 
 she use to look into the face of the people she meet , and wonder what 
 be absorb they . what secret grief and joy be they carry 
 about with they ? the loneliness of her own life now force she to this 
 speculation concern other , for she be extraordinarily lonely ; 
 Gratian and George be back at work , her father must be keep at bay ; 
 with Leila she feel ill at ease , for the confession have hurt her pride ; 
 and family friend and acquaintance of all sort she shun like the 
 plague . the only person she do not succeed in avoid be Jimmy Fort , 
 who come in one evening after dinner , bring she a large bunch of 
 hothouse violet . but then , he do not seem to matter - too new an 
 acquaintance , too detach . something he say make she aware that he 
 have hear of her loss , and that the violet be a token of sympathy . 
 he seem awfully kind that evening , tell she " tale of Araby , " and 
 say nothing which would shock her father . it be wonderful to be 
 a man and roll about the world as he have , and see all life , and queer 
 place , and people - Chinamen , and Gauchos , and boer , and Mexicans . it 
 give she a kind of thirst . and she like to watch his brown , humorous 
 face ; which seem make of dried leather . it give she the feeling that 
 life and experience be all that matter , do and see thing ; it 
 make her own trouble seem small ; less important . she squeeze his hand 
 when she say good night : " thank you for my violet and for come ; 
 it be awfully kind of you ! I wish I could have adventure ! " and he 
 answer : " you will , my dear fairy princess ! " he say it queerly and 
 very kindly . 

 Fairy Princess ! what a funny thing to call she ! if he have only know ! 

 there be not many adventure to be have in those region where she 
 wash up . not much " wide and adaptable life " to take her thought off 
 herself . but on her journey to and from the hospital she have more than 
 one odd little experience . one morning she notice a poorly dress 
 woman with a red and swollen face , flap along Regent Street like a 
 wound bird , and bite strangely at her hand . hear her groan , Noel 
 ask she what the matter be . the woman hold out the hand . " oh ! " she 
 moan , " I be scrubbin ' the floor and I get this great needle stick 
 through my ' and , and it be break off , and I can not   get it out . oh ! oh ! " 
 she bit at the needle - end , not quite visible , but almost within reach 
 of tooth , and suddenly go very white . in dismay , Noel put an arm round 
 she , and turn she into a fine chemist 's shop . several lady be in 
 there , buy perfume , and they look with acerbity at this disorder 
 dirty female entering among they . Noel go up to a man behind the 
 counter . " please give I something quick , for this poor woman , I think 
 she be go to faint . she be run a needle through her hand , and can not   get 
 it out . " the man give she ' something quick , " and Noel push past two of 
 the dame back to where the woman be sit . she be still obstinately 
 bite at her hand , and suddenly her chin fly up , and there , between 
 her tooth , be the needle . she take it from they with her other hand , 
 stick it proudly in the front of her dress , and out tumble the word : 
 " oh ! there - I have   get it ! " 

 when she have swallow the draught , she look round she , bewilder , 
 and say : 

 " thank you kindly , miss ! " and shuffle out . Noel pay for the draught , 
 and follow ; and , behind she , the shin shop seem to exhale a 
 perfume breath of relief . 

 " you can not   go back to work , " she say to the woman . " where do you live ? " 

 " ' ornsey , miss . " 

 " you must take a ' bus and go straight home , and put your hand at 
 once into weak Condy 's fluid and water . it be swell . here 's five 
 shilling . " 

 " yes , miss ; thank you , miss , I be sure . it be very kind of you . it do 
 ache cruel . " 

 " if it be not well this afternoon , you must go to a doctor . promise ! " 

 " oh , dear , yes . ' Ere 's my ' bus . thank you kindly , miss . " 

 Noel see she bear away , still suck at her dirty swollen hand . she 
 walk on in a glow of love for the poor woman , and hate for the lady 
 in the chemist 's shop , and forget her own trouble till she have almost 
 reach the hospital . 

 another November day , a Saturday , leave early , she walk to Hyde 
 Park . the plane - tree be just at the height of their spot beauty . 
 few - very few - yellow leaf still hung ; and the slender pretty tree 
 seem rejoice in their freedom from summer foliage . all their 
 delicate bough and twig be shake and dance in the wind ; and 
 their rain - wash leopard - like body have a lithe un - english gaiety . 
 Noel pass down their line , and seat herself on a bench . close by , an 
 artist be paint . his easel be only some three yard away from she , 
 and she could see the picture ; a vista of the Park Lane house through , 
 the gay plane - tree screen . he be a tall man , about forty , evidently 
 foreign , with a thin , long , oval , beardless face , high brow , large grey 
 eye which look as if he suffer from headache and live much within 
 himself . he cast many glance at she , and , pursuant of her new interest 
 in " life " she watch he discreetly ; a little startled however , when , 
 take off his broad - brim squash hat , he say in a broken accent : 

 " forgive I the liberty I take , mademoiselle , but would you so very 
 kindly allow I to make a sketch of you sit there ? I work very 
 quick . I beg you will let I . I be belgian , and have no manner , you 
 see . " and he smile . 

 " if you like , " say Noel . 

 " I thank you very much : " 

 he shift his easel , and begin to draw . she feel flattered , and a 
 little fluttered . he be so pale , and have a curious , half - feed look , 
 which move she . 

 " have you be long in England ? " she say presently . 

 " ever since the first month of the war . " 

 " do you like it ? " 

 " I be very homesick at first . but I live in my picture ; there be 
 wonderful thing in London . " 

 " why do you want to sketch I ? " 

 the painter smile again . " Mademoiselle , youth be so mysterious . those 
 young tree I have be paint mean so much more than the old big 
 tree . your eye be see thing that have not yet happen . there be 
 fate in they , and a look of defend we other from see it . we 
 have not such face in my country ; we be simple ; we do not defend our 
 expression . the English be very mysterious . we be like child to 
 they . yet in some way you be like child to we . you be not people 
 of the world at all . you English have be good to we , but you do not 
 like we . " 

 " and I suppose you do not like we , either ? " 

 he smile again , and she notice how white his tooth be . 

 " well , not very much . the English do thing from duty , but their heart 
 they keep to themselves . and their art - well , that be really amusing ! " 

 " I do not   know much about art , " Noel murmur . 

 " it be the world to I , " say the painter , and be silent , draw with 
 increase pace and passion . 

 " it be so difficult to get subject , " he remark abruptly . " I can not 
 afford to pay model , and they be not fond of I paint out of door . 
 if I have always a subject like you ! you - you have a grief , have you 
 not ? " 

 at that startling little question , Noel look up , frown . 

 " everybody have , now . " 

 the painter grasp his chin ; his eye have suddenly become tragical . 

 " yes , " he say , " everybody . Tragedy be daily bread . I have lose my 
 family ; they be in Belgium . how they live I do not know . " 

 " I be sorry ; very sorry , too , if we be not   nice to you , here . we ought to 
 be . " 

 he shrug his shoulder . " what would you have ? we be different . that 
 be unpardonable . an artist be always lonely , too ; he have a skin few 
 than other people , and he see thing that they do not . People do not 
 like you to be different . if ever in your life you act differently from 
 other , you will find it so , mademoiselle . " 

 Noel feel herself flush . be he read her secret ? his eye have such 
 a peculiar , secondsighte look . 

 " have you nearly finish ? " she ask . 

 " no , mademoiselle ; I could go on for hour ; but I do not wish to keep 
 you . it be cold for you , sit there . " 

 Noel get up . " may I look ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 she do not quite recognise herself - who do ? - but she see a face which 
 affect she oddly , of a girl look at something which be , and yet 
 be not , in front of she . 

 " my name be lavendie , " the painter say ; " my wife and I live here , " and 
 he give she a card . 

 Noel could not help answer : " my name be Noel Pierson ; I live with my 
 father ; here be the address " - she find her case , and fish out a card . 
 " my father be a clergyman ; would you care to come and see he ? he love 
 music and painting . " 

 " it would be a great pleasure ; and perhaps I might be allow to paint 
 you . alas ! I have no studio . " 

 Noel draw back . " I be afraid that I work in a hospital all day , and - and 
 I do not   want to be paint , thank you . but , daddy would like to meet 
 you , I be sure . " 

 the painter bow again ; she see that he be hurt . 

 " of course I can see that you be a very fine painter , " she say quickly ; 
 " only - only - I do not   want to , you see . perhaps you would like to paint 
 daddy ; he be get a most interesting face . " 

 the painter smile . " he be your father , mademoiselle . may I ask you one 
 question ? why do you not want to be paint ? " 

 " because - because I do not , I be afraid . " she hold out her hand . the 
 painter bow over it . " Au revoir , mademoiselle . " 

 " thank you , " say Noel ; " it be awfully interesting . " and she walk 
 away . the sky have become full of cloud round the westerly sun ; and 
 the foreign crinkle tracery of the plane - tree branch against that 
 french - grey , golden - edge mass , be very lovely . Beauty , and the 
 trouble of other , soothe she . she feel sorry for the painter , but 
 his eye see too much ! and his word : " if ever you act differently 
 from other , " make she feel he uncanny . be it true that people 
 always dislike and condemn those who act differently ? if her old 
 school - fellow now know what be before she , how would they treat she ? 
 in her father 's study hang a little reproduction of a tiny picture 
 in the Louvre , a " rape of Europa , " by an unknown painter - a humorous 
 delicate thing , of an enrapture ; fair - haired girl mount on a prance 
 white bull , cross a shallow stream , while on the bank all her white 
 girl - companion be gather , turn half - sour , half - envious face 
 away from that too - fearful spectacle , while one of they try with timid 
 desperation to mount astride of a sitting cow , and follow . the face of 
 the girl on the bull have once be compare by someone with her own . 
 she think of this picture now , and see her school fellow - a throng 
 of shocked and wonder girl . suppose one of they have be in her 
 position ! ' should I have be turn my face away , like the rest ? I 
 would not   no , I would not , ' she think ; ' I should have understand ! ' 
 but she know there be a kind of false emphasis in her thought . 
 instinctively she feel the painter right . one who act differently from 
 other , be lose . 

 she tell her father of the encounter , add : 

 " I expect he will come , Daddy . " 

 Pierson answer dreamily : " poor fellow , I shall be glad to see he if 
 he do . " 

 " and you will sit to he , will not   you ? " 

 " my dear - I ? " 

 " he be lonely , you know , and people be not   nice to he . be not   it hateful 
 that people should hurt other , because they be foreign or different ? " 

 she see his eye open with mild surprise , and go on : " I know you think 
 people be charitable , Daddy , but they be not , of course . " 

 " that be not exactly charitable , Nollie . " 

 " you know they be not . I think sin often just mean do thing 
 differently . it be not real sin when it only hurt yourself ; but that 
 do not   prevent people condemn you , do it ? " 

 " I do not   know what you mean , Nollie . " 

 Noel bite her lip , and murmur : " be you sure we be really Christians , 
 daddy ? " 

 the question be so startling , from his own daughter , that Pierson take 
 refuge in an attempt at wit . " I should like notice of that question , 
 Nollie , as they say in Parliament . " 

 " that mean you do not . " 

 Pierson flush . " we be fallible enough ; but , do not   get such idea into 
 your head , my child . there be a lot of rebellious talk and write in 
 these day .... " 

 Noel clasp her hand behind her head . " I think , " she say , look 
 straight before she , and speak to the air , " that Christianity be what 
 you do , not what you think or say . and I do not   believe people can be 
 Christians when they act like other - I mean , when they join together to 
 judge and hurt people . " 

 Pierson rise and pace the room . " you have not see enough of life to 
 talk like that , " he say . but Noel go on : 

 " one of the man in her hospital tell Gratian about the treatment of 
 conscientious objector - it be horrible . why do they treat they like 
 that , just because they disagree ? Captain Fort say it be fear which 
 make people bully . but how can it be fear when they be hundred to 
 one ? he say man have domesticate his animal but have never succeed in 
 domesticate himself . man must be a wild beast , you know , or the world 
 could not   be so awfully brutal . I do not   see much difference between be 
 brutal for good reason , and be brutal for bad one . " 

 Pierson look down at she with a troubled smile . there be something 
 fantastic to he in this sudden philosophising by one whom he have 
 watch grow up from a tiny thing . out of the mouth of babe and 
 suckling - sometimes ! but then the young generation be always something 
 of a seal book to he ; his sensitive shyness , and , still more , his 
 cloth , place a sort of invisible barrier between he and the heart of 
 other , especially the young . there be so many thing of which he be 
 compel to disapprove , or which at least he could not   discuss . and they 
 know it too well . until these last few month he have never realise that 
 his own daughter have remain as undiscovered by he as the interior of 
 Brazil . and now that he perceive this , he be bewilder , yet could not 
 imagine how to get on term with they . 

 and he stand look at Noel , intensely puzzle , suspect nothing of 
 the hard fact which be alter her - vaguely jealous , anxious , pained . 
 and when she have go up to bed , he roam up and down the room a long 
 time , think . he long for a friend to confide in , and consult ; but 
 he know no one . he shrink from they all , as too downright , bluff , and 
 active ; too worldly and unaesthetic ; or too stiff and narrow . amongst 
 the young man in his profession he be often aware of face which 
 attract he , but one could not confide deep personal question to man 
 half one 's age . but of his own generation , or his elder , he know not 
 one to whom he could have go . 




 VIII 


 Leila be deep in her new draught of life . when she fall in love it have 
 always be over head and ear , and so far her passion have always burn 
 itself out before that of her partner . this have be , of course , a great 
 advantage to she . not that Leila have ever expect her passion to burn 
 themselves out . when she fall in love she have always think it be for 
 always . this time she be sure it be , sure than she have ever be . 
 Jimmy Fort seem to she the man she have be look for all her life . 
 he be not so good - look as either Farie or Lynch , but beside he 
 these other seem to she now almost ridiculous . indeed they do not 
 figure at all , they shrink , they wither , they be husk , together 
 with the other for whom she have know pass weakness . there be 
 only one man in the world for she now , and would be for evermore . she 
 do not idealise he either , it be more serious than that ; she be 
 thrill by his voice , and his touch , she dream of he , long for he 
 when he be not with she . she worry , too , for she be perfectly 
 aware that he be not half as fond of she as she be of he . such a new 
 experience puzzle she , keep her instinct painfully on the alert . it 
 be perhaps just this uncertainty about his affection which make he 
 seem more precious than any of the other . but there be ever the other 
 reason , too - consciousness that Time be after she , and this her last 
 grand passion . she watch he as a mother - cat watch she kitten , 
 without seem to , of course , for she have much experience . she have 
 begin to have a curious secret jealousy of Noel though why she could not 
 have say . it be perhaps merely incidental to her age , or spring from 
 that vague resemblance between she and one who outrivalle even what she 
 have be as a girl ; or from the occasional allusion Fort make to 
 what he call " that little fairy princess . " something intangible , 
 instinctive , give she that jealousy . until the death of her young 
 cousin 's lover she have feel safe , for she know that Jimmy Fort would not 
 hanker after another man 's property ; have he not prove that in old day , 
 with herself , by run away from she ? and she have often regret 
 have tell he of Cyril Morland 's death . one day she determine to 
 repair that error . it be at the Zoo , where they often go on Sunday 
 afternoon . they be stand before a creature call the meercat , 
 which remind they both of old day on the veldt . without turn she 
 head she say , as if to the little animal : " do you know that your 
 fairy princess , as you call she , be go to have what be know as a 
 war - baby ? " 

 the sound of his " what ! " give she quite a stab . it be so utterly 
 horrify . 

 she say stubbornly : " she come and tell I all about it . the boy be 
 dead , as you know . yes , terrible , be not   it ? " and she look at he . his 
 face be almost comic , so wrinkle up with incredulity . 

 " that lovely child ! but it be impossible ! " 

 " the impossible be sometimes true , Jimmy . " 

 " I refuse to believe it . " 

 " I tell you it be so , " she say angrily . 

 " what a ghastly shame ! " 

 " it be her own do ; she say so , herself . " 

 " and her father - the padre ! my God ! " 

 Leila be suddenly smite with a horrible doubt . she have think it 
 would disgust he , cure he of any little tendency to romanticise that 
 child ; and now she perceive that it be rouse in he , instead , a 
 dangerous compassion . she could have bite her tongue out for have 
 speak . when he get on the high horse of some championship , he be not 
 to be trust , she have find that out ; be even find it out bitterly 
 in her own relation with he , constantly aware that half her hold on 
 he , at least , lie in his sense of chivalry , aware that he know she 
 lurking dread of be fling on the beach , by age . only ten minute 
 ago he have utter a tirade before the cage of a monkey which seem 
 unhappy . and now she have rouse that dangerous side of he in favour of 
 Noel . what an idiot she have be ! 

 " do not   look like that , Jimmy . I be sorry I tell you . " 

 his hand do not answer her pressure in the least , but he mutter : 

 " well , I do think that be the limit . what be to be do for she ? " 

 Leila answer softly : " nothing , I be afraid . do you love I ? " and she 
 press his hand hard . 

 " of course . " 

 but Leila think : ' if I be that meercat he would have take more notice 
 of my paw ! ' her heart begin suddenly to ache , and she walk on to the 
 next cage with head up , and her mouth hard set . 

 Jimmy Fort walk away from Camelot Mansions that evening in extreme 
 discomfort of mind . Leila have be so queer that he have take leave 
 immediately after supper . she have refuse to talk about Noel ; have even 
 seem angry when he have try to . how extraordinary some woman be ! 
 do they think that a man could hear of a thing like that about such 
 a dainty young creature without be upset ! it be the most perfectly 
 damnable news ! what on earth would she do - poor little fairy princess ! 
 Down have come her house of card with a vengeance ! the whole of her 
 life - the whole of her life ! with her bringing - up and her father and 
 all - it seem inconceivable that she could ever survive it . and Leila 
 have be almost callous about the monstrous business . woman be hard to 
 each other ! bad enough , these thing , when it be a simple work girl , 
 but this dainty , shelter , beautiful child ! no , it be altogether too 
 strong - too painful ! and follow an impulse which he could not resist , 
 he make his way to the old Square . but have reach the house , he 
 nearly go away again . while he stand hesitate with his hand on the 
 bell , a girl and a soldier pass , appear as if by magic out of the 
 moonlit November mist , blurred and solid shape embrace , then vanish 
 into it again , leave the sound of footstep . Fort jerk the bell . 
 he be show into what seem , to one come out of that mist , to be a 
 brilliant , crowded room , though in truth there be but two lamp and 
 five people in it . they be sit round the fire , talk , and 
 pause when he come in . when he have shake hand with Pierson and be 
 introduce to " my daughter Gratian " and a man in khaki " my son - in - law 
 George Laird , " to a tall thin - faced , foreign - look man in a black 
 stock and seemingly no collar , he go up to Noel , who have rise from a 
 chair before the fire . ' no ! ' he think , ' I have   dream it , or Leila 
 have lie ! ' she be so perfectly the self - possess , dainty maiden he 
 remember . even the feel of her hand be the same - warm and confident ; 
 and sink into a chair , he say : " please go on , and let I chip in . " 

 " we be quarrel about the Universe , Captain Fort , " say the man 
 in khaki ; " delight to have your help . I be just say that 
 this particular world have no particular importance , no more than a 
 newspaper - seller would accord to it if it be completely destroy 
 tomorrow - " orrible catastrophe , total destruction of the world - six 
 o'clock edition - pyper ! ' I say that it will become again the nebula out 
 of which it be form , and by friction with other nebula re - form into 
 a fresh shape and so on ad infinitum - but I can not   explain why . my wife 
 wonder if it exist at all except in the human mind - but she can not 
 explain what the human mind be . my father - in - law think that it be God 's 
 hobby - but he can not   explain who or what God be . Nollie be silent . and 
 Monsieur Lavendie have not   yet tell we what he think . what do you think , 
 monsieur ? " the thin - faced , big - eyed man put up his hand to his high , 
 veined brow as if he have a headache , redden , and begin to speak in 
 French , which Fort follow with difficulty . 

 " for I the Universe be a limitless artist , monsieur , who from all time 
 and to all time be ever express himself in differ form - always 
 try to make a masterpiece , and generally fail . for I this 
 world , and all the world , be like ourselves , and the flower and 
 tree - little separate work of art , more or less perfect , whose little 
 life run their course , and be spill or powder back into this 
 Creative Artist , whence issue ever fresh attempt at art . I agree with 
 Monsieur Laird , if I understand he right ; but I agree also with Madame 
 Laird , if I understand she . you see , I think mind and matter be one , or 
 perhaps there be no such thing as either mind or matter , only growth 
 and decay and growth again , for ever and ever ; but always conscious 
 growth - an artist express himself in million of ever - change form ; 
 decay and death as we call they , be but rest and sleep , the ebbing 
 of the tide , which must ever come between two rise tide , or the night 
 which come between two day . but the next day be never the same as the 
 day before , nor the tide as the last tide ; so the little shape of the 
 world and of ourselves , these work of art by the Eternal Artist , 
 be never renew in the same form , be never twice alike , but always 
 fresh - fresh world , fresh individual , fresh flower , fresh everything . 
 I do not see anything depress in that . to I it would be depress 
 to think that I would go on live after death , or live again in a new 
 body , myself yet not myself . how stale that would be ! when I finish a 
 picture it be inconceivable to I that this picture should ever 
 become another picture , or that one can divide the expression from 
 the mind - stuff it have express . the Great Artist who be the whole of 
 everything , be ever in fresh effort to achieve new thing . he be as a 
 fountain who throw up new drop , no two ever alike , which fall back 
 into the water , flow into the pipe , and so be throw up again in 
 fresh - shaped drop . but I can not explain why there should be this 
 Eternal Energy , ever express itself in fresh individual shape , this 
 Eternal Working Artist , instead of nothing at all - just empty dark for 
 always ; except indeed that it must be one thing or the other , either all 
 or nothing ; and it happen to be this and not that , the all and not the 
 nothing . " 

 he stop speak , and his big eye , which have fix themselves on 
 Fort 's face , seem to the latter not to be see he at all , but 
 to rest on something beyond . the man in khaki , who have rise and be 
 stand with his hand on his wife 's shoulder , say : 

 " Bravo , monsieur ; jolly well put from the artist 's point of view . the 
 idea be pretty , anyway ; but be there any need for an idea at all ? 
 thing be ; and we have just to take they . " Fort have the impression of 
 something dark and writhe ; the thin black form of his host , who have 
 rise and come close to the fire . 

 " I can not admit , " he be say , " the identity of the Creator with the 
 create . God exist outside ourselves . nor can I admit that there be no 
 defnite purpose and fulfilment . all be shape to his great end . I think 
 we be too give to spiritual pride . the world have lose reverence ; I 
 regret it , I bitterly regret it . " 

 " I rejoice at it , " say the man in khaki . " now , Captain Fort , your turn 
 to bat ! " 

 Fort , who have be look at Noel , give himself a shake , and say : " I 
 think what monsieur call expression , I call fight . I suspect the 
 Universe of be simply a long fight , a sum of conquest and defeat . 
 conquest lead to defeat , defeat to conquest . I want to win while 
 I be alive , and because I want to win , I want to live on after death . 
 death be a defeat . I do not   want to admit it . while I have that instinct , 
 I do not   think I shall really die ; when I lose it , I think I shall . " he 
 be conscious of Noel 's face turn towards he , but have the feeling 
 that she be not   really listen . " I suspect that what we call spirit 
 be just the fighting instinct ; that what we call matter be the mood 
 of lie down . whether , as Mr. Pierson say , God be outside we , or , as 
 monsieur think , we be all part of God , I do not   know , I be sure . " 

 " ah ! there we be ! " say the man in khaki . " we all speak after our 
 temperament , and none of we know . the religion of the world be just 
 the poetic expression of certain strongly mark temperament . Monsieur 
 be a poet just now , and his be the only temperament which have never yet 
 be ram down the world 's throat in the form of religion . go out and 
 proclaim your view from the housetop , monsieur , and see what happen . " 

 the painter shake his head with a smile which seem to fort very bright 
 on the surface , and very sad underneath . 

 " non , monsieur , " he say ; " the artist do not wish to impose his 
 temperament . difference of temperament be the very essence of his joy , 
 and his belief in life . without difference there would be no life for 
 he . ' tout casse , tout lasse , ' but change go on for ever : we artist 
 reverence change , monsieur ; we reverence the newness of each morning , 
 of each night , of each person , of each expression of energy . nothing be 
 final for we ; we be eager for all and always for more . we be in love , 
 you see , even with - death . " 

 there be a silence ; then Fort hear Pierson murmur : 

 " that be beautiful , monsieur ; but oh ! how wrong ! " " and what do you 
 think , Nollie ? " say the man in khaki suddenly . the girl have be 
 sit very still in her low chair , with her hand cross in her lap , 
 her eye on the fire , and the lamplight shin down on her fair hair ; 
 she look up , startle , and her eye meet Fort 's . 

 " I do not   know ; I be not   listen . " something move in he , a kind of 
 burn pity , a rage of protection . he say quickly : 

 " these be time of action . philosophy seem to mean nothing nowadays . 
 the one thing be to hate tyranny and cruelty , and protect everything 
 that be weak and lonely . it be all that be leave to make life worth living , 
 when all the pack of all the world be out for blood . " 

 Noel be listen now , and he go on fervently : " why ! even we 
 who start out to fight this prussian pack , have catch the pack 
 feeling - so that it be hunt all over the country , on every sort of 
 scent . it be a most infectious thing . " 

 " I can not see that we be be infect , Captain Fort . " 

 " I be afraid we be , Mr. Pierson . the great majority of people be always 
 inclined to run with the hound ; the pressure be great just now ; the pack 
 spirit 's in the air . " 

 Pierson shake his head . " no , I can not see it , " he repeat ; " it seem to 
 I that we be all more brotherly , and more tolerant . " 

 " ah ! monsieur le cure , " Fort hear the painter say very gently , " it be 
 difficult for a good man to see the evil round he . there be those whom 
 the world 's march leave apart , and reality can not touch . they walk 
 with God , and the bestiality of us animal be fantastic to they . the 
 spirit of the pack , as monsieur say , be in the air . I see all human 
 nature now , run with gaping mouth and red tongue loll out , 
 their breath and their cry spout thick before they . on whom they 
 will fall next - one never know ; the innocent with the guilty . perhaps 
 if you be to see some one dear to you devour before your eye , 
 monsieur le cure , you would feel it too ; and yet I do not know . " 

 Fort see Noel turn her face towards her father ; her expression at that 
 moment be very strange , search , half frightened . no ! Leila have not 
 lie , and he have not dream ! that thing be true ! 

 when presently he take his leave , and be out again in the Square , he 
 could see nothing but her face and form before he in the moonlight : its 
 soft outline , fair colouring , slender delicacy , and the brooding of the 
 big grey eye . he have already cross New Oxford Street and be some way 
 down towards the Strand , when a voice behind he murmur : " ah ! c'est 
 vous , monsieur ! " and the painter loom up at his elbow . 

 " be you go my way ? " say Fort . " I go slowly , I be afraid . " 

 " the slow the well , monsieur . London be so beautiful in the dark . it 
 be the despair of the painter - these moonlit night . there be moment 
 when one feel that reality do not exist . all be in dream - like the 
 face of that young lady . " 

 Fort star sharply round at he . " oh ! she strike you like that , do 
 she ? " 

 " ah ! what a charming figure ! what an atmosphere of the past and future 
 round she ! and she will not let I paint she ! well , perhaps only Mathieu 
 Maris . " he raise his broad bohemian hat , and run his finger through 
 his hair . 

 " yes , " say Fort , ' she would make a wonderful picture . I be not a judge of 
 Art , but I can see that . " 

 the painter smile , and go on in his rapid French : 

 " she have youth and age all at once - that be rare . her father be an 
 interesting man , too ; I be try to paint he ; he be very difficult . he 
 sit lose in some kind of vacancy of his own ; a man whose soul have go 
 before he somewhere , like that of his church , escape from this age of 
 machine , leave its body behind - be it not ? he be so kind ; a saint , 
 I think . the other clergyman I see pass in the street be not at all 
 like he ; they look button - up and busy , with face of man who might 
 be schoolmaster or lawyer , or even soldier - man of this world . do 
 you know this , monsieur - it be ironical , but it be true , I think a man 
 can not be a successful priest unless he be a man of this world . I do not 
 see any with that look of Monsieur Pierson , a little torture within , 
 and not quite present . he be half an artist , really a lover of music , 
 that man . I be paint he at the piano ; when he be play his face be 
 alive , but even then , so far away . to I , monsieur , he be exactly like a 
 beautiful church which know it be be desert . I find he pathetic . 
 Je suis socialiste , but I have always an aesthetic admiration for that 
 old Church , which hold its child by simple emotion . the time have 
 change ; it can no long hold they so ; it stand in the dusk , with its 
 spire to a heaven which exist no more , its bell , still beautiful but 
 out of tune with the music of the street . it be something of that which 
 I wish to get into my picture of Monsieur Pierson ; and sapristi ! it 
 be difficult ! " Fort grunt assent . so far as he could make out the 
 painter 's word , it seem to he a large order . 

 " to do it , you see , " go on the painter , " one should have the proper 
 background - these current of modern life and modern type , pass he 
 and leave he untouched . there be no illusion , and no dreaming , in 
 modern life . look at this street . La , la ! " 

 in the darken Strand , hundred of khaki - clothe figure and girl be 
 stream by , and all their voice have a hard , half - jovial vulgarity . 
 the motor - cab and bus push along remorselessly ; newspaper - seller 
 mutter their ceaseless invitation . again the painter make his gesture 
 of despair : " how be I to get into my picture this modern life , which 
 wash round he as round that church , there , stand in the middle of 
 the street ? see how the current sweep round it , as if to wash it away ; 
 yet it stand , seem not to see they . if I be a phantasist , it 
 would be easy enough : but to be a phantasist be too simple for I - those 
 romantic gentleman bring what they like from anywhere , to serve their 
 end . Moi , je suis realiste . and so , monsieur , I have invent an idea . 
 I be paint over his head while he sit there at the piano a picture 
 hang on the wall - of one of these young town girl who have no 
 mysteriousness at all , no youth ; nothing but a cheap knowledge and 
 defiance , and good humour . he be look up at it , but he do not see 
 it . I will make the face of that girl the face of modern life , and he 
 shall sit star at it , see nothing . what do you think of my idea ? " 

 but Fort have begin to feel something of the revolt which the man of 
 action so soon experience when he listen to an artist talk . 

 " it sound all right , " he say abruptly ; " all the same , monsieur , all my 
 sympathy be with modern life . take these young girl , and these tommie . 
 for all their feather - pat vulgarity and they be damned vulgar , I must 
 say - they be marvellous people ; they do take the rough with the smooth ; 
 they be all ' do their bit , ' you know , and face this particularly 
 beastly world . aesthetically , I daresay , they be deplorable , but can 
 you say that on the whole their philosophy be not   an advance on anything 
 we have   have up till now ? they worship nothing , it be true ; but they keep 
 their end up marvellously . " 

 the painter , who seem to feel the wind blow cold on his idea , 
 shrug his shoulder . 

 " I be not concerned with that , monsieur ; I set down what I see ; well 
 or bad , I do not know . but look at this ! " and he point down the 
 darken and moonlit street . it be all jewel and enamel with 
 little spot and splash of subdue red and green - blue light , and the 
 downward orange glow of the high lamp - like an enchanted dream - street 
 people by countless moving shape , which only come to earth - reality 
 when see close to . the painter draw his breath in with a hiss . 

 " ah ! " he say , " what beauty ! and they do not   see it - not one in a 
 thousand ! pity , be not   it ? beauty be the holy thing ! " 

 Fort , in his turn , shrug his shoulder . " every man to his vision ! " 
 he say . " my leg 's beginning to bother I ; I be afraid I must take a cab . 
 here be my address ; any time you like to come . I be often in about seven . 
 I can not   take you anywhere , I suppose ? " 

 " a thousand thank , monsieur ; but I go north . I love your word about 
 the pack . I often wake at night and hear the howling of all the pack 
 of the world . those who be by nature gentle nowadays feel they be 
 stranger in a far land . good night , monsieur ! " 

 he take off his queer hat , bow low , and cross out into the Strand , 
 like one who have come in a dream , and fade out with the waking . Fort 
 hail a cab , and go home , still see Noel 's face . there be one , if 
 you like , wait to be throw to the wolf , wait for the world 's 
 pack to begin howl round she - that lovely child ; and the first , the 
 loud of all the pack , perhaps , must be her own father , the lean , dark 
 figure with the gentle face , and the burn bright eye . what a ghastly 
 business ! his dream that night be not such as Leila would have 
 approve . 




 IX 

 when in the cupboard there be a real and very bony skeleton , carefully 
 keep from the sight of a single member of the family , the position of 
 that member be liable to become lonely . but Pierson , who have be lonely 
 fifteen year , do not feel it so much , perhaps , as most man would have . 
 in his dreamy nature there be a curious self - sufficiency , which only 
 violent shock disturb , and he go on with his routine of duty , which 
 have become for he as set as the pavement he trod on his way to and 
 from it . it be not exactly true , as the painter have say , that this 
 routine do not bring he into touch with life . after all he see people 
 when they be bear , when they marry , when they die . he help they 
 when they want money , and when they be ill ; he tell their child 
 Bible story on Sunday afternoon ; he serve those who be in need 
 with soup and bread from his soup kitchen . he never spar himself in 
 any way , and his ear be always at the service of their woe . and yet 
 he do not understand they , and they know that . it be as though he , or 
 they , be colour - blind . the value be all different . he be see 
 one set of object , they another . 

 one street of his parish touch a main line of thoroughfare , and form 
 a little part of the new hunting - ground of woman , who , chase forth 
 from their usual haunt by the Authorities under pressure of the 
 country 's danger , now pursue their calling in the dark . this particular 
 evil have always be a sort of nightmare to Pierson . the starvation 
 which rule his own existence incline he to a particularly severe view 
 and severity be not his strong point . in consequence there be ever 
 within he a sort of very personal and poignant struggle go on 
 beneath that seeming attitude of rigid disapproval . he join the 
 hunter , as it be , because he be afraid - not , of course , of his own 
 instinct , for he be fastidious , a gentleman , and a priest , but of 
 be lenient to a sin , to something which God abhor : he be , as it 
 be , bind to take a professional view of this particular offence . when 
 in his walk abroad he pass one of these woman , he would unconsciously 
 purse his lip , and frown . the darkness of the street seem to lend 
 they such power , such unholy sovereignty over the night . they be such 
 a danger to the soldier , too ; and in turn , the soldier be such a 
 danger to the lamb of his flock . domestic disaster in his parish come 
 to his ear from time to time ; case of young girl whose head be 
 turn by soldier , so that they be about to become mother . they 
 seem to he pitiful indeed ; but he could not forgive they for their 
 giddiness , for put temptation in the way of brave young man , 
 fighting , or about to fight . the glamour which surround soldier be 
 not excuse enough . when the baby be bear , and come to his notice , 
 he consult a Committee he have form , of three married and two maiden 
 lady , who visit the mother , and if necessary take the baby into 
 a creche ; for those baby have a new value to the country , and be 
 not - poor little thing ! - to be hold responsible for their mother ' 
 fault . he himself see little of the young mother ; shy of they , 
 secretly afraid , perhaps , of not be censorious enough . but once in a 
 way life set he face to face with one . 

 on New Year 's Eve he be sit in his study after tea , at that hour 
 which he try to keep for his parishioner , when a Mrs. Mitchett be 
 announce , a small bookseller 's wife , whom he know for an occasional 
 Communicant . she come in , accompany by a young dark - eyed girl in a 
 loose mouse - coloured coat . at his invitation they sit down in front of 
 the long bookcase on the two green leather chair which have grow wear 
 in the service of the parish ; and , screw round in his chair at the 
 bureau , with his long musician 's finger press together , he look 
 at they and wait . the woman have take out her handkerchief , and be 
 wipe her eye ; but the girl sit quiet , as the mouse she somewhat 
 resemble in that coat . 

 " yes , Mrs. Mitchett ? " he say gently , at last . 

 the woman put away her handkerchief , sniff resolutely , and begin : 

 " it be ' Ilda , sir . such a thing Mitchett and I never could ' ave 
 expect , comin ' on we so sudden . I think it well to bring ' er round , 
 poor girl . of course , it be all the war . I have   warn ' er a dozen time ; 
 but there it be , comin ' next month , and the man in France . " Pierson 
 instinctively avert his gaze from the girl , who have not move her eye 
 from his face , which she scan with a seem absence of interest , 
 as if she have long give up think over her lot , and leave it now to 
 other . 

 " that be sad , " he say ; " very , very sad . " 

 " yes , " murmur Mrs. Mitchett ; " that be what I tell ' Ilda . " 

 the girl 's glance , lower for a second , resume its impersonal scrutiny 
 of Pierson 's face . 

 " what be the man 's name and regiment ? perhaps we can get leave for he 
 to come home and marry Hilda at once . " 

 Mrs. Mitchett sniff . " she will not   give it , sir . now , ' Ilda , give it to 
 Mr. Pierson . " and her voice have a real note of entreaty . the girl shake 
 her head . Mrs. Mitchett murmur dolefully : " that be ' ow she be , sir ; 
 not a word will she say . and as I tell she , we can only think there must 
 ' ave be more than one . and that do put we to shame so ! " 

 but still the girl make no sign . 

 " you speak to she , sir ; I be really at my wit 's end . " 

 " why will not   you tell we ? " say Pierson . " the man will want to do the 
 right thing , ' I be sure . " 

 the girl shake her head , and speak for the first time . 

 " I do not   know his name . " 

 Mrs. Mitchett 's face twitch . 

 " oh , dear ! " she say : " think of that ! she be never say as much to we . " 

 " not know his name ? " Pierson murmur . " but how - how could you - " he 
 stop , but his face have darken . " surely you would never have do 
 such a thing without affection ? come , tell I ! " 

 " I do not   know it , " the girl repeat . 

 " it be these Parks , " say Mrs. Mitchett , from behind her handkerchief . 
 " and to think that this will be our first grandchild and all ! ' Ilda be 
 difficult ; as quiet , as quiet ; but that stubborn - " 

 Pierson look at the girl , who seem , if anything , less interested 
 than ever . this impenetrability and something mulish in her attitude 
 annoy he . " I can not   think , " he say , " how you could so have forget 
 yourself . it be truly grievous . " 

 Mrs. Mitchett murmur : " yes , sir ; the girl get it into their head 
 that there be go to be no young man for they . " 

 " that be right , " say the girl sullenly . 

 Pierson 's lip grow tight . " well , what can I do for you , Mrs. 
 Mitchett ? " he say . " do your daughter come to church ? " 

 Mrs. Mitchett shake her head mournfully . " never since she have her byke . " 

 Pierson rise from his chair . the old story ! control and discipline 
 undermine , and these bitter apple the result ! 

 " well , " he say , " if you need our creche , you have only to come to 
 I , " and he turn to the girl . " and you - will not   you let this dreadful 
 experience move your heart ? my dear girl , we must all master ourselves , 
 our passion , and our foolish wilfulness , especially in these time 
 when our country need we strong , and self - discipline , not think of 
 ourselves . I be sure you be a good girl at heart . " 

 the girl 's dark eye , unmove from his face , rouse in he a spasm 
 of nervous irritation . " your soul be in great danger , and you be very 
 unhappy , I can see . turn to God for help , and in his mercy everything 
 will be make so different for you - so very different ! come ! " 

 the girl say with a sort of surprising quietness : " I do not   want the 
 baby ! " 

 the remark stagger he , almost as if she have utter a hideous oath . 

 " ' Ilda be in munition , " say her mother in an explanatory voice : 
 " earnin ' a matter of four pound a week . oh ! dear , it be a waste an ' 
 all ! " a queer , rather terrible little smile curl Pierson 's lip . 

 " a judgment ! " he say . " good evening , Mrs. Mitchett . good evening , 
 Hilda . if you want I when the time come , send for I . " 

 they stand up ; he shake hand with they ; and be suddenly aware that the 
 door be open , and Noel stand there . he have hear no sound ; and how 
 long she have be there he could not tell . there be a singular fixity 
 in her face and attitude . she be star at the girl , who , as she 
 pass , lift her face , so that the dark eye and the grey eye meet . 
 the door be shut , and Noel stand there alone with he . 

 " be not   you early , my child ? " say Pierson . " you come in very quietly . " 

 " yes ; I hear . " 

 a slight shock go through he at the tone of her voice ; her face have 
 that possess look which he always dread . " what do you hear ? " he 
 say . 

 " I hear you say : ' a judgment ! ' you will say the same to I , will not   you ? 
 only , I do want my baby . " 

 she be stand with she back to the door , over which a dark curtain 
 hung ; her face look young and small against its stuff , her eye very 
 large . with one hand she pluck at her blouse , just over her heart . 

 Pierson star at she , and grip the back of the chair he have be 
 sit in . a lifetime of repression serve he in the half - realise 
 horror of that moment . he stammer out the single word - 

 " Nollie ! " 

 " it be quite true , " she say , turn round , and go out . 

 Pierson have a sort of vertigo ; if he have move , he must have fall 
 down . nollie ! he slide round and sink into his chair , and by some 
 horrible cruel fiction of his nerve , he seem to feel Noel on his 
 knee , as , when a little girl , she have be will not to sit , with her fair 
 hair fluff against his cheek . he seem to feel that hair tickle 
 his skin ; it use to be the great comfort he have know since she 
 mother die . at that moment his pride shrivel like a flower hold to a 
 flame ; all that abundant secret pride of a father who love and admire , 
 who worship still a dead wife in the child she have leave he ; who , 
 humble by nature , yet never know how proud he be till the bitter thing 
 happen ; all the long pride of the priest who , by dint of exhortation 
 and remonstrance have coat himself in a superiority he hardly 
 suspect - all this pride shrivel in he . then something writhe and 
 cry within , as a torture beast cry , at loss to know why it be be 
 torture . how many time have not a man use those word : " my God ! my 
 God ! why hast Thou forsake I ! " he spring up and try to pace his 
 way out of this cage of confusion : his thought and feeling make the 
 strange medley , spiritual and worldly - social ostracism - her soul in 
 peril - a trial send by God ! the future ! imagination fail he . he go 
 to his little piano , open it , close it again ; take his hat , and stole 
 out . he walk fast , without know where . it be very cold - a clear , 
 bitter evening . silent rapid motion in the frosty air be some relief . 
 as Noel have flee from he , have utter her news , so do he fly from 
 she . the afflicted walk fast . he be soon down by the river , and turn 
 West along its wall . the moon be up , bright and nearly full , and the 
 steel - like shimmer of its light burnish the ebb water . a cruel 
 night ! he come to the Obelisk , and lean against it , overcome by a 
 spasm of realisation . he seem to see his dead wife 's face star at 
 he out of the past , like an accusation . " how have you care for Nollie , 
 that she should have come to this ? " it become the face of the moonlit 
 sphinx , star straight at he , the broad dark face with wide nostril , 
 cruel lip , full eye blank of pupil , all liven and whiten by the 
 moonlight - an embodiment of the marvellous unseeing energy of life , 
 twist and turn heart without mercy . he gaze into those eye 
 with a sort of scared defiance . the great claw paw of the beast , the 
 strength and remorseless serenity of that crouch creature with human 
 head , make live by his imagination and the moonlight , seem to he 
 like a temptation to deny God , like a refutation of human virtue . 

 then , the sense of beauty stir in he ; he move where he could see 
 its flank coat in silver by the moonlight , the rib and the great 
 muscle , and the tail with tip coil over the haunch , like the head of 
 a serpent . it be weirdly live ; fine and cruel , that great man - make 
 thing . it express something in the soul of man , pitiless and remote 
 from love - or rather , the remorselessness which man have see , lurk 
 within man 's fate . Pierson recoil from it , and resume his march along 
 the Embankment , almost desert in the bitter cold . he come to where , in 
 the opening of the Underground railway , he could see the little form of 
 people move , little orange and red light glow . the sight arrest 
 he by its warmth and motion . be it not all a dream ? that woman and her 
 daughter , have they really come ? have not Noel be but an apparition , her 
 word a trick which his nerve have play he ? then , too vividly again , 
 he see her face against the dark stuff of the curtain , the curve of 
 her hand pluck at her blouse , hear the sound of his own horrify : 
 " Nollie ! " no illusion , no deception ! the edifice of his life be in the 
 dust . and a queer and ghastly company of face come about he ; face he 
 have think friendly , of good man and woman whom he know , yet at that 
 moment do not know , all gather round Noel , with finger point at 
 she . he stagger back from that vision , could not bear it , could not 
 recognise this calamity . with a sort of comfort , yet an aching sense of 
 unreality , his mind fly to all those summer holiday spend in Scotland , 
 Ireland , Cornwall , Wales , by mountain and lake , with his two girl ; what 
 sunset , and turn leaf , bird , beast , and insect they have watch 
 together ! from their youthful companionship , their eagerness , their 
 confidence in he , he have know so much warmth and pleasure . if all 
 those memory be true , surely this could not be true . he feel 
 suddenly that he must hurry back , go straight to Noel , tell she that she 
 have be cruel to he , or assure himself that , for the moment , she have 
 be insane : his temper rise suddenly , take fire . he feel anger against 
 she , against every one he know , against life itself . thrust his hand 
 deep into the pocket of his thin black overcoat , he plunge into that 
 narrow glow tunnel of the station booking - office , which lead back 
 to the crowded street . but by the time he reach home his anger have 
 evaporate ; he feel nothing but utter lassitude . it be nine o'clock , 
 and the maid have clear the dining table . in despair Noel have go 
 up to her room . he have no courage left , and sit down supperless at his 
 little piano , let his finger find soft painful harmony , so that 
 Noel perhaps hear the faint far thrumming of that music through uneasy 
 dream . and there he stay , till it become time for he to go forth to 
 the Old Year 's Midnight Service . 

 when he return , Pierson wrap himself in a rug and lie down on the 
 old sofa in his study . the maid , come in next morning to " do " the 
 grate , find he still asleep . she stand contemplate he in awe ; a 
 broad - face , kindly , fresh - coloured girl . he lie with his face rest 
 on his hand , his dark , just grizzle hair unruffled , as if he have not 
 stir all night ; his other hand clutch the rug to his chest , and 
 his booted foot protrude beyond it . to her young eye he look rather 
 appallingly neglect . she gaze with interest at the hollow in his 
 cheek , and the furrow in his brow , and the lip , dark - moustache and 
 bearded , so tightly compressed , even in sleep . be holy do not   make 
 a man happy , it seem ! what fascinate she be the cindery eyelash 
 rest on the cheek , the faint movement of face and body as he 
 breathe , the gentle hiss of breath escape through the twitching 
 nostril . she move near , bend down over he , with the childlike 
 notion of count those lash . her lip part in readiness to say : 
 " oh ! " if he wake . something in his face , and the little twitch which 
 pass over it , make she feel " that sorry " for he . he be a gentleman , 
 have money , preach to she every Sunday , and be not so very old - what 
 more could a man want ? and yet - he look so tired , with those cheek . 

 she pity he ; helpless and lonely he seem to she , asleep there 
 instead of go to bed properly . and sighing , she tiptoe towards the 
 door . 

 " be that you , Bessie ? " 

 the girl turn : " yes , sir . I be sorry I wake you , sir . ' Appy New Year , 
 sir ! " 

 " ah , yes . a Happy New Year , Bessie . " 

 she see his usual smile , see it die , and a fix look come on his face ; 
 it scar she , and she hurry away . Pierson have remember . for full 
 five minute he lie there star at nothing . then he rise , fold the 
 rug mechanically , and look at the clock . eight ! he go upstairs , 
 knock on Noel 's door , and enter . 

 the blind be draw up , but she be still in bed . he stand look 
 down at she . " a Happy New Year , my child ! " he say ; and he tremble 
 all over , shiver visibly . she look so young and innocent , so 
 round - faced and fresh , after her night 's sleep , that the thought sprang 
 up in he again : ' it must have be a dream ! ' she do not move , but a 
 slow flush come up in her cheek . no dream - dream ! he say tremulously : 
 " I can not   realise . I - I hop I have hear wrong . do not   I , Nollie ? do not 
 I ? " 

 she just shake her head . 

 " tell I - everything , " he say ; " for God 's sake ! " 

 he see her lip move , and catch the murmur : " there be nothing more . 
 Gratian and George know , and Leila . it can not   be undo , daddy . perhaps I 
 would not   have want to make sure , if you have not   try to stop Cyril and 
 I - and I be glad sometimes , because I shall have something of his - " she 
 look up at he . " after all , it be the same , really ; only , there be no 
 ring . it be no good talk to I now , as if I have not   be think of 
 this for age . I be use to anything you can say ; I have   say it to myself , 
 you see . there be nothing but to make the good of it . " 

 her hot hand come out from under the bedclothe , and clutch his very 
 tight . her flush have deepen , and her eye seem to he to glitter . 

 " oh , Daddy ! you do look tired ! have not   you be to bed ? poor daddy ! " 

 that hot clutch , and the word : " poor daddy ! " bring tear into his 
 eye . they roll slowly down to his beard , and he cover his face with 
 the other hand . her grip tighten convulsively ; suddenly she drag it 
 to her lip , kiss it , and let it drop . 

 " do not ! " she say , and turn away her face . 

 Pierson efface his emotion , and say quite calmly : 

 " shall you wish to be at home , my dear , or to go elsewhere ? " 

 Noel have begin to toss her head on her pillow , like a feverish child 
 whose hair get in its eye and mouth . 

 " oh ! I do not   know ; what do it matter ? " 

 " Kestrel ; would you like to go there ? your aunt - I could write to she . " 
 Noel star at he a moment ; a struggle seem go on within she . 

 " yes , " she say , " I would . only , not Uncle Bob . " 

 " perhaps your uncle would come up here , and keep I company . " 

 she turn her face away , and that toss movement of the limb beneath 
 the clothe begin again . " I do not   care , " she say ; " anywhere - it do not 
 matter . " 

 Pierson put his chilly hand on her forehead . " gently ! " he say , and 
 knelt down by the bed . " Merciful Father , " he murmur , " give we strength 
 to bear this dreadful trial . keep my beloved child safe , and bring 
 her peace ; and give I to understand how I have do wrong , how I have 
 fail towards Thee , and she . in all thing chasten and strengthen she , 
 my child , and I . " 

 his thought move on in the confused , inarticulate suspense of 
 prayer , till he hear she say : " you have not   fail ; why do you talk of 
 fail - it be not   true ; and do not   pray for I , Daddy . " 

 Pierson raise himself , and move back from the bed . her word 
 confound he , yet he be afraid to answer . she push her head deep 
 into the pillow , and lie look up at the ceiling . 

 " I shall have a son ; Cyril will not   quite have die . and I do not   want to be 
 forgive . " 

 he dimly perceive what long dumb process of thought and feeling have 
 go on in she to produce this harden state of mind , which to he 
 seem almost blasphemous . and in the very midst of this turmoil in his 
 heart , he could not help think how lovely her face look , lie back 
 so that the curve of her throat be bar , with the short tendril of 
 hair coil about it . that flung - back head , move restlessly from side 
 to side in the heat of the soft pillow , have such a passion of protest 
 life in it ! and he keep silence . 

 " I want you to know it be all I . but I can not   pretend . of course I will 
 try and not let it hurt you more than I possibly can . I be sorry for you , 
 poor daddy ; oh ! I be sorry for you ! " with a movement incredibly lithe and 
 swift , she turn and press her face down in the pillow , so that all 
 he could see be her tumbled hair and the bedclothe tremble above her 
 shoulder . he try to stroke that hair , but she shake her head free , 
 and he steal out . 

 she do not come to breakfast ; and when his own wretched meal be over , 
 the mechanism of his professional life catch he again at once . new 
 Year 's day ! he have much to do . he have , before all , to be of a cheerful 
 countenance before his flock , to greet all and any with an air of hope 
 and courage . 




 X 

 1 

 Thirza Pierson , see her brother - in - law 's handwriting , naturally say : 
 " here be a letter from Ted . " 

 Bob Pierson , with a mouth full of sausage , as naturally respond : 

 " what do he say ? " 

 in read on , she find that to answer that question be one of the 
 most difficult task ever set she . its news move and disturb she 
 deeply . under her wing this disaster have happen ! down here have be 
 work this most deplorable miracle , fraught with such dislocation of 
 life ! Noel 's face , absorb and passionate , outside the door of her 
 room on the night when Cyril Morland go away - her instinct have be 
 right ! 

 " he want you to go up and stay with he , Bob . " 

 " why not both of we ? " 

 " he want Nollie to come down to I ; she be not well . " 

 " not well ? what be the matter ? " 

 to tell he seem disloyalty to her sex ; not to tell he , disloyalty 
 to her husband . a simple consideration of fact and not of principle , 
 decide she . he would certainly say in a moment : ' here ! pitch it over ! ' 
 and she would have to . she say tranquilly : 

 " you remember that night when Cyril Morland go away , and Noel behave 
 so strangely . well , my dear ; she be go to have a child at the 
 beginning of April . the poor boy be dead , Bob ; he die for the Country . " 

 she see the red tide flow up into his face . 

 " what ! " 

 " Poor Edward be dreadfully upset . we must do what we can . I blame 
 myself . " by instinct she use those word . 

 " blame yourself ? stuff ! that young - ! " he stop . 

 Thirza say quietly : " no , Bob ; of the two , I be sure it be Noel ; she 
 be desperate that day . do not   you remember her face ? oh ! this war ! it be 
 turn the whole world upside down . that be the only comfort ; nothing 's 
 normal . " 

 Bob Pierson possess beyond most man the secret of happiness , for he 
 be always absorb in the moment , to the point of unself - consciousness . 
 eat an egg , cut down a tree , sit on a Tribunal , make up 
 his account , planting potato , look at the moon , rid his cob , 
 read the Lessons - no part of he stand aside to see how he be do 
 it , or wonder why he be do it , or not do it well . he grow like 
 a cork - tree , and act like a sturdy and well - natured dog . his grief , 
 anger , and enjoyment be simple as a child 's , or as his somewhat 
 noisy slumber . they be notably well - suit , for Thirza have the same 
 secret of happiness , though she , absorption in the moment do not - as 
 become a woman - prevent she be conscious of other ; indeed , such 
 form the chief subject of her absorption . one might say that they 
 neither of they have philosophy yet be as philosophic a couple as one 
 could meet on this earth of the self - conscious . daily life to these two 
 be still of simple savour . to be absorb in life - the queer endless 
 tissue of moment and thing feel and do and say and make , the odd 
 inspirit conjunction of countless people - be natural to they ; 
 but they never think whether they be absorb or not , or have any 
 particular attitude to Life or Death - a great blessing at the epoch in 
 which they be live . 

 Bob Pierson , then , pace the room , so absorb in his dismay and 
 concern , that he be almost happy . 

 " by Jove ! " he say , " what a ghastly thing ! 

 " Nollie , of all people ! I feel perfectly wretched , Thirza ; wretche 
 beyond word . " but with each repetition his voice grow cheery , and 
 Thirza feel that he be already over the bad . 

 " your coffee 's get cold ! " she say . 

 " what do you advise ? shall I go up , heh ? " 

 " I think you will be a godsend to poor Ted ; you will keep his spirit up . 
 Eve will not   get any leave till Easter ; and I can be quite alone , and see 
 to Nollie here . the servant can have a holiday - , Nurse and I will run 
 the house together . I shall enjoy it . " 

 " you be a good woman , Thirza ! " take his wife 's hand , he put it to his 
 lip . " there be not   another woman like you in the world . " 

 Thirza 's eye smile . " pass I your cup ; I will give you some fresh 
 coffee . " 

 it be decide to put the plan into operation at mid - month , and she bend 
 all her wit to instill into her husband the thought that a baby more 
 or less be no great matter in a world which already contain twelve 
 hundred million people . with a man 's keener sense of family propriety , 
 he could not see that this baby would be the same as any other baby . " by 
 heaven ! " he would say , " I simply can not   get use to it ; in our family ! 
 and Ted a parson ! what the devil shall we do with it ? " 

 " if Nollie will let we , why should not   we adopt it ? it will be something to 
 take my thought off the boy . " 

 " that be an idea ! but Ted be a funny fellow . he will have some doctrine of 
 atonement , or other in his bonnet . " 

 " oh , bother ! " say Thirza with asperity . 

 the thought of sojourn in town for a spell be not unpleasant to Bob 
 Pierson . his Tribunal work be over , his early , potato in , and he have 
 vision of work for the Country , of be a special constable , and 
 dining at his Club . the nearer he be to the front , and the more he 
 could talk about the war , the great the service he feel he would 
 be do . he would ask for a job where his brain would be of use . he 
 regret keenly that Thirza would not   be with he ; a long separation 
 like this would be a great trial . and he would sigh and run his finger 
 through his whisker . still for the Country , and for Nollie , one must 
 put up with it ! 

 when Thirza finally see he into the train , tear stand in the eye of 
 both , for they be honestly attach , and know well enough that this 
 job , once take in hand , would have to be see through ; a three month ' 
 separation at least . 

 " I shall write every day . " 

 " so shall I , Bob . " 

 " you will not   fret , old girl ? " 

 " only if you do . " 

 " I shall be up at 5.5 , and she will be down at 4.50 . give we a kiss - damn 
 the porter . God bless you ! I suppose she would mind if - I - be to come 
 down now and then ? " 

 " I be afraid she would . it be - it be - well , you know . " 

 " yes , yes ; I do . " and he really do ; for underneath , he have true 
 delicacy . 

 her last word : " you be very sweet , Bob , " remain in his ear all the 
 way to Severn Junction . 

 she go back to the house , empty of her husband , daughter , boy , 
 and maid ; only the dog leave and the old nurse whom she have take into 
 confidence . even in that shelter , woode valley it be very cold 
 this winter . the bird hide themselves , not one flower bloom , and the 
 red - brown river be full and swift . the sound of tree be fell for 
 trench prop , in the wood above the house resound all day long in the 
 frosty air . she mean to do the cooking herself ; and for the rest of the 
 morning and early afternoon she concoct nice thing , and think 
 out how she herself would feel if she be Noel and Noel she , so as 
 to smooth out of the way anything which would hurt the girl . in the 
 afternoon she go down to the station in the village car , the same 
 which have bear Cyril Morland away that July night , for their coachman 
 have be take for the army , and the horse be turn out . 

 Noel look tired and white , but calm - too calm . her face seem to 
 Thirza to have fin down , and with those brood eye , to be more 
 beautiful . in the car she possess herself of the girl 's hand , and 
 squeeze it hard ; their only allusion to the situation , except Noel 's 
 formal : 

 " thank you so much , Auntie , for have I ; it be most awfully sweet of 
 you and Uncle Bob . " 

 " there be no one in the house , my dear , except old Nurse . it will be very 
 dull for you ; but I think I would teach you to cook ; it be rather useful . " 

 the smile which slip on to Noel 's face give Thirza quite a turn . 

 she have assign the girl a different room , and have make it 
 extraordinarily cheerful with a log fire , chrysanthemum , bright copper 
 candlestick , warming - pan , and such like . 

 she go up with she at bedtime , and stand before the fire , say : 

 " you know , Nollie , I absolutely refuse to regard this as any sort of 
 tragedy . to bring life into the world in these day , no matter how , 
 ought to make anyone happy . I only wish I could do it again , then I 
 should feel some use . good night dear ; and if you want anything , knock 
 on the wall . I be next door . bless you ! " she see that the girl be 
 greatly move , underneath her pale mask ; and go out astonish at her 
 niece 's power of self - control . 

 but she do not sleep at all well ; for in imagination , she keep on 
 see Noel turn from side to side in the big bed , and those great 
 eye of her star at the dark . 


 2 

 the meeting of the brother Pierson take place at the dinner - hour , 
 and be characterise by a truly english lack of display . they be so 
 extremely different , and have be together so little since early day 
 in their old Buckinghamshire home , that they be practically stranger , 
 with just the potent link of far - distant memory in common . it be of 
 these they talk , and about the war . on this subject they agree in the 
 large , and differ in the narrow . for instance , both think they know 
 about Germany and other country , and neither of course have any real 
 knowledge of any country outside their own ; for , though both have pass 
 through considerable tract of foreign ground at one time or another , 
 they have never remark anything except its surface , - its church , and 
 its sunset . again , both assume that they be democrat , but neither 
 know the meaning of the word , nor feel that the work man could 
 be really trust ; and both revere Church and , king : both dislike 
 conscription , but consider it necessary . both favour Home Rule for 
 Ireland , but neither think it possible to grant it . both wish for 
 the war to end , but be for prosecute it to victory , and neither know 
 what they mean by that word . so much for the large . on the narrow 
 issue , such as strategy , and the personality of their country 's 
 leader , they be opposed . Edward be a Westerner , Robert an Easterner , 
 as be natural in one who have live twenty - five year in Ceylon . Edward 
 favour the fallen government , Robert the risen . neither have any 
 particular reason for their partisanship except what he have read in 
 the journal . after all - what other reason could they have have ? Edward 
 dislike the Harmsworth Press ; Robert think it be do good . Robert 
 be explosive , and rather vague ; Edward dreamy , and a little didactic . 
 Robert think poor Ted look like a ghost ; Edward think poor Bob 
 look like the set sun . their face be indeed as curiously 
 contrast as their view and voice ; the pale - dark , hollowed , narrow 
 face of Edward , with its short , point beard , and the red - skin , 
 broad , full , whiskered face of Robert . they part for the night with an 
 affectionate hand - clasp . so begin a queer partnership which consist , 
 as the day go on , of half an hour 's companionship at breakfast , each 
 read the paper ; and of dinner together perhaps three time a week . 
 each think his brother very odd , but continue to hold the high 
 opinion of he . and , behind it all , the deep tribal sense that they 
 stand together in trouble , grow . but of that trouble they never speak , 
 though not seldom Robert would lower his journal , and above the glass 
 perch on his well - shape nose , contemplate his brother , and a little 
 frown of sympathy would ridge his forehead between his bushy eyebrow . 
 and once in a way he would catch Edward 's eye come off duty from his 
 journal , to look , not at his brother , but at - the skeleton ; when that 
 happen , Robert would adjust his glass hastily , damn the newspaper 
 type , and apologise to Edward for swearing . and he would think : ' poor 
 Ted ! he ought to drink port , and - and enjoy himself , and forget it . what 
 a pity he be a parson ! ' 

 in his letter to Thirza he would deplore Edward 's asceticism . " he eat 
 nothing , he drink nothing , he smoke a miserable cigarette once in a 
 blue moon . he be as lonely as a coot ; it be a thousand pity he ever lose 
 his wife . I expect to see his wing sprout any day ; but - dash it all 
 I - I do not   believe he be get the flesh to grow they on . send he up some 
 clot cream ; I will see if I can get he to eat it . " when the cream 
 come , he get Edward to eat some the first morning , and at tea time find 
 that he have finish it himself . " we never talk about Nollie , " he write , 
 " I be always mean to have it out with he and tell he to buck up , but 
 when it come to the point I dry up ; because , after all , I feel it too ; 
 it stick in my gizzard horribly . we Piersons be pretty old , and we have 
 always be respectable , ever since St. Bartholomew , when that Huguenot 
 chap come over and found we . the only black sheep I ever hear of be 
 Cousin Leila . by the way , I see she the other day ; she come round here 
 to see Ted . I remember go to stay with she and her first husband ; 
 young Fane , at Simla , when I be come home , just before we be 
 marry . Phew ! that be a queer menage ; all the young chap flutter 
 round she , and young Fane look like a cynical ghost . even now she 
 can not   help set her cap a little at Ted , and he swallow her whole ; 
 think she a devoted creature reform to the nine with her hospital 
 and all that . poor old Ted ; he be the most dreamy chap that ever be . " 

 " we have have Gratian and her husband up for the week - end , " he write 
 a little later ; " I do not   like she so well as Nollie ; too serious and 
 downright for I . her husband seem a sensible fellow , though ; but the 
 devil of a free - thinker . he and poor Ted be like cat and dog . we have 
 Leila in to dinner again on Saturday , and a man call Fort come too . 
 she be sweet on he , I could see with half an eye , but poor old Ted 
 can not . the doctor and Ted talk up hill and down dale . the doctor say 
 a thing which strike I . ' what divide we from the beast ? will power : 
 nothing else . what be this war , really , but a death carnival of proof 
 that man 's will be invincible ? ' I stick it down to tell you , when I get 
 upstairs . he be a clever fellow . I believe in God , as you know , but I 
 must say when it come to an argument , poor old Ted do seem a 
 bit weak , with his : ' we be tell this , ' and ' we be tell that : nobody 
 mention Nollie . I must have the whole thing out with Ted ; we must know 
 how to act when it be all over . " 

 but not till the middle of March , when the brother have be sit 
 opposite each other at meal for two month , be the subject broach 
 between they , and then not by Robert . Edward , stand by the hearth 
 after dinner , in his familiar attitude , one foot on the fender , one hand 
 grasp the mantel - shelf , and his eye fix on the flame , say : " I have 
 never ask your forgiveness , Bob . " 

 Robert , linger at the table over his glass of port , start , look 
 at Edward 's back in its parson 's coat , and answer : 

 " my dear old chap ! " 

 " it have be very difficult to speak of this . " 

 " of course , of course ! " and there be a silence , while Robert 's eye 
 travel round the wall for inspiration . they encounter only 
 the effigy of past Piersons very oily work , and fall back on the 
 dining - table . Edward go on speak to the fire : 

 " it still seem to I incredible . day and night I think of what it be my 
 duty to do . " 

 " nothing ! " ejaculate Robert . " leave the baby with Thirza ; we will take 
 care of it , and when Nollie 's fit , let she go back to work in a hospital 
 again . she will soon get over it . " he see his brother shake his head , 
 and think : ' ah ! yes ; now there be go to be some d - d conscientious 
 complication . ' 

 Edward turn round on he : " that be very sweet of you both , but it 
 would be wrong and cowardly for I to allow it . " 

 the resentment which spring up in father when other father dispose of 
 young life , rise in Robert . 

 " dash it all , my dear Ted , that be for Nollie to say . she be a woman now , 
 remember . " 

 a smile go stray about in the shadow of his brother 's face . " a 
 woman ? little Nollie ! Bob , I have   make a terrible mess of it with my 
 girl . " he hide his lip with his hand , and turn again to the flame . 
 Robert feel a lump in his throat . " oh ! hang it , old boy , I do not   think 
 that . what else could you have do ? you take too much on yourself . 
 after all , they be fine girl . I be sure Nollie 's a darling . it be these 
 modern notion , and this war . cheer up ! it will all dry straight . " he 
 go up to his brother and put a hand on his shoulder . Edward seem to 
 stiffen under that touch . 

 " nothing come straight , " he say , " unless it be face ; you know that , 
 Bob . " 

 Robert 's face be a study at that moment . his cheek fill and 
 collapse again like a dog 's when it have be rebuke . his colour 
 deepen , and he rattle some money in a trouser pocket . 

 " something in that , of course , " he say gruffly . " all the same , the 
 decision 's with Nollie . we will see what Thirza say . anyway , there be 
 no hurry . it be a thousand pity you be a parson ; the trouble 's enough 
 without that : " 

 Edward shake his head . " my position be nothing ; it be the thought of my 
 child , my wife 's child . it be sheer pride ; and I can not   subdue it . I can not 
 fight it down . God forgive I , I rebel . " 

 and Robert think : ' by George , he do take it to heart ! well , so 
 should I ! I do , as it be ! ' he take out his pipe , and fill it , push 
 the tobacco down and down . 

 " I be not a man of the world , " he hear his brother say ; " I be out of 
 touch with many thing . it be almost unbearable to I to feel that 
 I be join with the world to condemn my own daughter ; not for their 
 reason , perhaps - I do not   know ; I hope not , but still , I be against she . " 

 Robert light his pipe . 

 " steady , old man ! " he say . " it be a misfortune . but if I be you I 
 should feel : ' she be do a wild , silly thing , but , hang it , if anybody 
 say a word against she , I will wring his neck . ' and what be more , you will 
 feel much the same , when it come to the point . " he emit a huge puff 
 of smoke , which obscure his brother 's face , and the blood , buzz in 
 his temple , seem to thicken the sound of Edward 's voice . 

 " I do not   know ; I have   try to see clearly . I have pray to be show 
 what her duty be , and mine . it seem to I there can be no peace for she 
 until she have atone , by open suffering ; that the world 's judgment be 
 her cross , and she must bear it ; especially in these day , when all the 
 world be face suffer so nobly . and then it seem so hard - so bitter ; 
 my poor little Nollie ! " 

 there be a silence , break only by the gurgling of Robert 's pipe , till 
 he say abruptly : 

 " I do not   follow you , Ted ; no , I do not . I think a man should screen his 
 child all he can . talk to she as you like , but do not   let the world do 
 it . dash it , the world 's a rotten gabbling place . I call myself a man of 
 the world , but when it come to private matter - well , then I draw the 
 line . it seem to I it seem to I inhuman . what do George Laird 
 think about it ? he be a know chap . I suppose you have   - no , I suppose you 
 have not   - " for a peculiar smile have come on Edward 's face . 

 " no , " he say , " I should hardly ask George Laird 's opinion . " 

 and Robert realise suddenly the stubborn loneliness of that thin black 
 figure , whose finger be play with a little gold cross . ' by Jove ! ' 
 he think , ' I believe old Ted 's like one of those eastern chap who 
 go into lonely place . he be get himself surround by vision of thing 
 that be not   there . he live in unreality - something we can not   understand . 
 I should not   be surprised if he hear voice , like - ' who be it ? tt , 
 tt ! what a pity ! ' Ted be deceptive . he be gentle and - all that , a 
 gentleman of course , and that disguise he ; but underneath ; what be 
 there - a regular ascetic , a fakir ! and a sense of bewilderment , of 
 deal with something which he could not grasp , beset Bob Pierson , so 
 that he go back to the table , and sit down again beside his port . 

 " it seem to I , " he say rather gruffly , " that the chicken have well 
 be hatch before we count it . " and then , sorry for his brusqueness , 
 empty his glass . as the fluid pass over his palate , he think : 
 ' poor old Ted ! he do not   even drink - have not   a pleasure in life , so far 
 as I can see , except do his duty , and do not   even seem to know 
 what that be . there be not   many like he - luckily ! and yet I love 
 he - pathetic chap ! ' 

 the " pathetic chap " be still star at the flame . 3 

 and at this very hour , when the brother be talk - for thought and 
 feeling do pass mysteriously over the invisible wire of space Cyril 
 Morland 's son be be bear of Noel , a little before his time . 




 PART III 




 I 

 down by the River Wye , among plum - tree in blossom , Noel have lay she 
 baby in a hammock , and stand read a letter : 


 " MY dearest nollie , 

 " now that you be strong again , I feel that I must put before you my 
 feeling as to your duty in this crisis of your life . your aunt and uncle 
 have make the most kind and generous offer to adopt your little boy . I 
 have know that this be in their mind for some time , and have think 
 it over day and night for week . in the worldly sense it would be the 
 good thing , no doubt . but this be a spiritual matter . the future of our 
 soul depend on how we meet the consequence of our conduct . and 
 painful , dreadful , indeed , as they must be , I be drive to feel that you 
 can only reach true peace by face they in a spirit of brave humility . 
 I want you to think and think - till you arrive at a certainty which 
 satisfy your conscience . if you decide , as I trust you will , to come 
 back to I here with your boy , I shall do all in my power to make you 
 happy while we face the future together . to do as your aunt and uncle in 
 their kindness wish , would , I be sore afraid , end in deprive you of 
 the inner strength and happiness which God only give to those who do 
 their duty and try courageously to repair their error . I have 
 confidence in you , my dear child . 

 " ever your most love father , 

 " EDWARD PIERSON . " 

 she read it through a second time , and look at her baby . daddy seem 
 to think that she might be willing to part from this wonderful creature ! 
 Sunlight fall through the plum blossom , in an extra patchwork quilt over 
 the bundle lie there , touch the baby 's nose and mouth , so that he 
 sneeze . Noel laugh , and put her lip close to his face . ' give you 
 up ! ' she think : ' oh , no ! and I be go to be happy too . they shall not 
 stop I : 

 in answer to the letter she say simply that she be come up ; and a 
 week later she go , to the dismay of her uncle and aunt . the old nurse 
 go too . everything have hitherto be so carefully watch and guard 
 against by Thirza , that Noel do not really come face to face with her 
 position till she reach home . 

 Gratian , who have manage to get transfer to a London Hospital , be 
 now live at home . she have provide the house with new maid against 
 her sister 's return ; and though Noel be relieve not to meet her old 
 familiar , she encounter with difficulty the stolid curiosity of new 
 face . that morning before she leave Kestrel , her aunt have come into her 
 room while she be dress , take her left hand and slip a little 
 gold band on to its third finger . " to please I , Nollie , now that you be 
 go , just for the foolish , who know nothing about you . " 

 Noel have suffer it with the thought : ' it be all very silly ! ' but now , 
 when the new maid be pour out her hot water , she be suddenly aware 
 of the girl 's round blue eye wander , as it be , mechanically to 
 her hand . this little hoop of gold , then , have an awful power ! a rush 
 of disgust come over she . all life seem suddenly a thing of form 
 and sham . everybody then would look at that little ring ; and she be a 
 coward , save herself from they ! when she be alone again , she slip 
 it off , and lay it on the washstand , where the sunlight fall . only this 
 little shin band of metal , this little yellow ring , stand between she 
 and the world 's hostile scorn ! her lip tremble . she take up the ring , 
 and go to the open window ; to throw it out . but she do not , uncertain 
 and unhappy - half realise the cruelty of life . a knock at the door 
 send she fly back to the washstand . the visitor be Gratian . 

 " I have   be look at he , " she say softly ; " he be like you , Nollie , 
 except for his nose . " 

 " he be hardly get one yet . but be not   his eye intelligent ? I think 
 they be wonderful . " she hold up the ring : " what shall I do about this , 
 gratian ? " 

 Gratian flush . " wear it . I do not   see why outsider should know . for 
 the sake of Dad I think you ought . there be the parish . " 

 Noel slip the ring back on to her finger . " would you ? " 

 " I can not   tell . I think I would . " 

 Noel laugh suddenly . " I be go to get cynical ; I can feel it in my 
 bone . how be daddy look ? " 

 " very thin ; Mr. Lauder be back again from the Front for a bit , and 
 take some of the work now . " 

 " do I hurt he very much still ? " 

 " he be awfully pleased that you have   come . he be as sweet as he can be about 
 you . " 

 " yes , " murmur Noel , " that be what be dreadful . I be glad he be not   in 
 when I come . have he tell anyone ? " 

 Gratian shake her head . " I do not   think anybody know ; unless - perhaps 
 Captain Fort . he come in again the other night ; and somehow - " 

 Noel flush . " Leila ! " she say enigmatically . " have you see she ? " 

 " I go to her flat last week with Dad - he like she . " 

 " Delilah be her real name , you know . all man like she . and Captain Fort 
 be her lover . " 

 Gratian gasp . Noel would say thing sometimes which make she feel the 
 young of the two . 

 " of course he be , " go on Noel in a hard voice . " she have no man 
 friend ; her sort never have , only lover . why do you think he know 
 about I ? " 

 " when he ask after you he look - " 

 " yes ; I have   see he look like that when he be sorry for anything . I do not 
 care . have Monsieur Lavendie be in lately ? " 

 " yes ; he look awfully unhappy . " 

 " his wife drug . " 

 " oh , Nollie ! how do you know ? " 

 " I see she once ; I be sure she do ; there be a smell ; and she be get 
 wander eye that go all glassy . he can paint I now , if he like . I 
 would not   let he before . do he know ? " 

 " of course not . " 

 " he know there be something ; he be get second sight , I think . but I 
 mind he less than anybody . be his picture of daddy good ? " 

 " powerful , but it hurt , somehow . " 

 " let us go down and see it . " 

 the picture be hang in the drawing - room , and its intense modernity make 
 that old - fashioned room seem lifeless and strange . the black figure , 
 with long pale finger touch the pale piano key , have a frightening 
 actuality . the face , three - quarter full , be raise as if for 
 inspiration , and the eye rest , dreamy and unseeing , on the face of a 
 girl paint and hang on a background of wall above the piano . 

 " it be the face of that girl , " say Gratian , when they have look at the 
 picture for some time in silence : 

 " no , " say Noel , " it be the look in his eye . " 

 " but why do he choose such a horrid , common girl ? be not   she fearfully 
 alive , though ? she look as if she be say : ' Cheerio ! ' " 

 " she be ; it be awfully pathetic , I think . poor daddy ! " 

 " it be a libel , " say Gratian stubbornly . 

 " no . that be what hurt . he be not   quite - quite all there . will he be 
 come in soon ? " 

 Gratian take her arm , and press it hard . " would you like I at dinner 
 or not ; I can easily be out ? " 

 Noel shake her head . " it be no good to funk it . he want I , and now 
 he be get I . oh ! why do he ? it will be awful for he . " 

 Gratian sigh . " I have   try my good , but he always say : ' I have   think 
 so long about it all that I can not   think any long . I can only feel the 
 braver course be the good . when thing be bravely and humbly meet , there 
 will be charity and forgiveness . ' " 

 " there will not , " say Noel , " daddy be a saint , and he do not   see . " 

 " yes , he be a saint . but one must think for oneself - one simply must . I 
 can not   believe as he do , any more ; can you , Nollie ? " 

 " I do not   know . when I be go through it , I pray ; but I do not   know 
 whether I really believe . I do not   think I mind much about that , one way 
 or the other . " 

 " I mind terribly , " say Gratian , " I want the truth . " 

 " I do not   know what I want , " say Noel slowly , " except that sometimes I 
 want - life ; awfully . " 

 and the two sister be silent , look at each other with a sort of 
 wonder . 

 Noel have a fancy to put on a bright - colour blue frock that evening , 
 and at her neck she hang a Breton cross of old paste , which have belong 
 to her mother . when she have finish dress she go into the nursery 
 and stand by the baby 's cot . the old nurse who be sit there beside 
 he , get up at once and say : 

 " he be sleep beautiful - the lamb . I will go down and get a cup o ' tea , 
 and come up , ma'am , when the gong go . " in the way peculiar to those 
 who have never to initiate , but only to support position in which they 
 be place by other , she have adopt for herself the theory that Noel 
 be a real war - widow . she know the truth perfectly ; for she have watch 
 that hurry little romance at Kestrel , but by dint of charity and 
 blur meditation it be easy for she to imagine the marriage ceremony 
 which would and should have take place ; and she be zealous that other 
 people should imagine it too . it be so much more regular and natural 
 like that , and " her " baby invest with his proper dignity . she go 
 downstairs to get a " cup o ' tea , " think : ' a picture they make - that 
 they do , bless his little heart ; and his pretty little mother - no more 
 than a child , all say and do . ' 

 Noel have be stand there some minute in the fail light , absorb 
 in the face of the sleep baby , when , raise her eye , she see in a 
 mirror the refection of her father 's dark figure by the door . she could 
 hear he breathe as if the ascent of the stair have tire he ; and 
 move to the head of the cot , she rest her hand on it , and turn she 
 face towards he . he come up and stand beside she , look silently down 
 at the baby . she see he make the sign of the Cross above it , and the 
 movement of his lip in prayer . love for her father , and rebellion 
 against this intercession for her perfect baby fight so hard in the 
 girl 's heart that she feel suffocated , and glad of the dark , so that he 
 could not see her eye . then he take her hand and put it to his lip , 
 but still without a word ; and for the life of she she could not speak 
 either . in silence , he kiss her forehead ; and there mount in Noel a 
 sudden passion of longing to show he her pride and love for her baby . 
 she put her finger down and touch one of his hand . the tiny sleep 
 finger uncurl and , like some little sea anemone , clutched round it . 
 she hear her father draw his breath in ; see he turn away quickly , 
 silently , and go out . and she stay , hardly breathe , with the hand of 
 her baby squeeze her finger . 




 II 

 1 

 when Edward Pierson , afraid of his own emotion , leave the twilit nursery , 
 he slip into his own room , and fall on his knee beside his bed , 
 absorb in the vision he have see . that young figure in Madonna blue , 
 with the halo of bright hair ; the sleep babe in the fine dusk ; the 
 silence , the adoration in that white room ! he see , too ; a vision of the 
 past , when Noel herself have be the sleep babe within her mother 's 
 arm , and he have stand beside they , wonder and give praise . it 
 pass with its other - worldliness and the fine holiness which belong to 
 beauty , pass and leave the tormenting realism of life . ah ! to live with 
 only the inner meaning , spiritual and beautifed , in a rare wonderment 
 such as he have experience just now ! 

 his alarum clock , while he kneel in his narrow , monkish little 
 room - tick the evening hour away into darkness . and still he knelt , 
 dread to come back into it all , to face the world 's eye , and the 
 sound of the world 's tongue , and the touch of the rough , the gross , the 
 unseemly . how could he guard his child ? how preserve that vision in her 
 life , in her spirit , about to enter such cold , rough water ? but the 
 gong sound ; he get up , and go downstairs . 

 but this first family moment , which all have dread , be relieve , 
 as dread moment so often be , by the unexpected appearance of the 
 belgian painter . he have a general invitation , of which he often avail 
 himself ; but he be so silent , and his thin , beardless face , which 
 seem all eye and brow , so mournful , that all three feel in the 
 presence of a sorrow deeply even than their own family grief . during the 
 meal he gaze silently at Noel . once he say : " you will let I paint you 
 now , mademoiselle , I hope ? " and his face brighten a little when 
 she nod . there be never much talk when he come , for any depth of 
 discussion , even of art , bring out at once too wide a difference . and 
 Pierson could never avoid a vague irritation with one who clearly have 
 spirituality , but of a sort which he could not understand . after dinner 
 he excuse himself , and go off to his study . Monsieur would be happy 
 alone with the two girl ! Gratian , too , get up . she have remember 
 Noel 's word : " I mind he less than anybody . " it be a chance for Nollie 
 to break the ice . 


 2 

 " I have not see you for a long time , mademoiselle , " say the painter , 
 when they be alone . 

 Noel be sit in front of the empty drawing - room hearth , with her 
 arm stretch out as if there have be a fire there . 

 " I have   be away . how be you go to paint I , monsieur ? " 

 " in that dress , mademoiselle ; just as you be now , warm yourself at 
 the fire of life . " 

 " but it be not   there . " 

 " yes , fire soon go out . Mademoiselle , will you come and see my wife ? 
 she be ill . " 

 " now ? " ask Noel , startle . 

 " yes , now . she be really ill , and I have no one there . that be what I 
 come to ask of your sister ; but - now you be here , it be even well . she 
 like you . " 

 Noel get up . " wait one minute ! " she say , and run upstairs . her baby 
 be asleep , and the old nurse dozing . put on a cloak and cap of 
 grey rabbit 's fur , she run down again to the hall where the painter be 
 wait ; and they go out together . 

 " I do not know if I be to blame , " he say , " my wife have be no real 
 wife to I since she know I have a mistress and be no real husband to 
 she . " 

 Noel star round at his face light by a queer , smile . 

 " yes , " he go on , " from that have come her tragedy . but she should have 
 know before I marry she . nothing be conceal . Bon Dieu ! she should 
 have know ! why can not a woman see thing as they be ? my mistress , 
 mademoiselle , be not a thing of flesh . it be my art . it have always be 
 first with I , and always will . she have never accept that , she be 
 incapable of accept it . I be sorry for she . but what would you ? I be 
 a fool to marry she . Chere mademoiselle , no trouble be anything beside 
 the trouble which go on day and night , meal after meal , year , after 
 year , between two people who should never have marry , because one 
 love too much and require all , and the other love not at all - no , not 
 at all , now , it be long dead - and can give but little . " 

 " can not   you separate ? " ask Noel , wonder . 

 " it be hard to separate from one who crave for you as she crave her 
 drug - yes , she take drug now , mademoiselle . it be impossible for one 
 who have any compassion in his soul . besides , what would she do ? we live 
 from hand to mouth , in a strange land . she have no friend here , not one . 
 how could I leave she while this war last ? as well could two person on 
 a desert island separate . she be kill herself , too , with these drug , 
 and I can not stop she . " 

 " poor madame ! " murmur Noel . " poor monsieur ! " 

 the painter draw his hand across his eye . 

 " I can not change my nature , " he say in a stifle voice , " nor she her . 
 so we go on . but life will stop suddenly some day for one of we . after 
 all , it be much bad for she than for I . Enter , mademoiselle . do not 
 tell she I be go to paint you ; she like you , because you refuse to 
 let I . " 

 Noel go up the stair , shudder ; she have be there once before , and 
 remember that sickly scent of drug . on the third floor they enter a 
 small sitting - room whose wall be cover with painting and drawing ; 
 from one corner a triangular stack of canvas jut out . there be 
 little furniture save an old red sofa , and on this be seat a stoutish 
 man in the garb of a belgian soldier , with his elbow on his knee and 
 his bearded cheek rest on his double fist . beside he on the sofa , 
 nurse a doll , be a little girl , who look up at Noel . she have a most 
 strange , attractive , pale little face , with pointed chin and large eye , 
 which never move from this apparition in grey rabbit ' skin . 

 " ah , Barra ! you here ! " say the painter : 

 " Mademoiselle , this be Monsieur Barra , a friend of our from the front ; 
 and this be our landlady 's little girl . a little refugee , too , be not 
 you , Chica ? " 

 the child give he a sudden brilliant smile and resume her grave 
 scrutiny of the visitor . the soldier , who have rise heavily , offer 
 Noel one of his podgy hand , with a sad and heavy giggle . 

 " sit down , mademoiselle , " say Lavendie , place a chair for she : " I 
 will bring my wife in , " and he go out through some double door . 

 Noel sit down . the soldier have resume his old attitude , and the little 
 girl her nursing of the doll , though her big eye still watch the 
 visitor . overcome by strangeness , Noel make no attempt to talk . and 
 presently through the double door the painter and his wife come in . she 
 be a thin woman in a red wrapper , with hollow cheek , high cheek - bone , 
 and hungry eye ; her dark hair hang loose , and one hand play 
 restlessly with a fold of her gown . she take Noel 's hand ; and her 
 uplifted eye seem to dig into the girl 's face , to let go suddenly , 
 and flutter . 

 " how do you do ? " she say in English . " so Pierre bring you , to see I 
 again . I remember you so well . you would not let he paint you . ah ! 
 que c'est drole ! you be so pretty , too . Hein , Monsieur Barra , be not 
 mademoiselle pretty ? " 

 the soldier give his heavy giggle , and resume his scrutiny of the 
 floor . 

 " Henriette , " say lavendie , ' sit down beside Chica - you must not stand . 
 sit down , mademoiselle , I beg . " 

 " I be so sorry you be not well , " say Noel , and sit down again . 

 the painter stand lean against the wall , and his wife look up at 
 his tall , thin figure , with eye which have in they anger , and a sort of 
 cunning . 

 " a great painter , my husband , be he not ? " she say to Noel . " you would 
 not imagine what that man can do . and how he paint - all day long ; and 
 all night in his head . and so you would not let he paint you , after 
 all ? " 

 Lavendie say impatiently : " Voyons , Henriette , causez d'autre choose . " 

 his wife pluck nervously at a fold in her red gown , and give he the 
 look of a dog that have be rebuke . 

 " I be a prisoner here , mademoiselle , I never leave the house . here I 
 live day after day - my husband be always paint . who would go out 
 alone under this grey sky of your , and the hatred of the war in every 
 face ? I prefer to keep my room . my husband go painting ; every face 
 he see interest he , except that which he see every day . but I be a 
 prisoner . Monsieur Barra be our first visitor for a long time . " 

 the soldier raise his face from his fist . " Prisonnier , madame ! what 
 would you say if you be out there ? " and he give his thick giggle . 
 " we be the prisoner , we other . what would you say to imprisonment 
 by explosion day and night ; never a minute free . bom ! bom ! bom ! ah ! le 
 tranchee ! it be not so free as all that , there . " 

 " every one have his own prison , " say Lavendie bitterly . " mademoiselle 
 even , have her prison - and little Chica , and her doll . every one have his 
 prison , Barra . Monsieur Barra be also a painter , mademoiselle . " 

 " Moi ! " say Barra , lift his heavy hairy hand . " I paint puddle , 
 star - bomb , horse ' rib - I paint hole and hole and hole , wire and 
 wire and wire , and water - long white ugly water . I paint splinter , and 
 man 's soul naked , and man 's body dead , and nightmare - nightmare - all 
 day and all night - I paint they in my head . " he suddenly cease speaking 
 and relapse into contemplation of the carpet , with his bearded cheek 
 rest on his fist . " and their soul as white as snow , les camarade , " 
 he add suddenly and loudly , " million of Belgians , English , French , 
 even the Boches , with white soul . I paint those soul ! " 

 a little shiver run through Noel , and she look appealingly at 
 Lavendie . 

 " Barra , " he say , as if the soldier be not there , " be a great painter , 
 but the Front have turn his head a little . what he say be true , 
 though . there be no hatred out there . it be here that we be prisoner 
 of hatred , mademoiselle ; avoid hatred - they be poison ! " 

 his wife put out her hand and touch the child 's shoulder . 

 " why should we not hate ? " she say . " who kill Chica 's father , and blow 
 her home to - rag ? who throw she out into this horrible England - pardon , 
 mademoiselle , but it be horrible . ah ! les boche ! if my hatred could 
 destroy they there would not be one left . even my husband be not so mad 
 about his painting when we live at home . but here - ! " her eye dart 
 at his face again , and then sink as if rebuke . Noel see the painter 's 
 lip move . the sick woman 's whole figure writhe . 

 " it be mania , your painting ! " she look at Noel with a smile . " will you 
 have some tea , mademoiselle ? Monsieur Barra , some tea ? " 

 the soldier say thickly : " no , madame ; in the trench we have tea 
 enough . it console we . but when we get away - give we wine , le bon vin ; 
 le bon petit vin ! " 

 " get some wine , Pierre ! " 

 Noel see from the painter 's face that there be no wine , and perhaps no 
 money to get any ; but he go quickly out . she rise and say : 

 " I must be go , madame . " 

 Madame Lavendie lean forward and clutch her wrist . " wait a little , 
 mademoiselle . we shall have some wine , and Pierre shall take you back 
 presently . you can not go home alone - you be too pretty . be she not , 
 Monsieur Barra ? " 

 the soldier look up : " what would you say , " he say , " to bottle of 
 wine burst in the air , burst red and burst white , all day long , 
 all night long ? great steel bottle , large as Chica : bit of bottle , 
 carry off man 's head ? Bsum , garra - a - a , and a house come down , and 
 little bit of people ever so small , ever so small , tiny bit in the air 
 and all over the ground . great soul out there , madame . but I will tell 
 you a secret , " and again he give his heavy giggle , " all a little , little 
 mad ; nothing to speak of - just a little bit mad ; like a watch , you 
 know , that you can wind for ever . that be the discovery of this war , 
 mademoiselle , " he say , address Noel for the first time , " you can not 
 gain a great soul till you be a little mad . " and lower his piggy 
 grey eye at once , he resume his former attitude . " it be that madness I 
 shall paint some day , " he announce to the carpet ; " lurk in one tiny 
 corner of each soul of all those million , as it creep , as it peep , 
 ever so sudden , ever so little when we all think it have be put to bed , 
 here - there , now - then , when you least think ; in and out like a mouse 
 with bright eye . million of man with white soul , all a little mad . 
 a great subject , I think , " he add heavily . involuntarily Noel put she 
 hand to her heart , which be beat fast . she feel quite sick . 

 " how long have you be at the Front , monsieur ? " 

 " two year , mademoiselle . time to go home and paint , be it not ? but 
 art - ! " he shrug his heavy round shoulder , his whole bear - like body . 
 " a little mad , " he mutter once more . " I will tell you a story . once 
 in winter after I have rest a fortnight , I go back to the trench at 
 night , and I want some earth to fill up a hole in the ground where I be 
 sleep ; when one have sleep in a bed one become particular . well , I 
 scratch it from my parapet , and I come to something funny . I strike my 
 briquet , and there be a Boche 's face all frozen and earthy and dead and 
 greeny - white in the flame from my briquet . " 

 " oh , no ! " 

 " oh ! but yes , mademoiselle ; true as I sit here . very useful in the 
 parapet - dead Boche . once a man like I . but in the morning I could not 
 stand he ; we dig he out and bury he , and fill the hole up with 
 other thing . but there I stand in the night , and my face as close to 
 his as this " - and he hold his thick hand a foot before his face . " we 
 talk of our home ; he have a soul , that man . ' il I disait des chose ' , 
 how he have suffer ; and I , too , tell he my suffering . dear God , we 
 know all ; we shall never know more than we know out there , we other , 
 for we be mad - nothing to speak of , but just a little , little mad . when 
 you see we , mademoiselle , walk the street , remember that . " and he 
 drop his face on to his fist again . 

 a silence have fall in the room - very queer and complete . the little 
 girl nurse her doll , the soldier gaze at the floor , the woman 's mouth 
 move stealthily , and in Noel the thought rush continually to the 
 verge of action : ' could not   I get up and run downstairs ? ' but she sit on , 
 hypnotise by that silence , till Lavendie reappear with a bottle and 
 four glass . 

 " to drink our health , and wish we luck , mademoiselle , " he say . 

 Noel raise the glass he have give she . " I wish you all happiness . " 

 " and you , mademoiselle , " the two man murmur . 

 she drink a little , and rise . 

 " and now , mademoiselle , " say Lavendie , " if you must go , I will see you 
 home . " 

 Noel take Madame Lavendie 's hand ; it be cold , and return no pressure ; 
 her eye have the glaze look that she remember . the soldier have put 
 his empty glass down on the floor , and be regard it unconscious of 
 she . Noel turn quickly to the door ; the last thing she see be the 
 little girl nurse her doll . 

 in the street the painter begin at once in his rapid French : 

 " I ought not to have ask you to come , mademoiselle ; I do not know our 
 friend Barra be there . besides , my wife be not fit to receive a lady ; 
 vous voyez qu'il y a de la manie dans cette pauvre tote . I should not 
 have ask you ; but I be so miserable . " 

 " oh ! " murmur Noel , " I know . " 

 " in our home over there she have interest . in this great town she can 
 only nurse her grief against I . ah ! this war ! it seem to I we be all 
 in the stomach of a great coiling serpent . we lie there , be digest . 
 in a way it be well out there in the trench ; they be beyond hate , 
 they have attain a height that we have not . it be wonderful how they 
 still can be for go on till they have beat the Boche ; that be 
 curious and it be very great . do Barra tell you how , when they come 
 back - all these fighter - they be go to rule , and manage the 
 future of the world ? but it will not be so . they will mix in with life , 
 separate - be scatter , and they will be rule as they be before . the 
 tongue and the pen will rule they : those who have not see the war will 
 rule they . " 

 " oh ! " ' cry Noel , ' surely they will be the brave and strong in the 
 future . " 

 the painter smile . 

 " War make man simple , " he say , " elemental ; life in peace be neither 
 simple nor elemental , it be subtle , full of change environment , to 
 which man must adapt himself ; the cunning , the astute , the adaptable , 
 will ever rule in time of peace . it be pathetic , the belief of those 
 brave soldier that the - future be theirs . " 

 " he say , a strange thing , " murmur Noel ; " that they be all a little 
 mad . " 

 " he be a man of queer genius - Barra ; you should see some of his early 
 picture . mad be not quite the word , but something be loosen , be 
 rattle round in they , they have lose proportion , they be be 
 force in one direction . I tell you , mademoiselle , this war be one great 
 force - house ; every live plant be be make to grow too fast , each 
 quality , each passion ; hate and love , intolerance and lust and avarice , 
 courage and energy ; yes , and self - sacrifice - all be be force and 
 force beyond their strength , beyond the natural flow of the sap , force 
 till there have come a great wild luxuriant crop , and then - Psum ! Presto ! 
 the change come , and these plant will wither and rot and stink . but we 
 who see life in form of Art be the only one who feel that ; and we be 
 so few . the natural shape of thing be lose . there be a mist of blood 
 before all eye . man be afraid of be fair . see how we all hate not 
 only our enemy , but those who differ from we . look at the street 
 too - see how man and woman rush together , how Venus reign in this 
 force - house . be it not natural that Youth about to die should yearn 
 for pleasure , for love , for union , before death ? " 

 Noel star up at he . ' now ! ' she think : I will . ' 

 " yes , " she say , " I know that be true , because I rush , myself . I would 
 like you to know . we could not   be marry - there be not   time . and - he be 
 kill . but his son be alive . that be why I have   be away so long . I want 
 every one to know . " she speak very calmly , but her cheek feel burn 
 hot . 

 the painter have make an upward movement of his hand , as if they have 
 be jerk by an electric current , then he say quite quietly : 

 " my profound respect , mademoiselle , and my great sympathy . and your 
 father ? " 

 " it be awful for he . " 

 the painter say gently : " ah ! mademoiselle , I be not so sure . perhaps he 
 do not suffer so greatly . perhaps not even your trouble can hurt he 
 very much . he live in a world apart . that , I think , be his true tragedy 
 to be alive , and yet not live enough to feel reality . do you know 
 Anatole France 's description of an old woman : ' Elle vivait , mais si 
 peu . ' would that not be well say of the Church in these day : ' Elle 
 vivait , mais si peu . ' I see he always like a rather beautiful dark 
 spire in the night - time when you can not see how it be attach to the 
 earth . he do not know , he never will know , Life . " 

 Noel look round at he . " what do you mean by Life , monsieur ? I be 
 always read about Life , and people talk of see life ! what be 
 it - where be it ? I never see anything that you could call Life . " 

 the painter smile . 

 " to ' see life ' ! " he say . " ah ! that be different . to enjoy yourself ! 
 well , it be my experience that when people be ' see life ' as they 
 call it , they be not enjoy themselves . you know when one be very 
 thirsty one drink and drink , but the thirst remain all the same . 
 there be place where one can see life as it be call , but the only 
 person you will see enjoy themselves at such place be a few 
 humdrum like myself , who go there for a talk over a cup of coffee . 
 perhaps at your age , though , it be different . " 

 Noel clasp her hand , and her eye seem to shine in the gloom . " I 
 want music and dancing and light , and beautiful thing and face ; but I 
 never get they . " 

 " no , there do not exist in this town , or in any other , a place which 
 will give you that . Fox - trot and ragtime and paint and powder and glare 
 and half - drunken young man , and woman with red lip you can get they in 
 plenty . but rhythm and beauty and charm never . in Brussels when I be 
 young I see much ' life ' as they call it , but not one lovely thing 
 unspoile ; it be all as ash in the mouth . ah ! you may smile , but I 
 know what I be talk of . happiness never come when you be look 
 for it , mademoiselle ; beauty be in Nature and in real art , never in 
 these false silly make belief . there be a place just here where we 
 Belgians go ; would you like to see how true my word be ? 

 " oh , yes ! " 

 " Tres - bien ! let we go in ? " 

 they pass into a revolve doorway with little glass compartment 
 which shoot they out into a shin corridor . at the end of this the 
 painter look at Noel and seem to hesitate , then he turn off from 
 the room they be about to enter into a room on the right . it be 
 large , full of gilt and plush and marble table , where couple be 
 seat ; young man in khaki and old man in plain clothe , together or 
 with young woman . at these last Noel look , face after face , while they 
 be pass down a long way to an empty table . she see that some be 
 pretty , and some only try to be , that nearly all be powder and 
 have their eye darken and their lip redden , till she feel her own 
 face to be dreadfully ungarnishe : up in a gallery a small band be 
 play an attractive jingling hollow little tune ; and the buzz of talk 
 and laughter be almost deafen . 

 " what will you have , mademoiselle ? " say the painter . " it be just nine 
 o'clock ; we must order quickly . " 

 " may I have one of those green thing ? " 

 " Deux creme de menthe , " say Lavendie to the waiter . 

 Noel be too absorb to see the queer , bitter little smile hovering 
 about his face . she be busy look at the face of woman whose eye , 
 furtively cold and enquiring , be fix on she ; and at the face of man 
 with eye that be furtively warm and wonder . 

 " I wonder if daddy be ever in a place like this ? " she say , put the 
 glass of green stuff to her lip . " be it nice ? it smell of peppermint . " 

 " a beautiful colour . good luck , mademoiselle ! " and he chink his glass 
 with her . 

 Noel sip , hold it away , and sip again . 

 " it be nice ; but awfully sticky . may I have a cigarette ? " 

 " Des cigarette , " say Lavendie to the waiter , " Et deux cafe noir . 
 now , mademoiselle , " he murmur when they be bring , " if we imagine 
 that we have drink a bottle of wine each , we shall have exhaust 
 all the preliminary of what be call Vice . amusing , be not   it ? " he 
 shrug his shoulder . 

 his face strike Noel suddenly as tarnished and almost sullen . 

 " do not   be angry , monsieur , it be all new to I , you see . " 

 the painter smile , his bright , skin - deep smile . 

 " Pardon ! I forget myself . only , it hurt I to see beauty in a place 
 like this . it do not go well with that tune , and these voice , and 
 these face . enjoy yourself , mademoiselle ; drink it all in ! see the way 
 these people look at each other ; what love shin in their eye ! a pity , 
 too , we can not hear what they be say . believe I , their talk be most 
 subtle , tre - spirituel . these young woman be ' do their bit , ' as you 
 call it ; bring le plaisir to all these who be serve their country . 
 eat , drink , love , for tomorrow we die . who care for the world simple 
 or the world beautiful , in day like these ? the house of the spirit be 
 empty . " 

 he be look at her sidelong as if he would enter her very soul . 

 Noel get up . " I be ready to go , monsieur . " 

 he put her cloak on her shoulder , pay the bill , and they go out , 
 thread again through the little table , through the buzz of talk 
 and laughter and the fume of tobacco , while another hollow little tune 
 jingle away behind they . 

 " through there , " say the painter , point to another door , " they 
 dance . so it go . London in war - time ! well , after all , it be never 
 very different ; no great town be . do you enjoy your sight of ' life , ' 
 mademoiselle ? " 

 " I think one must dance , to be happy . be that where your friend go ? " 

 " oh , no ! to a room much rough , and play domino , and drink coffee and 
 beer , and talk . they have no money to throw away . " 

 " why do not   you show I ? " 

 " Mademoiselle , in that room you might see someone perhaps whom one day 
 you would meet again ; in the place we visit you be safe enough at 
 least I hope so . " 

 Noel shrug . " I suppose it do not   matter now , what I do . " 

 and a rush of emotion catch at her throat - a wave from the past - the 
 moonlit night , the dark old Abbey , the wood and the river . two tear 
 roll down her cheek . 

 " I be think of - something , " she say in a muffled voice . " it be all 
 right . " 

 " Chere mademoiselle ! " Lavendie murmur ; and all the way home he be 
 timid and distressed . shake his hand at the door , she murmur : 

 " I be sorry I be such a fool ; and thank you awfully , monsieur . good 
 night . " 

 " good night ; and well dream . there be a good time come - peace 
 and happiness once more in the world . it will not always be this 
 Forcing - House . good night , chere mademoiselle ! " 

 Noel go up to the nursery , and steal in . a night - light be burn , 
 Nurse and baby be fast asleep . she tiptoe through into her own room . 
 once there , she feel suddenly so tired that she could hardly undress ; 
 and yet curiously rest , as if with that rush of emotion , Cyril and the 
 past have slip from she for ever . 




 III 


 Noel 's first encounter with opinion take place the follow day . the 
 baby have just come in from its airing ; she have see it comfortably 
 snoozing , and be on her way downstairs , when a voice from the hall 
 say : 

 " how do you do ? " and she see the khaki - clothe figure of Adrian Lauder , her 
 father 's curate ! hesitate just a moment , she finish her descent , and 
 put her finger in his . he be a rather heavy , dough - colour young man 
 of nearly thirty , unsuited by khaki , with a round white collar button 
 behind ; but his aspire eye redeem he , proclaim the good 
 intention in the world , and an inclination towards sentiment in the 
 presence of beauty . 

 " I have not   see you for age , " he say rather fatuously , follow she 
 into her father 's study . 

 " no , " say Noel . " how - do you like be at the Front ? " 

 " ah ! " he say , " they be wonderful ! " and his eye shine . " it be so nice to 
 see you again . " 

 " be it ? " 

 he seem puzzle by that answer ; stammer , and say : 

 " I do not   know your sister have a baby . a jolly baby . " 

 " she have not . " 

 Lauder 's mouth open . ' a silly mouth , ' she think . 

 " oh ! " he say . " be it a protegee - belgian or something ? " 

 " no , it be mine ; my own . " and , turn round , she slip the little ring 
 off her finger . when she turn back to he , his face have not recover 
 from her word . it have a hapless look , as of one to whom such a thing 
 ought not to have happen . 

 " do not   look like that , " say Noel . " do not   you understand ? it be 
 mine - mine . " she put out her left hand . " look ! there be no ring . " 

 he stammer : " I say , you ought not   to - you ought not   to - ! " 

 " what ? " 

 " joke about - about such thing ; ought you ? " 

 " one do not   joke if one 's have a baby without be marry , you know . " 

 Lauder go suddenly slack . a shell might have burst a few pace from 
 he . and then , just as one would in such a case , he make an effort , 
 brace himself , and say in a curious voice , both stiff and heavy : " I 
 can not   - one do not   - it be not - " 

 " it be , " say Noel . " if you do not   believe I , ask Daddy . " 

 he put his hand up to his round collar ; and with the wild thought that 
 he be go to tear it off , she cry : " do not ! " 

 " you ! " he say . " you ! but - " 

 Noel turn away from he to the window : she stand look out , but see 
 nothing whatever . 

 " I do not   want it hide , " she say without turn round , " I want every 
 one to know . it be stupid as it be - stupid ! " and she stamp her foot . 
 " can not   you see how stupid it be - everybody 's mouth fall open ! " 

 he utter a little sound which have pain in it , and she feel a real pang 
 of compunction . he have grip the back of a chair ; his face have lose 
 its heaviness . a dull flush colour his cheek . Noel have a feeling , as 
 if she have be convict of treachery . it be his silence , the curious 
 look of an impersonal pain beyond power of word ; she feel in he 
 something much deep than mere disapproval - something which echo 
 within herself . she walk quickly past he and escape . she run 
 upstairs and throw herself on her bed . he be nothing : it be not that ! 
 it be in herself , the awful feeling , for the first time develop and 
 poignant , that she have betray her caste , forfeit the right to be 
 think a lady , betray her secret reserve and refinement , repay with 
 black ingratitude the love lavish on her up bringing , by behave like 
 any uncared - for common girl . she have never feel this before - not even 
 when Gratian first hear of it , and they have stand one at each end of 
 the hearth , unable to speak . then she still have her passion , and her 
 grief for the dead . that be go now as if it have never be ; and she 
 have no defence , nothing between she and this crush humiliation and 
 chagrin . she have be mad ! she must have be mad ! the Belgian Barra be 
 right : " all a little mad " in this " force - house " of a war ! she bury 
 her face deep in the pillow , till it almost stop her power of 
 breathing ; her head and cheek and ear seem to be on fire . if only he 
 have show disgust , do something which rouse her temper , her sense 
 of justice , her feel that Fate have be too cruel to she ; but he have 
 just stand there , bewilderment incarnate , like a creature with some very 
 deep illusion shatter . it be horrible ! then , feel that she could 
 not stay still , must walk , run , get away somehow from this feeling of 
 treachery and betrayal , she spring up . all be quiet below , and 
 she slip downstairs and out , speed along with no knowledge of 
 direction , take the way she have take day after day to her hospital . 
 it be the last of April , tree and shrub be luscious with blossom 
 and leaf ; the dog run gaily ; people have almost happy face in the 
 sunshine . ' if I could get away from myself , I would not   care , ' she 
 think . easy to get away from people , from London , even from England 
 perhaps ; but from oneself - impossible ! she pass her hospital ; and 
 look at it dully , at the Red Cross flag against its stucco wall , and 
 a soldier in his blue slop and red tie , come out . she have spend many 
 miserable hour there , but none quite so miserable as this . she pass 
 the church opposite to the flat where Leila live , and run suddenly 
 into a tall man come round the corner , see Fort . she bend her head , 
 and try to hurry past . but his hand be hold out , she could not help 
 put hers into it ; and look up hardily , she say : 

 " you know about I , do not   you ? " 

 his face , naturally so frank , seem to clench up , as if he be rid 
 at a fence . ' he will tell a lie , ' she think bitterly . but he do not . 

 " yes , Leila tell I . " 

 and she think : ' I suppose he will try and pretend that I have   not be a 
 beast ! ' 

 " I admire your pluck , " he say . 

 " I have not   any . " 

 " we never know ourselves , do we ? I suppose you would not   walk my pace a 
 minute or two , would you ? I be go the same way . " 

 " I do not   know which way I be go . " 

 " that be my case , too . " 

 they walk on in silence . 

 " I wish to God I be back in France , " say Fort abruptly . " one do not 
 feel clean here . " 

 Noel 's heart applaud . 

 ah ! to get away - away from oneself ! but at the thought of her baby , her 
 heart fall again . " be your leg quite hopeless ? " she say . 

 " quite . " 

 " that must be horrid . " 

 " hundred of thousand would look on it as splendid luck ; and so it be 
 if you count it well to be alive than dead , which I do , in spite of 
 the blue . " 

 " how be Cousin Leila ? " 

 " very well . she go on peg away at the hospital ; she be a brick . " 
 but he do not look at she , and again there be silence , till he stop 
 by Lord 's Cricket - ground . 

 " I must not   keep you crawl along at this pace . " 

 " oh , I do not   mind ! " 

 " I only want to say that if I can be of any service to you at any time 
 in any way whatever , please command I . " 

 he give her hand a squeeze , take his hat off ; and Noel walk slowly on . 
 the little interview , with its suppression , and its implication , have 
 but exasperate her restlessness , and yet , in a way , it have soothe the 
 soreness of her heart . Captain Fort at all event do not despise she ; 
 and he be in trouble like herself . she feel that somehow by the look 
 of his face , and the tone of his voice when he speak of Leila . she 
 quicken her pace . George 's word come back to she : " if you be not 
 ashamed of yourself , no one will be of you ! " how easy to say ! the old 
 day , her school , the little half grow - up dance she use to go to , 
 when everything be happy . go ! all go ! 

 but her meeting with opinion be not over for the day , for turn 
 again at last into the home Square , tired out by her three hour ' 
 ramble , she meet an old lady whom she and Gratian have know from 
 babyhood - a handsome dame , the widow of an official , who spend her day , 
 which show no symptom of decline , in admirable work . her daughter , 
 the widow of an officer kill at the Marne , be with she , and the two 
 greet Noel with a shower of cordial question : so she be back from 
 the country , and be she quite well again ? and work at her hospital ? 
 and how be her dear father ? they have think he look very thin and 
 worn . but now Gratian be at home - how dreadfully the war keep husband 
 and wife apart ! and whose be the dear little baby they have in the 
 house ? 

 " mine , " say Noel , walk straight past they with her head up . in every 
 fibre of her be she could feel the hurt , startle , utterly bewilder 
 look of those firm friendly person leave there on the pavement behind 
 she ; could feel the way they would gather themselves together , and walk 
 on , perhaps without a word , and then round the corner begin : " what have 
 come to Noel ? what do she mean ? " and take the little gold hoop out of 
 her pocket , she fling it with all her might into the Square Garden . the 
 action save she from a breakdown ; and she go in calmly . Lunch be 
 long over , but her father have not go out , for he meet she in the hall 
 and draw she into the dining - room . 

 " you must eat , my child , " he say . and while she be swallow down 
 what he have cause to be keep back for she , he stand by the hearth in 
 that favourite attitude of his , one foot on the fender , and one hand 
 grip the mantel - shelf . 

 " you have   get your wish , daddy , " she say dully : " everybody know now . 
 I have   tell Mr. Lauder , and Monsieur , and the Dinnafords . " 

 she see his finger uncrisp , then grip the shelf again . " I be glad , " he 
 say . 

 " Aunt Thirza give I a ring to wear , but I have   throw it away . " 

 " my dear child , " he begin , but could not go on , for the quivering of 
 his lip . 

 " I want to say once more , Daddy , that I be fearfully sorry about you . 
 and I be ashamed of myself ; I think I be not , but I be - only , I think 
 it be cruel , and I be not penitent to God ; and it be no good try to 
 make I . " 

 Pierson turn and look at she . for a long time after , she could not 
 get that look out of her memory . 

 Jimmy Fort have turn away from Noel feeling particularly wretched . ever 
 since the day when Leila have tell he of the girl 's misfortune he have 
 be aware that his liaison have no decent foundation , save a sort of 
 pity . one day , in a queer access of compunction , he have make Leila an 
 offer of marriage . she have refuse ; and he have respect she the more , 
 realise by the quiver in her voice and the look in her eye that she 
 refuse he , not because she do not love he well enough , but because 
 she be afraid of lose any of his affection . she be a woman of great 
 experience . 

 to - day he have take advantage of the luncheon interval to bring she some 
 flower , with a note to say that he could not come that evening . let 
 himself in with his latchkey , he have carefully put those japanese 
 azalea in the bowl " Famille Rose , " take water from her bedroom . then 
 he have sit down on the divan with his head in his hand . 

 though he have roll so much about the world , he have never have much to 
 do with woman . and there be nothing in he of the Frenchman , who take 
 what life put in his way as so much enjoyment on the credit side , and 
 accept the end of such affair as they naturally and rather rapidly 
 arrive . it have be a pleasure , and be no long a pleasure ; but this 
 apparently do not dissolve it , or absolve he . he feel himself bind by 
 an obscure but deep instinct to go on pretend that he be not tired 
 of she , so long as she be not tired of he . and he sit there try to 
 remember any sign , however small , of such a consummation , quite without 
 success . on the contrary , he have even the wretched feeling that if only 
 he have love she , she would have be much more likely to have tired of 
 he by now . for she he be still the unconquered , in spite of his loyal 
 endeavour to seem conquer . he have make a fatal mistake , that evening 
 after the concert at Queen 's Hall , to let himself go , on a mixed tide of 
 desire and pity ! 

 his folly come to he with increase poignancy after he have part from 
 Noel . how could he have be such a base fool , as to have commit 
 himself to Leila on an evening when he have actually be in the company 
 of that child ? be it the vague , unseizable likeness between they 
 which have push he over the edge ? ' I have   be an ass , ' he think ; ' a 
 horrible ass . ' I would always have give every hour I have   ever spend with 
 Leila , for one real smile from that girl . ' 

 this sudden sight of Noel after month during which he have try loyally 
 to forget her existence , and not succeed at all , make he realise as 
 he never have yet that he be in love with she ; so very much in love 
 with she that the thought of Leila be become nauseate . and yet the 
 instinct of a gentleman seem to forbid he to betray that secret to 
 either of they . it be an accursed coil ! he hail a cab , for he be 
 late ; and all the way back to the War Office he continue to see the 
 girl 's figure and her face with its short hair . and a fearful temptation 
 rise within he . be it not she who be now the real object for chivalry 
 and pity ? have he not the right to consecrate himself to championship of 
 one in such a deplorable position ? Leila have live her life ; but this 
 child 's life - pretty well wreck - be all before she . and then he 
 grin from sheer disgust . for he know that this be Jesuitry . not 
 chivalry be move he , but love ! love ! love of the unattainable ! and 
 with a heavy heart , indeed , he enter the great building , where , in a 
 small room , companion by the telephone , and surround by sheet of 
 paper cover with figure , he pass his day . the war make everything 
 seem dreary , hopeless . no wonder he have catch at any distraction which 
 come along - catch at it , till it have catch he ! 




 iv 

 1 

 to find out the bad be , for human nature , only a question of time . 
 but where the " bad " be attach to a family haloe , as it be , by the 
 authority and reputation of an institution like the Church , the 
 process of discovery have to break through many a little hedge . 
 sheer unlikelihood , genuine respect , the defensive instinct in those 
 identify with an institution , who will themselves feel weak if its 
 strength be diminish , the feeling that the scandal be too good to be 
 true - all these little hedge , and more , have to be break through . to 
 the Dinnafords , the unholy importance of what Noel have say to they 
 would have continue to keep they dumb , out of self - protection ; but its 
 monstrosity have give they the feeling that there must be some mistake , 
 that the girl have be overtake by a wild desire to " pull their leg " 
 as dear Charlie would say . with the hope of get this view confirm , 
 they lie in wait for the old nurse who take the baby out , and obtain 
 the information , shortly impart : " oh , yes ; Miss Noel 's . she ' usband 
 be kill - poor lamb ! " and they feel reward . they have be sure there 
 be some mistake . the relief of hear that word " ' usband " be intense . 
 one of these hasty war marriage , of which the dear Vicar have not 
 approve , and so it have be keep dark . quite intelligible , but so sad ! 
 enough misgive however remain in their mind , to prevent their go 
 to condole with the dear Vicar ; but not enough to prevent their roundly 
 contradict the rumour and gossip already come to their ear . and 
 then one day , when their friend Mrs. Curtis have say too positively : 
 " well , she do not   wear a wedding - ring , that I will swear , because I 
 take very good care to look ! " they determine to ask Mr. Lauder . he 
 would - indeed must - know ; and , of course , would not tell a story . when 
 they ask he it be so manifest that he do know , that they almost 
 withdraw the question . the poor young man have go the colour of a 
 tomato . 

 " I prefer not to answer , " he say . the rest of a very short interview 
 be pass in exquisite discomfort . indeed discomfort , exquisite and 
 otherwise , within a few week of Noel 's return , have begin to pervade 
 all the habitual congregation of Pierson 's church . it be notice that 
 neither of the two sister attend Service now . certain people who go 
 in the sincere hope of see Noel , only fall off again when she do 
 not appear . after all , she would not have the face ! and Gratian be too 
 ashamed , no doubt . it be constantly remark that the Vicar look very 
 grave and thin , even for he . as the rumour harden into certainty , 
 the feeling towards he become a curious medley of sympathy and 
 condemnation . there be about the whole business that which English 
 people especially resent . by the very fact of his presence before they 
 every Sunday , and his public ministration , he be exhibit to they , 
 as it be , the seamed and blush face of his daughter 's private life , 
 besides afford one long and glare demonstration of the failure of 
 the Church to guide its flock : if a man could not keep his own daughter 
 in the straight path - whom could he ? resign ! the word begin to be 
 think about , but not yet speak . he have be there so long ; he have 
 spend so much money on the church and the parish ; his gentle dreamy 
 manner be greatly like . he be a gentleman ; and have help many 
 people ; and , though his love of music and vestment have always cause 
 heart - burning , yet it have give a certain cachet to the church . the 
 woman , at any rate , be always glad to know that the church they go 
 to be capable of draw their fellow woman away from other church . 
 besides , it be war - time , and moral delinquency which in time of peace 
 would have bulk too large to neglect , be now less insistently dwelt 
 on , by mind preoccupy by food and air - raid . thing , of course , could 
 not go on as they be ; but as yet they do go on . 

 the talk - about be always the last to hear the talk ; and nothing 
 concrete or tangible come Pierson 's way . he go about his usual routine 
 without seem change . and yet there be a change , secret and creeping . 
 wound almost to death himself , he feel as though surround by one 
 great wound in other ; but it be some week before anything occur to 
 rouse within he the weapon of anger or the protective impulse . 

 and then one day a little swift brutality shake he to the very soul . 
 he be come home from a long parish round , and have turn into the 
 Square , when a low voice behind he say : 

 " wot price the little barstard ? " 

 a cold , sick feeling stifle his very breathing ; he gasp , and spin 
 round , to see two big loutish boy walk fast away . with swift and 
 stealthy passion he spring after they , and put his hand on their 
 two neighbouring shoulder , wrench they round so that they face he , 
 with mouth fall open in alarm . shake they with all his force , he 
 say : 

 " how dare you - how dare you use that word ? " his face and voice must have 
 be rather terrible , for the scare in their face bring he to sudden 
 consciousness of his own violence , and he drop his hand . in two 
 second they be at the corner . they stop there for a second ; one 
 of they shout " Gran'pa " ; then they vanish . he be leave with lip and 
 hand quivering , and a feeling that he have not know for year - the weak 
 white empty feel one have after yield utterly to sudden murderous 
 rage . he cross over , and stand lean against the Garden railing , 
 with the thought : ' God forgive I ! I could have kill they - I could 
 have kill they ! ' there have be a devil in he . if he have have 
 something in his hand , he might now have be a murderer : how awful ! 
 only one have speak ; but he could have kill they both ! and the word 
 be true , and be in all mouth - all low common mouth , day after day , 
 of his own daughter 's child ! the ghastliness of this thought , bring 
 home so utterly , make he writhe , and grasp the railing as if he would 
 have bend they . 

 from that day on , a creep sensation of be reject of man , never 
 leave he ; the sense of identification with Noel and her tiny outcast 
 become ever more poignant , more real ; the desire to protect they ever 
 more passionate ; and the feeling that round about there be whispering 
 voice , point finger , and a grow malevolence be ever more 
 sickening . he be begin too to realise the deep and hidden truth : 
 how easily the breath of scandal destroy the influence and sanctity 
 of those endow therewith by vocation ; how invaluable it be to feel 
 untarnished , and how difficult to feel that when other think you 
 tarnish . 

 he try to be with Noel as much as possible ; and in the evening they 
 sometimes go walk together , without ever talk of what be always 
 in their mind . between six and eight the girl be give sitting to 
 Lavendie in the drawing - room , and sometimes Pierson would come there and 
 play to they . he be always possess now by a sense of the danger Noel 
 run from companionship with any man . on three occasion , Jimmy Fort 
 make his appearance after dinner . he have so little to say that it be 
 difficult to understand why he come ; but , sharpen by this new dread 
 for his daughter , Pierson notice his eye always follow she . ' he 
 admire she , ' he think ; and often he would try his utmost to grasp the 
 character of this man , who have live such a rove life . ' be he - can he 
 be the sort of man I would trust Nollie to ? ' he would think . ' oh , that 
 I should have to hope like this that some good man would marry she - my 
 little Nollie , a child only the other day ! ' 

 in these sad , painful , lonely week he find a spot of something like 
 refuge in Leila 's sitting - room , and would go there often for half an 
 hour when she be back from her hospital . that little black - walled room 
 with its japanese print and its flower , soothe he . and Leila soothe 
 he , innocent as he be of any knowledge of her late aberration , 
 and perhaps conscious that she herself be not too happy . to watch 
 her arrange flower , sing her little french song , or to find she 
 beside he , listen to his confidence , be the only real pleasure he 
 know in these day . and Leila , in turn , would watch he and think : ' poor 
 Edward ! he have never live ; and never will ; now ! ' but sometimes the 
 thought would shoot through she : ' perhaps he be to be envy . he do not 
 feel what I feel , anyway . why do I fall in love again ? ' 

 they do not speak of Noel as a rule , but one evening she express she 
 view roundly . 

 " it be a great mistake to make Noel come back . Edward . it be quixotic . 
 you will be lucky if real mischief do not   come of it . she be not a patient 
 character ; one day she will do something rash . and , mind you , she will be 
 much more likely to break out if she see the world treat you badly 
 than if it happen to herself . I should send she back to the country , 
 before she make bad bad . " 

 " I can not   do that , Leila . we must live it down together . " 

 " Wrong , Edward . you should take thing as they be . " 

 with a heavy sigh Pierson answer : 

 " I wish I could see her future . she be so attractive . and her defence 
 be go . she be lose faith , and belief in all that a good woman should 
 be . the day after she come back she tell I she be ashamed of herself . 
 but since - she be not give a sign . she be so proud - my poor little 
 Nollie . I see how man admire she , too . our belgian friend be paint 
 she . he be a good man ; but he find her beautiful , and who can wonder . 
 and your friend Captain Fort . father be suppose to be blind , but they 
 see very clear sometimes . " 

 Leila rise and draw down a blind . 

 " this sun , " she say . " do Jimmy Fort come to you - often ? " 

 " oh ! no ; very seldom . but still - I can see . " 

 ' you bat - you blunderer ! ' think Leila : ' see ! you can not   even see this 
 beside you ! ' 

 " I expect he be sorry for she , " she say in a queer voice . 

 " why should he be sorry ? he do not   know : " 

 " oh , yes ! he know ; I tell he . " 

 " you tell he ! " 

 " yes , " Leila repeat stubbornly ; " and he be sorry for she . " 

 and even then " this monk " beside she do not see , and go blunder 
 on . 

 " no , no ; it be not merely that he be sorry . by the way he look at she , I 
 know I be not mistaken . I have   wonder - what do you think , Leila . he be too 
 old for she ; but he seem an honourable , kind man . " 

 " oh ! a most honourable , kind man . " but only by press her hand against 
 her lip have she smother a burst of bitter laughter . he , who see 
 nothing , could yet notice Fort 's eye when he look at Noel , and be 
 positive that he be in love with she ! how plainly those eye must 
 speak ! her control give way . 

 " all this be very interesting , " she say , spurn her word like Noel , 
 " consider that he be more than my friend , Edward . " it give she a sort 
 of pleasure to see he wince . ' these blind bat ! ' she think , terribly 
 sting that he should so clearly assume she out of the running . then she 
 be sorry , his face have become so still and wistful . and turn away , 
 she say : 

 " oh ! I shall not   break my heart ; I be a good loser . and I be a good fighter , 
 too ; perhaps I shall not   lose . " and snap off a sprig of geranium , she 
 press it to her lip . 

 " forgive I , " say Pierson slowly ; " I do not   know . I be stupid . I think 
 your love for your poor soldier have leave no room for other feeling . " 

 Leila utter a shrill laugh . " what have they to do with each other ? do 
 you never hear of passion , Edward ? oh ! do not   look at I like that . do 
 you think a woman can not   feel passion at my age ? as much as ever , more 
 than ever , because it be all slip away . " 

 she take her hand from her lip , but a geranium petal be leave cling 
 there , like a bloodstain . " what have your life be all these year , " 
 she go on vehemently - ' suppression of passion , nothing else ! you monk 
 twist Nature up with holy word , and try to disguise what the eerie 
 simpleton can see . well , I have not   suppress passion , Edward . that be 
 all . " 

 " and be you happy for that ? " 

 " I be ; and I shall be again . " 

 a little smile curl Pierson 's lip . " shall be ? " he say . " I hope so . 
 it be just two way of look at thing , Leila . " 

 " oh , Edward ! do not   be so gentle ! I suppose you do not   think a person like 
 I can ever really love ? " 

 he be stand before she with his head down , and a sense that , naive 
 and bat - like as he be , there be something in he she could not reach 
 or understand , make she cry out : 

 " I have   not be nice to you . forgive I , Edward ! I be so unhappy . " 

 " there be a Greek who use to say : ' God be the helping of man by man . ' 
 it be not   true , but it be beautiful . good - bye , dear Leila , and do not   be 
 sorrowful . " 

 she squeeze his hand , and turn to the window . 

 she stand there watch his black figure cross the road in the 
 sunshine , and pass round the corner by the railing of the church . he 
 walk quickly , very upright ; there be something unseeing even about 
 that back view of he ; or be it that he see - another world ? she have 
 never lose the mental habit of her orthodox girlhood , and in spite of 
 all impatience , recognise his sanctity . when he have disappear she 
 go into her bedroom . what he have say , indeed , be no discovery . she 
 have know . oh ! she have know . ' why do not   I accept Jimmy 's offer ? 
 why do not   I marry he ? be it too late ? ' she think . ' could I ? would 
 he - even now ? ' but then she start away from her own thought . marry 
 he ! know his heart be with this girl ? 

 she look long at her face in the mirror , study with a fearful 
 interest the little hard line and marking there beneath their light 
 coating of powder . she examine the cunning touch of colour matter 
 here and there in her front hair . be they cunne enough ? do they 
 deceive ? they seem to she suddenly to stare out . she finger and 
 smooth the slight looseness and fulness of the skin below her chin . 
 she stretch herself , and pass her hand down over her whole form , 
 search as it be for slackness , or thickness . and she have the bitter 
 thought : ' I be all out . I be do all I can . ' the line of a little poem 
 Fort have show she go thrum through her head : 

  " Time , you old gipsy man 
  will you not stay 
  put up your caravan 
  just for a day ? " 

 what more could she do ? he do not like to see her lip redden . she 
 have mark his disapproval , watch he wipe his mouth after a kiss , 
 when he think she could not   see he . ' I need'nt ! ' she think . ' Noel 's 
 lip be no redder , really . what have she well than I ? youth - dew on 
 the grass ! ' that do not   last long ! but long enough to " do she in " as 
 her soldier - man would say . and , suddenly she revolt against herself , 
 against Fort , against this chilled and foggy country ; feel a fierce 
 nostalgia for african sun , and the african flower ; the happy - go - lucky , 
 hand - to - mouth existence of those five year before the war begin . high 
 Constantia at grape harvest ! how many year ago - ten year , eleven 
 year ! ah ! to have before she those ten year , with he ! ten year in 
 the sun ! he would have love she then , and go on love she ! and she 
 would not have tired of he , as she have tired of those other . ' in half 
 an hour , ' she think , ' he will be here , sit opposite I ; I shall see he 
 struggle force himself to seem affectionate ! it be too humbling ! but 
 I do not   care ; I want he ! ' 

 she search her wardrobe , for some garment or touch of colour , novelty 
 of any sort , to help she . but she have try they all - those little 
 trick - be bankrupt . and such a discouraged , heavy mood come on she , 
 that she do not even " change , " but go back in her nurse 's dress and 
 lie down on the divan , pretend to sleep , while the maid set out the 
 supper . she lie there moody and motionless , try to summon courage , 
 feeling that if she show herself beat she be beat ; know that 
 she only hold he by pity . but when she hear his footstep on the stair 
 she swiftly pass her hand over her cheek , as if to press the blood 
 out of they , and lie absolutely still . she hop that she be white , and 
 indeed she be , with finger - mark under the eye , for she have suffer 
 greatly this last hour . through her lash she see he halt , and look at 
 she in surprise . asleep , or - ill , which ? she do not move . she want 
 to watch he . he tiptoe across the room and stand look down at she . 
 there be a furrow between his eye . ' ah ! ' she think , ' it would suit 
 you , if I be dead , my kind friend . ' he bend a little towards she ; and 
 she wonder suddenly whether she look graceful lie there , sorry now 
 that she have not change her dress . she see he shrug his shoulder ever 
 so faintly with a puzzled little movement . he have not see that she be 
 sham . how nice his face be - not mean , secret , callous ! she open 
 her eye , which against she will have in they the despair she be 
 feel . he go on his knee , and lift her hand to his lip , hide 
 they with it . 

 " Jimmy , " she say gently , " I be an awful bore to you . poor Jimmy ! no ! 
 do not   pretend ! I know what I know ! " ' oh , God ! what be I say ? ' she 
 think . ' it be fatal - fatal . I ought never ! ' and draw his head to she , 
 she put it to her heart . then , instinctively aware that this moment have 
 be press to its uttermost , she scramble up , kiss his forehead , 
 stretch herself , and laugh . 

 " I be asleep , dream ; dream you love I . be not   it funny ? come 
 along . there be oyster , for the last time this season . " 

 all that evening , as if both know they have be look over a 
 precipice , they seem to be tread warily , desperately anxious not 
 to rouse emotion in each other , or touch on thing which must bring a 
 scene . and Leila talk incessantly of Africa . 

 " do not   you long for the sun , Jimmy ? could not   we - could not   you go ? oh ! 
 why do not   this wretched war end ? all that we have   get here at home every 
 scrap of wealth , and comfort , and age , and art , and music , I would give it 
 all for the light and the sun out there . would not   you ? " 

 and Fort say he would , know well of one thing which he would not 
 give . and she know that , as well as he . 

 they be both gayer than they have be for a long time ; so that when he 
 have go , she fall back once more on to the divan , and bury her face 
 in a cushion , weep bitterly . 




 v 

 1 

 it be not quite disillusionment that Pierson feel while he walk away . 
 perhaps he have not really believe in Leila 's regeneration . it be more 
 an acute discomfort , an increase loneliness . a soft and restful spot 
 be now deny he ; a certain warmth and allurement have go out of his 
 life . he have not even the feeling that it be his duty to try and save 
 Leila by persuade she to marry Fort . he have always be too 
 sensitive , too much as it be of a gentleman , for the robuster sort of 
 evangelism . such delicacy have be a stumbling - block to he all through 
 professional life . in the eight year when his wife be with he , all 
 have be more certain , more direct and simple , with the help of her 
 sympathy , judgment ; and companionship . at her death a sort of mist 
 have gather in his soul . no one have ever speak plainly to he . to a 
 clergyman , who do ? no one have tell he in so many word that he should 
 have marry again - that to stay unmarried be bad for he , physically 
 and spiritually , fog and pervert life ; not drive he , indeed , 
 as it drive many , to intolerance and cruelty , but to that half - live 
 dreaminess , and the vague unhappy yearning which so constantly beset 
 he . all these celibate year he have really only be happy in his 
 music , or in far - away country place , take strong exercise , and lose 
 himself in the beauty of Nature ; and since the war begin he have only 
 once , for those three day at Kestrel , be out of London . 

 he walk home , go over in his mind very anxiously all the evidence 
 he have of Fort 's feeling for Noel . how many time have he be to they 
 since she come back ? only three time - three evening visit ! and he have 
 not be alone with she a single minute ! before this calamity befell 
 his daughter , he would never have observe anything in Fort 's demeanour ; 
 but , in his new watchfulness , he have see the almost reverential way he 
 look at she , notice the extra softness of his voice when he speak 
 to she , and once a look of sudden pain , a sort of dulling of his whole 
 self , when Noel have get up and go out of the room . and the girl 
 herself ? twice he have surprise her gazing at Fort when he be not 
 look , with a sort of brood interest . he remember how , as a 
 little girl , she would watch a grown - up , and then suddenly one day 
 attach herself to he , and be quite devoted . yes , he must warn she , 
 before she could possibly become entangle . in his fastidious chastity , 
 the opinion he have hold of Fort be suddenly lower . he , already a 
 free - thinker , be now reveal as a free - liver . poor little Nollie ! 
 Endangered again already ! every man a kind of wolf wait to pounce on 
 she ! 

 he find Lavendie and Noel in the drawing - room , stand before the 
 portrait which be near completion . he look at it for a long 
 minute , and turn away : 

 " do not   you think it be like I , daddy ? " 

 " it be like you ; but it hurt I . I can not   tell why . " 

 he see the smile of a painter whose picture be be criticise come on 
 Lavendie 's face . 

 " it be perhaps the colouring which do not please you , monsieur ? " 

 " no , no ; deep . the expression ; what be she wait for ? " 

 the defensive smile die on Lavendie 's lip . 

 " it be as I see she , monsieur le cure . " 

 Pierson turn again to the picture , and suddenly cover his eye . " she 
 look ' fey , " ' he say , and go out of the room . 

 Lavendie and Noel remain star at the picture . " Fey ? what do that 
 mean , mademoiselle ? " 

 " possess , or something . " 

 and they continue to stare at the picture , till Lavendie say : 

 " I think there be still a little too much light on that ear . " 

 the same evening , at bedtime , Pierson call Noel back . 

 " Nollie , I want you to know something . in all but the name , Captain Fort 
 be a married man . " 

 he see her flush , and feel his own face darken with colour . 

 she say calmly : " I know ; to Leila . " 

 " do you mean she have tell you ? " 

 Noel shake her head . 

 " then how ? " 

 " I guess . daddy , do not   treat I as a child any more . what be the use , 
 now ? " 

 he sit down in the chair before the hearth , and cover his face with 
 his hand . by the quivering of those hand , and the movement of his 
 shoulder , she could tell that he be stifle emotion , perhaps even 
 cry ; and sink down on his knee she press his hand and face to 
 she , murmur : " oh , daddy dear ! oh , daddy dear ! " 

 he put his arm round she , and they sit a long time with their cheek 
 press together , not speak a word . 




 VI 

 1 

 the day after that silent outburst of emotion in the drawing - room be a 
 Sunday . and , obey the longing awaken overnight to be as good as she 
 could to her father ; Noel say to he : 

 " would you like I to come to Church ? " 

 " of course , Nollie . " 

 how could he have answer otherwise ? to he Church be the home 
 of comfort and absolution , where people must bring their sin and 
 trouble - a haven of sinner , the fount of charity , of forgiveness , and 
 love . not to have believe that , after all these year , would have be 
 to deny all his usefulness in life , and to cast a slur on the House of 
 God . 

 and so Noel walk there with he , for Gratian have go down to George , 
 for the week - end . she slip quietly up the side aisle to their empty 
 pew , under the pulpit . never turn her eye from the chancel , she 
 remain unconscious of the stir her presence make , during that hour and 
 twenty minute . behind she , the dumb current of wonder , disapproval , 
 and resentment run a stealthy course . on she all eye be fix soon 
 or later , and every mind become the play ground of judgment . from every 
 soul , kneeling , standing , or sit , while the voice of the Service 
 drone , sang , or speak , a kind of glare radiate on to that one small 
 devoted head , which seem so ludicrously devout . she disturb their 
 devotion , this girl who have betray her father , her faith , her class . 
 she ought to repent , of course , and Church be the right place ; yet 
 there be something brazen in she repent there before their very 
 eye ; she be too palpable a flaw in the crystal of the Church 's 
 authority , too visible a rent in the raiment of their priest . her figure 
 focus all the uneasy amazement and heart searching of these last 
 week . mother quiver with the knowledge that their daughter could 
 see she ; wife with the idea that their husband be see she . 
 man experience sensation vary from condemnation to a sort of 
 covetousness . young folk wonder , and feel inclined to giggle . old 
 maid could hardly bear to look . here and there a man or woman who have 
 see life face to face , be simply sorry ! the consciousness of all who 
 know she personally be at stretch how to behave if they come within 
 reach of she in go out . for , though only half a dozen would actually 
 rub shoulder with she , all know that they might be , and many feel it 
 their duty to be , of that half - dozen , so as to establish their attitude 
 once for all . it be , in fact , too severe a test for human nature and 
 the feeling which Church ought to arouse . the stillness of that young 
 figure , the impossibility of see her face and judging of her state 
 of mind thereby ; finally , a faint lurking shame that they should be so 
 intrigue and disturb by something which have to do with sex , in 
 this House of Worship - all combine to produce in every mind that 
 herd - feeling of defence , which so soon become , offensive . and , half 
 unconscious , half aware of it all , Noel stand , and sit , and knelt . once 
 or twice she see her father 's eye fix on she ; and , still in the glow 
 of last night 's pity and remorse , feel a kind of worship for his thin 
 grave face . but for the most part , her own wear the expression Lavendie 
 have translate to his canvas - the look of one ever wait for the 
 extreme moment of life , for those few and fleeting poignancy 
 which existence hold for the human heart . a look neither hungry nor 
 dissatisfy , but dreamy and expectant , which might blaze into warmth 
 and depth at any moment , and then go back to its dream . 

 when the last note of the organ die away she continue to sit very 
 still , without look round . 

 there be no second Service , and the congregation melt out behind 
 she , and have disperse into the street and square long before she 
 come forth . after hesitate whether or no to go to the vestry door , she 
 turn away and walk home alone . 

 it be this deliberate evasion of all contact which probably clinch 
 the business . the absence of vent , of any escape - pipe for the feeling , 
 be always dangerous . they feel cheat . if Noel have come out amongst all 
 those whose devotion her presence have disturb , if in that exit , some 
 have show and other have witness one know not what of a manifested 
 ostracism , the outraged sense of social decency might have be appease 
 and sleep dog allow to lie , for we soon get use to thing ; 
 and , after all , the war take precedence in every mind even over social 
 decency . but none of this have occur , and a sense that Sunday after 
 Sunday the same little outrage would happen to they , move more than a 
 dozen quite unrelated person , and cause the posting that evening of 
 as many letter , sign and unsigne , to a certain quarter . London be no 
 place for parish conspiracy , and a situation which in the country would 
 have provoke meeting more or less public , and possibly a resolution , 
 could perhaps only thus be deal with . besides , in certain folk there 
 be ever a mysterious itch to write an unsigned letter - such missive 
 satisfy some obscure sense of justice , some uncontrollable longing to 
 get even with those who have hurt or disturb they , without afford 
 the offender chance for far hurt or disturbance . 

 letter which be post often reach their destination . 

 on Wednesday morning Pierson be sit in his study at the hour 
 devote to the call of his parishioner , when the maid announce , 
 " Canon Rushbourne , sir , " and he see before he an old College friend 
 whom he have meet but seldom in recent year . his visitor be a 
 short , grey - haired man of rather portly figure , whose round , rosy , 
 good - humour face have a look of sober goodness , and whose light - blue 
 eye shine a little . he grasp Pierson 's hand , and say in a voice 
 to whose natural heavy resonance professional duty have add a certain 
 unction : 

 " my dear Edward , how many year it be since we meet ! do you remember 
 dear old Blakeway ? I see he only yesterday . he be just the same . I be 
 delighted to see you again , " and he laugh a little soft nervous laugh . 
 then for a few moment he talk of the war and old College day , and 
 Pierson look at he and think : ' what have he come for ? ' 

 " you have   something to say to I , Alec , " he say , at last . 

 Canon Rushbourne lean forward in his chair , and answer with evident 
 effort : " yes ; I want to have a little talk with you , Edward . I hope 
 you will not   mind . I do hope you will not . " 

 " why should I mind ? " 

 Canon Rushbourne 's eye shine more than ever , there be real 
 friendliness in his face . 

 " I know you have   every right to say to I : ' mind your own business . ' but 
 I make up my mind to come as a friend , hop to save you from - er " he 
 stammer , and begin again : " I think you ought to know of the feeling in 
 your parish that - er - that - er - your position be very delicate . without 
 breach of confidence I may tell you that letter have be send to 
 headquarters ; you can imagine perhaps what I mean . do believe , my dear 
 friend , that I be actuate by my old affection for you ; nothing else , I 
 do assure you . " 

 in the silence , his breathing could be hear , as of a man a little 
 touch with asthma , while he continually smooth his thick black 
 knee , his whole face radiate an anxious kindliness . the sun shine 
 brightly on those two black figure , so very different , and draw out 
 of their well - wear garment the faint latent green mossiness which . 
 underlie the clothe of clergyman . 

 at last Pierson say : " thank you , Alec ; I understand . " 

 the Canon utter a resounding sigh . " you do not   realise how very easily 
 people misinterpret she be here with you ; it seem to they a kind - a 
 kind of challenge . they be bind , I think , to feel that ; and I be 
 afraid , in consequence - " he stop , move by the fact that Pierson have 
 close his eye . 

 " I be to choose , you mean , between my daughter and my parish ? " 

 the Canon seem , with a stammer of word , to try and blunt the edge of 
 that clear question . 

 " my visit be quite informal , my dear fellow ; I can not   say at all . but 
 there be evidently much feeling ; that be what I want you to know . you 
 have not   quite see , I think , that - " 

 Pierson raise his hand . " I can not   talk of this . " 

 the Canon rise . " believe I , Edward , I sympathise deeply . I feel I 
 have to warn you . " he hold out his hand . " good - bye , my dear friend , do 
 forgive I " ; and he go out . in the hall an adventure befell he so 
 plump , and awkward , that he could barely recite it to Mrs. Rushbourne 
 that night . 

 " come out from my poor friend , " he say , " I run into a baby 's 
 perambulator and that young mother , whom I remember as a little 
 thing " - he hold his hand at the level of his thigh - " arrange it for 
 go out . it startle I ; and I fear I ask quite foolishly : ' be it 
 a boy ? ' the poor young thing look up at I . she have very large eye , 
 quite beautiful , strange eye . ' have you be speak to Daddy about 
 I ? ' ' my dear young lady , ' I say , ' I be such an old friend , you see . 
 you must forgive I . ' and then she say : ' be they go to ask he 
 to resign ? ' ' that depend on you , ' I say . why do I say these thing , 
 Charlotte ? I ought simply to have hold my tongue . poor young thing ; so 
 very young ! and the little baby ! " " she have bring it on herself , Alec , " 
 Mrs. Rushbourne reply . 




 VII 

 1 

 the moment his visitor have vanish , Pierson pace up and down the 
 study , with anger rise in his , heart . his daughter or his parish ! 
 the old saw , " an Englishman 's house be his castle ! " be be attack 
 within he . must he not then harbour his own daughter , and help she by 
 candid atonement to regain her inward strength and peace ? be he not 
 thereby act as a true Christian , in by far the hard course he and 
 she could pursue ? to go back on that decision and imperil his daughter 's 
 spirit , or else resign his parish - the alternative be brutal ! this 
 be the centre of his world , the only spot where so lonely a man could 
 hope to feel even the semblance of home ; a thousand little thread 
 tether he to his church , his parishioner , and this house - for , to 
 live on here if he give up his church be out of the question . but his 
 chief feeling be a bewildered anger that for do what seem to he 
 his duty , he should be attack by his parishioner . 

 a passion of desire to know what they really think and feel - these 
 parishioner of his , whom he have befriend , and for whom he have work 
 so long - beset he now , and he go out . but the absurdity of his quest 
 strike he before he have go the length of the Square . one could not 
 go to people and say : " stand and deliver I your inmost judgment . " and 
 suddenly he be aware of how far away he really be from they . through 
 all his ministration have he ever come to know their heart ? and now , in 
 this dire necessity for knowledge , there seem no way of get it . 
 he go at random into a stationer 's shop ; the shopman sing bass in his 
 choir . they have meet Sunday after Sunday for the last seven year . but 
 when , with this itch for intimate knowledge on he , he see the man 
 behind the counter , it be as if he be look on he for the first 
 time . the russian proverb , " the heart of another be a dark forest , " 
 gash into his mind , while he say : 

 " well , Hodson , what news of your son ? " 

 " nothing more , Mr. Pierson , thank you , sir , nothing more at present . " 

 and it seem to Pierson , gaze at the man 's face clothe in a short , 
 grizzle beard cut rather like his own , that he must be think : ' ah ! 
 sir , but what news of your daughter ? ' no one would ever tell he to his 
 face what he be think . and buy two pencil , he go out . on the 
 other side of the road be a bird - fancier 's shop , keep by a woman whose 
 husband have be take for the Army . she be not friendly towards he , 
 for it be know to she that he have expostulate with her husband for 
 keep lark , and other wild bird . and quite deliberately he cross 
 the road , and stand look in at the window , with the morbid hope that 
 from this unfriendly one he might hear truth . she be in her shop , and 
 come to the door . 

 " have you any news of your husband , Mrs. Cherry ? " 

 " no , Mr. Pierson , I ' ave not ; not this week . " 

 " he have not   go out yet ? " 

 " no , Mr. Pierson ; ' e ' as not . " 

 there be no expression on her face , perfectly blank it be - Pierson have 
 a mad longing to say ' for God 's sake , woman , speak out what be in your 
 mind ; tell I what you think of I and my daughter . never mind my 
 cloth ! ' but he could no more say it than the woman could tell he what 
 be in her mind . and with a " good morning " he pass on . no man or woman 
 would tell he anything , unless , perhaps , they be drunk . he come to a 
 public house , and for a moment even hesitate before it , but the thought 
 of insult aim at Noel stop he , and he pass that too . and then 
 reality make itself know to he . though he have come out to hear what 
 they be think , he do not really want to hear it , could not endure 
 it if he do . he have be too long immune from criticism , too long in 
 the position of one who may tell other what he think of they . and 
 stand there in the crowded street , he be attack by that longing 
 for the country which have always come on he when he be hard pressed . 
 he look at his memoranda . by stupendous luck it be almost a blank 
 day . an omnibus pass close by which would take he far out . he climb 
 on to it , and travel as far as Hendon ; then get down , set forth 
 on foot . it be bright and hot , and the May blossom in full foam . he 
 walk fast along the perfectly straight road till he come to the top 
 of Elstree Hill . there for a few moment he stand gaze at the school 
 chapel , the cricket - field , the wide land beyond . all be very quiet , for 
 it be lunch - time . a horse be tethered there , and a stroll cat , as 
 though strike by the tall black incongruity of his figure , pause in her 
 progress , then , slither under the wicket gate , arch she back and 
 rub herself against his leg , crinkle and wave the tip of her 
 tail . Pierson bend down and stroke the creature 's head ; but utter 
 a faint miaou , the cat step daintily across the road , Pierson too 
 step on , past the village , and down over the stile , into a field 
 path . at the edge of the young clover , under a bank of hawthorn , he lie 
 down on his back , with his hat beside he and his arm cross over his 
 chest , like the effigy of some crusader one may see carve on an old 
 tomb . though he lie quiet as that old knight , his eye be not closed , 
 but fix on the blue , where a lark be sing . its song refresh his 
 spirit ; its passionate light - heartedness stir all the love of beauty 
 in he , awake revolt against a world so murderous and uncharitable . 
 oh ! to pass up with that song into a land of bright spirit , where 
 be nothing ugly , hard , merciless , and the gentle face of the Saviour 
 radiate everlaste love ! the scent of the mayflower , bear down by 
 the sun shine , drench his sens ; he close his eye , and , at once , 
 as if resent that momentary escape , his mind resume debate with 
 startling intensity . this matter go to the very well - spring , have 
 a terrible and secret significance . if to act as conscience bid he 
 render he unfit to keep his parish , all be build on sand , have no 
 deep reality , be but root in convention . charity , and the forgiveness 
 of sin honestly atone for - what become of they ? either he be wrong to 
 have espouse straightforward confession and atonement for she , or they 
 be wrong in chase he from that espousal . there could be no make 
 those extreme to meet . but if he be wrong , have do the hard 
 thing already - where could he turn ? his church stand bankrupt of ideal . 
 he feel as if push over the edge of the world , with foot on space , 
 and head in some blind cloud . ' I can not have be wrong , ' he think ; 
 ' any other course be so much easy . I sacrifice my pride , and my poor 
 girl 's pride ; I would have love to let she run away . if for this we be 
 to be stone and cast forth , what living force be there in the religion 
 I have love ; what do it all come to ? have I serve a sham ? I can not 
 and will not believe it . something be wrong with I , something be 
 wrong - but where - what ? ' he roll over , lie on his face , and pray . he 
 pray for guidance and deliverance from the gust of anger which keep 
 sweep over he ; even more for relief from the feeling of personal 
 outrage , and the unfairness of this thing . he have strive to be loyal to 
 what he think the right , have sacrifice all his sensitiveness , all his 
 secret fastidious pride in his child and himself . for that he be to 
 be throw out ! whether through prayer , or in the scent and feel of the 
 clover , he find presently a certain rest . away in the distance he could 
 see the spire of Harrow Church . 

 the Church ! no ! she be not , could not be , at fault . the fault be in 
 himself . ' I be unpractical , ' he think . ' it be so , I know . Agnes use 
 to say so , Bob and Thirza think so . they all think I unpractical and 
 dreamy . be it a sin - I wonder ? ' there be lamb in the next field ; he 
 watch their gambolling and his heart relax ; brush the clover 
 dust off his black clothe , he begin to retrace his step . the boy be 
 play cricket now , and he stand a few minute watch they . he 
 have not see cricket play since the war begin ; it seem almost 
 otherworldly , with the click of the bat , and the shrill young ' voice , 
 under the distant drone of that sky - hornet threshing along to Hendon . 
 a boy make a good leg hit . " well play ! " he call . then , suddenly 
 conscious of his own incongruity and strangeness in that green spot , he 
 turn away on the road back to London . to resign ; to await event ; 
 to send Noel away - of those three course , the last alone seem 
 impossible . ' be I really so far from they , ' he think , ' that they can 
 wish I to go , for this ? if so , I have well go . it will be just another 
 failure . but I will not   believe it yet ; I can not   believe it . ' 

 the heat be swelter , and he become very tired before at last he 
 reach his omnibus , and could sit with the breeze cool his hot face . 
 he do not reach home till six , have eat nothing since breakfast . 
 intend to have a bath and lie down till dinner , he go upstairs . 

 unwonted silence reign . he tap on the nursery door . it be 
 deserted ; he pass through to Noel 's room ; but that too be empty . 
 the wardrobe stand open as if it have be hastily ransack , and her 
 dressing - table be bare . in alarm he go to the bell and pull 
 it sharply . the old - fashioned ring of it jingle out far below . the 
 parlour - maid come up . 

 " where be Miss Noel and Nurse , Susan ? " 

 " I do not   know you be in , sir . Miss Noel leave I this note to give 
 you . they - i - " 

 Pierson stop she with his hand . " thank you , Susan ; get I some tea , 
 please . " with the note unopened in his hand , he wait till she be 
 go . his head be go round , and he sit down on the side of Noel 's 
 bed to read : 


 " DARLING DADDY , 

 " the man who come this morning tell I of what be go to happen . I 
 simply will not   have it . I be send Nurse and baby down to Kestrel at 
 once , and go to Leila 's for the night , until I have   make up my mind 
 what to do . I know it be a mistake my come back . I do not   care what 
 happen to I , but I will not   have you hurt . I think it be hateful of 
 people to try and injure you for my fault . I have   have to borrow money from 
 Susan - six pound . oh ! daddy dear , forgive I . 

 " your love 

 " NOLLIE . " 


 he read it with unutterable relief ; at all event he know where she 
 be - poor , wilful , rush , love - hearted child ; know where she be , 
 and could get at she . after his bath and some tea , he would go to 
 Leila 's and bring she back . poor little Nollie , think that by just 
 leave his house she could settle this deep matter ! he do not hurry , 
 feel decidedly exhaust , and it be nearly eight before he set out , 
 leave a message for Gratian , who do not as a rule come in from her 
 hospital till past nine . 

 the day be still glow , and now , in the cool of evening , his 
 refresh sens soak up its beauty . ' God have so make this world , ' he 
 think , ' that , no matter what our struggle and suffering , it be ever 
 a joy to live when the sun shin , or the moon be bright , or the 
 night starry . even we can not   spoil it . ' in Regent 's Park the lilac and 
 laburnum be still in bloom though June have come , and he gaze at they 
 in pass , as a lover might at his lady . his conscience prick he 
 suddenly . Mrs. Mitchett and the dark - eyed girl she have bring to he 
 on New Year 's Eve , the very night he have learn of his own daughter 's 
 tragedy - have he ever think of they since ? how have that poor girl 
 fare ? he have be too impatient of her impenetrable mood . what do he 
 know of the heart of other , when he do not even know his own , could 
 not rule his feeling of anger and revolt , have not guide his own 
 daughter into the water of safety ! and Leila ! have he not be too 
 censorious in thought ? how powerful , how strange be this instinct of 
 sex , which hover and swoop on life , seize they , bear they away , 
 then drop they exhausted and defenceless ! some munition - wagon , 
 paint a dull grey , lumber past , drive by sunburned youth in drab . 
 life - force , death - force - be it all one ; the great unknowable momentum 
 from which there be but the one escape , in the arm of their Heavenly 
 Father ? Blake 's little old stanzas come into his mind : 

  " and we be put on earth a little space , 
  that we may learn to bear the beam of love ; 
  and these black body and this sunburnt face 
  be but a cloud , and like a shady grove . 

  " for when our soul have learn the heat to bear , 
  the cloud will vanish , we shall hear his voice , 
  say : come out from the grove , my love and care , 
  and round my golden tent like lamb rejoice ! " 

 learn the heat to bear ! those lamb he have watch in a field that 
 afternoon , their sudden little leap and rush , their funny quivering 
 wriggling tail , their tiny nuzzle black snout - what little miracle 
 of careless joy among the meadow flower ! Lambs , and flower , and 
 sunlight ! famine , lust , and the great grey gun ! a maze , a wilderness ; 
 and but for faith , what issue , what path for man to take which do not 
 keep he wander hopeless , in its thicket ? ' God preserve our faith 
 in love , in charity , and the life to come ! ' he think . and a blind 
 man with a dog , to whose neck be tie a little deep dish for penny , 
 ground a hurdy - gurdy as he pass . Pierson put a shilling in the dish . 
 the man stop play , his whitish eye look up . " thank you kindly , 
 sir ; I will go home now . come on , Dick ! " he tap his way round the 
 corner , with his dog strain in front . a blackbird hide among the 
 blossom of an acacia , burst into evening song , and another great grey 
 munition - wagon rumble out through the Park gate . 2 

 the Church - clock be strike nine when he reach Leila 's flat , go 
 up , and knock . sound from - a piano cease ; the door be open by 
 Noel . she recoil when she see who it be , and say : 

 " why do you come , daddy ? it be much well not . " 

 " be you alone here ? " 

 " yes ; Leila give I her key . she have to be at the hospital till ten 
 to - night . " 

 " you must come home with I , my dear . " 

 Noel close the piano , and sit down on the divan . her face have the 
 same expression as when he have tell she that she could not marry Cyril 
 Morland . 

 " come , Nollie , " he say ; " do not   be unreasonable . we must see this 
 through together . " 

 " no . " 

 " my dear , that be childish . do you think the mere accident of your being 
 or not be at home can affect my decision as to what my duty be ? " 

 " yes ; it be my be there that matter . those people do not   care , so long 
 as it be not   an open scandal . " 

 " Nollie ! " 

 " but it be so , Daddy . of course it be so , and you know it . if I be away 
 they will just pity you for have a bad daughter . and quite right too . I 
 be a bad daughter . " 

 Pierson smile . " just like when you be a tiny . " 

 " I wish I be a tiny again , or ten year old . it be this half age - but 
 I be not come back with you , Daddy ; so it be no good . " 

 Pierson sit down beside she . 

 " I have   be think this over all day , " he say quietly . " perhaps in 
 my pride I make a mistake when I first know of your trouble . perhaps I 
 ought to have accept the consequence of my failure , then , and have 
 give up , and take you away at once . after all , if a man be not fit to 
 have the care of soul , he should have the grace to know it . " 

 " but you be fit , " cry Noel passionately ; " daddy , you be fit ! " 

 " I be afraid not . there be something want in I , I do not   know exactly 
 what ; but something very want . " 

 " there be not . it be only that you be too good - that be why ! " 

 Pierson shake his head . " do not , Nollie ! " 

 " I will , " cry Noel . " you be too gentle , and you be too good . you be 
 charitable , and you be simple , and you believe in another world ; that be 
 what be the matter with you , Daddy . do you think they do , those people 
 who want to chase we out ? they do not   even begin to believe , whatever 
 they say or think . I hate they , and sometimes I hate the Church ; 
 either it be hard and narrow , or else it be worldly . " she stop at the 
 expression on her father 's face , the most strange look of pain , and 
 horror , as if an unspoken treachery of his own have be drag forth 
 for his inspection . 

 " you be talk wildly , " he say , but his lip be tremble . " you 
 must not   say thing like that ; they be blasphemous and wicked . " 

 Noel bite her lip , sit very stiff and still , against a high blue 
 cushion . then she burst out again : 

 " you have   slave for those people year and year , and you have   have no 
 pleasure and you have   have no love ; and they would not   care that if you 
 break your heart . they do not   care for anything , so long as it all seem 
 proper . daddy , if you let they hurt you , I will not   forgive you ! " 

 " and what if you hurt I now , Nollie ? " 

 Noel press his hand against her warm cheek . 

 " oh , no ! oh , no ! I do not   - I will not . not again . I have   do that already . " 

 " very well , my dear ! then come home with I , and we will see what be good 
 to be do . it can not   be settle by run away . " 

 Noel drop his hand . " no . twice I have   do what you want , and it be 
 be a mistake . if I have not   go to Church on Sunday to please you , 
 perhaps it would never have come to this . you do not   see thing , Daddy . I 
 could tell , though I be sit right in front . I know what their face 
 be like , and what they be think . " 

 " one must do right , Nollie , and not mind . " 

 " yes ; but what be right ? it be not right for I to hurt you , and I be not 
 go to . " 

 Pierson understand all at once that it be useless to try and move she . 

 " what be you go to do , then ? " 

 " I suppose I shall go to Kestrel to - morrow . auntie will have I , I know ; 
 I shall talk to Leila . " 

 " whatever you do , promise to let I know . " 

 Noel nod . 

 " daddy , you - look awfully , awfully tired . I be go to give you some 
 medicine . " she go to a little three - cornered cupboard , and bent down . 
 medicine ! the medicine he want be not for the body ; knowledge of what 
 his duty be - that alone could heal he ! 

 the loud popping of a cork rouse he . " what be you do , Nollie ? " 

 Noel rise with a flushed face , hold in one hand a glass of champagne , 
 in the other a biscuit . 

 " you be to take this ; and I be go to have some myself . " 

 " my dear , " say Pierson bewilder ; " it be not your . " 

 " drink it ; daddy ! do not   you know that Leila would never forgive I if 
 I let you go home look like that . besides , she tell I I be to eat . 
 drink it . you can send she a nice present . drink it ! " and she stamp 
 her foot . 

 Pierson take the glass , and sit there nibble and sip . it be nice , 
 very ! he have not quite realise how much he need food and drink . Noel 
 return from the cupboard a second time ; she too have a glass and a 
 biscuit . 

 " there , you look well already . now you be to go home at once , in a cab 
 if you can get one ; and tell Gratian to make you feed up , or you will not 
 have a body at all ; you can not   do your duty if you have not   one , you 
 know . " 

 Pierson smile , and finish the champagne . 

 Noel take the glass from he . " you be my child to - night , and I be go 
 to send you to bed . do not   worry , daddy ; it will all come right . " and , 
 take his arm , she go downstairs with he , and blow he a kiss from 
 the doorway . 

 he walk away in a sort of dream . daylight be not quite go , but the 
 moon be up , just past its full , and the search - light have begin their 
 nightly wandering . it be a sky of ghost and shadow , fit to the 
 thought which come to he . the finger of Providence be in all this , 
 perhaps ! why should he not go out to France ! at last ; why not ? some 
 well man , who understand man 's heart , who know the world , would take 
 his place ; and he could go where death make all thing simple , and he 
 could not fail . he walk fast and fast , full of an intoxicating 
 relief . Thirza and Gratian would take care of Nollie far well than 
 he . yes , surely it be ordain ! Moonlight have the town now ; and all be 
 steel blue , the very air steel - blue ; a dream - city of marvellous beauty , 
 through which he pass , exalt . soon he would be where that poor boy , 
 and a million other , have give their life ; with the mud and the shell 
 and the scarred grey ground , and the jagged tree , where Christ be 
 daily crucify - there where he have so often long to be these three 
 year past . it be ordain ! 

 and two woman whom he meet look at each other when he have go by , and 
 those word ' the blighted crow ' which they have be about to speak , die 
 on their lip . 




 VIII 

 Noel feel light - hearted too , as if she have win a victory . she find some 
 potted meat , spread it on another biscuit , eat it greedily , and finish 
 the pint bottle of champagne . then she hunt for the cigarette , and 
 sit down at the piano . she play old tune - " there be a Tavern in the 
 Town , " " once I love a Maiden Fair , " " mow the Barley , " " Clementine , " 
 " lowland , " and sing to they such word as she remember . there be a 
 delicious run in her vein , and once she get up and dance . she be 
 kneel at the window , look out , when she hear the door open , and 
 without get up , cry out : 

 " be not   it a gorgeous night ! I have   have Daddy here . I give he some of your 
 champagne , and drink the rest - " then be conscious of a figure far too 
 tall for Leila , and a man 's voice say : 

 " I be awfully sorry . it be only I , Jimmy Fort . " 

 Noel scramble up . " Leila be not   in ; but she will be directly - it be past 
 ten . " 

 he be stand stock - still in the middle of the room . 

 " will not   you sit down ? oh ! and will not   you have a cigarette ? " 

 " thank . " 

 by the flash of his briquette she see his face clearly ; the look on it 
 fill she with a sort of malicious glee . 

 " I be go now , " she say . " would you mind tell Leila that I find I 
 could not   stop ? " she make towards the divan to get her hat . when she have 
 put it on , she find he stand just in front of she . 

 " Noel - if you do not   mind I call you that ? " 

 " not a bit . " 

 " do not   go ; I be go myself . " 

 " oh , no ! not for world . " she try to slip past , but he take hold of 
 her wrist . 

 " please ; just one minute ! " 

 Noel stay motionless , look at he , while his hand still hold she 
 wrist . he say quietly : 

 " do you mind tell I why you come here ? " 

 " oh , just to see Leila . " 

 " thing have come to a head at home , have not   they ? " 

 Noel shrug her shoulder . 

 " you come for refuge , do not   you ? " 

 " from whom ? " 

 " do not   be angry ; from the need of hurt your father . " 

 she nod . 

 " I know it would come to that . what be you go to do ? " 

 " enjoy myself . " she be say something fatuous , yet she mean it . 

 " that be absurd . do not   be angry ! you be quite right . only , you must begin 
 at the right end , must not   you ? sit down ! " 

 Noel try to free her wrist . 

 " no ; sit down , please . " 

 Noel sit down ; but as he loose her wrist , she laugh . this be where 
 he sit with Leila , where they would sit when she be go . " it be awfully 
 funny , be not   it ? " she say . 

 " Funny ? " he mutter savagely . " Most thing be , in this funny world . " 

 the sound of a taxi stop not far off have come to her ear , and she 
 gather her foot under she , plant they firmly . if she spring up , 
 could she slip by he before he catch her arm again , and get that taxi ? 

 " if I go now , " he say , " will you promise I to stop till you have   see 
 Leila ? " 

 " no . " 

 " that be foolish . come , promise ! " 

 Noel shake her head . she feel a perverse pleasure at his embarrassment . 

 " Leila 's lucky , be not   she ? no child , no husband , no father , no 
 anything . lovely ! " 

 she see his arm go up as if to ward off a blow . " Poor Leila ! " he say . 

 " why be you sorry for she ? she have freedom ! and she have you ! " 

 she know it would hurt ; but she want to hurt he . 

 " you need not   envy she for that . " 

 he have just speak , when Noel see a figure over by the door . 

 she jump up , and say breathlessly : 

 " oh , here you be , Leila ! Father 's be here , and we have   have some of your 
 champagne ! " 

 " Capital ! you be in the dark ! " 

 Noel feel the blood rush into her cheek . the light leap up , and Leila 
 come forward . she look extremely pale , calm , and self - contain , in 
 her nurse 's dress ; her full lip be tightly press together , but Noel 
 could see her breast heave violently . a turmoil of shame and wounded 
 pride begin rag in the girl . why have she not fly long ago ? why have 
 she let herself be trap like this ? Leila would think she have be 
 make up to he ! horrible ! disgusting ! why do not   he - why do not   some 
 one , speak ? then Leila say : 

 " I do not   expect you , Jimmy ; I be glad you have not   be dull . Noel be 
 stay here to - night . give I a cigarette . sit down , both of you . I be 
 awfully tired ! " 

 she sink into a chair , lean back , with her knee cross ; and at 
 that moment Noel admire she . she have say it beautifully ; she look 
 so calm . Fort be light her cigarette ; his hand be shake , his face 
 all sorry and mortify . 

 " give Noel one , too , and draw the curtain , Jimmy . quick ! not that it 
 make any difference ; it be as light as day . sit down , dear . " 

 but Noel remain stand . 

 " what have you be talk of ? love and chinese lantern , or only I ? " 

 at those word Fort , who be draw the last curtain , turn round ; his 
 tall figure be poise awkwardly against the wall , his face , unsuited to 
 diplomacy , have a look as of flesh be beat . if weal have start up 
 across it , Noel would not have be surprised . 

 he say with painful slowness : 

 " I do not   exactly know ; we have hardly begin , have we ? " 

 " the night be young , " say Leila . " go on while I just take off my 
 thing . " 

 she rise with the cigarette between her lip , and go into the inner 
 room . in pass , she give Noel a look . what there be in that look , 
 the girl could never make clear even to herself . perhaps a creature shot 
 would gaze like that , with a sort of profound and distant questioning , 
 reproach , and anger , with a sort of pride , and the quiver of death . as 
 the door close , Fort come right across the room . 

 " go to she ; " cry Noel ; ' she want you . can not   you see , she want you ? " 

 and before he could move , she be at the door . she fly downstairs , and 
 out into the moonlight . the taxi , a little way off , be just begin 
 to move away ; she run towards it , call out : 

 " anywhere ! Piccadilly ! " and jump in , blot herself against the 
 cushion in the far corner . 

 she do not come to herself , as it be , for several minute , and then 
 feel she ' could no long bear the cab , stop it , and get out . 
 where be she ? Bond Street ! she begin , idly , wander down its narrow 
 length ; the full street by day , the empty by night . oh ! it have 
 be horrible ! nothing say by any of they - nothing , and yet everything 
 drag out - of he , of Leila , of herself ! she seem to have no pride 
 or decency leave , as if she have be catch steal . all her happy 
 exhilaration be go , leave a miserable recklessness . nothing she 
 do be right , nothing turn out well , so what do it all matter ? the 
 moonlight flooding down between the tall house give she a peculiar 
 heady feeling . " fey " her father have call she . she laugh . ' but I be 
 not go home , ' she think . bore with the street 's length ; she 
 turn off , and be suddenly in Hanover Square . there be the Church , 
 grey - white , where she have be bridesmaid to a second cousin , when she 
 be fifteen . she seem to see it all again - her frock , the lily 
 in her hand , the surplice of the choir , the bride 's dress , all 
 moonlight - colour , and unreal . ' I wonder what be become of she ! ' she 
 think . ' he be dead , I expect , like Cyril ! ' she see her father 's face 
 as he be marry they , hear his voice : " for well , for bad , for 
 rich , for poor , in sickness and in health , till death do you part . " 
 and the moonlight on the Church seem to shift and quiver - some pigeon 
 perhaps have be disturb up there . then instead of that wedding 
 vision , she see Monsieur Barra , sit on his chair , gaze at the 
 floor , and Chica nurse her doll . " all mad , mademoiselle , a little mad . 
 million of man with white soul , but all a little tiny bit mad , you 
 know . " then Leila 's face come before she , with that look in her eye . 
 she feel again the hot clasp of Fort 's finger on her wrist , and walk 
 on , rub it with the other hand . she turn into Regent Street . the 
 wide curve of the Quadrant sweep into a sky of unreal blue , and the 
 orange - shade lamp merely add to the unreality . ' Love and chinese 
 lantern ! I should like some coffee , ' she think suddenly . she be 
 quite close to the place where Lavendie have take she . should she go 
 in there ? why not ? she must go somewhere . she turn into the revolve 
 cage of glass . but no soon be she imprison there than in a flash 
 Lavendie 's face of disgust ; and the red - lipped woman , the green stuff 
 that smell of peppermint come back , fill she with a rush of dismay . 
 she make the full circle in the revolving cage ; and come out into 
 the street again with a laugh . a tall young man in khaki stand there : 
 " Hallo ! " he say . " come in and dance ! " she start , recoil from he 
 and begin to walk away as fast as ever she could . she pass a woman 
 whose eye seem to scorch she . a woman like a swift vision of ruin 
 with those eye , and thickly powdered cheek , and loose red mouth . Noel 
 shudder and flee along , feel that her only safety lie in speed . but 
 she could not walk about all night . there would be no train for Kestrel 
 till the morning - and do she really want to go there , and eat her heart 
 out ? suddenly she think of George . why should she not go down to he ? 
 he would know what be good for she to do . at the foot of the step 
 below the Waterloo Column she stand still . all be quiet there and 
 empty , the great building whiten , the tree blur and blue ; and 
 sweet air be come across their flowering top . the queer " fey " 
 moony sensation be still with she ; so that she feel small and light , 
 as if she could have float through a ring . faint rim of light show 
 round the window of the Admiralty . the war ! however lovely the night , 
 however sweet the lilac smell - that never stop ! she turn away and 
 pass out under the arch , make for the station . the train of the 
 wound have just come in , and she stand in the cheering crowd watch 
 the ambulance run out . tear of excited emotion fill her eye , and 
 trickle down . steady , smooth , grey , one after the other they come 
 gliding , with a little burst of cheer greet each one . all be go 
 now , and she could pass in . she go to the buffet and get a large cup 
 of coffee , and a bun . then , have note the time of her early morning 
 train , she seek the lady ' waiting - room , and sit down in 
 a corner , take out her purse and count her money . two pound 
 fifteen - enough to go to the hotel , if she like . but , without 
 luggage - it be so conspicuous , and she could sleep in this corner all 
 right , if she want . what do girl do who have no money , and no friend 
 to go to ? tuck away in the corner of that empty , heavy , varnish 
 room , she seem to see the cruelty and hardness of life as she have 
 never before see it , not even when face her confinement . how lucky 
 she have be , and be ! everyone be good to she . she have no real want 
 or danger , to face . but , for woman - yes , and man too - who have no one to 
 fall back on , nothing but their own hand and health and luck , it must 
 be awful . that girl whose eye have scorch she - perhaps she have no 
 one - nothing . and people who be bear ill , and the million of poor 
 woman , like those whom she have go visit with Gratian sometimes in 
 the poor street of her father 's parish - for the first time she seem 
 to really know and feel the sort of life they lead . and then , Leila 's 
 face come back to she once more - Leila whom she have rob . and the 
 bad of it be , that , alongside her remorseful sympathy , she feel a 
 sort of satisfaction . she could not help his not love Leila , she could 
 not help it if he love herself ! and he do - she know it ! to feel that 
 anyone love she be so comforting . but it be all awful ! and she - the 
 cause of it ! and yet - she have never do or say anything to attract 
 he . no ! she could not have help it . 

 she have begin to feel drowsy , and close her eye . and gradually there 
 come on she a cosey sensation , as if she be lean up against someone 
 with her head tuck in against his shoulder , as she have so often lean 
 as a child against her father , come back from some long darkening 
 drive in Wales or Scotland . she seem even to feel the wet soft 
 westerly air on her face and eyelid , and to sniff the scent of a frieze 
 coat ; to hear the jog of hoof and the rolling of the wheel ; to feel 
 the closing in of the darkness . then , so dimly and drowsily , she seem 
 to know that it be not her father , but someone - someone - then no more , 
 no more at all . 




 IX 

 she be awaken by the scream of an engine , and look around she 
 amazed . her neck have fall sideway while she sleep , and feel horridly 
 stiff ; her head ache , and she be shiver . she see by the clock that 
 it be past five . ' if only I could get some tea ! ' she think . ' anyway I 
 will not   stay here any long ! ' when she have wash , and rub some of 
 the stiffness out of her neck , the tea renew her sense of adventure 
 wonderfully . her train do not start for an hour ; she have time for a 
 walk , to warm herself , and go down to the river . there be an early 
 haze , and all look a little mysterious ; but people be already 
 pass on their way to work . she walk along , look at the water 
 flow up under the bright mist to which the gull give a sort of 
 hover life . she go as far as Blackfriars Bridge , and turn back , 
 sit down on a bench under a plane - tree , just as the sun break through . 
 a little pasty woman with a pinched yellowish face be already sit 
 there , so still , and seem to see so little , that Noel wonder of 
 what she could be think . while she watch , the woman 's face begin 
 pucker , and tear roll slowly , down , trickle from pucker to 
 pucker , till , summon up her courage , Noel sidle nearer , and say : 

 " oh ! what be the matter ? " 

 the tear seem to stop from sheer surprise ; little grey eye gaze 
 round , patient little eye from above an almost bridgeless nose . 

 " i'ad a baby . it be dead .... its father 's dead in France .... I be go 
 in the water , but I do not   like the look of it , and now I never will . " 

 that " now I never will , " move Noel terribly . she slide her arm along the 
 back of the bench and clasp the skinny of shoulder . 

 " do not   cry ! " 

 " it be my first . I be thirty - eight . I will never ' ave another . oh ! why 
 do not   I go in the water ? " 

 the face pucker again , and the squeeze - out tear run down . ' of course 
 she must cry , ' think Noel ; ' cry and cry till it feel well . ' and she 
 stroke the shoulder of the little woman , whose emotion be disengage 
 the scent of old clothe . 

 " the father of my baby be kill in France , too , " she say at last . the 
 little sad grey eye look curiously round . 

 " be ' e ? ' ave you get your baby still ? " 

 " yes , oh , yes ! " 

 " I be glad of that . it ' urt so bad , it do . I would rather lose I ' usband 
 than I baby , any day . " the sun be shin now on a cheek of that 
 terribly patient face ; its brightness seem cruel perch there . 

 " can I do anything to help you ? " Noel murmur . 

 " no , thank you , miss . I be go ' ome now . I do not   live far . thank you 
 kindly . " and raise her eye for one more of those half - bewilder 
 look , she move away along the Embankment wall . when she be out of 
 sight , Noel walk back to the station . the train be in , and she take 
 her seat . she have three fellow passenger , all in khaki ; very silent and 
 moody , as man be when they have to get up early . one be tall , dark , 
 and perhaps thirty - five ; the second small , and about fifty , with 
 cropped , scanty grey hair ; the third be of medium height and quite 
 sixty - five , with a long row of little coloured patch on his tunic , and 
 a bald , narrow , well - shape head , grey hair brush back at the side , 
 and the thin , collect feature and droop moustache of the old 
 school . it be at he that Noel look . when he glance out of the 
 window , or otherwise retire within himself , she like his face ; but 
 when he turn to the ticket - collector or speak to the other , she do 
 not like it half so much . it be as if the old fellow have two self , 
 one of which he use when alone , the other in which he dress every 
 morning to meet the world . they have begin to talk about some Tribunal on 
 which they have to sit . Noel do not listen , but a word or two carry to 
 she now and then . 

 " how many to - day ? " she hear the old fellow ask , and the little cropped 
 man answer : " hundred and fourteen . " 

 fresh from the sight of the poor little shabby woman and her grief , she 
 could not help a sort of shrink from that trim old soldier , with his 
 thin , regular face , who hold the fate of a " hundred and fourteen " in 
 his firm , narrow grasp , perhaps every day . would he understand their 
 trouble or want ? of course he would not ! then , she see he look at 
 she critically with his keen eye . if he have know her secret , he would 
 be think : ' a lady and act like that ! oh , no ! quite - quite out of the 
 question ! ' and she feel as if she could , sink under the seat with shame . 
 but no doubt he be only think : ' very young to be travel by 
 herself at this hour of the morning . pretty too ! ' if he know the real 
 truth of she - how he would stare ! but why should this utter stranger , 
 this old disciplinarian , by a casual glance , by the mere form of his 
 face , make she feel more guilty and ashamed than she have yet feel ? that 
 puzzle she . he be , must be , a narrow , conventional old man ; but he have 
 this power to make she feel ashamed , because she feel that he have faith 
 in his god , and be true to they ; because she know he would die soon 
 than depart from his creed of conduct . she turn to the window , bite 
 her lip - angry and despairing . she would never - never get use to her 
 position ; it be no good ! and again she have the longing of her dream , 
 to tuck her face away into that coat , smell the scent of the frieze , 
 snuggle in , be protect , and forget . ' if I have be that poor lonely 
 little woman , ' she think , ' and have lose everything , I should have go 
 into the water . I should have rush and jump . it be only luck that I be 
 alive . I will not   look at that old man again : then I shall not   feel so bad . ' 

 she have buy some chocolate at the station , and nibble it , gaze 
 steadily at the field cover with daisy and the first of the 
 buttercup and cowslip . the three soldier be talk now in 
 carefully lower voice . the word : " woman , " " under control , " " perfect 
 plague , " come to she , make her ear burn . in the hypersensitive mood 
 cause by the strain of yesterday , her broken night , and the emotional 
 meeting with the little woman , she feel as if they be include she 
 among those " woman . " ' if we stop , I will get out , ' she think . but when 
 the train do stop it be they who get out . she feel the old General 's 
 keen veil glance sum she up for the last time , and look full at 
 he just for a moment . he touch his cap , and say : " will you have 
 the window up or down ? " and linger to draw it half - way up . ' his 
 punctiliousness make she feel bad than ever . when the train have 
 start again she roam up and down her empty carriage ; there be 
 no more a way out of her position than out of this rolling cushion 
 carriage ! and then she seem to hear Fort 's voice say : ' sit down , 
 please ! ' and to feel his finger clasp her wrist , oh ! he be nice and 
 comfort ; he would never reproach or remind she ! and now , probably , 
 she would never see he again . 

 the train draw up at last . she do not know where George lodge , and 
 would have to go to his hospital . she plan to get there at half past 
 nine , and have eat a sort of breakfast at the station , go forth 
 into the town . the seaside be still wrap in the early glamour which 
 haunt chalk of a bright morning . but the street be very much alive . 
 here be real business of the war . she pass house which have be 
 wreck . truck clang and shunt , great lorry rumble smoothly by . 
 Sea - and air - plane be move like great bird far up in the bright 
 haze , and khaki be everywhere . but it be the sea Noel want . she make 
 her way westward to a little beach ; and , sit down on a stone , open 
 her arm to catch the sun on her face and chest . the tide be nearly 
 up , with the wavelet of a blue bright sea . the great fact , the great 
 fact in the world , except the sun ; vast and free , make everything 
 human seem small and transitory ! it do she good , like a tranquillising 
 friend . the sea might be cruel and terrible , awful thing it could do , 
 and awful thing be be do on it ; but its wide level line , its 
 never - end song , its sane savour , be the good medicine she could 
 possibly have take . she rub the Shelly sand between her finger 
 in absurd ecstasy ; take off her shoe and stocking , paddle , and sit 
 dry her leg in the sun . 

 when she leave the little beach , she feel as if someone have say to she : 

 ' your trouble be very little . there be the sun , the sea , the air ; enjoy 
 they . they can not   take those from you . ' 

 at the hospital she have to wait half an hour in a little bare room 
 before George come . 

 " Nollie ! Splendid . I have   get an hour . let us get out of this cemetery . 
 we will have time for a good stretch on the top . jolly of you to have 
 come to I . tell we all about it . " 

 when she have finish , he squeeze her arm . 348 

 " I know it would not   do . your Dad forget that he be a public figure , and 
 must expect to be damn accordingly . but though you have   cut and run , 
 he will resign all the same , Nollie . " 

 " oh , no ! " cry Noel . 

 George shake his head . 

 " yes , he will resign , you will see , he be get no worldly sense ; not a grain . " 

 " then I shall have spoil his life , just as if - oh , no ! " 

 " let us sit down here . I must be back at eleven . " 

 they sit down on a bench , where the green cliff stretch out before 
 they , over a sea quite clear of haze , far down and very blue . 

 " why should he resign , " cry Noel again , " now that I have   go ? he will be 
 lose without it all . " 

 George smile . 

 " Found , my dear . he will be where he ought to be , Nollie , where the Church 
 be , and the Churchmen be not - in the air ! " 

 " do not ! " cry Noel passionately . 

 " no , no , I be not chaff . there be no room on earth for saint in 
 authority . there 's use for a saintly symbol , even if one do not   hold 
 with it , but there be no mortal use for those who try to have thing both 
 way - to be saint and seer of vision , and yet to come the practical 
 and worldly and rule ordinary man 's life . saintly example yes ; but not 
 saintly governance . you have   be his deliverance , Nollie . " 

 " but daddy love his Church . " 

 George frown . " of course , it will be a wrench . a man 's bind to have a 
 cosey feeling about a place where he be be boss so long ; and there 
 be something about a Church - the drone , the scent , the half darkness ; 
 there be beauty in it , it be a pleasant drug . but he be not be ask 
 to give up the drug habit ; only to stop administer drug to other . 
 do not   worry , Nollie ; I do not   believe that be ever suit he , it want a 
 thick skin than he be get . " 

 " but all the people he help ? " 

 " no reason he should not   go on help people , be there ? " 

 " but to go on live there , without - Mother die there , you know ! " 

 George grunt . " Dreams , Nollie , all round he ; of the past and the 
 future , of what people be and what he can do with they . I never see he 
 without a skirmish , as you know , and yet I be fond of he . but I should 
 be twice as fond , and half as likely to skirmish , if he would drop the 
 habit of authority . then I believe he would have some real influence over 
 I ; there be something beautiful about he , I know that quite well . " 

 " yes , " murmur Noel fervently . 

 " he be such a queer mixture , " muse George . " clean out of his age ; chalk 
 above most of the parson in a spiritual sense and chalk below most 
 of they in the worldly . and yet I believe he be in the right of it . the 
 Church ought to be a forlorn hope , Nollie ; then we should believe in 
 it . instead of that , it be a sort of business that no one can take 
 too seriously . you see , the Church spiritual can not   make good in this 
 age - have no chance of make good , and so in the main it be give it up 
 for vested interest and social influence . your father be a symbol of 
 what the Church be not . but what about you , my dear ? there be a room at 
 my boarding - house , and only one old lady besides myself , who knit all 
 the time . if Grace can get shift we will find a house , and you can have 
 the baby . they will send your luggage on from Paddington if you write ; and 
 in the meantime Gracie 's get some thing here that you can have . " 

 " I will have to send a wire to daddy . " 

 " I will do that . you come to my digging at half past one , and I will settle 
 you in . until then , you would well stay up here . " 

 when he have go she roam a little far , and lie down on the 
 short grass , where the chalk break through in patch . she could hear a 
 distant rumbling , very low , travel in that grass , the long mutter 
 of the Flanders gun . ' I wonder if it be as beautiful a day there , ' she 
 think . ' how dreadful to see no green , no butterfly , no flower - not 
 even sky - for the dust of the shell . oh ! will not   it ever , ever end ? ' and 
 a sort of passion for the earth well up in she , the warm grassy earth 
 along which she lay , press so close that she could feel it with every 
 inch of her body , and the soft spike of the grass against her nose and 
 lip . an aching sweetness torture she , she want the earth to close 
 its arm about she , she want the answer to her embrace of it . she be 
 alive , and want love . not death - not loneliness - not death ! and out 
 there , where the gun mutter , million of man would be think that 
 same thought ! 




 X 

 Pierson have pass nearly the whole night with the relic of his past , 
 the record of his stewardship , the token of his short married life . 
 the idea which have possess he walk home in the moonlight sustain 
 he in that melancholy task of docketing and destruction . there be 
 not nearly so much to do as one would have suppose , for , with all 
 his dreaminess , he have be oddly neat and businesslike in all parish 
 matter . but a hundred time that night he stop , overcome by 
 memory . every corner , drawer , photograph , paper be a thread in the 
 long - spin web of his life in this house . some phase of his work , 
 some vision of his wife or daughter start forth from each bit of 
 furniture , picture , doorway . Noiseless , in his slipper , he steal up and 
 down between the study , diningroom , drawing - room , and anyone see he 
 at his work in the dim light which visit the staircase from above the 
 front door and the upper - passage window , would have think : ' a ghost , a 
 ghost go into mourning for the condition of the world . ' he have to make 
 this reckon to - night , while the exaltation of his new idea be on 
 he ; have to rummage out the very depth of old association , so that once 
 for all he might know whether he have strength to close the door on the 
 past . five o'clock strike before he have finish , and , almost drop 
 from fatigue , sit down at his little piano in bright daylight . the last 
 memory to beset he be the first of all ; his honeymoon , before they 
 come back to live in this house , already choose , furnish , and wait 
 for they . they have spend it in Germany - the first day in Baden - baden , 
 and each morning have be awaken by a Chorale play down in the 
 garden of the Kurhaus , a gentle , beautiful tune , to remind they that 
 they be in heaven . and softly , so softly that the tune seem to be 
 but dream he begin play those old Chorales , one after another , so 
 that the stilly sound float out , through the open window , puzzle 
 the early bird and cat and those few human who be abroad as 
 yet ..... 

 he receive the telegram from Noel in the afternoon of the same day , 
 just as he be about to set out for Leila 's to get news of she ; and 
 close on the top of it come lavendie . he find the painter stand 
 disconsolate in front of his picture . 

 " Mademoiselle have desert I ? " 

 " I be afraid we shall all desert you soon , monsieur . " 

 " you be go ? " 

 " yes , I be leave here . I hope to go to France . " 

 " and mademoiselle ? " 

 " she be at the sea with my son - in - law . " 

 the painter run his hand through his hair , but stop they half - way , 
 as if aware that he be be guilty of ill - breeding . 

 " Mon dieu ! " he say : " be this not a calamity for you , monsieur le cure ? " 
 but his sense of the calamity be so patently limited to his unfinished 
 picture that Pierson could not help a smile . 

 " ah , monsieur ! " say the painter , on whom nothing be lose . " Comme je 
 suis egoiste ! I show my feeling ; it be deplorable . my disappointment 
 must seem a bagatelle to you , who will be so distressed at leave 
 your old home . this must be a time of great trouble . believe I ; I 
 understand . but to sympathise with a grief which be not show would 
 be an impertinence , would it not ? you english gentlefolk do not let we 
 share your grief ; you keep they to yourself . " 

 Pierson star . " true , " he say . " quite true ! " 

 " I be no judge of Christianity , monsieur , but for we artist the door 
 of the human heart stand open , our own and other . I suppose we have no 
 pride - c'est tre - indelicat . tell I , monsieur , you would not think 
 it worthy of you to speak to I of your trouble , would you , as I have 
 speak of mine ? " 

 Pierson bow his head , abash . 

 " you preach of universal charity and love , " go on Lavendie ; " but 
 how can there be that when you teach also secretly the keeping of your 
 trouble to yourself ? man respond to example , not to teaching ; you 
 set the example of the stranger , not the brother . you expect from other 
 what you do not give . frankly , monsieur , do you not feel that with every 
 revelation of your soul and feeling , virtue go out of you ? and I 
 will tell you why , if you will not think it an offence . in open your 
 heart you feel that you lose authority . you be officer , and must 
 never forget that . be it not so ? " 

 Pierson grow red . " I hope there be another feeling too . I think we 
 feel that to speak of our suffering or , deep feeling be to obtrude 
 oneself , to make a fuss , to be self - concern , when we might be 
 concern with other . " 

 " Monsieur , au fond we be all concerned with self . to seem selfless be 
 but your particular way of cultivate the perfection of self . you admit 
 that not to obtrude self be the way to perfect yourself . eh bien ! what 
 be that but a deep concern with self ? to be free of this , there be no 
 way but to forget all about oneself in what one be do , as I forget 
 everything when I be paint . but , " he add , with a sudden smile , " you 
 would not wish to forget the perfecting of self - it would not be right 
 in your profession . so I must take away this picture , must I not ? it be 
 one of my good work : I regret much not to have finish it . " 

 " some day , perhaps - " 

 " some day ! the picture will stand still , but mademoiselle will not . she 
 will rush at something , and behold ! this face will be go . no ; I prefer 
 to keep it as it be . it have truth now . " and lift down the canvas , he 
 stand it against the wall and fold up the easel . " Bon soir , monsieur , 
 you have be very good to I . " he wring Pierson 's hand ; and his face 
 for a moment seem all eye and spirit . " Adieu ! " 

 " good - bye , " Pierson murmur . " God bless you ! " 

 " I do not   know if I have great confidence in he , " reply Lavendie , 
 " but I shall ever remember that so good a man as you have wish it . to 
 mademoiselle my distinguished salutation , if you please . if you will 
 permit I , I will come back for my other thing to - morrow . " and carry 
 easel and canvas , he depart . 

 Pierson stay in the old drawing - room , wait for Gratian to come in , 
 and think over the painter 's word . have his education and position 
 really make it impossible for he to be brotherly ? be this the secret 
 of the impotence which he sometimes feel ; the reason why charity and 
 love be not more alive in the heart of his congregation ? ' God know 
 I have   no consciousness of have feel myself superior , ' he think ; ' and 
 yet I would be truly ashamed to tell people of my trouble and of my 
 struggle . can it be that Christ , if he be on earth , would count we 
 Pharisees , believe ourselves not as other man ? but surely it be not as 
 Christians but rather as gentleman that we keep ourselves to ourselves . 
 officer , he call we . I fear - I fear it be true . ' ah , well ! there 
 would not be many more day now . he would learn out there how to open 
 the heart of other , and his own . suffering and death level all 
 barrier , make all man brother . he be still sit there when Gratian 
 come in ; and take her hand , he say : 

 " Noel have go down to George , and I want you to get transfer and go 
 to they , Gracie . I be give up the parish and ask for a chaplaincy . " 

 " give up ? after all this time ? be it because of Nollie ? " 

 " no , I think not ; I think the time have come . I feel my work here be 
 barren . " 

 " oh , no ! and even if it be , it be only because - " 

 Pierson smile . " because of what , gracie ? " 

 " Dad , it be what I have   feel in myself . we want to think and decide thing 
 for ourselves , we want to own our conscience , we can not   take thing at 
 second - hand any long . " 

 Pierson 's face darken . " ah ! " he say , " to have lose faith be a 
 grievous thing . " 

 " we be gain charity , " cry Gratian . 

 " the two thing be not opposed , my dear . " 

 " not in theory ; but in practice I think they often be . oh , Dad ! you 
 look so tired . have you really make up your mind ? will not   you feel lost ? " 

 " for a little . I shall find myself , out there . " 

 but the look on his face be too much for Gratian 's composure , and she 
 turn away . 

 Pierson go down to his study to write his letter of resignation . 
 sit before that blank sheet of paper , he realise to the full how 
 strongly he have resent the public condemnation pass on his own flesh 
 and blood , how much his action be the expression of a purely mundane 
 championship of his daughter ; of a mundane mortification . ' Pride , ' he 
 think . ' ought I to stay and conquer it ? ' twice he set his pen down , 
 twice take it up again . he could not conquer it . to stay where he be 
 not want , on a sort of sufferance - never ! and while he sit before that 
 empty sheet of paper he try to do the hard thing a man can do - to 
 see himself as other see he ; and meet with such success as one might 
 expect - hark at once to the verdict , not of other at all , but of 
 his own conscience ; and come soon to that perpetual gnawing sense 
 which have possess he ever since the war begin , that it be his duty 
 to be dead . this feeling that to be alive be unworthy of he when so 
 many of his flock have make the last sacrifice , be reinforce by his 
 domestic tragedy and the bitter disillusionment it have bring . a sense 
 of have lose caste weigh on he , while he sit there with his past 
 recede from he , dusty and unreal . he have the queer feeling of 
 his old life fall from he , drop round his foot like the outworn 
 scale of a serpent , rung after rung of task and duty perform day 
 after day , year after year . have they ever be quite real ? well , he 
 have shed they now , and be to move out into life illumine by the great 
 reality - death ! and take up his pen , he write his resignation . 




 XI 

 1 

 the last Sunday , sunny and bright ! though he do not ask she to go , 
 Gratian go to every Service that day . and the sight of she , after this 
 long interval , in their old pew , where once he have be will not to see his 
 wife 's face , and draw refreshment therefrom , affect Pierson more than 
 anything else . he have tell no one of his come departure , shrink 
 from the falsity and suppression which must underlie every allusion and 
 expression of regret . in the last minute of his last sermon he would 
 tell they ! he go through the day in a sort of dream . truly proud and 
 sensitive , under this social blight , he shrink from all alike , make no 
 attempt to single out supporter or adherent from those who have fall 
 away . he know there would be some , perhaps many , seriously grieve that 
 he be go ; but to try and realise who they be , to weigh they in the 
 scale against the rest and so forth , be quite against his nature . it 
 be all or nothing . but when for the last time of all those hundred , 
 he mount the step of his dark pulpit , he show no trace of finality , 
 do not perhaps even feel it yet . for so beautiful a summer evening the 
 congregation be large . in spite of all reticence , rumour be busy 
 and curiosity still rife . the writer of the letter , anonymous and 
 otherwise , have spend a week , not indeed in proclaim what they have 
 do , but in justify to themselves the secret fact that they have do 
 it . and this be well achieve by speak to their neighbour of the 
 serious and awkward situation of the poor Vicar . the result be visible 
 in a well attendance than have be see since summer - time begin . 

 Pierson have never be a great preacher , his voice lack resonance and 
 pliancy , his thought breadth and buoyancy , and he be not free from , 
 the sing - song which mar the utterance of many who have to speak 
 professionally . but he always make an impression of goodness and 
 sincerity . on this last Sunday evening he preach again the first 
 sermon he have ever preach from that pulpit , fresh from the honeymoon 
 with his young wife . " Solomon in all his glory be not array like one 
 of these . " it lack now the happy fervour of that most happy of all 
 his day , yet gain poignancy , come from so wear a face and voice . 
 Gratian , who know that he be go to end with his farewell , be in 
 a choke of emotion long before he come to it . she sit wink away her 
 tear , and not till he pause , for so long that she think his strength 
 have fail , do she look up . he be lean a little forward , seem to 
 see nothing ; but his hand , grasp the pulpit 's edge , be quiver . 
 there be deep silence in the Church , for the look of his face and 
 figure be strange , even to Gratian . when his lip part again to 
 speak , a mist cover her eye , and she lose sight of he . 

 " friend , I be leave you ; these be the last word I shall ever speak 
 in this place . I go to other work . you have be very good to I . God 
 have be very good to I . I pray with my whole heart that he may bless 
 you all . amen ! amen ! " 

 the mist clear into tear , and she could see he again gaze down at 
 she . be it at she ? he be surely see something - some vision sweeter 
 than reality , something he love more dearly . she fall on her knee , and 
 bury her face in her hand . all through the hymn she knelt , and 
 through his clear slow Benediction : " the peace of God , which passeth all 
 understanding , keep your heart and mind in the knowledge and love 
 of God , and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord ; and the blessing of God 
 Almighty , the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost , be amongst you and 
 remain with you always . " and still she kneel on ; till she be alone in 
 the Church . then she rise and steal home . he do not come in ; she do 
 not expect he . ' it be over , ' she keep think ; ' all over . my beloved 
 daddy ! now he have no home ; Nollie and I have pull he down . and yet I 
 could not   help it , and perhaps she could not . Poor Nollie ! ... ' 


 2 

 Pierson have stay in the vestry , talk with his choir and warden ; 
 there be no hitch , for his resignation have be accept , and he have 
 arrange with a friend to carry on till the new Vicar be appoint . 
 when they be go he go back into the empty church , and mount to 
 the organ - loft . a little window up there be open , and he stand lean 
 against the stone , look out , rest his whole being . only now that 
 it be over do he know what stress he have be through . sparrow be 
 chirping , but sound of traffic have almost cease , in that quiet Sunday 
 hour of the evening meal . finish ! incredible that he would never come 
 up here again , never see those roof - line , that corner of Square Garden , 
 and hear this familiar chirping of the sparrow . he sit down at the 
 organ and begin to play . the last time the sound would roll out and echo 
 ' round the emptied House of God . for a long time he play , while the 
 building darken slowly down there below he . of all that he would 
 leave , he would miss this most - the right to come and play here in the 
 darken Church , to release emotional sound in this dim empty space 
 grow ever more beautiful . from chord to chord he let himself go 
 deep and deep into the surge and swell of those sound wave , lose 
 all sense of actuality , till the music and the whole dark building be 
 fuse in one rapturous solemnity . away down there the darkness creep 
 over the Church , till the pew , the altar - all be invisible , save the 
 column ; and the wall . he begin play his favourite slow movement 
 from Beethoven 's Seventh Symphony - keep to the end , for the vision it 
 ever bring he . and a cat , which have be stalk the sparrow , creep 
 in through the little window , and crouch , startle , star at he 
 with her green eye . he close the organ , go quickly down , and lock 
 up his Church for the last time . it be warm outside than in , and 
 light , for daylight be not quite gone . he move away a few yard , 
 and stand look up . wall , buttress , and spire be clothe in milky 
 shadowy grey . the top of the spire seem to touch a star . ' goodbye , 
 my church ! ' he think . ' good - bye , good - bye ! ' he feel his face quiver ; 
 clench his tooth , and turn away . 




 XII 

 when Noel flee , Fort have start forward to stop she ; then , realise 
 that with his lameness he could never catch she , he go back and 
 enter Leila 's bedroom . 

 she have take off her dress , and be stand in front of her glass , 
 with the cigarette still in her mouth ; and the only movement be the 
 curling of its blue smoke . he could see her face reflect , pale , with 
 a little spot of red in each cheek , and burn red ear . she have not 
 seem to hear he come in , but he see her eye change when they 
 catch his reflection in the mirror . from lost and blank , they become 
 alive and smouldering . 

 " Noel 's go ! " he say . 

 she answer , as if to his reflection in the glass 

 " and you have not   go too ? ah , no ! of course - your leg ! she flee , I 
 suppose ? it be rather a jar , my come in , I be afraid . " 

 " no ; it be my come in that be the jar . " 

 Leila turn round . " Jimmy ! I wonder you could discuss I . the rest - " 
 she shrug her shoulder - " but that ! " 

 " I be not discuss you . I merely say you be not to be envy for 
 have I . be you ? " 

 the moment he have speak , he be sorry . the anger in her eye change 
 instantly , first to search , then to misery . she cry out : 

 " I be to be envy . oh ! jimmy ; I be ! " and fling herself face down on 
 the bed . 

 through Fort 's mind go the thought : ' atrocious ! ' how could he 
 soothe - make she feel that he love she , when he do not   - that he want 
 she , when he want Noel . he go up to the bedside and touch she 
 timidly : 

 " Leila , what be it ? you be overtired . what be the matter ? I could not   help 
 the child 's be here . why do you let it upset you ? she be go . it be 
 all right . thing be just as they be . " 

 " yes ! " come the strangle echo ; " just ! " 

 he kneel down and stroke her arm . it shiver under the touch , seem 
 to stop shiver and wait for the next touch , as if hop it might be 
 warm ; shiver again . 

 " look at I ! " he say . " what be it you want ? I be ready to do anything . " 

 she turn and draw herself up on the bed , screw herself back against 
 the pillow as if for support , with her knee draw under she . he be 
 astonish at the strength of her face and figure , thus entrench . 

 " my dear Jimmy ! " she say , " I want you to do nothing but get I another 
 cigarette . at my age one expect no more than one get ! " she hold out 
 her thumb and finger : " do you mind ? " 

 Fort turn away to get the cigarette . with what bitter restraint and 
 curious little smile she have say that ! but no soon be he out of the 
 room and hunt blindly for the cigarette , than his mind be fill 
 with an aching concern for Noel , flee like that , reckless and hurt , 
 with nowhere to go . he find the polished birch - wood box which hold the 
 cigarette , and make a desperate effort to dismiss the image of the girl 
 before he again reach Leila . she be still sit there , with she 
 arm cross , in the stillness of one whose every nerve and fibre be 
 stretch taut . 

 " have one yourself , " she say . " the pipe of peace . " 

 Fort light the cigarette , and sit down on the edge of the bed ; and his 
 mind at once go back to Noel . 

 " yes , " she say suddenly ; " I wonder where she be go . can you see she ? 
 she might do something reckless a second time . poor Jimmy ! it would be a 
 pity . and so that monk be be here , and drunk champagne . good idea ! get 
 I some , Jimmy ! " 

 again Fort go , and with he the image of the girl . when he come back 
 the second time ; she have put on that dark silk garment in which she 
 have appear suddenly radiant the fatal night after the Queen 's 
 Hall concert . she take the wineglass , and pass he , go into the 
 sitting - room . 

 " come and sit down , " she say . " be your leg hurt you ? " 

 " not more than usual , " and he sit down beside she . 

 " will not   you have some ? ' in vino verita ; ' my friend . " 

 he shake his head , and say humbly : " I admire you , Leila . " 

 " that be lucky . I do not   know anyone else who , would . " and she drink she 
 champagne at a draught . 

 " do not   you wish , " she say suddenly , " that I have be one of those 
 wonderful New Women , all brain and good work . how I should have talk 
 the Universe up and down , and the war , and cause , drink tea , and 
 never bore you to try and love I . what a pity ! " 

 but to Fort there have come Noel 's word : " it be awfully funny , be not   it ? " 

 " Leila , " he say suddenly , ' something be get to be do . so long as you 
 do not   wish I to , I will promise never to see that child again . " 

 " my dear boy , she be not a child . she be ripe for love ; and - I be too 
 ripe for love . that be what be the matter , and I have   get to lump it . " she 
 wrench her hand out of his and , drop the empty glass , cover she 
 face . the awful sensation which visit the true Englishman when a scene 
 star he in the face spin in Fort 's brain . should he seize her hand , 
 drag they down , and kiss she ? should he get up and leave she alone ? 
 speak , or keep silent ; try to console ; try to pretend ? and he do 
 absolutely nothing . so far as a man can understand that moment in 
 a woman 's life when she accept the defeat of Youth and Beauty , he 
 understand perhaps ; but it be only a glimmering . he understand much 
 well how she be recognise once for all that she love where she be 
 not love . 

 ' and I can not   help that , ' he think dumbly ; ' simply can not   help that ! ' 
 nothing he could say or do would alter it . no word can convince a woman 
 when kiss have lose reality . then , to his infinite relief , she take 
 her hand from her face , and say : 

 " this be very dull . I think you would well go , Jimmy . " 

 he make an effort to speak , but be too afraid of falsity in his voice . 

 " very nearly a scene ! " say Leila . " my God ! 

 " how man hate they ! so do I. I have   have too many in my time ; nothing come 
 of they but a headache next morning . I have   spar you that , Jimmy . give 
 I a kiss for it . " 

 he bend down and put his lip to her . with all his heart he try to 
 answer the passion in her kiss . she push he away suddenly , and say 
 faintly : 

 " thank you ; you do try ! " 

 Fort dash his hand across his eye . the sight of her face just then 
 move he horribly . what a brute he feel ! he take her limp hand , put it 
 to his lip , and murmur : 

 " I shall come in to - morrow . we will go to the theatre , shall we ? good 
 night , Leila ! " 

 but , in open the door , he catch sight of her face , star at he , 
 evidently wait for he to turn ; the eye have a frightened look . they 
 go suddenly soft , so soft as to give his heart a squeeze . 

 she lift her hand , blow he a kiss , and he see her smile . without 
 know what his own lip answer , he go out . he could not make 
 up his mind to go away , but , cross to the railing , stand lean 
 against they , look up at her window . she have be very good to he . 
 he feel like a man who have win at card , and sneak away without give 
 the loser his revenge . if only she have not   love he ; and it have be a 
 soulless companionship , a quite sordid business . anything rather than 
 this ! English to the backbone , he could not divest himself of a sense of 
 guilt . to see no way of make up to she , of straighten it out , 
 make he feel intensely mean . ' shall I go up again ? ' he think . the 
 window - curtain move . then the shred of light up there vanish . ' she be 
 go to bed , ' he think . ' I should only upset her bad . where be Noel , 
 now , I wonder ? I shall never see she again , I suppose . altogether a bad 
 business . my God , yes ! a bad - bad business ! ' 

 and , painfully , for his leg be hurt he , he walk away . 

 Leila be only too well aware of a truth that feeling be no less real , 
 poignant , and important to those outside morality 's ring fence than to 
 those within . her feeling be , indeed , probably even more real and 
 poignant , just as a wild fruit 's flavour be sharp than that of the 
 tame product . opinion - she know - would say , that have wilfully 
 choose a position outside morality she have not half the case for 
 brokenheartedness she would have have if Fort have be her husband : 
 opinion - she know - would say she have no claim on he , and the soon an 
 illegal tie be break , the well ! but she feel fully as wretched as if 
 she have be marry . she have not want to be outside morality ; never 
 in her life want to be that . she be like those who by confession shed 
 their sin and start again with a clear conscience . she never mean to 
 sin , only to love , and when she be in love , nothing else matter for 
 the moment . but , though a gambler , she have always so far pay up . only , 
 this time the stake be the heavy a woman can put down . it be 
 her last throw ; and she know it . so long as a woman believe in her 
 attraction , there be hope , even when the curtain fall on a love - affair ! 
 but for Leila the lamp of belief have suddenly go out , and when this 
 next curtain drop she feel that she must sit in the dark until old 
 age make she indifferent . and between forty - four and real old age a gulf 
 be fix . this be the first time a man have tired of she . why ! he have 
 be tired before he begin , or so she feel . in one swift moment as of a 
 drown person , she see again all the passage of their companionship , 
 know with certainty that it have never be a genuine flame . Shame run , 
 consume , in her vein . she bury her face in the cushion . this girl 
 have possess his real heart all the time . with a laugh she think : ' I 
 put my money on the wrong horse ; I ought to have back Edward . I could 
 have turn that poor monk 's head . if only I have never see Jimmy again ; 
 if I have tear his letter up , I could have make poor Edward love I ! ' 
 if ! what folly ! thing happen as they must ! 

 and , start up , she begin to roam the little room . without Jimmy she 
 would be wretche , with he she would be wretche too ! ' I can not   bear 
 to see his face , ' she think ; ' and I can not   live here without he ! it be 
 really funny ! ' the thought of her hospital fill she with loathing . to 
 go there day after day with this despair eat at her heart - she simply 
 could not . she go over her resource . she have more money than she 
 think ; Jimmy have give she a Christmas present of five hundred pound . 
 she have want to tear up the cheque , or force he to take it back ; but 
 the reality of the previous five year have prevail with she , and she 
 have bank it . she be glad now . she have not to consider money . her mind 
 seek to escape in the past . she think of her first husband , Ronny 
 Fane ; of their mosquito - curtain room in that ghastly Madras heat . 
 Poor Ronny ! what a pale , cynical young ghost start up under that name . 
 she think of Lynch , his horsey , matter - of - fact solidity . she have love 
 they both - for a time . she think of the veldt , of Constantia , and the 
 loom of Table Mountain under the star ; and the first sight of 
 Jimmy , his straight look , the curve of his crisp head , the kind , 
 fighting - schoolboy frankness of his face . even now , after all those 
 month of their companionship , that long - ago evening at grape harvest , 
 when she sing to he under the scented creeper , be the memory of he 
 most charge with real feeling . that one evening at any rate he have 
 long for she , eleven : year ago , when she be in her prime . she could 
 have hold her own then ; Noel would have come in vain . to think that 
 this girl have still fifteen year before she would be even in her prime . 
 fifteen year of witchery ; and then another ten before she be on the 
 shelf . why ! if Noel marry Jimmy , he would be an old man dot on she 
 still , by the time she have reach this fatal age of forty - four : she 
 feel as if she must scream , and ; stuff her handkerchief into her 
 mouth , turn out the light . darkness cool she , a little . she pull 
 aside the curtain , and let in the moon light . Jimmy and that girl 
 be out in it some where , seek each other , if not in body , then in 
 thought . and soon , somehow , somewhere , they would come together - come 
 together because Fate mean they to ! fate which have give her young 
 cousin a likeness to herself ; place she , too , in just such a hopeless 
 position as appeal to Jimmy , and give he a chance against young 
 man . she see it with bitter surety . good gambler cut their loss ! 
 yes , and proud woman do not keep unwilling lover ! if she have even 
 an outside chance , she would trail her pride , drag it through the mud , 
 through thorn ! but she have not . and she clench her fist , and strike 
 out at the night , as though at the face of that fate which one could 
 never reach - impalpable , remorseless , surround Fate with its faint 
 mocking smile , devoid of all human warmth . nothing could set back the 
 clock , and give she what this girl have . Time have " do she in , " as it 
 " do in " every woman , one by one . and she see herself go down the 
 year , powder a little more , paint a little more , touch up her 
 hair , till it be all artifice , hold on by every little device - and 
 all , to what end ? to see his face get cold and colder , hear his voice 
 more and more constrain to gentleness ; and know that underneath , 
 aversion be grow with the thought ' you be keep I from life , and 
 love ! ' till one evening , in sheer nerve - break , she would say or do some 
 fearful thing , and he would come no more . ' no , Jimmy ! ' she think ; 
 ' find she , and stay with she . you be not worth all that ! ' and puff 
 to the curtain , as though with that gesture she could shut out her 
 creeping fate , she turn up the light and sit down at her writing 
 table . she stay some minute motionless , her chin rest on her 
 hand , the dark silk fall down from her arm . a little mirror , 
 frame in curiously carve ivory , pick up by she in an indian bazaar 
 twenty - five year ago , hang on a level with her face and give that face 
 back to she . ' I be not ugly , ' she think passionately , ' I be not . I still 
 have some look leave . if only that girl have not   come . and it be all my 
 doing . oh , what make I write to both of they , Edward and Jimmy ? ' she 
 turn the mirror aside , and take up a pen . 


 " MY DEAR JIMMY , " she write : " it will be well for we both if you take 
 a holiday from here . do not   come again till I write for you . I be sorry 
 I make you so much disturbance to - night . have a good time , and a good 
 rest ; and do not   worry . your - " 


 so far she have write when a tear drop on the page , and she have 
 to tear it up and begin again . this time she write to the end - " your 
 Leila . " ' I must post it now , ' she think , ' or he may not get it before 
 to - morrow evening . I could not   go through with this again . ' she hurry 
 out with it and slip it in a pillar box . the night smell of 
 flower ; and , hasten back , she lie down , and stay awake for hour , 
 tossing , and star at the dark . 




 xiii 

 1 

 Leila have pluck , but little patience . her one thought be to get away 
 and she at once begin settle up her affair and get a permit to 
 return to South Africa . the excitement of purchase and preparation be 
 as good an anodyne as she could have take . the peril of the sea 
 be at full just then , and the prospect of danger give she a sort of 
 pleasure . ' if I go down , ' she think , ' all the well ; brisk , instead 
 of long and dreary . ' but when she have the permit and her cabin be 
 book , the irrevocability of her step come to she with full force . 
 should she see he again or no ? her boat start in three day , and she 
 must decide . if in compunction he be to be affectionate , she know she 
 would never keep to her decision , and then the horror would begin again , 
 till again she be force to this same action . she let the hour go and 
 go till the very day before , when the ache to see he and the dread of 
 it have become so unbearable that she could not keep quiet . late that 
 afternoon - everything , to the last label , ready - she go out , still 
 undecided . an itch to turn the dagger in her wound , to know what have 
 become of Noel , take she to Edward 's house . almost unconsciously she 
 have put on her prettiest frock , and spend an hour before the glass . a 
 feverishness of soul , more than of body , which have hang about she ever 
 since that night , give she colour . she look her prettiest ; and she 
 buy a gardenia at a shop in Baker Street and fasten it in her 
 dress . reach the old Square , she be astonish to see a board up 
 with the word : " to let , " though the house still look inhabited . she 
 rang , and be show into the drawing - room . she have only twice be 
 in this house before ; and for some reason , perhaps because of her own 
 unhappiness , the old , rather shabby room strike she as pathetic , as if 
 inhabit by the past . ' I wonder what his wife be like , ' she think : 
 and then she see , hang against a strip of black velvet on the wall , 
 that fade colour sketch of the slender young woman lean forward , 
 with her hand cross in her lap . the colouring be lavender and old 
 ivory , with faint touch of rose . the eye , so living , be a little 
 like Gratian 's ; the whole face delicate , eager , good . ' yes , ' she 
 think , ' he must have love you very much . to say good - bye must have 
 be hard . ' she be still stand before it when Pierson come in . 

 " that be a dear face , Edward . I have   come to say good - bye . I be leave for 
 South Africa to - morrow . " and , as her hand touch his , she think : ' I 
 must have be mad to think I could ever have make he love I . ' 

 " be you - be you leave he ? " 

 Leila nod : 

 " that be very brave , and wonderful . " 

 " oh ! no . need must when the devil drive - that be all . I do not   give up 
 happiness of my own accord . that be not within a hundred mile of the 
 truth . what I shall become , I do not   know , but nothing well , you may be 
 sure . I give up because I can not   keep , and you know why . where be Noel ? " 

 " down at the sea , with George and Gratian . " 

 he be look at she in wonder ; and the pain , puzzle expression on 
 his face anger she . 

 " I see the house be to let . who would have think a child like that could 
 root up two fossil like we ? never mind , Edward , there be the same blood 
 in we . we will keep our end up in our own way . where be you go ? " 

 " they will give I a chaplaincy in the East , I think . " 

 for a wild moment Leila think : ' shall I offer to go with he - the two 
 lose dog together ? ' 

 " what would have happen , Edward , if you have propose to I that May 
 week , when we be - a little bit in love ? which would it have be , 
 bad for , you or I ? " 

 " you would not   have take I , Leila . " 

 " oh , one never know . but you would never have be a priest then , and you would 
 never have become a saint . " 

 " do not   use that silly word . if you know - " 

 " I do ; I can see that you have   be half burn alive ; half burn and 
 half bury ! well , you have your reward , whatever it be , and I mine . 
 good - bye , Edward ! " she take his hand . " you might give I your blessing ; 
 I want it . " 

 Pierson put his other hand on her shoulder and , bend forward , kiss 
 her forehead . 

 the tear rush up in Leila 's eye . " ah I ! " she say , " it be a sad 
 world ! " and wipe the quiver off her lip with the back of her 
 gloved hand , she go quickly past he to the door . she look back from 
 there . he have not stir , but his lip be move . ' he be pray for 
 I ! ' she think . ' how funny ! ' 


 2 

 the moment she be outside , she forget he ; the dreadful ache for Fort 
 seem to have be whip up within she , as if that figure of lifelong 
 repression have infuriate the love of life and pleasure in she . she 
 must and would see Jimmy again , if she have to wait and seek for he all 
 night ! it be nearly seven , he would surely have finish at the War 
 Office ; he might be at his Club or at his room . she make for the 
 latter . 

 the little street near Buckingham Gate , where no wag have chalk " peace " 
 on the door for nearly a year now , have an arid look after a hot day 's 
 sun . the hair - dresser 's shop below his room be still open , and the 
 private door ajar : ' I will not   ring , ' she think ; ' I will go straight up . ' 
 while she be mount the two flight of stair , she stop twice , 
 breathless , from a pain in her side . she often have that pain now , as if 
 the longing in her heart strain it physically . on the modest landing 
 at the top , outside his room , she wait , lean against the wall , 
 which be cover with a red paper . a window at the back be open and 
 the confused sound of singing come in - a chorus " Vive - la , vive - la , 
 vive - la ve . Vive la compagnie . " so it come to she . ' o God ! ' she think : 
 ' let he be in , let he be nice to I . it be the last time . ' and , sick 
 from anxiety , she open the door . he be in - lie on a wicker - couch 
 against the wall in the far corner , with his arm cross behind his 
 head , and a pipe in his mouth ; his eye be closed , and he neither 
 move , nor open they , perhaps suppose she to be the servant . 
 Noiseless as a cat , Leila cross the room till she stand above he . and 
 wait for he to come out of that defiant lethargy , she take her fill 
 of his thin , bony face , healthy and hollow at the same time . with tooth 
 clench on the pipe it have a look of hard resistance , as of a man with 
 his head back , his arm pinion to his side , stiffen against some 
 creature , cling and climb and try to drag he down . the pipe 
 be alive , and dribble smoke ; and his leg , the injure one , wriggle 
 restlessly , as if worry he ; but the rest of he be as utterly and 
 obstinately still as though he be asleep . his hair grow thick and 
 crisp , not a thread of grey in it , the tooth which hold the pipe glint 
 white and strong . his face be young ; so much young than her . why do 
 she love it - the face of a man who could not   love she ? for a second she 
 feel as if she could seize the cushion which have slip down off the 
 couch , and smother he as he lie there , refuse , so it seem to she , 
 to come to consciousness . Love despise ! humiliation ! she nearly turn 
 and steal away . then through the door , leave open , behind she , the sound 
 of that chorus : " Vive - la , vive - la , vive - la ve ! " come in and jolt her 
 nerve unbearably . tear the gardenia from her breast , she fling it on 
 to his upturned face . 

 " Jimmy ! " 

 Fort struggle up , and star at she . his face be comic from 
 bewilderment , and she break into a little nervous laugh . 

 " you be not   dream of I , dear Jimmy , that be certain . in what garden 
 be you wander ? " 

 " Leila ! you ! how - how jolly ! " 

 " how - how jolly ! I want to see you , so I come . and I have see you , as 
 you be , when you be not   with I . I shall remember it ; it be good for 
 I - awfully good for I . " 

 " I do not   hear you . " 

 " far , far away , my dear . put my gardenia in , your buttonhole . stop , I will 
 pin it in . have you have a good rest all this week ? do you like my dress ? 
 it be new . you would not   have notice it , would you ? " 

 " I should have notice . I think it be charming . 

 " Jimmy , I believe that nothing - nothing will ever shake your chivalry . " 

 " Chivalry ? I have none . " 

 " I be go to shut the door , do you mind ? " but he go to the door 
 himself , shut it , and come back to she . Leila look up at he . 

 " Jimmy , if ever you love I a little bit , be nice to I today . and if I 
 say thing - if I be bitter - do not   mind ; do not   notice it . promise ! " 

 " I promise . " 

 she take off her hat and sit lean against he on the couch , so that 
 she could not see his face . and with his arm round she , she let herself 
 go , deep into the water of illusion ; down - down , try to forget there 
 be a surface to which she must return ; like a little girl she play 
 that game of make - believe . ' he love I - he love I - he love I ! ' to 
 lose herself like that for , just an hour , only an hour ; she feel that 
 she would give the rest of the time vouchsafe to she ; give it all and 
 willingly . her hand clasp his against her heart , she turn her face 
 backward , up to his , close her eye so as still not to see his face ; 
 the scent of the gardenia in his coat hurt she , so sweet and strong it 
 be . 


 3 

 when with her hat on she stand ready to go , it be get dark . she have 
 come out of her dream now , be play at make - believe no more . and she 
 stand with a stony smile , in the half - dark , look between her lash 
 at the mortified expression on his unconscious face . 

 " Poor Jimmy ! " she say ; " I be not go to keep you from dinner any 
 long . no , do not   come with I . I be go alone ; and do not   light up , for 
 heaven 's sake . " 

 she put her hand on the lapel of his coat . " that flower 's go brown at 
 the edge . throw it away ; I can not   bear fade flower . nor can you . get 
 yourself a fresh one tomorrow . " 

 she pull the flower from his buttonhole and , crush it in her hand , 
 hold her face up . 

 " well , kiss I once more ; it will not   hurt you . " 

 for one moment her lip clung to his with all their might . she wrench 
 they away , feel for the handle blindly , open the door , and , shut 
 it in his face , go slowly , sway a little , down the stair . she 
 trail a gloved hand along the wall , as if its solidity could help 
 she . at the last half - landing , where a curtain hung , divide off back 
 premise , she stop and listen . there be not   a sound . ' if I stand 
 here behind this curtain , ' she think , ' I shall see he again . ' she 
 slip behind the curtain , close draw but for a little chink . it be 
 so dark there that she could not see her own hand . she hear the door 
 open , and his slow footstep come down the stair . his foot , knee , 
 whole figure come into sight , his face just a dim blur . he pass , 
 smoke a cigarette . she cram her hand against her mouth to stop 
 herself from speak and the crush gardenia fill her nostril with 
 its cold , fragrant velvet . he be go , the door below be shut . a wild , 
 half - stupid longing come on she to go up again , wait till he come in , 
 throw herself upon he , tell he she be go , beg he to keep she with 
 he . ah ! and he would ! he would look at she with that haggard pity she 
 could not bear , and say , " of course , Leila , of course . " no ! by God , no ! 
 " I be go quietly home , " she mutter ; " just quietly home ! come along , 
 be brave ; do not   be a fool ! come along ! " and she go down into the 
 street : at the entrance to the Park she see he , fifty yard in front , 
 dawdling along . and , as if she have be his shadow lengthen out 
 to that far distance , she move behind he . slowly , always at that 
 distance , she follow he under the plane - tree , along the Park 
 railing , past St. James 's Palace , into Pall Mall . he go up some 
 step , and vanish into his Club . it be the end . she look up at the 
 building ; a monstrous granite tomb , all dark . an emptied cab be just 
 move from the door . she get in . " Camelot Mansions , St. John 's Wood . " 
 and brace against the cushion , panting , and clench her hand , she 
 think : ' well , I have   see he again . hard crust 's well than no bread . 
 oh , God ! all finish - not a crumb , not a crumb ! Vive - la , vive - la , 
 vive - la ve . Vive - la compagnie ! ' 




 XIV 

 Fort have be lie there about an hour , sleeping and awake , before that 
 visit : he have dream a curious and wonderfully emotionalise dream . a 
 long grey line , in a dim light , neither of night nor morning , the whole 
 length of the battle - front in France , charge in short drive , which 
 carry the line a little forward , with just a tiny pause and suck - back ; 
 then on again irresistibly , on and on ; and at each rush , every voice , 
 his own among they , shout " Hooray ! the English ! Hooray ! the English ! " 
 the sensation of that advance tide of dim figure in grey light , the 
 throb and roar , the wonderful , rhythmic steady drive of it , no more 
 to be stop than the wave of an incoming tide , be gloriously 
 fascinating ; life be nothing , death nothing . " Hooray , the English ! " in 
 that dream , he be his country , he be every one of that long charge 
 line , drive forward in . those great heaving pulsation , irresistible , 
 on and on . out of the very centre of this intoxicating dream he have be 
 drag by some street noise , and have close his eye again , in the 
 vain hope that he might dream it on to its end . but it come no more ; 
 and light his pipe , he lie there wonder at its fervid , fantastic 
 realism . death be nothing , if his country live and win . in wake 
 hour he never have quite that single - hearted knowledge of himself . and 
 what marvellously real touch get mix into the fantastic stuff of 
 dream , as if something be at work to convince the dreamer in spite 
 of himself - " Hooray ! " not " Hurrah ! " just common " Hooray ! " and " the 
 English , " not the literary " british . " and then the soft flower have 
 strike his forehead , and Leila 's voice cry : " Jimmy ! " 

 when she leave he , his thought be just a tired : ' well , so it be begin 
 again ! ' what do it matter , since common loyalty and compassion cut he 
 off from what his heart desire ; and that desire be absurd , as little 
 likely of attainment as the moon . what do it matter ? if it give she 
 any pleasure to love he , let it go on ! yet , all the time that he be 
 walk across under the plane tree , Noel seem to walk in front of 
 he , just out of reach , so that he ache with the thought that he would 
 never catch she up , and walk beside she . 

 two day later , on reach his room in the evening , he find this 
 letter on ship 's note - paper , with the Plymouth postmark - 

  " fare thee well , and if for ever , 
  then for ever fare thee well " 
  " Leila " 

 he read it with a really horrible feeling , for all the world as if he 
 have be accuse of a crime and do not know whether he have commit it 
 or not . and , try to collect his thought , he take a cab and drive to 
 her fiat . it be closed , but her address be give he ; a bank in 
 Cape Town . he have receive his release . in his remorse and relief , so 
 confusing and so poignant , he hear the driver of the cab ask where 
 he want to go now . " oh , back again ! " but before they have go a mile 
 he correct the address , in an impulse of which next moment he feel 
 thoroughly ashamed . what he be do indeed , be as indecent as if 
 he be drive from the funeral of his wife to the boudoir of another 
 woman . when he reach the old Square , and the word " to let " stared he 
 in the face , he feel a curious relief , though it mean that he would 
 not see she whom to see for ten minute he feel he would give a year of 
 life . dismiss his cab , he stand debate whether to ring the bell . 
 the sight of a maid 's face at the window decide he . Mr. Pierson be 
 out , and the young lady be away . he ask for Mrs. Laird 's address , 
 and turn away , almost into the arm of Pierson himself . the greeting 
 be stiff and strange . ' do he know that Leila 's go ? ' he think . 
 ' if so , he must think I the most awful skunk . and be I ? be I ? ' when he 
 reach home , he sit down to write to Leila . but have star at the 
 paper for an hour and write these three line - 


 " MY dear LEILA , 

 " I can not express to you the feeling with which I receive your letter - " 


 he tear it up . nothing would be adequate , nothing would be decent . let 
 the dead past bury its dead - the dead past which in his heart have never 
 be alive ! why pretend ? he have do his good to keep his end up . why 
 pretend ? 




 PART IV 




 I 

 in the boarding - house , whence the Lairds have not yet remove , the old 
 lady who knit , sit by the fireplace , and light from the setting 
 sun throw her shadow on the wall , move spidery and grey , over the 
 yellowish distemper , in time to the tune of her needle . she be a very 
 old lady - the old lady in the world , Noel think - and she knit 
 without stop , without breathing , so that the girl feel inclined to 
 scream . in the evening when George and Gratian be not in , Noel would 
 often sit watch the needle , brood over she as yet undecided 
 future . and now and again the old lady would look up above her 
 spectacle ; move the corner of her lip ever so slightly , and drop she 
 gaze again . she have pit herself against Fate ; so long as she knit , 
 the war could not stop - such be the conclusion Noel have come to . this 
 old lady knit the epic of acquiescence to the tune of her needle ; it 
 be she who keep the war go such a thin old lady ! ' if I be to hold 
 her elbow from behind , ' the girl use to think , ' I believe she would die . 
 I expect I ought to ; then the war would stop . and if the war stop , 
 there would be love and life again . ' then the little silvery tune would 
 click itself once more into her brain , and stop her thinking . in her lap 
 this evening lie a letter from her father . 


 " MY dearest nollie , 

 " I be glad to say I have my chaplaincy , and be to start for Egypt very 
 soon . I should have wish to go to France , but must take what I can 
 get , in view of my age , for they really do not   want we who be get 
 on , I fear . it be a great comfort to I to think that Gratian be with 
 you , and no doubt you will all soon be in a house where my little 
 grandson can join you . I have excellent account of he in a letter from 
 your aunt , just receive : my child , you must never again think that my 
 resignation have be due to you . it be not so . you know , or perhaps you 
 do not , that ever since the war break out , I have chafe over stay at 
 home , my heart have be with our boy out there , and soon or later it 
 must have come to this , apart from anything else . Monsieur Lavendie 
 have be round in the evening , twice ; he be a nice man , I like he very 
 much , in spite of our difference of view . he want to give I the 
 sketch he make of you in the Park , but what can I do with it now ? and to 
 tell you the truth , I like it no well than the oil painting . it be 
 not a likeness , as I know you . I hope I do not   hurt his feeling , the 
 feeling of an artist be so very easily wound . there be one thing I 
 must tell you . Leila have go back to South Africa ; she come round one 
 evening about ten day ago , to say goodbye . she be very brave , for 
 I fear it mean a great wrench for she . I hope and pray she may find 
 comfort and tranquillity out there . and now , my dear , I want you to 
 promise I not to see Captain Fort . I know that he admire you . but , 
 apart from the question of his conduct in regard to Leila , he make the 
 sad impression on I by come to our house the very day after her 
 departure . there be something about that which make I feel he can not 
 be the sort of man in whom I could feel any confidence . I do not   suppose 
 for a moment that he be in your thought , and yet before go so far 
 from you , I feel I must warn you . I should rejoice to see you married to 
 a good man ; but , though I do not   wish to think hardly of anyone , I can not 
 believe Captain Fort be that . 

 " I shall come down to you before I start , which may be in quite a short 
 time now . my dear love to you and Gracie , and good wish to George . 

 " your ever love father , 

 " EDWARD PIERSON " 


 across this letter lie on her knee , Noel gaze at the spidery 
 movement on the wall . be it acquiescence that the old lady knit , or 
 be it resistance - a challenge to death itself , a challenge dance to 
 the tune of the needle like the grey ghost of human resistance to Fate ! 
 she would not   give in , this old lady in the world , she mean to knit 
 till she fall into the grave . and so Leila have go ! it hurt she to know 
 that ; and yet it please she . Acquiescence - resistance ! why do daddy 
 always want to choose the way she should go ? so gentle he be , yet he 
 always want to ! and why do he always make she feel that she must go 
 the other way ? the sunlight cease to stream in , the old lady 's shadow 
 fade off the wall , but the needle still sing their little tune . and 
 the girl say : 

 " do you enjoy knit , Mrs. Adam ? " 

 the old lady look at she above the spectacle . 

 " Enjoy , my dear ? it pass the time . " 

 " but do you want the time to pass ? " 

 there be no answer for a moment , and Noel think : ' how dreadful of I 
 to have say that ! ' 

 " Eh ? " say the old lady . 

 " I say : be not   it very tiring ? " 

 " not when I do not   think about it , my dear . " 

 " what do you think about ? " 

 the old lady cackle gently . 

 " oh - well ! " she say . 

 and Noel think : ' it must be dreadful to grow old , and pass the time ! ' 

 she take up her father 's letter , and bent it meditatively against she 
 chin . he want she to pass the time - not to live , not to enjoy ! to pass 
 the time . what else have he be do himself , all these year , ever 
 since she could remember , ever since her mother die , but just pass 
 the time ? pass the time because he do not believe in this life ; not 
 live at all , just prepare for the life he do believe in . deny 
 himself everything that be exciting and nice , so that when he die he 
 might pass pure and saintly to his other world . he could not believe 
 Captain Fort a good man , because he have not pass the time , and 
 resist Leila ; and Leila be go ! and now it be a sin for he to love 
 someone else ; he must pass the time again . ' daddy do not   believe in 
 life , ' she think ; ' it be monsieur 's picture . daddy 's a saint ; but I 
 do not   want to be a saint , and pass the time . he do not   mind make 
 people unhappy , because the more they be repressed , the saintlier 
 they will be . but I can not   bear to be unhappy , or to see other unhappy . I 
 wonder if I could bear to be unhappy to save someone else - as Leila be ? 
 I admire she ! oh ! I admire she ! she be not do it because she think it 
 good for her soul ; only because she can not   bear make he unhappy . she 
 must love he very much . poor Leila ! and she be do it all by herself , 
 of her own accord . ' it be like what George say of the soldier ; they 
 do not   know why they be hero , it be not because they have be tell to 
 be , or because they believe in a future life . they just have to be , from 
 inside somewhere , to save other . ' and they love life as much as I 
 do , ' she think . ' what a beast it make one feel ! ' those needle ! 
 resistance - acquiescence ? both perhaps . the old lady in the world , 
 with her lip move at the corner , keep thing in , have live her 
 life , and know it . how dreadful to live on when you be of no more 
 interest to anyone , but must just " pass the time " and die . but how much 
 more dreadful to " pass the time " when you be strong , and life and love 
 be yours for the taking ! ' I shall not   answer daddy , ' she think . 




 II 

 the maid , who one Saturday in July open the door to Jimmy Fort , have 
 never hear the name of Laird , for she be but a unit in the ceaseless 
 procession which pass through the boarding - house of place subject to 
 air - raid . place he in a sitting - room , she say she would find Miss 
 ' Allow . there he wait , turn the leaf of an illustrate Journal , 
 wherein Society beauty ; starve Servians , actress with pretty 
 leg , prize dog , sink ship , royalty , shell burst , and padre 
 read funeral service , testify to the catholicity of the public 
 taste , but do not assuage his nerve . what if their address be not 
 know here ? why , in his fear of put thing to the test , have he let 
 this month go by ? an old lady be sit by the hearth , knitting , the 
 click of whose needle blend with the buzzing of a large bee on the 
 window - pane . ' she may know , ' he think , ' she look as if she have be 
 here for ever . ' and approach she , he say : 

 " I can assure you those sock be very much appreciate , ma'am . " 

 the old lady bridle over her spectacle . 

 " it pass the time , " she say . 

 " oh , more than that ; it help to win the war , ma'am . " 

 the old lady 's lip move at the corner ; she do not answer . ' deaf ! ' he 
 think . 

 " may I ask if you know my friend , Doctor and Mrs. Laird , and Miss 
 Pierson ? " 

 the old lady cackle gently . 

 " oh , yes ! a pretty young girl ; as pretty as life . she use to sit with 
 I . quite a pleasure to watch she ; such large eye she have . " 

 " where have they go ? can you tell I ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know at all . " 

 it be a little cold douche on his heart . he long to say : ' stop 
 knit a minute , please . it be my life , to know . ' but the tune of the 
 needle answer : ' it be my life to knit . ' and he turn away to the 
 window . 

 " she use to sit just there ; quite still ; quite still . " 

 Fort look down at the window - seat . so , she use to sit just here , 
 quite still . 

 " what a dreadful war this be ! " say the old lady . " have you be at the 
 front ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " to think of the poor young girl who will never have husband ! I be sure I 
 think it be dreadful . " 

 " yes , " say Fort ; " it be dreadful - " and then a voice from the doorway 
 say : 

 " do you want Doctor and Mrs. Laird , sir ? East bungalow their address 
 be ; it be a little way out on the North Road . anyone will tell you . " 

 with a sigh of relief Fort look gratefully at the old lady who have 
 call Noel as pretty as life . " good afternoon , ma'am . " 

 " good afternoon . " the needle click , and little movement occur at 
 the corner of her mouth . Fort go out . he could not find a vehicle , 
 and be a long time walk . the Bungalow be ugly , of yellow brick 
 point with red . it lie about two - third up between the main road and 
 cliff , and have a rock - garden and a glaring , brand - new look , in the 
 afternoon sunlight . he open the gate , utter one of those prayer 
 which come so glibly from unbeliever when they want anything . a baby 's 
 crying answer it , and he think with ecstasy : ' Heaven , she be here ! ' 
 pass the rock - garden he could see a lawn at the back of the house and 
 a perambulator out there under a holm - oak tree , and Noel - surely Noel 
 herself ! harden his heart , he go forward . in a lilac sunbonnet she 
 be bend over the perambulator . he trod softly on the grass , and be 
 quite close before she hear he . he have prepare no word , but just 
 hold out his hand . the baby , interested in the shadow fail across its 
 pram , cease cry . Noel take his hand . under the sunbonnet , which hide 
 her hair , she seem old and paler , as if she feel the heat . he have no 
 feeling that she be glad to see he . 

 " how do you do ? have you see Gratian ; she ought to be in . " 

 " I do not   come to see she ; I come to see you . " 

 Noel turn to the baby . 

 " here he be . " 

 Fort stand at the end of the perambulator , and look at that other 
 fellow 's baby . in the shade of the hood , with the frilly clothe , it 
 seem to he lie with its head downhill . it have scratch its snub 
 nose and bumpy forehead , and it star up at its mother with blue eye , 
 which seem to have no underlid so fat be its cheek . 

 " I wonder what they think about , " he say . 

 Noel put her finger into the baby 's fist . 

 " they only think when they want some thing . " 

 " that be a deep saying : but his eye be awfully interested in you . " 

 Noel smile ; and very slowly the baby 's curly mouth unclose , and 
 discover his toothlessness . 

 " he be a darling , " she say in a whisper . 

 ' and so be you , ' he think , ' if only I dare say it ! ' 

 " daddy be here , " she say suddenly , without look up . " he be sailing 
 for Egypt the day after to - morrow . he do not   like you . " 

 Fort 's heart give a jump . why do she tell he that , unless - unless she 
 be just a little on his side ? 

 " I expect that , " he say . " I be a sinner , as you know . " 

 Noel look up at he . " sin ! " she say , and bent again over her baby . 
 the word , the tone in which she say it , crouch over her baby , give 
 he the thought : ' if it be not   for that little creature , I should not 
 have a dog 's chance . ' he say , " I will go and see your father . be he in ? " 

 " I think so . " 

 " may I come to - morrow ? " 

 " it be Sunday ; and Daddy 's last day . " 

 " ah ! of course . " he do not dare look back , to see if her gaze be 
 follow he , but he think : ' Chance or no chance , I be go to fight 
 for her tooth and nail . ' 

 in a room darken against the evening sun Pierson be sit on a sofa 
 reading . the sight of that figure in khaki disconcert Fort , who have 
 not realise that there would be this metamorphosis . the narrow face , 
 clean - shaven now , with its deep - set eye and compress lip , look 
 more priestly than ever , in spite of this brown garb . he feel his hope 
 suddenly to be very forlorn indeed . and rush at the fence , he begin 
 abruptly : 

 " I have   come to ask you , sir , for your permission to marry Noel , if she 
 will have I . " 

 he have think Pierson 's face gentle ; it be not gentle now . " do you 
 know I be here , then , Captain Fort ? " 

 " I see Noel in the garden . I have   say nothing to she , of course . but she 
 tell I you be start to - morrow for Egypt , so I shall have no other 
 chance . " 

 " I be sorry you have come . it be not for I to judge , but I do not   think 
 you will make Noel happy . " 

 " may I ask you why , sir ? " 

 " Captain Fort , the world 's judgment of these thing be not mine ; but 
 since you ask I . I will tell you frankly . my cousin Leila have a claim 
 on you . it be she you should ask to marry you . " 

 " I do ask she ; she refuse . " 

 " I know . she would not refuse you again if you go out to she . " 

 " I be not free to go out to she ; besides , she would refuse . she know I 
 do not   love she , and never have . " 

 " never have ? " 

 " no . " 

 " then why - " 

 " because I be a man , I suppose , and a fool " 

 " if it be simply , ' because you be a man ' as you call it , it be clear 
 that no principle or faith govern you . and yet you ask I to give you 
 Noel ; my poor Noel , who want the love and protection not of a ' man ' but 
 of a good man . no , Captain Fort , no ! " 

 Fort bite his lip . " I be clearly not a good man in your sense of the 
 word ; but I love she terribly , and I would protect she . I do not   in the 
 least know whether she will have I . I do not   expect she to , naturally . but 
 I warn you that I mean to ask she , and to wait for she . I be so much in 
 love that I can do nothing else . " 

 " the man who be truly in love do what be good for the one he love . " 
 Fort bend his head ; he feel as if he be at school again , confront 
 his head - master . " that be true , " he say . " and I shall never trade on 
 her position . if she can not   feel anything for I now or in the future , 
 I shall not   trouble she , you may be sure of that . but if by some wonderful 
 chance she should , I know I can make she happy , sir . " 

 " she be a child . " 

 " no , she be not a child , " say Fort stubbornly . 

 Pierson touch the lapel of his new tunic . " Captain Fort , I be go 
 far away from she , and leave she without protection . I trust to your 
 chivalry not to ask she , till I come back . " 

 Fort throw back his head . " no , no , I will not   accept that position . with 
 or without your presence the fact will be the same . either she can love 
 I , or she can not . if she can , she will be happy with I . if she can not , 
 there be an end of it . " 

 Pierson come slowly up to he . " in my view , " he say , " you be as bind 
 to Leila as if you be married to she . " 

 " you can not , expect I to take the priest 's view , sir . " 

 Pierson 's lip tremble . 

 " you call it a priest 's view ; I think it be only the view of a man of 
 honour . " 

 Fort redden . " that be for my conscience , " he say stubbornly . " I can not 
 tell you , and I be not go to , how thing begin . I be a fool . but I 
 do my good , and I know that Leila do not   think I be bound . if she have , 
 she would never have go . when there be no feeling - there never be 
 real feeling on my side - and when there be this terribly real feeling for 
 Noel , which I never seek , which I try to keep down , which I run away 
 from - " 

 " do you ? " 

 " yes . to go on with the other be foul . I should have think you might 
 have see that , sir ; but I do go on with it . it be Leila who make an 
 end . " 

 " Leila behave nobly , I think . " 

 " she be splendid ; but that do not   make I a brute . " . 

 Pierson turn away to the window , whence he must see Noel . 

 " it be repugnant to I , " he say . " be there never to be any purity in 
 her life ? " 

 " be there never to be any life for she ? at your rate , sir , there will be 
 none . I be no bad than other man , and I love she more than they could . " 

 for fully a minute Pierson stand silent , before he say : " forgive I if 
 I have   speak harshly . I do not   mean to . I love she intensely ; I wish for 
 nothing but her good . but all my life I have believe that for a man 
 there be only one woman - for a woman only one man . " 

 " then , Sir , " Fort burst out , " you wish she - " 

 Pierson have put his hand up , as if to ward off a blow ; and , angry though 
 he be , Fort stop . 

 " we be all make of flesh and blood , " he continue coldly , " and it seem 
 to I that you think we be not . " 

 " we have spirit too , Captain Fort . " the voice be suddenly so gentle 
 that Fort 's anger evaporate . 

 " I have a great respect for you , sir ; but a great love for Noel , and 
 nothing in this world will prevent I try to give my life to she . " 

 a smile quiver over Pierson 's face . " if you try , then I can but pray 
 that you will fail . " 

 Fort do not answer , and go out . 

 he walk slowly away from the bungalow , with his head down , sore , 
 angry , and yet - relieve . he know where he stand ; nor do he feel that 
 he have be worst - those stricture have not touch he . convict of 
 immorality , he remain conscious of private justification , in a way 
 that human being have . only one little corner of memory , unseen and 
 uncriticised by his opponent , trouble he . he pardon himself the 
 rest ; the one thing he do not pardon be the fact that he have know 
 Noel before his liaison with Leila commence ; have even let Leila sweep 
 he away on , an evening when he have be in Noel 's company . for that he 
 feel a real disgust with himself . and all the way back to the station he 
 keep think : ' how could I ? I deserve to lose she ! still , I shall try ; 
 but not now - not yet ! ' and , wearily enough , he take the train back to 
 town . 




 III 

 both girl rise early that last day , and go with their father to 
 Communion . as Gratian have say to George : " it be nothing to I now , but 
 it will mean a lot to he out there , as a memory of we . so I must go . " 
 and he have answer : " quite right , my dear . let he have all he can get 
 of you both to - day . I will keep out of the way , and be back the last thing 
 at night . " their father 's smile when he see they wait for he go 
 straight to both their heart . it be a delicious day , and the early 
 freshness have not yet dry out of the air , when they be walk home 
 to breakfast . each girl have slip a hand under his arm . ' it be like 
 Moses or be it Aaron ? ' Noel think absurdly Memory have complete hold 
 of she . all the old day ! nursery hour on Sundays after tea , story 
 out of the huge Bible bind in mother - o'pearl , with photogravure of the 
 Holy Land - palm , and hill , and goat , and little eastern figure , and 
 funny boat on the Sea of Galilee , and camel - always camel . the book 
 would be on his knee , and they one on each arm of his chair , wait 
 eagerly for the page to be turn so that a new picture come . and there 
 would be the feel of his cheek , prickly against theirs ; and the old 
 name with the old glamour - to Gratian , Joshua , Daniel , Mordecai , Peter ; 
 to Noel Absalom because of his hair , and Haman because she like the 
 sound , and Ruth because she be pretty and John because he lean on 
 Jesus ' breast . neither of they care for Job or David , and Elijah and 
 Elisha they detest because they hat the name Eliza . and later day 
 by firelight in the drawing - room , roast chestnut just before evening 
 church , and tell ghost story , and try to make daddy eat his 
 share . and hour beside he at the piano , each eager for her special 
 hymn - for Gratian , " onward , Christian Soldiers , " " Lead , Kindly Light , " 
 and " o God our help " ; for Noel , " Nearer , my God , to Thee , " the one with 
 " the Hosts of Midian " in it , and " for those in Peril on the Sea . " 
 and carol ! ah ! and chorister ! Noel have love one deeply - the word 
 " chorister " be so enchanting ; and because of his whiteness , and hair 
 which have no grease on it , but stand up all bright ; she have never speak 
 to he - a far worship , like that for a star . and always , always daddy 
 have be gentle ; sometimes angry , but always gentle ; and they sometimes 
 not at all ! and mix up with it all , the dog they have have , and the 
 cat they have have , and the cockatoo , and the governess , and their red 
 cloak , and the curate , and the pantomime , and " Peter Pan , " and " Alice 
 in Wonderland " - daddy sit between they , so that one could snuggle 
 up . and later , the school - day , the hockey , the prize , the holiday , 
 the rush into his arm ; and the great and wonderful yearly exodus to far 
 place , fishing and bathing ; walk and drive ; ride and climb , always 
 with he . and concert and Shakespeare play in the Christmas and Easter 
 holiday ; and the walk home through the street - all light in those 
 day - one on each side of he . and this be the end ! they wait on he 
 at breakfast : they keep steal glance at he , photograph he in 
 their mind . Gratian get her camera and do actually photograph he in 
 the morning sunlight with Noel , without Noel , with the baby ; against 
 all regulation for the defence of the realm . it be Noel who suggest : 
 " daddy , let us take lunch out and go for all day on the cliff , we three , 
 and forget there be a war . " 

 so easy to say , so difficult to do , with the boom of the gun travel 
 to their ear along the grass , mingle with the buzz of insect . yet 
 that hum of summer , the innumerable voice of tiny life , gossamer 
 thing all as alive as they , and as important to their frail self ; and 
 the white cloud , few and so slow - move , and the remote strange purity 
 which cling to the chalky down , all this white and green and blue of 
 land and sea have its peace , which creep into the spirit of those three 
 alone with Nature , this once more , the last time for - who could say how 
 long ? they talk , by tacit agreement , of nothing but what have happen 
 before the war begin , while the flock of the blow dandelion drift 
 past . Pierson sit cross - legged on the grass , without his cap , suffer 
 a little still from the stiffness of his unwonted garment . and the 
 girl lie one on each side of he , half critical , and half admiring . 
 Noel could not bear his collar . 

 " if you have a soft collar you would be lovely , daddy . perhaps out there 
 they will let you take it off . it must be fearfully hot in Egypt . oh ! I 
 wish I be go . I wish I be go everywhere in the world . some 
 day ! " presently he read to they , Murray 's " Hippolytus " of euripide . and 
 now and then Gratian and he discuss a passage . but Noel lie silent , 
 look at the sky . whenever his voice cease , there be the song of the 
 lark , and very faint , the distant mutter of the gun . 

 they stay up there till past six , and it be time to go and have tea 
 before Evening Service . those hour in the bake sun have draw virtue 
 out of they ; they be silent and melancholy all the evening . Noel 
 be the first to go up to her bedroom . she go without say good 
 night - she know her father would come to her room that last evening . 
 George have not yet come in ; and Gratian be leave alone with Pierson 
 in the drawing - room , round whose single lamp , in spite of close - draw 
 curtain , moth be circle : she move over to he on the sofa . 

 " Dad , promise I not to worry about Nollie ; we will take care of she . " 

 " she can only take care of herself , Gracie , and will she ? do you know 
 that Captain Fort be here yesterday ? " 

 " she tell I . " 

 " what be she feel about he ? " 

 " I do not   think she know . nollie dream along , and then suddenly 
 rush . " 

 " I wish she be safe from that man . " 

 " but , Dad , why ? George like he and so do I. " 

 a big grey moth be flutter against the lamp . Pierson get up and 
 catch it in the curve of his palm . " poor thing ! you be like my Nollie ; 
 so soft , and dreamy , so feckless , so reckless . " and go to the 
 curtain , he thrust his hand through , and release the moth . 

 " Dad ! " say Gratian suddenly , " we can only find out for ourselves , 
 even if we do singe our wing in do it . we have   be read James 's 
 ' Pragmatism . ' George say the only chapter that be important be 
 miss - the one on ethic , to show that what we do be not wrong till 
 it be prove wrong by the result . I suppose he be afraid to deliver that 
 lecture . " 

 Pierson 's face wear the smile which always come on it when he have to 
 deal with George , the smile which say : " ah , George , that be very clever ; 
 but I know . " 

 " my dear , " he say , " that doctrine be the most dangerous in the world . I 
 be surprised at George . " 

 " I do not   think George be in danger , Dad . " 

 " George be a man of wide experience and strong judgment and character ; 
 but think how fatal it would be for Nollie , my poor Nollie , whom a 
 little gust can blow into the candle . " 

 " all the same , " say Gratian stubbornly , " I do not   think anyone can be 
 good or worth anything unless they judge for themselves and take risk . " 

 Pierson go close to she ; his face be quiver . 

 " do not   let we differ on this last night ; I must go up to Nollie for a 
 minute , and then to bed . I shall not   see you to - morrow ; you must not   get 
 up ; I can bear part well like this . and my train go at eight . God 
 bless you , gracie ; give George my love . I know , I have always know that 
 he be a good man , though we do fight so . good - bye , my darling . " 

 he go out with his cheek wet from Gratian 's tear , and stand in 
 the porch a minute to recover his composure . the shadow of the house 
 stretch velvet and blunt over the rock - garden . a night - jar be 
 spinning ; the churr sound affect he oddly . the last English 
 night - bird he would hear . England ! what a night - to say good - bye ! ' my 
 country ! ' he think ; ' my beautiful country ! ' the dew be lie thick 
 and silvery already on the little patch of grass - the last dew , the last 
 scent of an english night . the call of a bugle float out . " England ! " 
 he pray ; " God be about you ! " a little sound answer from across the 
 grass , like an old man 's cough , and the scrape and rattle of a chain . a 
 face emerge at the edge of the house 's shadow ; bearded and horn like 
 that of Pan , it seem to stare at he . and he see the dim grey form 
 of the garden goat , hear it scuttle round the stake to which it be 
 tethered , as though alarm at this visitor to its ' domain . 

 he go up the half - flight of stair to Noel 's narrow little room , next 
 the nursery . no voice answer his tap . it be dark , but he could see 
 she at the window , lean far out , with her chin on her hand . 

 " Nollie ! " 

 she answer without turn : " such a lovely night , daddy . come and 
 look ! I would like to set the goat free , only he would eat the rock plant . but 
 it be his night , be not   it ? he ought to be run and skip in it : 
 it be such a shame to tie thing up . do you never , feel wild in your 
 heart , daddy ? " 

 " always , I think , Nollie ; too wild . it be be hard to tame oneself . " 

 Noel slip her hand through his arm . " let us go and take the goat and 
 skip together on the hill . if only we have a penny whistle ! do you hear 
 the bugle ? the bugle and the goat ! " 

 Pierson press the hand against he . 

 " Nollie , be good while I be away . you know what I do not   want . I tell you 
 in my letter . " he look at her cheek , and dare say no more . her face 
 have its " fey " look again . 

 " do not   you feel , " she say suddenly , " on a night like this , all the 
 thing , all the thing - the star have life , Daddy , and the moon have 
 a big life , and the shadow have , and the moth and the bird and the 
 goat and the tree , and the flower , and all of we - escape ? oh ! daddy , 
 why be there a war ? and why be people so bound and so unhappy ? do not 
 tell I it be God - do not ! " 

 Pierson could not answer , for there come into his mind the greek song he 
 have be read aloud that afternoon - 

  " o for a deep and dewy spring , 
  with runlet cold to draw and drink , 
  and a great meadow blossoming , 
  long - grassed , and poplar in a ring , 
  to rest I by the brink . 
  o take I to the mountain , o , 
  past the great pine and through the wood , 
  up where the lean hound softly go , 
  a - whine for wild thing ' blood , 
  and madly fly the dapple roe , 
  o God , to shout and speed they there ; 
  an arrow by my chestnut hair 
  draw tight and one keen glimmering spear 
  ah ! if I could ! " 

 all that in life have be to he unknown , of venture and wild savour ; 
 all the emotion he have stifle ; the swift Pan he have deny ; the sharp 
 fruit , the burn sun , the dark pool , the unearthly moonlight , which 
 be not of God - all come with the breath of that old song , and the look 
 on the girl 's face . and he cover his eye . 

 Noel 's hand tug at his arm . " be not   beauty terribly alive , " she 
 murmur , " like a lovely person ? it make you ache to kiss it . " 

 his lip feel parch . " there be a beauty beyond all that , " he say 
 stubbornly . 

 " where ? " 

 " Holiness , duty , faith . o Nollie , my love ! " but Noel 's hand tighten on 
 his arm . 

 " shall I tell you what I should like ? " she whisper . " to take God 's 
 hand and show he thing . I be certain he be not see everything . " 

 a shudder go through Pierson , one of those queer sudden shiver , which 
 come from a strange note in a voice , or a new sharp scent or sight . 

 " my dear , what thing you say ! " 

 " but he have not , and it be time he do . we would creep , and peep , and see it 
 all for once , as he can not   in his church . daddy , oh ! daddy ! I can not 
 bear it any more ; to think of they be kill on a night like this ; 
 kill and kill so that they never see it all again - never see 
 it - never see it ! " she sink down , and cover her face with her arm . 

 " I can not , I can not ! oh ! take it all away , the cruelty ! why do it 
 come - why the star and the flower , if God do not   care any more than 
 that ? " 

 horribly affect he stand bend over she , stroke her head . then the 
 habit of a hundred death - bed help he . " come , Nollie ! this life be 
 but a minute . we must all die . " 

 " but not they - not so young ! " she cling to his knee , and look up . 
 " daddy , I do not   want you to go ; promise I to come back ! " 

 the childishness of those word bring back his balance . 

 " my dear sweetheart , of course ! come , Nollie , get up . the sun be be too 
 much for you . " 

 Noel get up , and put her hand on her father 's shoulder . " forgive 
 I for all my badness , and all my badness to come , especially all my 
 badness to come ! " 

 Pierson smile . " I shall always forgive you , Nollie ; but there will not 
 be - there must not   be any badness to come . I pray God to keep you , and 
 make you like your mother . " 

 " mother never have a devil , like you and I . " 

 he be silent from surprise . how do this child know the devil of wild 
 feeling he have fight against year after year ; until with the many year 
 he have feel it weaken within he ! she whisper on : " I do not   hate my 
 devil . 

 " why should I ? - it be part of I . every day when the sun set , I will think 
 of you , Daddy ; and you might do the same - that will keep I good . I 
 shall not   come to the station tomorrow , I should only cry . and I shall not   say 
 good - bye now . it be unlucky . " 

 she fling her arm round he ; and half smother by that fervent 
 embrace , he kiss her cheek and hair . free of each other at last , he 
 stand for a moment look at she by the moonlight . 

 " there never be anyone more loving than you ; Nollie ! " he say quietly . 
 " remember my letter . and good night , my love ! " then , afraid to stay 
 another second , he go quickly out of the dark little room .... 

 George Laird , return half an hour later , hear a voice say softly : 
 " George , George ! " 

 look up , he see a little white blur at the window , and Noel 's face 
 just visible . 

 " George , let the goat loose , just for to - night , to please I . " 

 something in that voice , and in the gesture of her stretch - out arm 
 move George in a queer way , although , as Pierson have once say , he have 
 no music in his soul . he loose the goat . 




 IV 

 1 

 in the week which succeed Pierson 's departure , Gratian and George 
 often discuss Noel 's conduct and position by the light of the 
 Pragmatic theory . George hold a suitably scientific view . just as 
 he would point out to his wife - in the physical world , creature who 
 diverge from the normal have to justify their divergence in competition 
 with their environment , or else go under , so in the ethical world it 
 be all a question of whether Nollie could make good her vagary . if she 
 could , and grow in strength of character thereby , it be ipso facto all 
 right , her vagary would be prove an advantage , and the world enrich . 
 if not , the world by her failure to make good would be impoverish , and 
 her vagary prove wrong . the orthodox and academy - he insist - be 
 always forget the adaptability of live organism ; how every action 
 which be out of the ordinary , unconsciously modify all the other 
 action together with the outlook , and philosophy of the doer . " of 
 course Nollie be crazy , " he say , " but when she do what she do , she 
 at once begin to think differently about life and moral . the deep 
 instinct we all have be the instinct that we must do what we must , and 
 think that what we have   do be really all right ; in fact the - instinct of 
 self - preservation . we be all fight animal ; and we feel in our bone 
 that if we admit we be beat - we be beat ; but that every fight we 
 win , especially against odd , harden those bone . but personally I 
 do not   think she can make good on her own . " 

 Gratian , whose Pragmatism be not yet fully bake , respond doubtfully : 

 " no , I do not   think she can . and if she could I be not sure . but be not 
 pragmatism a perfectly beastly word , George ? it have no sense of humour 
 in it at all . " 

 " it be a bit thick , and in the hand of the young , deuce likely to 
 become Prigmatism ; but not with Nollie . " 

 they watch the victim of their discussion with real anxiety . the 
 knowledge that she would never be more sheltered than she be with they , 
 at all event until she marry , gravely impede the formation of any 
 judgment as to whether or no she could make good . now and again 
 there would come to Gratian who after all know her sister well than 
 George - the disquieting thought that whatever conclusion Noel lead they 
 to form , she would almost certainly force they to abandon soon or 
 later . 

 three day after her father 's departure Noel have declare that she 
 want to work on the land . this George have promptly veto . 

 " you be not   strong enough yet , my dear : wait till the harvest begin . 
 then you can go and help on the farm here . if you can stand that without 
 damage , we will think about it . " 

 but the weather be wet and harvest late , and Noel have nothing much to 
 do but attend to her baby , already well attend to by Nurse , and dream 
 and brood , and now and then cook an omelette or do some housework for 
 the sake of a gnawing conscience . since Gratian and George be away in 
 hospital all day , she be very much alone . several time in the evening 
 Gratian try to come at the core of her thought , Twice she fly the 
 kite of Leila . the first time Noel only answer : " yes , she be a brick . " 
 the second time , she say : " I do not   want to think about she . " 

 but , harden her heart , Gratian go on : " do not   you think it be queer 
 we have   never hear from Captain Fort since he come down ? " 

 in her calm voice Noel answer : " why should we , after be tell 
 that he be not   like ? " 

 " who tell he that ? " 

 " I tell he , that daddy do not ; but I expect daddy say much bad 
 thing . " she give a little laugh , then softly add : " daddy 's wonderful , 
 be not   he ? " 

 " how ? " 

 " the way he drive one to do the other thing . if he have not   oppose my 
 marriage to Cyril , you know , that would not   have happen , it just make 
 all the difference . it stir I up so fearfully . " gratian star at 
 she , astonish that she could see herself so clearly . towards the end 
 of August she have a letter from Fort . 


 " DEAR MRS . LAIRD , 

 " you know all about thing , of course , except the one thing which to I 
 be all important . I can not   go on without know whether I have a chance 
 with your sister . it be against your father 's express wish that she 
 should have anything to do with I , but I tell he that I could not and 
 would not promise not to ask she . I get my holiday at the end of this 
 month , and be come down to put it to the touch . it mean more to I 
 than you can possibly imagine . 

 " I be , dear Mrs. Laird , 

 " your very faithful servant , 

 " JAMES FORT . " 


 she discuss the letter with George , whose advice be : " answer it 
 politely , but say nothing ; and nothing to Nollie . I think it would be 
 a very good thing . of course it be a bit of a make - shift - twice her age ; 
 but he be a genuine man , if not exactly brilliant . " 

 Gratian answer almost sullenly : " I have   always want the very good for 
 Nollie . " 

 George screw up his steel - colour eye , as he might have look 
 at one on whom he have to operate . " quite so , " he say . " but you must 
 remember , Gracie , that out of the swan she be , Nollie have make herself 
 into a lame duck . fifty per cent at least be off her value , socially . we 
 must look at thing as they be . " 

 " Father be dead against it . " 

 George smile , on the point of say : ' that make I feel it must be a 
 good thing ! ' but he subdue the impulse . 

 " I agree that we be bind by his absence not to further it actively . 
 still Nollie know his wish , and it be up to she and no one else . after 
 all , she be no long a child . " 

 his advice be follow . but to write that polite letter , which say 
 nothing , cost Gratian a sleepless night , and two or three hour ' 
 penmanship . she be very conscientious . knowledge of this impending 
 visit increase the anxiety with which she watch her sister , but the 
 only inkle she obtain of Noel 's state of mind be when the girl 
 show she a letter she have receive from Thirza , ask she to come 
 back to Kestrel . a postscript , in Uncle Bob 's handwriting , add these 
 word : 

 " we be get quite fossilise down here ; Eve 's go and leave we again . 
 we miss you and the youngster awfully . come along down , Nollie there be a 
 dear ! " 

 " they be darling , " Noel say , " but I shall not   go . I be too restless , ever 
 since Daddy go ; you do not   know how restless . this rain simply make I 
 want to die . " 


 2 

 the weather improve next day , and at the end of that week harvest 
 begin . by what seem to Noel a stroke of luck the farmer 's binder be 
 break ; he could not get it repair , and want all the human binder 
 he could get . that first day in the field blister her hand , burn 
 her face and neck , make every nerve and bone in her body ache ; but be 
 the happy day she have spend for week , the happy perhaps since 
 Cyril Morland leave she , over a year ago . she have a bath and go to bed 
 the moment she get in . 

 lie there nibble chocolate and smoke a cigarette , she luxuriate 
 in the weariness which have still her dreadful restlessness . watch 
 the smoke of her cigarette curl up against the sunset glow which fill 
 her window , she muse : if only she could be tired out like this every 
 day ! she would be all right then , would lose the feeling of not know 
 what she want , of be in a sort o of large box , with the lid slam 
 down , roam round it like a dazed and homesick bee in an overturned 
 tumbler ; the feeling of be only half alive , of have a wing maim 
 so that she could only fly a little way , and must then drop . 

 she sleep like a top that night . but the next day 's work be real 
 torture , and the third not much well . by the end of the week , however , 
 she be no long stiff . 

 Saturday be cloudless ; a perfect day . the field she be work in lay 
 on a slope . it be the last field to be cut , and the good wheat yet , 
 with a glorious burn shade in its gold and the ear blunt and full . she 
 have get use now to the feel of the great sheaf in her arm , and the 
 bind wisp draw through her hand till she hold they level , below the 
 ear , ready for the twist . there be no new sensation in it now ; 
 just steady , rather dreamy work , to keep her place in the row , to the 
 swish - swish of the cutter and the call of the driver to his horse at 
 the turn ; with continual little pause , to straighten and rest she back 
 a moment , and shake her head free from the fly , or suck her finger , 
 sore from the constant pushing of the straw end under . so the hour 
 go on , rather hot and wearisome , yet with a feeling of something good 
 be do , of a job get surely to its end . and gradually the centre 
 patch narrow , and the sun slowly slant down . 

 when they stop for tea , instead of run home as usual , she drink 
 it cold out of a flask she have bring , eat a bun and some chocolate , 
 and lie down on her back against the hedge . she always avoid that 
 group of her fellow worker round the tea - can which the farmer 's wife 
 bring out . to avoid people , if she could , have become habitual to 
 she now . they must know about she , or would soon if she give they the 
 chance . she have never lose consciousness of her ring - finger , expect 
 every eye to fall on it as a matter of course . lie on her face , she 
 puff her cigarette into the grass , and watch a beetle , till one of 
 the sheep - dog , scout for scrap , come up , and she feed he with her 
 second bun . have finish the bun , he try to eat the beetle , and , 
 when she rescue it , convince that she have nothing more to give he , 
 sneeze at she , and go away . press the end of her cigarette out 
 against the bank , she turn over . already the driver be perch on his 
 tiny seat , and his companion , whose business it be to free the fall 
 corn , be get up alongside . Swish - swish ! it have begin again . she 
 rise , stretch herself , and go back to her place in the row . the 
 field would be finish to - night ; she would have a lovely rest - all 
 Sunday I towards seven o'clock a narrow strip , not twenty yard broad , 
 alone be leave . this last half hour be what Noel dread . to - day it be 
 bad , for the farmer have no cartridge leave , and the rabbit be deal 
 with by hullabaloo and stick and chase dog . rabbit be vermin , of 
 course , and eat the crop , and must be kill ; besides , they be good 
 food , and fetch two shilling apiece ; all this she know but to see 
 the poor frighten thing steal out , pounce on , turn , shout 
 at , chase , roll over by great swift dog , fall on by the boy and 
 kill and carry with their limp grey body upside down , so dead 
 and soft and helpless , always make she feel quite sick . she stand very 
 still , try not to see or hear , and in the corn opposite to she a 
 rabbit steal along , crouch , and peep . ' oh ! ' she think , ' come out 
 here , bunny . I will let you away - can not   you see I will ? it be your only 
 chance . come out ! ' but the rabbit crouch , and gaze , with its little 
 cow head poke forward , and its ear lay flat ; it seem try to 
 understand whether this still thing in front of it be the same as those 
 other . with the thought , ' of course it will not   while I look at it , ' Noel 
 turn her head away . out of the corner of her eye she could see a man 
 stand a few yard off . the rabbit bolt out . now the man would shout 
 and turn it . but he do not , and the rabbit scuttle past he and away 
 to the hedge . she hear a shout from the end of the row , see a dog 
 galloping . too late ! hurrah ! and clasp her hand , she look at the 
 man . it be Fort ! with the queer feeling - amazement , pleasure , the 
 thrill of conspiracy , she see he come up to she . 

 " I do want that rabbit to get off , " she sigh out ; " I have   be watch 
 it . thank you ! " 

 he look at she . " my goodness ! " be all he say . 

 Noel 's hand fly up to her cheek . " yes , I know ; be my nose very red ? " 

 " no ; you be as lovely as Ruth , if she be lovely . " 

 Swish - swish ! the cutter come by ; Noel start forward to her place in 
 the row ; but catch her arm , he say : " no , let I do this little bit . 
 I have not   have a day in the field since the war begin . talk to I while 
 I be bind . " 

 she stand watch he . he make a different , strong twist from her , 
 and take large sheaf , so that she feel a sort of jealousy . 

 " I do not   know you know about this sort of thing . " 

 " oh , Lord , yes ! I have a farm once out West . nothing like field - work , to 
 make you feel good . I have   be watch you ; you bind jolly well . " 

 Noel give a sigh of pleasure . 

 " where have you come from ? " she ask . 

 " straight from the station . I be on my holiday . " he look up at she , and 
 they both fall silent . 

 Swish - swish ! the cutter be come again . Noel go to the beginning 
 of her portion of the fall corn , he to the end of it . they work 
 towards each other , and meet before the cutter be on they a third time . 

 " will you come in to supper ? " 

 " I would love to . " 

 " then let us go now , please . I do not   want to see any more rabbit 
 kill . " 

 they speak very little on the way to the bungalow , but she feel his eye 
 on she all the time . she leave he with George and Gratian who have just 
 come in , and go up for her bath . 

 Supper have be lay out in the verandah , and it be nearly dark before 
 they have finish . in rhyme with the failing of the light Noel become 
 more and more silent . when they go in , she run up to her baby . she 
 do not go down again , but as on the night before her father go 
 away , stand at her window , lean out . a dark night , no moon ; in the 
 starlight she could only just see the dim garden , where no goat be 
 graze . now that her first excitement have wear off , this sudden 
 reappearance of Fort fill she with nervous melancholy : she know 
 perfectly well what he have come for , she have always know . she have no 
 certain knowledge of her own mind ; but she know that all these week she 
 have be between his influence and her father 's , listen to they , 
 as it be , plead with she . and , curiously , the pleading of each , 
 instead of draw she towards the pleader , have seem drag she away 
 from he , drive she into the arm of the other . to the protection of 
 one or the other she feel she must go ; and it humiliate she to think 
 that in all the world there be no other place for she . the wildness of 
 that one night in the old Abbey seem to have power to govern all her 
 life to come . why should that one night , that one act , have this uncanny 
 power to drive she this way or that , to those arm or these ? must she , 
 because of it , always need protection ? stand there in the dark it be 
 almost as if they have come up behind she , with their pleading ; and a 
 shiver run down her back . she long to turn on they , and cry out : " go 
 away ; oh ; go away ! I do not   want either of you ; I just want to be leave 
 alone ! " then something , a moth perhaps , touch her neck . she gasp and 
 shake herself . how silly ! 

 she hear the back door round the corner of the house opening ; a man 's 
 low voice down in the dark say : 

 " who be the young lady that come out in the field ? " 

 another voice - one of the maid - answer : 

 " the Missis 's sister . " 

 " they say she be get a baby . " 

 " never you mind what she be get . " 

 Noel hear the man 's laugh . it seem to she the most odious laugh she 
 have ever hear . she think swiftly and absurdly : ' I will get away from 
 all this . ' the window be only a few foot up . she get out on to the 
 ledge , let herself down , and drop . there be a flower - bed below , 
 quite soft , with a scent of geranium - leaf and earth . she brush 
 herself , and go tiptoe across the gravel and the little front lawn , 
 to the gate . the house be quite dark , quite silent . she walk on , down 
 the road . ' jolly ! ' she think . ' night after night we sleep , and never 
 see the night : sleep until we be call , and never see anything . if 
 they want to catch I they will have to run . ' and she begin run down 
 the road in her evening frock and shoe , with nothing on her head . she 
 stop after go perhaps three hundred yard , by the edge of the 
 wood . it be splendidly dark in there , and she grope her way from trunk 
 to trunk , with a delicious , half - scared sense of adventure and novelty . 
 she stop at last by a thin trunk whose bark glimmer faintly . she 
 feel it with her cheek , quite smooth - a birch tree ; and , with her arm 
 round it , she stand perfectly still . wonderfully , magically silent , 
 fresh and sweet - scented and dark ! the little tree tremble suddenly 
 within her arm , and she hear the low distant rumble , to which she have 
 grow so accustomed - the gun , always at work , kill - kill man and 
 kill tree , little tree perhaps like this within her arm , little 
 trembling tree ! out there , in this dark night , there would not be a 
 single unscarred tree like this smooth quivering thing , no field of 
 corn , not even a bush or a blade of grass , no leaf to rustle and smell 
 sweet , not a bird , no little soft - footed night beast , except the rat ; 
 and she shudder , think of the belgian soldier - painter . hold the 
 tree tight , she squeeze its smooth body against she . a rush of the same 
 helpless , hopeless revolt and sorrow overtake she , which have wring from 
 she that passionate little outburst to her father , the night before he 
 go away . kill , tear , and bruise ; burn , and kill , like Cyril ! 
 all the young thing , like this little tree . 

 rumble ! rumble ! quiver ! quiver ! and all else so still , so sweet and 
 still , and starry , up there through the leaf .... ' I can not   bear it ! ' 
 she think . she press her lip , which the sun have warm all day , 
 against the satiny smooth bark . but the little tree stand within her 
 arm insentient , quiver only to the long rumble . with each of 
 those dull muttering , life and love be go out , like the flame of 
 candle on a Christmas - tree , blow , one by one . to her eye , accustom 
 by now to the darkness in there , the wood seem slowly to be gather 
 a sort of life , as though it be a great thing watch she ; a great 
 thing with hundred of limb and eye , and the power of breathing . the 
 little tree , which have seem so individual and friendly , cease to be a 
 comfort and become a part of the whole live wood , absorb in itself , 
 and coldly watch she , this intruder of the mischievous breed , the 
 fatal breed which loose those rumbling on the earth . Noel unlock her 
 arm , and recoil . a bough scrap her neck , some leaf fly against 
 her eye ; she step aside , trip over a root , and fall . a bough 
 have hit she too , and she lie a little daze , quiver at such dark 
 unfriendliness . she hold her hand up to her face for the mere pleasure 
 of see something a little less dark ; it be childish , and absurd , but 
 she be frightened . the wood seem to have so many eye , so many arm , 
 and all unfriendly ; it seem wait to give her other blow , other 
 fall , and to guard she within its darkness until - ! she get up , move 
 a few step , and stand still , she have forget from where she have come 
 in . and afraid of move deeply into the unfriendly wood , she turn 
 slowly round , try to tell which way to go . it be all just one dark 
 watch thing , of limb on the ground and in the air . ' any way , ' she 
 think ; ' any way of course will take I out ! ' and she grope forward , 
 keep her hand up to guard her face . it be silly , but she could not 
 help the sinking , scatter feeling which come to one bush , or lose 
 in a fog . if the wood have not be so dark , so , - alive ! and for a second 
 she have the senseless , terrifying thought of a child : ' what if I never 
 get out ! ' then she laugh at it , and stand still again , listen . 
 there be no sound to guide she , no sound at all except that faint dull 
 rumble , which seem to come from every side , now . and the tree watch 
 she . ' ugh ! ' she think ; ' I hate this wood ! ' she see it now , its snaky 
 branch , its darkness , and great form , as an abode of giant and 
 witch . she grope and scramble on again , trip once more , and fall , 
 hit her forehead against a trunk . the blow daze and sober she . 
 ' it be idiotic , ' she think ; ' I be a baby ! I will just walk very slowly 
 till I reach the edge . I know it be not   a large wood ! ' she turn 
 deliberately to face each direction ; solemnly select that from which 
 the muttering of the gun seem to come , and start again , move 
 very slowly with her hand stretch out . something rustle in the 
 undergrowth , quite close ; she see a pair of green eye shin . her 
 heart jump into her mouth . the thing spring - there be a swish of 
 fern and twig , and silence . Noel clasp her breast . a poach cat ! 
 and again she move forward . but she have lose direction . ' I be go 
 round and round , ' she think . ' they always do . ' and the sinking 
 scatter feeling of the " bushed " clutched at she again . ' shall I call ? ' 
 she think . ' I must be near the road . but it be so babyish . ' she move 
 on again . her foot strike something soft . a voice mutter a thick oath ; 
 a hand seize her ankle . she leap , and drag and wrench it free ; 
 and , utterly unnerved , she scream , and run forward blindly . 




 V 

 no one could have so convince a feeling as Jimmy Fort that he would 
 be a ' bit of a makeshift ' for Noel . he have spend the week after his 
 interview with her father obsess by her image , often say to himself 
 " it will not   do . it be play it too low down to try and get that child , 
 when I know that , but for her trouble , I should not   have a chance . " he 
 have never have much opinion of his look , but now he seem to himself 
 absurdly old and dry - up in this desert of a London . he loathe the 
 Office job to which they have put he , and the whole atmosphere of 
 officialdom . another year of it , and he would shrivel like an old apple ! 
 he begin to look at himself anxiously , take stock of his physical 
 asset now that he have this dream of young beauty . he would be forty 
 next month , and she be nineteen ! but there would be time too when he 
 would feel that , with she , he could be as much of a " three - year - old " as 
 the youngster she have love . have little hope of win she , he take 
 her " past " but lightly . be it not that past which give he what chance 
 he have ? on two thing he be determine : he would not trade on her 
 past . and if by any chance she take he , he would never show she that he 
 remember that she have one . 

 after write to Gratian he have spend the week before his holiday begin , 
 in an attempt to renew the youthfulness of his appearance , which make 
 he feel old , lean , bony and browner than ever . he get up early , 
 ride in the rain , take turkish bath , and do all manner of exercise ; 
 neither smoke nor drank , and go to bed early , exactly as if he have 
 be go to ride a steeplechase . on the afternoon , when at last he 
 leave on that terrific pilgrimage , he gaze at his face with a sort of 
 despair , it be so lean , and leather - colour , and he count almost a 
 dozen grey hair . 

 when he reach the bungalow , and be tell that she be work in the 
 corn - field , he have for the first time a feeling that Fate be on 
 his side . such a meeting would be easy than any other ! he have be 
 watch she for several minute before she see he , with his heart 
 beat more violently than it have ever beat in the trench ; and 
 that new feeling of hope stay with he - all through the greeting , 
 throughout supper , and even after she have leave they and go upstairs . 
 then , with the suddenness of a blind draw down , it vanish , and he 
 sit on , try to talk , and slowly get more and more silent and 
 restless . 

 " Nollie get so tired , working , " Gratian say : he know she mean it 
 kindly but that she should say it at all be ominous . he get up at 
 last , have lose hope of see Noel again , conscious too that he have 
 answer the last three question at random . 

 in the porch George say : " you will come in to lunch tomorrow , will not   you ? " 

 " oh , thank , I be afraid it will bore you all . " 

 " not a bit . Nollie will not   be so tired . " 

 again - so well mean . they be very kind . he look up from the gate , 
 try to make out which her window might be ; but all be dark . a little 
 way down the road he stop to light a cigarette ; and , lean against 
 a gate , draw the smoke of it deep into his lung , try to assuage the 
 ache in his heart . so it be hopeless ! she have take the first , the very 
 first chance , to get away from he ! she know that he love she , could 
 not help know , for he have never be able to keep it out of his eye 
 and voice . if she have feel ever so little for he , she would not have 
 avoid he this first evening . ' I will go back to that desert , ' he 
 think ; ' I be not go to whine and crawl . I will go back , and bite on 
 it ; one must have some pride . oh , why the hell be I crock - up like 
 this ? if only I could get out to France again ! ' and then Noel 's figure 
 bent over the fall corn form before he . ' I will have one more try , ' 
 he think ; ' one more - tomorrow somewhere , I will get to know for certain . 
 and if I get what Leila 's get I shall deserve it , I suppose . Poor 
 Leila ! where be she ? back at High Constantia ? ' what be that ? a cry - of 
 terror - in that wood ! cross to the edge , he call " Coo - ee ! " and 
 stand peer into its darkness . he hear the sound of bush be 
 brush aside , and whistle . a figure come burst out , almost into his 
 arm . 

 " Hallo ! " he say ; " what be up ? " 

 a voice gasp : " oh ! it be - it be nothing ! " 

 he see Noel . she have sway back , and stand about a yard away . he could 
 dimly see she cover her face with her arm . feel instinctively 
 that she want to hide her fright , he say quietly : 

 " what luck ! I be just pass . it be awfully dark . " 

 " I - I get lose ; and a man - catch my foot , in there ! " 

 move beyond control by the little gulp and gasp of her breathing , he 
 step forward and put his hand on her shoulder . he hold she lightly , 
 without speak , terrify lest he should wound her pride . 

 " I - I get in there , " she gasp , " and the tree - and I stumble over a 
 roan asleep , and he - " 

 " yes , yes , I know , " he murmur , as if to a child . she have drop she 
 arm now , and he could see her face , with eye unnaturally dilate , and 
 lip quivering . then move again beyond control , he draw she so close 
 that he could feel the throbbing of her heart , and put his lip to she 
 forehead all wet with heat . she close her eye , give a little choke , 
 and bury her face against his coat . 

 " there , there , my darling ! " he keep on say . " there , there , my 
 darling ! " he could feel the snuggling of her cheek against his shoulder . 
 he have get she - have get she ! he be somehow certain that she would not 
 draw back now . and in the wonder and ecstasy of that thought , all the 
 world above her head , the star in their course , the wood which have 
 frighten she , seem miracle of beauty and fitness . by such fortune 
 as have never come to man , he have get she ! and he murmur over and over 
 again : 

 " I love you ! " she be rest perfectly quiet against he , while her 
 heart cease gradually to beat so fast . he could feel her cheek rub 
 against his coat of Harris tweed . suddenly she sniff at it , and 
 whisper : 

 " it smell good . " 




 VI 

 when summer sun have burn all Egypt , the white man look eagerly each 
 day for evening , whose rose - colour veil melt opalescent into the dun 
 drift , of the hill , and iridescent above , into the slowly deepening 
 blue . Pierson stand gaze at the mystery of the desert from under the 
 little group of palm and bougainvillea which form the garden of the 
 hospital . even - song be in full voice : from the far wing a gramophone 
 be grind out a music - hall ditty ; two aeroplane , wheel exactly 
 like the buzzard of the desert , be let drip the faint whir of 
 their flight ; metallic voice drift from the arab village ; the wheel 
 of the water - well creak ; and every now and then a dry rustle be 
 stir from the palm - leaf by puff of desert wind . on either hand 
 an old road run out , whose line could be mark by the little old 
 watch - tower of another age . for how many hundred year have human 
 life pass along it to East and West ; the brown man and their camel , 
 thread that immemorial track over the desert , which ever fill he 
 with wonder , so still it be , so wide , so desolate , and every evening so 
 beautiful ! he sometimes feel that he could sit for ever look at it ; 
 as though its cruel mysterious loveliness be - home ; and yet he never 
 look at it without a spasm of homesickness . 

 so far his new work have bring he no nearer to the heart of man . or 
 at least he do not feel it have . both at the regimental base , and now in 
 this hospital - an intermediate stage - wait for the draft with 
 which he would be go into Palestine , all have be very nice to he , 
 friendly , and as it be indulgent ; so might schoolboy have treat 
 some well - intentione dreamy master , or business man a harmless 
 idealistic inventor who come visit their office . he have even the 
 feeling that they be glad to have he about , just as they be glad to 
 have their mascot and their regimental colour ; but of heart - to - heart 
 simple comradeship - it seem they neither want it of he nor expect 
 he to give it , so that he have a feeling that he would be forward and 
 impertinent to offer it . moreover , he no long know how . he be very 
 lonely . ' when I come face to face with death , ' he would think , ' it will 
 be different . death make we all brother . I may be of real use to they 
 then . ' 

 they bring he a letter while he stand there listen to that 
 even - song , gaze at the old desert road . 


 " DARLING DAD , 

 " I do hope this will reach you before you move on to Palestine . you say 
 in your last - at the end of September , so I hope you will just get it . 
 there be one great piece of news , which I be afraid will hurt and trouble 
 you ; Nollie be married to Jimmy Fort . they be marry down here this 
 afternoon , and have just go up to Town . they have to find a house of 
 course . she have be very restless , lonely , and unhappy ever since 
 you go , and I be sure it be really for the good : she be quite another 
 creature , and simply devoted , headlong . it be just like Nollie . she say 
 she do not   know what she want , up to the last minute . but now she 
 seem as if she could never want anything else . 

 " Dad dear , Nollie could never have make good by herself . it be not   her 
 nature , and it be much well like this , I feel sure , and so do George . 
 of course it be not   ideal - and one want that for she ; but she do 
 break her wing , and he be so awfully good and devoted to she , though you 
 do not   believe it , and perhaps will not , even now . the great thing be to 
 feel her happy again , and know she be safe . Nollie be capable of great 
 devotion ; only she must be anchor . she be drift all about ; and one 
 do not   know what she might have do , in one of her mood . I do hope 
 you will not   grieve about it . she be dreadfully anxious about how you will 
 feel . I know it will be wretche for you , so far off ; but do try and 
 believe it be for the good .... she be out of danger ; and she be really 
 in a horrible position . it be so good for the baby , too , and only fair 
 to he . I do think one must take thing as they be , Dad dear . it be 
 impossible to mend Nollie 's wing . if she be a fighter , and glory 
 in it , or if she be the sort who would ' take the veil ' - but she be not 
 either . so it be all right , Dad . she be write to you herself . I be sure 
 Leila do not   want Jimmy Fort to be unhappy because he could not   love she ; 
 or she would never have go away . George send you his love ; we be 
 both very well . and Nollie be look splendid still , after her harvest 
 work . all , all my love , Dad dear . be there anything we can get , and send 
 you ? do take care of your blessed self , and do not   grieve about Nollie . 

 " GRATIAN . " 


 a half - sheet of paper flutter down ; he pick it up from among the 
 parch fibre of dead palm - leaf . 


 " DADDY DARLING , 

 " I have   do it . forgive I - I be so happy . 

 " your nollie . " 


 the desert shimmer , the palm - leaf rustle , and Pierson stand try 
 to master the emotion rouse in he by those two letter . he feel no 
 anger , not even vexation ; he feel no sorrow , but a loneliness so utter 
 and complete that he do not know how to bear it . it seem as if some 
 last link with life have ' snap . ' my girl be happy , ' he think . 
 ' if I be not - what do it matter ? if my faith and my conviction 
 mean nothing to they - why should they follow ? I must and will not feel 
 lonely . I ought to have the sense of God present , to feel his hand in 
 mine . if I can not , what use be i - what use to the poor fellow in there , 
 what use in all the world ? ' 

 an old native on a donkey go by , pip a soudanese melody on a little 
 wooden arab flute . Pierson turn back into the hospital hum it . a 
 nurse meet he there . 

 " the poor boy at the end of a ward be sink fast , sir ; I expect he would 
 like to see you . " 

 he go into a ward , and walk down between the bed to the west window 
 end , where two screen have be put , to block off the cot . another 
 nurse , who be sit beside it , rise at once . 

 " he be quite conscious , " she whisper ; " he can still speak a little . 
 he be such a dear . " a tear roll down her cheek , and she pass out 
 behind the screen . Pierson look down at the boy ; perhaps he be 
 twenty , but the unshaven down on his cheek be soft and almost 
 colourless . his eye be closed . he breathe regularly , and do not 
 seem in pain ; but there be about he that which tell he be go ; 
 something resign , already of the grave . the window be wide open , 
 cover by mosquito - netting , and a tiny line of sunlight , slant 
 through across the foot of the cot , creep slowly backwards over the 
 sheet and the boy 's body , shorten as it creep . in the grey whiteness 
 of the wall ; the bed , the boy 's face , just that pale yellow bar of 
 sunlight , and one splash of red and blue from a little flag on the wall 
 glow out . at this cooler hour , the ward behind the screen be almost 
 empty , and few sound break the stillness ; but from without come that 
 intermittent rustle of dry palm - leaf . Pierson wait in silence , 
 watch the sun sink . if the boy might pass like this , it would be 
 God 's mercy . then he see the boy 's eye open , wonderfully clear eye of 
 the lighted grey which have dark rim ; his lip move , and Pierson bend 
 down to hear . 

 " I be go West , zurr . " the whisper have a little soft burr ; the lip 
 quiver ; a pucker as of a child form on his face , and pass . 

 through Pierson 's mind there flash the thought : ' o god ! let I be some 
 help to he ! ' 

 " to God , my dear son ! " he say . 

 a flicker of humour , of ironic question , pass over the boy 's lip . 

 terribly move , Pierson kneel down , and begin softly , fervently pray . 
 his whispering mingle with the rustle of the palm - leaf , while the bar 
 of sunlight creep up the body . in the boy 's smile have be the whole of 
 stoic doubt , of stoic acquiescence . it have meet he with an unconscious 
 challenge ; have seem to know so much . Pierson take his hand , which lay 
 outside the sheet . the boy 's lip move , as though in thank ; he draw 
 a long feeble breath , as if to suck in the thread of sunlight ; and his 
 eye close . Pierson bend over the hand . when he look up the boy be 
 dead . he kiss his forehead and go quietly out . 

 the sun have set , and he walk away from the hospital to a hillock 
 beyond the track on the desert 's edge , and stand look at the 
 afterglow . the sun and the boy - together they have go West , into that 
 wide glowing nothingness . 

 the muezzin call to sunset prayer in the arab village come to he clear 
 and sharp , while he sit there , unutterably lonely . why have that smile 
 so move he ? other death smile have be like this evening smile on the 
 desert hill - a glowing peace , a promise of heaven . but the boy 's smile 
 have say : ' waste no breath on I - you can not help . who know - who know ? 
 I have no hope , no faith ; but I be adventure . good - bye ! ' poor boy ! he 
 have brave all thing , and move out uncertain , yet undaunted ! be that , 
 then , the uttermost truth , be faith a small thing ? but from that 
 strange notion he recoil with horror . ' in faith I have live , 
 in faith I will die ! ' he think , ' God help I ! ' and the breeze , 
 ruffle the desert sand , blow the grain against the palm of his 
 hand , outstretche above the warm earth . 
