ruth 

 

 by 

 ELIZABETH GASKELL 

 Drop , drop , slow tear ! 
 and bathe those beauteous foot , 
 which bring from heaven 
 the news and Prince of peace . 
 cease not , wet eye , 
 for mercy to entreat : 
 to cry for vengeance 
 Sin doth never cease . 
 in your deep flood 
 Drown all my fault and fear ; 
 nor let his eye 
 see sin , but through my tear . 

 Phineas Fletcher 

 

 

 

 CHAPTER I 

 the Dressmaker 's Apprentice at work 
 

 there be an assize - town in one of the eastern county which be much distinguish by the Tudor sovereign , and , in consequence of their favour and protection , attain a degree of importance that surprise the modern traveller . 

 a hundred year ago its appearance be that of picturesque grandeur . the old house , which be the temporary residence of such of the county - family as content themselves with the gaiety of a provincial town , crowd the street and give they the irregular but noble appearance yet to be see in the city of Belgium . the side of the street have a quaint richness , from the effect of the gable , and the stack of chimney which cut against the blue sky above ; while , if the eye fall lower down , the attention be arrest by all kind of projection in the shape of balcony and oriel ; and it be amusing to see the infinite variety of window that have be cram into the wall long before Mr Pitt 's day of taxation . the street below suffer from all these projection and advanced story above ; they be dark , and ill - paved with large , round , jolt pebble , and with no side - path protect by kerb - stone ; there be no lamp - post for long winter night ; and no regard be pay to the want of the middle class , who neither drive about in coach of their own , nor be carry by their own man in their own sedan into the very hall of their friend . the professional man and their wife , the shopkeeper and their spouse , and all such people , walk about at considerable peril both night and day . the broad unwieldy carriage hem they up against the house in the narrow street . the inhospitable house project their flight of step almost into the carriage - way , force pedestrian again into the danger they have avoid for twenty or thirty pace . then , at night , the only light be derive from the glare , flare oil - lamp hang above the door of the more aristocratic mansion ; just allow space for the passer - by to become visible , before they again disappear into the darkness , where it be no uncommon thing for robber to be in wait for their prey . 

 the tradition of those bygone time , even to the small social particular , enable one to understand more clearly the circumstance which contribute to the formation of character . the daily life into which people be bear , and into which they be absorb before they be well aware , form chain which only one in a hundred have moral strength enough to despise , and to break when the right time come when an inward necessity for independent individual action arise , which be superior to all outward conventionality . therefore it be well to know what be the chain of daily domestic habit which be the natural lead - string of our forefather before they learn to go alone . 

 the picturesqueness of those ancient street have depart now . the Astleys , the Dunstans , the Waverhams name of power in that district go up duly to London in the season , and have sell their residence in the county - town fifty year ago , or more . and when the county - town lose its attraction for the Astleys , the Dunstans , the Waverhams , how could it be suppose that the Domvilles , the bexton , and the wilde would continue to go and winter there in their second - rate house , and with their increase expenditure ? so the grand old house stand empty awhile ; and then speculator venture to purchase , and to turn the deserted mansion into many small dwelling , fit for professional man , or even   bend your ear lower , lest the shade of Marmaduke , first Baron Waverham , hear   into shop ! 

 even that be not so very bad , compare with the next innovation on the old glory . the shopkeeper find out that the once fashionable street be dark , and that the dingy light do not show off their good to advantage ; the surgeon could not see to draw his patient 's tooth ; the lawyer have to ring for candle an hour early than he be accustom to do when live in a more plebeian street . in short , by mutual consent , the whole front of one side of the street be pull down , and rebuild in the flat , mean , unrelieved style of George the Third . the body of the house be too solidly grand to submit to alteration ; so people be occasionally surprised , after pass through a commonplace - look shop , to find themselves at the foot of a grand carve oaken staircase , light by a window of stain glass , story all over with armorial bearing . 

 up such a stair past such a window   through which the moonlight fall on she with a glory of many colour   Ruth Hilton pass wearily one January night , now many year ago . I call it night ; but , strictly speak , it be morning . two o'clock in the morning chime forth the old bell of St Saviour 's . and yet more than a dozen girl still sit in the room into which Ruth enter , stitch away as if for very life , not dare to gape , or show any outward manifestation of sleepiness . they only sigh a little when Ruth tell Mrs Mason the hour of the night , as the result of her errand ; for they know that , stay up as late as they might , the work - hour of the next day must begin at eight , and their young limb be very weary . 

 Mrs Mason work away as hard as any of they ; but she be old and tough ; and , besides , the gain be her . but even she perceive that some rest be need . " young lady ! there will be an interval allow of half an hour . ring the bell , Miss Sutton . Martha shall bring you up some bread and cheese and beer . you will be so good as to eat it stand away from the dress and to have your hand wash ready for work when I return . in half an hour , " say she once more , very distinctly ; and then she leave the room . 

 it be curious to watch the young girl as they instantaneously avail themselves of Mrs Mason 's absence . one fat , particularly heavy - look damsel lay her head on her fold arm and be asleep in a moment ; refuse to be waken for her share in the frugal supper , but spring up with a frightened look at the sound of Mrs Mason 's return footstep , even while it be still far off on the echo stair . two or three other huddle over the scanty fireplace , which , with every possible economy of space , and no attempt whatever at anything of grace or ornament , be insert in the slight , flat - look wall , that have be run up by the present owner of the property to portion off this division of the grand old drawing - room of the mansion . some employ the time in eat their bread and cheese , with as measured and incessant a motion of the jaw   and almost as stupidly placid an expression of countenance , as you may see in cow ruminate in the first meadow you happen to pass . 

 some hold up admiringly the beautiful ball - dress in progress , while other examine the effect , back from the object to be criticise in the true artistic manner . other stretch themselves into all sort of posture to relieve the weary muscle ; one or two give vent to all the yawn , cough , and sneeze that have be pen up so long in the presence of Mrs Mason . but Ruth Hilton spring to the large old window , and press against it as a bird press against the bar of its cage . she put back the blind , and gaze into the quiet moonlight night . it be doubly light almost as much so as day for everything be cover with the deep snow which have be fall silently ever since the evening before . the window be in a square recess ; the old strange little pane of glass have be replace by those which give more light . a little distance off , the feathery branch of a larch wave softly to and fro in the scarcely perceptible night - breeze . poor old larch ! the time have be when it have stand in a pleasant lawn , with the tender grass creep caressingly up to its very trunk ; but now the lawn be divide into yard and squalid back premise , and the larch be pen up and gird about with flag - stone . the snow lie thick on its bough , and now and then fall noiselessly down . the old stable have be add to , and alter into a dismal street of mean - looking house , back to back with the ancient mansion . and over all these change from grandeur to squalor , bend down the purple heaven with their unchanging splendour ! 

 Ruth press her hot forehead against the cold glass , and strain her ache eye in gaze out on the lovely sky of a winter 's night . the impulse be strong upon she to snatch up a shawl , and wrap it round her head , to sally forth and enjoy the glory ; and time be when that impulse would have be instantly follow ; but now , Ruth 's eye fill with tear , and she stand quite still , dream of the day that be go . some one touch her shoulder while her thought be far away , remember past January night , which have resemble this , and be yet so different . 

 " Ruth , love , " whisper a girl who have unwillingly distinguish herself by a long hard fit of coughing , " come and have some supper . you do not   know yet how it help one through the night . " 

 " one run one blow of the fresh air would do I more good , " say Ruth . 

 " not such a night as this , " reply the other , shiver at the very thought . 

 " and why not such a night as this , Jenny ? " answer Ruth . " oh ! at home I have many a time run up the lane all the way to the mill , just to see the icicle hang on the great wheel ; and when I be once out , I could hardly find in my heart to come in , even to mother , sit by the fire ; even to mother , " she add , in a low , melancholy tone , which have something of inexpressible sadness in it . " why , Jenny ! " say she , rouse herself , but not before her eye be swim with tear , " own , now , that you never see those dismal , hateful , tumble - down old house there look half so what shall I call they ? almost beautiful as they do now , with that soft , pure , exquisite covering ; and if they be so improved , think of what tree , and grass , and ivy must be on such a night as this . " 

 Jenny could not be persuade into admire the winter 's night , which to she come only as a cold and dismal time , when her cough be more troublesome , and the pain in her side bad than usual . but she put her arm round Ruth 's neck , and stand by she , glad that the orphan apprentice , who be not yet inure to the hardship of a dressmaker 's workroom , should find so much to give her pleasure in such a common occurrence as a frosty night . 

 they remain deep in separate train of thought till Mrs Mason 's step be hear , when each return , supperless but refresh , to her seat . 

 Ruth 's place be the cold and the dark in the room , although she like it the good ; she have instinctively choose it for the sake of the wall opposite to she , on which be a remnant of the beauty of the old drawing - room , which must once have be magnificent , to judge from the fade speciman leave . it be divide into panel of pale sea - green , pick out with white and gold ; and on these panel be paint be throw with the careless , triumphant hand of a master the most lovely wreath of flower , profuse and luxuriant beyond description , and so real - look , that you could almost fancy you smell their fragrance , and hear the south wind go softly rustle in and out among the crimson rose the branch of purple and white lilac the float golden - tressed laburnum bough . besides these , there be stately white lily , sacred to the Virgin hollyhock , fraxinella , monk's - hood , pansy , primrose ; every flower which bloom profusely in charming old - fashioned country garden be there , depict among its graceful foliage , but not in the wild disorder in which I have enumerate they . at the bottom of the panel lie a holly - branch , whose stiff straightness be ornament by a twining drapery of English ivy and mistletoe and winter aconite ; while down either side hang pendant garland of spring and autumn flower ; and , crown all , come gorgeous summer with the sweet musk - rose , and the rich - colour flower of June and July . 

 Surely Monnoyer , or whoever the dead and go artist might be , would have be gratify to know the pleasure his handiwork , even in its wane , have power to give to the heavy heart of a young girl ; for they conjure up vision of other sister - flower that grow , and blossom , and wither away in her early home . 

 Mrs Mason be particularly desirous that her workwoman should exert themselves to - night , for , on the next , the annual hunt - ball be to take place . it be the one gaiety of the town since the assize - ball have be discontinue . many be the dress she have promise should be send home " without fail " the next morning ; she have not let one slip through her finger , for fear , if it do , it might fall into the hand of the rival dressmaker , who have just establish herself in the very same street . 

 she determine to administer a gentle stimulant to the flag spirit , and with a little preliminary cough to attract attention , she begin : 

 " I may as well inform you , young lady , that I have be request this year , as on previous occasion , to allow some of my young people to attend in the ante - chamber of the assembly - room with sandal ribbon , pin , and such little matter , and to be ready to repair any accidental injury to the lady ' dress . I shall send four of the most diligent . " she lay a marked emphasis on the last word , but without much effect ; they be too sleepy to care for any of the pomp and vanity , or , indeed , for any of the comfort of this world , except one sole thing their bed . 

 Mrs Mason be a very worthy woman , but , like many other worthy woman , she have her foible ; and one   very natural to her calling   be to pay an extreme regard to appearance . accordingly , she have already select in her own mind the four girl who be most likely to do credit to the " establishment ; " and these be secretly determine upon , although it be very well to promise the reward to the most diligent . she be really not aware of the falseness of this conduct ; be an adept in that species of sophistry with which people persuade themselves that what they wish to do be right . 

 at last there be no resist the evidence of weariness . they be tell to go to bed ; but even that welcome command be languidly obey . slowly they fold up their work , heavily they move about , until at length all be put away , and they troop up the wide , dark staircase . 

 " oh ! how shall I get through five year of these terrible night ! in that close room ! and in that oppressive stillness ! which let every sound of the thread be hear as it go eternally backwards and forwards , " sob out Ruth , as she throw herself on her bed , without even undress herself . 

 " Nay , Ruth , you know it will not   be always as it have be to - night . we often get to bed by ten o'clock ; and by - and - by you will not   mind the closeness of the room . you be wear out to - night , or you would not have mind the sound of the needle ; I never hear it . come , let I unfasten you , " say Jenny . 

 " what be the use of undressing ? we must be up again and at work in three hour . " 

 " and in those three hour you may get a great deal of rest , if you will but undress yourself and fairly go to bed . come , love . " 

 Jenny 's advice be not resist ; but before Ruth go to sleep , she say : 

 " oh ! I wish I be not so cross and impatient . I do not   think I use to be . " 

 " no , I be sure not . Most new girl get impatient at first ; but it go off , and they do not   care much for anything after awhile . poor child ! she be asleep already , " say Jenny to herself . 

 she could not sleep or rest . the tightness at her side be bad than usual . she almost think she ought to mention it in her letter home ; but then she remember the premium her father have struggle hard to pay , and the large family , young than herself , that have to be care for , and she determine to bear on , and trust that when the warm weather come both the pain and the cough would go away . she would be prudent about herself . 

 what be the matter with Ruth ? she be cry in her sleep as if her heart would break . such agitated slumber could be no rest ; so Jenny waken she . 

 " Ruth ! Ruth ! " 

 " oh , Jenny ! " say Ruth , sit up in bed , and push back the mass of hair that be heat her forehead , " I think I see mamma by the side of the bed , come , as she use to do , to see if I be asleep and comfortable ; and when I try to take hold of she , she go away and leave I alone I do not   know where ; so strange ! " 

 " it be only a dream ; you know you have be talk about she to I , and you be feverish with sit up late . go to sleep again , and I will watch , and waken you if you seem uneasy . " 

 " but you will be so tired . oh , dear ! dear ! " Ruth be asleep again , even while she sigh . 

 Morning come , and though their rest have be short , the girl arise refresh . 

 " Miss Sutton , Miss Jennings , Miss Booth , and Miss Hilton , you will see that you be ready to accompany I to the shire - hall by eight o'clock . " 

 one or two of the girl look astonish , but the majority , have anticipate the selection , and know from experience the unexpresse rule by which it be make , receive it with the sullen indifference which have become their feeling with regard to most event a deaden sense of life , consequent upon their unnatural mode of existence , their sedentary day , and their frequent night of late watching . 

 but to Ruth it be inexplicable . she have yawn , and loitered , and look off at the beautiful panel , and lose herself in thought of home , until she fully expect the reprimand which at any other time she would have be sure to receive , and now , to her surprise , she be single out as one of the most diligent ! 

 much as she long for the delight of see the noble shire - hall the boast of the county and of catch glimpse of the dancer , and hear the band ; much as she long for some variety to the dull , monotonous life she be lead , she could not feel happy to accept a privilege , grant , as she believe , in ignorance of the real state of the case ; so she startle her companion by rise abruptly and go up to Mrs Mason , who be finish a dress which ought to have be send home two hour before : 

 " if you please , Mrs Mason , I be not one of the most diligent ; I be afraid I believe I be not diligent at all . I be very tired ; and I could not help think , and when I think , I can not   attend to my work . " she stop , believe she have sufficiently explain her meaning ; but Mrs Mason would not understand , and do not wish for any further elucidation . 

 " well , my dear , you must learn to think and work too ; or , if you can not   do both , you must leave off thinking . your guardian , you know , expect you to make great progress in your business , and I be sure you will not   disappoint he . " 

 but that be not to the point . Ruth stand still an instant , although Mrs Mason resume her employment in a manner which any one but a " new girl " would have know to be intelligible enough , that she do not wish for any more conversation just then . 

 " but as I be not diligent I ought not to go , ma'am . Miss Wood be far more industrious than I , and many of the other . " 

 " tiresome girl ! " mutter Mrs Mason ; " I have   half a mind to keep she at home for plague I so . " but , look up , she be strike afresh with the remarkable beauty which Ruth possess ; such a credit to the house , with her wave outline of figure , her strike face , with dark eyebrow and dark lash , combine with auburn hair and a fair complexion . no ! diligent or idle , Ruth Hilton must appear to - night . 

 " Miss Hilton , " say Mrs Mason , with stiff dignity , " I be not accustomed   as these young lady can tell you   to have my decision question . what I say , I mean ; and I have my reason . so sit down , if you please , and take care and be ready by eight . not a word more , " as she fancy she see Ruth again about to speak . 

 " Jenny ! you ought to have go , not I , " say Ruth , in no low voice to Miss Wood , as she sit down by she . 

 " Hush ! Ruth . I could not go if I might , because of my cough . I would rather give it up to you than any one , if it be mine to give . and suppose it be , and take the pleasure as my present , and tell I every bit about it when you come home to - night . " 

 " well ! I shall take it in that way , and not as if I have earn it , which I have not . so thank you . you can not   think how I shall enjoy it now . I do work diligently for five minute last night , after I hear of it , I want to go so much . but I could not keep it up . oh , dear ! and I shall really hear a band ! and see the inside of that beautiful shire - hall ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER II 

 Ruth go to the Shire - Hall 
 

 in due time that evening , Mrs Mason collect " her young lady " for an inspection of their appearance before proceed to the shire - hall . her eager , important , hurried manner of summon they be not unlike that of a hen cluck her chicken together ; and to judge from the close investigation they have to undergo , it might have be think that their part in the evening 's performance be to be far more important than that of temporary ladies'-maid . 

 " be that your good frock , Miss Hilton ? " ask Mrs Mason , in a half - dissatisfied tone , turn Ruth about ; for it be only her Sunday black silk , and be somewhat worn and shabby . 

 " yes , ma'am , " answer Ruth , quietly . 

 " oh ! indeed . then it will do "   still the half - satisfied tone . " dress , young lady , you know , be a very secondary consideration . conduct be everything . still , Miss Hilton , I think you should write and ask your guardian to send you money for another gown . I be sorry I do not think of it before . " 

 " I do not think he would send any if I write , " answer Ruth , in a low voice . " he be angry when I want a shawl , when the cold weather set in . " 

 Mrs Mason give she a little push of dismissal , and Ruth fall into the rank by her friend , Miss Wood . 

 " never mind , Ruthie ; you be pretty than any of they , " say a merry , good - natured girl , whose plainness exclude she from any of the envy of rivalry . 

 " yes ! I know I be pretty , " say Ruth , sadly , " but I be sorry I have no well gown , for this be very shabby . I be ashamed of it myself , and I can see Mrs Mason be twice as much ashamed . I wish I need not go . I do not know we should have to think about our own dress at all , or I should not have wish to go . " 

 " never mind , Ruth , " say Jenny , " you have   be look at now , and Mrs Mason will soon be too busy to think about you and your gown . " 

 " do you hear Ruth Hilton say she know she be pretty ? " whisper one girl to another , so loudly that Ruth catch the word . 

 " I could not help know , " answer she , simply , " for many people have tell I so . " 

 at length these preliminary be over , and they be walk briskly through the frosty air ; the free motion be so inspiriting that Ruth almost dance along , and quite forget all about shabby gown and grumble guardian . the shire - hall be even more striking than she have expect . the side of the staircase be paint with figure that show ghostly in the dim light , for only their face look out of the dark , dingy canvas , with a strange fix stare of expression . 

 the young milliner have to arrange their ware on table in the ante - room , and make all ready before they could venture to peep into the ball - room , where the musician be already tune their instrument , and where one or two char - woman   strange contrast ! with their dirty , loose attire , and their incessant chatter , to the grand echo of the vaulted room   be complete the dusting of bench and chair . 

 they quit the place as Ruth and her companion enter . they have talk lightly and merrily in the ante - room , but now their voice be hush , awe by the old magnificence of the vast apartment . it be so large , that object show dim at the further end , as through a mist . full - length figure of county worthy hang around , in all variety of costume , from the day of Holbein to the present time . the lofty roof be indistinct , for the lamp be not fully light yet ; while through the richly - paint gothic window at one end the moonbeam fall , many - tint , on the floor , and mock with their vividness the struggle of the artificial light to illuminate its little sphere . 

 high above sound the musician , fitfully try some strain of which they be not certain . then they stop play and talk , and their voice sound goblin - like in their dark recess , where candle be carry about in an uncertain wavering manner , remind Ruth of the flickering zigzag motion of the will - o'-the - wisp . 

 suddenly the room spring into the full blaze of light , and Ruth feel less impressed with its appearance , and more willing to obey Mrs Mason 's sharp summon to her wandering flock , than she have be when it be dim and mysterious . they have presently enough to do in render office of assistance to the lady who throng in , and whose voice drown all the muffle sound of the band Ruth have long so much to hear . still , if one pleasure be less , another be great than she have anticipate . 

 " on condition " of such a number of little observance that Ruth think Mrs Mason would never have end enumerate they , they be allow during the dance to stand at a side - door and watch . and what a beautiful sight it be ! float away to that bound music now far away , like garland of fairy , now near , and show as lovely woman , with every ornament of graceful dress the elite of the county dance on , little caring whose eye gaze and be dazzle . outside all be cold , and colourless , and uniform , one coating of snow over all . but inside it be warm , and glowing , and vivid ; flower scent the air , and wreathe the head , and rest on the bosom , as if it be midsummer . bright colour flash on the eye and be go , and succeed by other as lovely in the rapid movement of the dance . smile dimple every face , and low tone of happiness murmur indistinctly through the room in every pause of the music . 

 Ruth do not care to separate the figure that form a joyous and brilliant whole ; it be enough to gaze , and dream of the happy smoothness of the life in which such music , and such profusion of flower , of jewel , elegance of every description , and beauty of all shape and hue , be everyday thing . she do not want to know who the people be ; although to hear a catalogue of name seem to be the great delight of most of her companion . 

 in fact , the enumeration rather disturb she ; and to avoid the shock of too rapid a descent into the commonplace world of Miss Smiths and Mr Thomsons , she return to her post in the ante - room . there she stand think , or dream . she be startle back to actual life by a voice close to she . one of the dancing young lady have meet with a misfortune . her dress , of some gossamer material , have be loop up by nosegay of flower , and one of these have fall off in the dance , leave her gown to trail . to repair this , she have beg her partner to bring she to the room where the assistant should have be . none be there but Ruth . 

 " shall I leave you ? " ask the gentleman . " be my absence necessary ? " 

 " oh , no ! " reply the lady . " a few stitch will set all to right . besides , I dare not enter that room by myself . " so far she speak sweetly and prettily . but now she address Ruth . " make haste . do not   keep I an hour . " and her voice become cold and authoritative . 

 she be very pretty , with long dark ringlet and sparkle black eye . these have strike Ruth in the hasty glance she have take , before she kneel down to her task . she also see that the gentleman be young and elegant . 

 " oh , that lovely galop ! how I long to dance to it ! will it never be do ? what a frightful time you be take ; and I be die to return in time for this galop ! " 

 by way of show a pretty , childlike impatience , she begin to beat time with her foot to the spirited air the band be play . Ruth could not darn the rent in her dress with this continual motion , and she look up to remonstrate . as she throw her head back for this purpose , she catch the eye of the gentleman who be stand by ; it be so expressive of amusement at the air and grace of his pretty partner , that Ruth be infect by the feeling , and have to bend her face down to conceal the smile that mantle there . but not before he have see it , and not before his attention have be thereby draw to consider the kneeling figure , that , habit in black up to the throat , with the noble head bend down to the occupation in which she be engage , form such a contrast to the flippant , bright , artificial girl who sit to be serve with an air as haughty as a queen on her throne . 

 " oh , Mr Bellingham ! I be ashamed to detain you so long . I have no idea any one could have spend so much time over a little tear . no wonder Mrs Mason charge so much for dress - making , if her work - woman be so slow . " 

 it be mean to be witty , but Mr Bellingham look grave . he see the scarlet colour of annoyance flush to that beautiful cheek which be partially present to he . he take a candle from the table , and hold it so that Ruth have more light . she do not look up to thank he , for she feel ashamed that he should have see the smile which she have catch from he . 

 " I be sorry I have be so long , ma'am , " say she , gently , as she finish her work . " I be afraid it might tear out again if I do not do it carefully . " she rise . 

 " I would rather have have it tear than have miss that charming galop , " say the young lady , shake out her dress as a bird shake its plumage . " shall we go , Mr Bellingham ? " look up at he . 

 he be surprised that she give no word or sign of thank to the assistant . he take up a camellia that some one have leave on the table . 

 " allow I , Miss Duncombe , to give this in your name to this young lady , as thank for her dexterous help . " 

 " oh of course , " say she . 

 Ruth receive the flower silently , but with a grave , modest motion of her head . they have go , and she be once more alone . presently , her companion return . 

 " what be the matter with Miss duncombe ? do she come here ? " ask they . 

 " only her lace dress be tear , and I mend it , " answer Ruth , quietly . 

 " do Mr Bellingham come with she ? they say he be go to be married to she ; do he come , Ruth ? " 

 " yes , " say Ruth , and relapse into silence . 

 Mr Bellingham dance on gaily and merrily through the night , and flirt with Miss Duncombe , as he think good . but he look often to the side - door where the milliner 's apprentice stand ; and once he recognise the tall , slight figure , and the rich auburn hair of the girl in black ; and then his eye seek for the camellia . it be there , snowy white in her bosom . and he dance on more gaily than ever . 

 the cold grey dawn be drearily light up the street when Mrs Mason and her company return home . the lamp be extinguish , yet the shutter of the shop and dwelling - house be not open . all sound have an echo unheard by day . one or two houseless beggar sit on doorstep , and , shivering , sleep , with head bow on their knee , or rest against the cold hard support afford by the wall . 

 Ruth feel as if a dream have melt away , and she be once more in the actual world . how long it would be , even in the most favourable chance , before she should again enter the shire - hall ! or hear a band of music ! or even see again those bright , happy people as much without any semblance of care or woe as if they belong to another race of being . have they ever to deny themselves a wish , much less a want ? literally and figuratively , their life seem to wander through flowery pleasure - path . here be cold , bite mid - winter for she , and such as she for those poor beggar almost a season of death ; but to Miss Duncombe and her companion , a happy , merry time , when flower still bloom , and fire crackle , and comfort and luxury be pile around they like fairy gift . what do they know of the meaning of the word , so terrific to the poor ? what be winter to they ? but Ruth fancy that Mr Bellingham look as if he could understand the feeling of those remove from he by circumstance and station . he have draw up the window of his carriage , it be true , with a shudder . 

 Ruth , then , have be watch he . 

 yet she have no idea that any association make her camellia precious to she . she believe it be solely on account of its exquisite beauty that she tend it so carefully . she tell Jenny every particular of its presentation , with open , straight - looking eye , and without the deepening of a shade of colour . 

 " be it not kind of he ? you can not   think how nicely he do it , just when I be a little bit mortified by her ungracious way . " 

 " it be very nice , indeed , " reply Jenny . " such a beautiful flower ! I wish it have some scent . " 

 " I wish it to be exactly as it be ; it be perfect . so pure ! " say Ruth , almost clasp her treasure as she place it in water . " who be Mr Bellingham ? " 

 " he be son to that Mrs Bellingham of the Priory , for whom we make the grey satin pelisse , " answer Jenny , sleepily . 

 " that be before my time , " say Ruth . but there be no answer . Jenny be asleep . 

 it be long before Ruth follow her example . even on a winter day , it be clear morning light that fall upon her face as she smile in her slumber . Jenny would not waken she , but watch her face with admiration ; it be so lovely in its happiness . 

 " she be dream of last night , " think Jenny . 

 it be true she be ; but one figure flit more than all the rest through her vision . he present flower after flower to she in that baseless morning dream , which be all too quickly end . the night before , she have see her dead mother in her sleep , and she waken , weep . and now she dream of Mr Bellingham , and smile . 

 and yet , be this a more evil dream than the other ? 

 the reality of life seem to cut more sharply against her heart than usual that morning . the late hour of the precede night , and perhaps the excitement of the evening before , have indispose she to bear calmly the rub and cross which beset all Mrs Mason 's young lady at time . 

 for Mrs Mason , though the first dressmaker in the county , be human after all ; and suffer , like her apprentice , from the same cause that affect they . this morning she be disposed to find fault with everything , and everybody . she seem to have rise with the determination of put the world and all that it contain   her world , at least   to right before night ; and abuse and negligence , which have long pass unreproved , or wink at , be to - day to be drag to light , and sharply reprimand . nothing less than perfection would satisfy Mrs Mason at such time . 

 she have her idea of justice , too ; but they be not divinely beautiful and true idea ; they be something more resemble a grocer 's , or tea - dealer 's idea of equal right . a little over - indulgence last night be to be balance by a good deal of over - severity to - day ; and this manner of rectify previous error fully satisfy her conscience . 

 Ruth be not incline for , or capable of , much extra exertion ; and it would have task all her power to have please her superior . the work - room seem fill with sharp call . " Miss Hilton ! where have you put the blue Persian ? whenever thing be mislay , I know it have be Miss Hilton 's evening for side away ! " 

 " Miss Hilton be go out last night , so I offer to clear the workroom for she . I will find it directly , ma'am , " answer one of the girl . 

 " oh , I be well aware of Miss Hilton 's custom of shuffle off her duty upon any one who can be induce to relieve she , " reply Mrs Mason . 

 Ruth redden , and tear spring to her eye ; but she be so conscious of the falsity of the accusation , that she rebuke herself for be move by it , and , raise her head , give a proud look round , as if in appeal to her companion . 

 " where be the skirt of Lady Farnham 's dress ? the flounce not put on ! I be surprised . may I ask to whom this work be entrust yesterday ? " inquire Mrs Mason , fix her eye on Ruth . 

 " I be to have do it , but I make a mistake , and have to undo it . I be very sorry . " 

 " I might have guess , certainly . there be little difficulty , to be sure , in discover , when work have be neglect or spoil , into whose hand it have fall . " 

 such be the speech which fall to Ruth 's share on this day of all day , when she be least fit to bear they with equanimity . 

 in the afternoon it be necessary for Mrs Mason to go a few mile into the country . she leave injunction , and order , and direction , and prohibition without end ; but at last she be go , and in the relief of her absence , Ruth lay her arm on the table , and , bury her head , begin to cry aloud , with weak , unchecked sob . 

 " do not   cry , Miss Hilton , " " Ruthie , never mind the old dragon , " " how will you bear on for five year , if you do not   spirit yourself up not to care a straw for what she say ? " be some of the mode of comfort and sympathy administer by the young workwoman . 

 Jenny , with a wise insight into the grievance and its remedy , say : 

 " suppose Ruth go out instead of you , Fanny Barton , to do the errand . the fresh air will do she good ; and you know you dislike the cold east wind , while Ruth say she enjoy frost and snow , and all kind of shivery weather . " 

 Fanny Barton be a great sleepy - look girl , huddle over the fire . no one so willing as she to relinquish the walk on this bleak afternoon , when the east wind blow keenly down the street , dry up the very snow itself . there be no temptation to come abroad , for those who be not absolutely oblige to leave their warm room ; indeed , the dusk hour show that it be the usual tea - time for the humble inhabitant of that part of the town through which Ruth have to pass on her shopping expedition . as she come to the high ground just above the river , where the street slop rapidly down to the bridge , she see the flat country beyond all cover with snow , make the black dome of the cloud - laden sky appear yet blacker ; as if the winter 's night have never fairly go away , but have hover on the edge of the world all through the short bleak day . down by the bridge   where there be a little shelving bank , use as a landing - place for any pleasure - boat that could float on that shallow stream   some child be play , and defy the cold ; one of they have get a large washing - tub , and with the use of a break oar keep steer and push himself hither and thither in the little creek , much to the admiration of his companion , who stand gravely look on , immovable in their attentive observation of the hero , although their face be blue with cold , and their hand cram deep into their pocket with some faint hope of find warmth there . perhaps they fear that , if they unpack themselves from their lumpy attitude and begin to move about , the cruel wind would find its way into every cranny of their tattered dress . they be all huddle up , and still ; with eye intent on the embryo sailor . at last , one little man , envious of the reputation that his playfellow be acquire by his daring , call out : 

 " I will set thee a craddy , Tom ! Thou dar'n't   go over yon black line in the water , out into the real river . " 

 of course the challenge be not to be refuse , and Tom paddle away towards the dark line , beyond which the river sweep with smooth , steady current . Ruth   a child in year herself   stand at the top of the declivity watch the adventurer , but as unconscious of any danger as the group of child below . at their playfellow 's success , they break through the calm gravity of observation into boisterous mark of applause , clap their hand , and stamp their impatient little foot , and shout , " well do , Tom ; thou hast do it rarely ! " 

 Tom stand in childish dignity for a moment , face his admirer ; then , in an instant , his washing - tub boat be whirl round , and he lose his balance , and fall out ; and both he and his boat be carry away slowly , but surely , by the strong full river which eternally move onwards to the sea . 

 the child shriek aloud with terror ; and Ruth fly down to the little bay , and far into its shallow water , before she feel how useless such an action be , and that the sensible plan would have be to seek for efficient help . hardly have this thought strike she , when , loud and sharp than the sullen roar of the stream that be ceaselessly and unrelentingly flow on , come the splash of a horse gallop through the water in which she be stand . past she like lightning down in the stream , swim along with the current a stoop rider an outstretche , grasp arm a little life redeem , and a child save to those who love it ! Ruth stand dizzy and sick with emotion while all this take place ; and when the rider turn his swimming horse , and slowly breast up the river to the landing - place , she recognise he as the Mr Bellingham of the night before . he carry the unconscious child across his horse ; the body hang in so lifeless a manner that Ruth believe it be dead , and her eye be suddenly blind with tear . she wad back to the beach , to the point towards which Mr Bellingham be direct his horse . 

 " be he dead ? " ask she , stretch out her arm to receive the little fellow ; for she instinctively feel that the position in which he hang be not the most conducive to return consciousness , if , indeed , it would ever return . 

 " I think not , " answer Mr Bellingham , as he give the child to she , before spring off his horse . " be he your brother ? do you know who he be ? " 

 " look ! " say Ruth , who have sit down upon the ground , the well to prop the poor lad , " his hand twitch ! he live ! oh , sir , he live ! whose boy be he ? "   to the people , who come hurry and gather to the spot at the rumour of an accident . 

 " he be old Nelly Brownson 's , " say they . " her grandson . " 

 " we must take he into a house directly , " say she . " be his home far off ? " 

 " no , no ; it be just close by . " 

 " one of you go for a doctor at once , " say Mr Bellingham , authoritatively , " and bring he to the old woman 's without delay . you must not hold he any long , " he continue , speak to Ruth , and remember her face now for the first time ; " your dress be dripping wet already . here ! you fellow , take he up , d'ye see ! " 

 but the child 's hand have nervously clench Ruth 's dress , and she would not have he disturb . she carry her heavy burden very tenderly towards a mean little cottage indicate by the neighbour ; an old crippled woman be come out of the door , shake all over with agitation . 

 " dear heart ! " say she , " he be the last of them all , and he be go afore I . " 

 " nonsense , " say Mr Bellingham , " the boy be alive , and likely to live . " 

 but the old woman be helpless and hopeless , and insist on believe that her grandson be dead ; and dead he would have be if it have not be for Ruth , and one or two of the more sensible neighbour , who , under Mr Bellingham 's direction , bustle about , and do all that be necessary until animation be restore . 

 " what a confound time these people be in fetch the doctor , " say Mr Bellingham to Ruth , between whom and himself a sort of silent understanding have spring up from the circumstance of their have be the only two   besides mere child   who have witness the accident , and also the only two to whom a certain degree of cultivation have give the power of understand each other 's thought and even each other 's word . 

 " it take so much to knock an idea into such stupid people 's head . they stand gap and ask which doctor they be to go for , as if it signify whether it be Brown or Smith , so long as he have his wit about he . I have no more time to waste here , either ; I be on the gallop when I catch sight of the lad ; and , now he have fairly sob and open his eye , I see no use in my staying in this stifle atmosphere . may I trouble you with one thing ? will you be so good as to see that the little fellow have all that he want ? if you will allow I , I will leave you my purse , " continue he , give it to Ruth , who be only too glad to have this power entrust to she of procure one or two requisite which she have perceive to be want . but she see some gold between the net - work ; she do not like the charge of such rich . 

 " I shall not want so much , really , sir . one sovereign will be plenty more than enough . may I take that out , and I will give you back what be leave of it when I see you again ? or , perhaps I have well send it to you , sir ? " 

 " I think you have well keep it all at present . oh ! what a horrid dirty place this be ; insufferable two minute long . you must not stay here ; you will be poison with this abominable air . come towards the door , I beg . well , if you think one sovereign will be enough , I will take my purse ; only , remember you apply to I if you think they want more . " 

 they be stand at the door , where some one be hold Mr Bellingham 's horse . Ruth be look at he with her earnest eye   Mrs Mason and her errand quite forget in the interest of the afternoon 's event , her whole thought bent upon rightly understand and follow out his wish for the little boy 's welfare ; and until now this have be the first object in his own mind . but at this moment the strong perception of Ruth 's exceed beauty come again upon he . he almost lose the sense of what he be say , he be so startled into admiration . the night before , he have not see her eye ; and now they look straight and innocently full at he , grave , earnest , and deep . but when she instinctively read the change in the expression of his countenance , she drop her large white veiling lid ; and he think her face be lovely still . 

 the irresistible impulse seize he to arrange matter so that he might see she again before long . 

 " no ! " say he . " I see it would be well that you should keep the purse . many thing may be want for the lad which we can not calculate upon now . if I remember rightly , there be three sovereign and some loose change ; I shall , perhaps , see you again in a few day , when , if there be any money leave in the purse , you can restore it to I . " 

 " oh , yes , sir , " say Ruth , alive to the magnitude of the want to which she might have to administer , and yet rather afraid of the responsibility imply in the possession of so much money . 

 " be there any chance of my meeting you again in this house ? " ask he . 

 " I hope to come whenever I can , sir ; but I must run in errand - time , and I do not   know when my turn may be . " 

 " oh " he do not fully understand this answer " I should like to know how you think the boy be go on , if it be not give you too much trouble ; do you ever take walk ? " 

 " not for walk 's sake , sir . " 

 " well ! " say he , " you go to church , I suppose ? Mrs Mason do not keep you at work on Sundays , I trust ? " 

 " oh , no , sir . I go to church regularly . " 

 " then , perhaps , you will be so good as to tell I what church you go to , and I will meet you there next Sunday afternoon ? " 

 " I go to St Nicholas ' , sir . I will take care and bring you word how the boy be , and what doctor they get ; and I will keep an account of the money I spend . " 

 " very well ; thank you . remember , I trust to you . " 

 he mean that he rely on her promise to meet he ; but Ruth think that he be refer to the responsibility of do the good she could for the child . he be go away , when a fresh thought strike he , and he turn back into the cottage once more , and address Ruth , with a half smile on his countenance : 

 " it seem rather strange , but we have no one to introduce we ; my name be Bellingham yours be ? " 

 " Ruth Hilton , sir , " she answer , in a low voice , for , now that the conversation no long relate to the boy , she feel shy and restrain . 

 he hold out his hand to shake her , and just as she give it to he , the old grandmother come totter up to ask some question . the interruption jar upon he , and make he once more keenly alive to the closeness of the air , and the squalor and dirt by which he be surround . 

 " my good woman , " say he to Nelly Brownson , " could you not keep your place a little neater and clean ? it be more fit for pig than human being . the air in this room be quite offensive , and the dirt and filth be really disgraceful . " 

 by this time he be mount , and , bow to Ruth , he ride away . 

 then the old woman 's wrath break out . 

 " who may you be , that know no well manner than to come into a poor woman 's house to abuse it ? fit for pig , indeed ! what d'ye call yon fellow ? " 

 " he be Mr Bellingham , " say Ruth , shock at the old woman 's apparent ingratitude . " it be he that ride into the water to save your grandson . he would have be drown but for Mr Bellingham . I think once they would both have be sweep away by the current , it be so strong . " 

 " the river be none so deep , either , " the old woman say , anxious to diminish as much as possible the obligation she be under to one who have offend she . " some one else would have save he , if this fine young spark have never be near . he be an orphan , and God watch over orphan , they say . I would rather it have be any one else as have pick he out , than one who come into a poor body 's house only to abuse it . " 

 " he do not come in only to abuse it , " say Ruth , gently . " he come with little Tom ; he only say it be not quite so clean as it might be . " 

 " what ! you be take up the cry , be you ? wait till you be an old woman like I , cripple with rheumatiz , and a lad to see after like Tom , who be always in mud when he be not   in water ; and his food and mine to scrape together   God know we be often short , and do the good I can , and water to fetch up that steep brow . " 

 she stop to cough ; and Ruth judiciously change the subject , and begin to consult the old woman as to the want of her grandson , in which consultation they be soon assist by the medical man . 

 when Ruth have make one or two arrangement with a neighbour , whom she ask to procure the most necessary thing , and have hear from the doctor that all would be right in a day or two , she begin to quake at the recollection of the length of time she have spend at Nelly Brownson 's , and to remember , with some affright , the strict watch keep by Mrs Mason over her apprentice ' out - going and in - coming on working day . she hurry off to the shop , and try to recall her wander thought to the respective merit of pink and blue as a match to lilac , find she have lose her pattern , and go home with ill - choose thing , and in a fit of despair at her own stupidity . 

 the truth be , that the afternoon 's adventure fill her mind ; only , the figure of Tom   who be now safe , and likely to do well   be recede into the background , and that of Mr Bellingham become more prominent than it have be . his spirited and natural action of gallop into the water to save the child , be magnify by Ruth into the most heroic deed of daring ; his interest about the boy be tender , thoughtful benevolence in her eye , and his careless liberality of money be fine generosity ; for she forget that generosity imply some degree of self - denial . she be gratify , too , by the power of dispense comfort he have entrust to she , and be busy with Alnaschar vision of wise expenditure , when the necessity of open Mrs Mason 's house - door summon she back into actual present life , and the dread of an immediate scolding . 

 for this time , however , she be spar ; but spar for such a reason that she would have be thankful for some blame in preference to her impunity . during her absence , Jenny 's difficulty of breathing have suddenly become bad , and the girl have , on their own responsibility , put she to bed , and be stand round she in dismay , when Mrs Mason 's return home   only a few minute before Ruth arrive   flutter they back into the workroom . 

 and now , all be confusion and hurry ; a doctor to be send for ; a mind to be unburdened of direction for a dress to a forewoman , who be too ill to understand ; scolding to be scatter with no illiberal hand amongst a group of frightened girl , hardly spar the poor invalid herself for her inopportune illness . in the middle of all this turmoil , Ruth creep quietly to her place , with a heavy sadden heart at the indisposition of the gentle forewoman . she would gladly have nurse Jenny herself , and often long to do it , but she could not be spar . hand , unskilful in fine and delicate work , would be well enough qualified to tend the sick , until the mother arrive from home . meanwhile , extra diligence be require in the workroom ; and Ruth find no opportunity of go to see little Tom , or to fulfil the plan for make he and his grandmother more comfortable , which she have propose to herself . she regret her rash promise to Mr Bellingham , of attend to the little boy 's welfare ; all that she could do be do by mean of Mrs Mason 's servant , through whom she make inquiry , and send the necessary help . 

 the subject of Jenny 's illness be the prominent one in the house . Ruth tell of her own adventure , to be sure ; but when she be at the very crisis of the boy 's fall into the river , the more fresh and vivid interest of some tiding of Jenny be bring into the room , and Ruth cease , almost blame herself for care for anything besides the question of life or death to be decide in that very house . 

 then a pale , gentle - look woman be see move softly about ; and it be whisper that this be the mother come to nurse her child . everybody like she , she be so sweet - looking , and give so little trouble , and seem so patient , and so thankful for any inquiry about her daughter , whose illness , it be understand , although its severity be mitigate , be likely to be long and tedious . while all the feeling and thought relate to Jenny be predominant , Sunday arrive . Mrs Mason go the accustomed visit to her father 's , make some little show of apology to Mrs Wood for leave she and her daughter ; the apprentice disperse to the various friend with whom they be in the habit of spend the day ; and Ruth go to St Nicholas ' , with a sorrowful heart , depress on account of Jenny , and self - reproachful at have rashly undertake what she have be unable to perform . 

 as she come out of church , she be join by Mr Bellingham . she have half hop that he might have forget the arrangement , and yet she wish to relieve herself of her responsibility . she know his step behind she , and the contend feeling make her heart beat hard , and she long to run away . 

 " Miss Hilton , I believe , " say he , overtake she , and bow forward , so as to catch a sight of her rose - red face . " how be our little sailor go on ? well , I trust , from the symptom the other day . " 

 " I believe , sir , he be quite well now . I be very sorry , but I have not be able to go and see he . I be so sorry I could not help it . but I have get one or two thing through another person . I have put they down on this slip of paper ; and here be your purse , sir , for I be afraid I can do nothing more for he . we have illness in the house , and it make we very busy . " 

 Ruth have be so much accustomed to blame of late , that she almost anticipate some remonstrance or reproach now , for not have fulfil her promise well . she little guess that Mr Bellingham be far more busy try to devise some excuse for meet she again , during the silence that succeed her speech , than displeased with she for not bring a more particular account of the little boy , in whom he have cease to feel any interest . 

 she repeat , after a minute 's pause : 

 " I be very sorry I have do so little , sir . " 

 " oh , yes , I be sure you have do all you could . it be thoughtless in I to add to your engagement . " 

 " he be displeased with I , " think Ruth , " for what he believe to have be neglect of the boy , whose life he risk his own to save . if I tell all , he would see that I could not do more ; but I can not tell he all the sorrow and worry that have take up my time . " 

 " and yet I be tempt to give you another little commission , if it be not take up too much of your time , and presume too much on your good - nature , " say he , a bright idea have just strike he . " Mrs Mason live in Heneage Place , do not she ? my mother 's ancestor live there ; and once , when the house be be repair , she take I in to show I the old place . there be an old hunting - piece paint on a panel over one of the chimney - piece ; the figure be portrait of my ancestor . I have often think I should like to purchase it , if it still remain there . can you ascertain this for I , and bring I word next Sunday ? " 

 " oh , yes , sir , " say Ruth , glad that this commission be completely within her power to execute , and anxious to make up for her previous seem neglect . " I will look directly I get home , and ask Mrs Mason to write and let you know . " 

 " thank you , " say he , only half satisfied ; " I think perhaps , however , it might be as well not to trouble Mrs Mason about it ; you see , it would compromise I , and I be not quite determined to purchase the picture ; if you would ascertain whether the painting be there , and tell I , I would take a little time to reflect , and afterwards I could apply to Mrs Mason myself . " 

 " very well , sir ; I will see about it . " so they part . 

 before the next Sunday , Mrs Wood have take her daughter to her distant home , to recruit in that quiet place . Ruth watch she down the street from an upper window , and , sigh deep and long , return to the workroom , whence the warning voice and the gentle wisdom have depart . 

 

 

 CHAPTER III 

 Sunday at Mrs Mason 's 
 

 Mr Bellingham attend afternoon service at St Nicholas ' church the next Sunday . his thought have be far more occupy by Ruth than her by he , although his appearance upon the scene of her life be more an event to she than it be to he . he be puzzle by the impression she have produce on he , though he do not in general analyse the nature of his feeling , but simply enjoy they with the delight which youth take in experience new and strong emotion . 

 he be old compare to Ruth , but young as a man ; hardly three - and - twenty . the fact of his be an only child have give he , as it do to many , a sort of inequality in those part of the character which be usually form by the number of year that a person have live . 

 the unevenness of discipline to which only child be subject ; the thwarting , result from over - anxiety ; the indiscreet indulgence , arise from a love centre all in one object ; have be exaggerate in his education , probably from the circumstance that his mother   his only survive parent   have be similarly situate to himself . 

 he be already in possession of the comparatively small property he inherit from his father . the estate on which his mother live be her own ; and her income give she the mean of indulge or control he , after he have grow to man 's estate , as her wayward disposition and her love of power prompt she . 

 have he be double - deal in his conduct towards she , have he condescend to humour she in the least , her passionate love for he would have induce she to strip herself of all her possession to add to his dignity or happiness . but although he feel the warm affection for she , the regardlessness which she have teach he   by example , perhaps , more than by precept   of the feeling of other , be continually prompt he to do thing that she , for the time being , resent as mortal affront . he would mimic the clergyman she specially esteem , even to his very face ; he would refuse to visit her school for month and month ; and , when weary into go at last , revenge himself by puzzle the child with the most ridiculous question   gravely put   that he could imagine . 

 all these boyish trick annoy and irritate she far more than the account which reach she of more serious misdoing at college and in town . of these grave offence she never speak ; of the small misdeed she hardly ever cease speak . 

 still , at time , she have great influence over he , and nothing delight she more than to exercise it . the submission of his will to hers be sure to be liberally reward ; for it give her great happiness to extort , from his indifference or his affection , the concession which she never seek by force of reason , or by appeal to principle concession which he frequently withhold , solely for the sake of assert his independence of her control . 

 she be anxious for he to marry Miss Duncombe . he care little or nothing about it it be time enough to be marry ten year hence ; and so he be dawdle through some month of his life sometimes flirt with the nothing - loath Miss Duncombe , sometimes plague , and sometimes delight his mother , at all time take care to please himself when he first see Ruth Hilton , and a new , passionate , hearty feeling shoot through his whole being . he do not know why he be so fascinated by she . she be very beautiful , but he have see other equally beautiful , and with many more agacerie calculate to set off the effect of their charm . 

 there be , perhaps , something bewitch in the union of the grace and loveliness of womanhood with the naivetť , simplicity , and innocence of an intelligent child . there be a spell in the shyness , which make she avoid and shun all admire approach to acquaintance . it would be an exquisite delight to attract and tame her wildness , just as he have often allure and tame the timid fawn in his mother 's park . 

 by no over - bold admiration , or rash , passionate word , would he startle she ; and , surely , in time she might be induce to look upon he as a friend , if not something near and dearer still . 

 in accordance with this determination , he resist the strong temptation of walk by her side the whole distance home after church . he only receive the intelligence she bring respect the panel with thank , speak a few word about the weather , bow , and be go . Ruth believe she should never see he again ; and , in spite of sundry self - upbraiding for her folly , she could not help feel as if a shadow be draw over her existence for several day to come . 

 Mrs Mason be a widow , and have to struggle for the sake of the six or seven child leave dependent on her exertion ; thus there be some reason , and great excuse , for the pinch economy which regulate her household affair . 

 on Sundays she choose to conclude that all her apprentice have friend who would be glad to see they to dinner , and give they a welcome reception for the remainder of the day ; while she , and those of her child who be not at school , go to spend the day at her father 's house , several mile out of the town . accordingly , no dinner be cook on Sundays for the young workwoman ; no fire be light in any room to which they have access . on this morning they breakfast in Mrs Mason 's own parlour , after which the room be close against they through the day by some understood , though unspoken prohibition . 

 what become of such as Ruth , who have no home and no friend in that large , populous , desolate town ? she have hitherto commission the servant , who go to market on Saturdays for the family , to buy she a bun or biscuit , whereon she make her fast dinner in the deserted workroom , sit in her walking - dress to keep off the cold , which cling to she in spite of shawl and bonnet . then she would sit at the window , look out on the dreary prospect till her eye be often blind by tear ; and , partly to shake off thought and recollection , the indulgence in which she feel to be productive of no good , and partly to have some idea to dwell upon during the come week beyond those suggest by the constant view of the same room , she would carry her Bible , and place herself in the window - seat on the wide landing , which command the street in front of the house . from thence she could see the irregular grandeur of the place ; she catch a view of the grey church - tower , rise hoary and massive into mid - air ; she see one or two figure loiter along on the sunny side of the street , in all the enjoyment of their fine clothe and Sunday leisure ; and she imagine history for they , and try to picture to herself their home and their daily doing . 

 and before long , the bell swing heavily in the church - tower , and strike out with musical clang the first summon to afternoon church . 

 after church be over , she use to return home to the same window - seat , and watch till the winter twilight be over and go , and the star come out over the black mass of house . and then she would steal down to ask for a candle , as a companion to she in the deserted workroom . occasionally the servant would bring she up some tea ; but of late Ruth have decline take any , as she have discover she be rob the kind - hearted creature of part of the small provision leave out for she by Mrs Mason . she sit on , hungry and cold , try to read she Bible , and to think the old holy thought which have be her childish meditation at her mother 's knee , until one after another the apprentice return , weary with their day 's enjoyment , and their week 's late watching ; too weary to make she in any way a partaker of their pleasure by enter into detail of the manner in which they have spend their day . 

 and last of all , Mrs Mason return ; and , summon her " young people " once more into the parlour , she read a prayer before dismiss they to bed . she always expect to find they all in the house when she come home , but ask no question as to their proceeding through the day ; perhaps because she dread to hear that one or two have occasionally nowhere to go , and that it would be sometimes necessary to order a Sunday 's dinner , and leave a light fire on that day . 

 for five month Ruth have be an inmate at Mrs Mason 's , and such have be the regular order of the Sundays . while the forewoman stay there , it be true , she be ever ready to give Ruth the little variety of hearing of recreation in which she be no partaker ; and however tired Jenny might be at night , she have ever some sympathy to bestow on Ruth for the dull length of day she have pass . after her departure , the monotonous idleness of the Sunday seem bad to bear than the incessant labour of the work - day ; until the time come when it seem to be a recognise hope in her mind , that on Sunday afternoon she should see Mr Bellingham , and hear a few word from he , as from a friend who take an interest in her thought and proceeding during the past week . 

 Ruth 's mother have be the daughter of a poor curate in Norfolk , and , early leave without parent or home , she be thankful to marry a respectable farmer a good deal old than herself . after their marriage , however , everything seem to go wrong . Mrs Hilton fall into a delicate state of health , and be unable to bestow the ever - watchful attention to domestic affair so requisite in a farmer 's wife . her husband have a series of misfortune of a more important kind than the death of a whole brood of turkey from get among the nettle , or the year of bad cheese spoil by a careless dairymaid which be the consequence   so the neighbour say   of Mr Hilton 's mistake in marry a delicate , fine lady . his crop fail ; his horse die ; his barn take fire ; in short , if he have be in any way a remarkable character , one might have suppose he to be the object of an avenge fate , so successive be the evil which pursue he ; but as he be only a somewhat commonplace farmer , I believe we must attribute his calamity to some want in his character of the one quality require to act as keystone to many excellence . while his wife live , all worldly misfortune seem as nothing to he ; her strong sense and lively faculty of hope uphold he from despair ; her sympathy be always ready , and the invalid 's room have an atmosphere of peace and encouragement , which affect all who enter it . but when Ruth be about twelve , one morning in the busy hay - time , Mrs Hilton be leave alone for some hour . this have often happen before , nor have she seem weak than usual when they have go forth to the field ; but on their return , with merry voice , to fetch the dinner prepare for the haymaker , they find an unusual silence brood over the house ; no low voice call out gently to welcome they , and ask after the day 's progress ; and , on enter the little parlour , which be call Mrs Hilton 's , and be sacred to she , they find she lie dead on her accustomed sofa . quite calm and peaceful she lay ; there have be no struggle at last ; the struggle be for the survivor , and one sink under it . her husband do not make much ado at first at least , not in outward show ; her memory seem to keep in check all external violence of grief ; but , day by day , date from his wife 's death , his mental power decrease . he be still a hale - look elderly man , and his bodily health appear as good as ever ; but he sit for hour in his easy - chair , look into the fire , not move , nor speak , unless when it be absolutely necessary to answer repeat question . if Ruth , with coaxing and dragging , induce he to come out with she , he go with measured step around his field , his head bent to the ground with the same abstract , unseeing look ; never smile never change the expression of his face , not even to one of deep sadness , when anything occur which might be suppose to remind he of his dead wife . but in this abstraction from all outward thing , his worldly affair go ever lower down . he pay money away , or receive it , as if it have be so much water ; the gold mine of Potosi could not have touch the deep grief of his soul ; but God in his mercy know the sure balm , and send the Beautiful Messenger to take the weary one home . 

 after his death , the creditor be the chief people who appear to take any interest in the affair ; and it seem strange to Ruth to see people , whom she scarcely know , examine and touch all that she have be accustom to consider as precious and sacred . her father have make his will at her birth . with the pride of newly and late - acquire paternity , he have consider the office of guardian to his little darling as one which would have be an additional honour to the lord - lieutenant of the county ; but as he have not the pleasure of his lordship 's acquaintance , he select the person of most consequence amongst those whom he do know ; not any very ambitious appointment , in those day of comparative prosperity ; but certainly the flourish maltster of Skelton be a little surprised , when , fifteen year later , he learn that he be executor to a will bequeath many vanish hundred of pound , and guardian to a young girl whom he could not remember ever to have see . 

 he be a sensible , hard - head man of the world ; have a very fair proportion of conscience as conscience go ; indeed , perhaps more than many people ; for he have some idea of duty extend to the circle beyond his own family ; and do not , as some would have do , decline act altogether , but speedily summon the creditor , examine into the account , sell up the farming - stock , and discharge all the debt ; pay about L80 into the Skelton bank for a week , while he inquire for a situation or apprenticeship of some kind for poor heart - break Ruth ; hear of Mrs Mason 's ; arrange all with she in two short conversation ; drive over for Ruth in his gig ; wait while she and the old servant pack up her clothe ; and grow very impatient while she run , with her eye stream with tear , round the garden , tear off in a passion of love whole bough of favourite China and damask rose , late flower against the casement - window of what have be her mother 's room . when she take her seat in the gig , she be little able , even if she have be incline , to profit by her guardian 's lecture on economy and self - reliance ; but she be quiet and silent , look forward with longing to the night - time , when , in her bedroom , she might give way to all her passionate sorrow at be wrench from the home where she have live with her parent , in that utter absence of any anticipation of change , which be either the blessing or the curse of childhood . but at night there be four other girl in her room , and she could not cry before they . she watch and wait till , one by one , they drop off to sleep , and then she bury her face in the pillow , and shake with sob grief ; and then she pause to conjure up , with fond luxuriance , every recollection of the happy day , so little value in their uneventful peace while they last , so passionately regret when once go for ever ; to remember every look and word of the dear mother , and to moan afresh over the change cause by her death ; the first clouding in of Ruth 's day of life . it be Jenny 's sympathy on this first night , when awaken by Ruth 's irrepressible agony , that have make the bond between they . but Ruth 's love disposition , continually send forth fibre in search of nutriment , find no other object for regard among those of her daily life to compensate for the want of natural tie . 

 but , almost insensibly , Jenny 's place in Ruth 's heart be fill up ; there be some one who listen with tender interest to all her little revelation ; who question she about her early day of happiness , and , in return , speak of his own childhood not so golden in reality as Ruth 's , but more dazzling , when recount with story of the beautiful cream - colour arabian pony , and the old picture - gallery in the house , and avenue , and terrace , and fountain in the garden , for Ruth to paint , with all the vividness of imagination , as scenery and background for the figure which be grow by slow degree most prominent in her thought . 

 it must not be suppose that this be effect all at once , though the intermediate stage have be pass over . on Sunday , Mr Bellingham only speak to she to receive the information about the panel ; nor do he come to St Nicholas ' the next , nor yet the follow Sunday . but the third he walk by her side a little way , and , see her annoyance , he leave she ; and then she wish for he back again , and find the day very dreary , and wonder why a strange undefined feeling have make her imagine she be do wrong in walk alongside of one so kind and good as Mr Bellingham ; it have be very foolish of she to be self - conscious all the time , and if ever he speak to she again she would not think of what people might say , but enjoy the pleasure which his kind word and evident interest in she might give . then she think it be very likely he never would notice she again , for she know she have be very rude with her short answer ; it be very provoking that she have behave so rudely . she should be sixteen in another month , and she be still childish and awkward . thus she lecture herself , after part with Mr Bellingham ; and the consequence be , that on the following Sunday she be ten time as blushing and conscious , and   Mr Bellingham think   ten time more beautiful than ever . he suggest , that instead of go straight home through high - street , she should take the round by the Leasowes ; at first she decline , but then , suddenly wonder and question herself why she refuse a thing which be , as far as reason and knowledge   her knowledge   go , so innocent , and which be certainly so tempting and pleasant , she agree to go the round ; and when she be once in the meadow that skirt the town , she forget all doubt and awkwardness nay , almost forget the presence of Mr Bellingham in her delight at the new tender beauty of an early spring day in February . among the last year 's brown ruin , heap together by the wind in the hedgerow , she find the fresh green crinkle leaf and pale star - like flower of the primrose . here and there a golden celandine make brilliant the side of the little brook that   full of water in " February fill - dyke "   bubble along by the side of the path ; the sun be low in the horizon , and once , when they come to a high part of the Leasowes , Ruth burst into an exclamation of delight at the evening glory of mellow light which be in the sky behind the purple distance , while the brown leafless wood in the foreground derive an almost metallic lustre from the golden mist and haze of the sunset . it be but three - quarter of a mile round by the meadow , but somehow it take they an hour to walk it . Ruth turn to thank Mr Bellingham for his kindness in take her home by this beautiful way , but his look of admiration at her glowing , animate face , make she suddenly silent ; and , hardly wish he good - bye , she quickly enter the house with a beat , happy , agitated heart . 

 " how strange it be , " she think that evening , " that I should feel as if this charming afternoon 's walk be , somehow , not exactly wrong , but yet as if it be not right . why can it be ? I be not defraud Mrs Mason of any of her time ; that I know would be wrong ; I be leave to go where I like on Sundays . I have be to church , so it can not   be because I have miss do my duty . if I have go this walk with Jenny , I wonder whether I should have feel as I do now . there must be something wrong in I , myself , to feel so guilty when I have do nothing which be not right ; and yet I can thank God for the happiness I have have in this charming spring walk , which dear mamma use to say be a sign when pleasure be innocent and good for we . " 

 she be not conscious , as yet , that Mr Bellingham 's presence have add any charm to the ramble ; and when she might have become aware of this , as , week after week , Sunday after Sunday , loiter ramble after loiter ramble succeed each other , she be too much absorb with one set of thought to have much inclination for self - questioning . 

 " tell I everything , Ruth , as you would to a brother ; let I help you , if I can , in your difficulty , " he say to her one afternoon . and he really do try to understand , and to realise , how an insignificant and paltry person like Mason the dressmaker could be an object of dread , and regard as a person have authority , by Ruth . he flame up with indignation when , by way of impress he with Mrs Mason 's power and consequence , Ruth speak of some instance of the effect of her employer 's displeasure . he declare his mother should never have a gown make again by such a tyrant such a Mrs Brownrigg ; that he would prevent all his acquaintance from go to such a cruel dressmaker ; till Ruth be alarm at the threaten consequence of her one - sided account , and plead for Mrs Mason as earnestly as if a young man 's menace of this description be likely to be literally fulfil . 

 " indeed , sir , I have be very wrong ; if you please , sir , do not   be so angry . she be often very good to we ; it be only sometimes she go into a passion ; and we be very provoking , I dare say . I know I be for one . I have often to undo my work , and you can not   think how it spoil anything   particularly silk   to be unpick ; and Mrs Mason have to bear all the blame . oh ! I be sorry I say anything about it . do not   speak to your mother about it , pray , sir . Mrs Mason think so much of Mrs Bellingham 's custom . " 

 " well , I will not   this time " recollect that there might be some awkwardness in account to his mother for the mean by which he have obtain his very correct information as to what pass in Mrs Mason 's workroom " but if ever she do so again , I will not answer for myself . " 

 " I will take care and not tell again , sir , " say Ruth , in a low voice . 

 " Nay , Ruth , you be not go to have secret from I , be you ? do not   you remember your promise to consider I as a brother ? go on tell I everything that happen to you , pray ; you can not think how much interest I take in all your interest . I can quite fancy that charming home at Milham you tell I about last Sunday . I can almost fancy Mrs Mason 's workroom ; and that , surely , be a proof either of the strength of my imagination , or of your power of description . " 

 Ruth smile . " it be , indeed , sir . our workroom must be so different to anything you ever see . I think you must have pass through Milham often on your way to Lowford . " 

 " then you do not   think it be any stretch of fancy to have so clear an idea as I have of Milham Grange ? on the left hand of the road , be it , Ruth ? " 

 " yes , sir , just over the bridge , and up the hill where the elm - tree meet overhead and make a green shade ; and then come the dear old Grange , that I shall never see again . " 

 " never ! nonsense , Ruthie ; it be only six mile off ; you may see it any day . it be not an hour 's ride . " 

 " perhaps I may see it again when I be grow old ; I do not think exactly what ' never ' mean ; it be so very long since I be there , and I do not   see any chance of my go for year and year , at any rate . " 

 " why , Ruth , you we may go next Sunday afternoon , if you like . " 

 she look up at he with a lovely light of pleasure in her face at the idea . " how , sir ? can I walk it between afternoon service and the time Mrs Mason come home ? I would go for only one glimpse ; but if I could get into the house oh , sir ! if I could just see mamma 's room again ! " 

 he be revolve plan in his head for give she this pleasure , and he have also his own in view . if they go in any of his carriage , the loitering charm of the walk would be lose ; and they must , to a certain degree , be encumber by , and expose to , the notice of servant . 

 " be you a good walker , Ruth ? do you think you can manage six mile ? if we set off at two o'clock , we shall be there by four , without hurrying ; or say half - past four . then we might stay two hour , and you could show I all the old walk and old place you love , and we could still come leisurely home . oh , it be all arrange directly ! " 

 " but do you think it would be right , sir ? it seem as if it would be such a great pleasure , that it must be in some way wrong . " 

 " why , you little goose , what can be wrong in it ? " 

 " in the first place , I miss go to church by set out at two , " say Ruth , a little gravely . 

 " only for once . surely you do not   see any harm in miss church for once ? you will go in the morning , you know . " 

 " I wonder if Mrs Mason would think it right if she would allow it ? " 

 " no , I dare say not . but you do not   mean to be govern by Mrs Mason 's notion of right and wrong . she think it right to treat that poor girl Palmer in the way you tell I about . you would think that wrong , you know , and so would every one of sense and feeling . Come , Ruth , do not   pin your faith on any one , but judge for yourself . the pleasure be perfectly innocent ; it be not a selfish pleasure either , for I shall enjoy it to the full as much as you will . I shall like to see the place where you spend your childhood ; I shall almost love they as much as you do . " he have drop his voice ; and speak in low , persuasive tone . Ruth hang down her head , and blush with exceed happiness ; but she could not speak , even to urge her doubt afresh . thus it be in a manner settle . 

 how delightfully happy the plan make she through the come week ! she be too young when her mother die to have receive any caution or word of advice respect the subject of a woman 's life if , indeed , wise parent ever directly speak of what , in its depth and power , can not be put into word which be a brood spirit with no definite form or shape that man should know it , but which be there , and present before we have recognise and realise its existence . Ruth be innocent and snow - pure . she have hear of fall in love , but do not know the sign and symptom thereof ; nor , indeed , have she trouble her head much about they . Sorrow have fill up her day , to the exclusion of all light thought than the consideration of present duty , and the remembrance of the happy time which have be . but the interval of blank , after the loss of her mother and during her father 's life - in - death , have make she all the more ready to value and cle to sympathy first from Jenny , and now from Mr Bellingham . to see her home again , and to see it with he ; to show he   secure of his interest   the haunt of former time , each with its little tale of the past of dead and go event ! no come shadow throw its gloom over this week 's dream of happiness a dream which be too bright to be speak about to common and indifferent ear . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IV 

 Treading in Perilous Places 
 

 Sunday come , as brilliant as if there be no sorrow , or death , or guilt in the world ; a day or two of rain have make the earth fresh and brave as the blue heaven above . Ruth think it be too strong a realisation of her hope , and look for an over - clouding at noon ; but the glory endure , and at two o'clock she be in the Leasowes , with a beat heart full of joy , long to stop the hour , which would pass too quickly through the afternoon . 

 they saunter through the fragrant lane , as if their loitering would prolong the time , and check the fiery - footed steed gallop apace towards the close of the happy day . it be past five o'clock before they come to the great mill - wheel , which stand in Sabbath idleness , motionless in a brown mass of shade , and still wet with yesterday 's immersion in the deep transparent water beneath . they clamber the little hill , not yet fully shade by the overarch elm ; and then Ruth check Mr Bellingham , by a slight motion of the hand which lie within his arm , and glance up into his face to see what that face should express as it look on Milham Grange , now lie still and peaceful in its afternoon shadow . it be a house of after - thought ; building material be plentiful in the neighbourhood , and every successive owner have find a necessity for some addition or projection , till it be a picturesque mass of irregularity of broken light and shadow which , as a whole , give a full and complete idea of a " home . " all its gable and nook be blend and hold together by the tender green of the climb rose and young creeper . an old couple be live in the house until it should be let , but they dwelt in the back part , and never use the front door ; so the little bird have grow tame and familiar , and perch upon the window - sill and porch , and on the old stone cistern which catch the water from the roof . 

 they go silently through the untrimmed garden , full of the pale - colour flower of spring . a spider have spread her web over the front door . the sight of this convey a sense of desolation to Ruth 's heart ; she think it be possible the state entrance have never be use since her father 's dead body have be bear forth , and , without speak a word , she turn abruptly away , and go round the house to another door . Mr Bellingham follow without question , little understand her feeling , but full of admiration for the vary expression call out upon her face . 

 the old woman have not yet return from church , or from the weekly gossip or neighbourly tea which succeed . the husband sit in the kitchen , spell the psalm for the day in his Prayer - book , and read the word out aloud a habit he have acquire from the double solitude of his life , for he be deaf . he do not hear the quiet entrance of the pair , and they be strike with the sort of ghostly echo which seem to haunt half - furnish and uninhabited house . the verse he be read be the follow : 
 

 why art thou so vexed , o my soul : and why art thou so disquiet within I ? 

 o put thy trust in God : for I will yet thank he , which be the help of my countenance , and my God . 
 

 and when he have finish he shut the book , and sigh with the satisfaction of have do his duty . the word of holy trust , though perhaps they be not fully understand , carry a faithful peace down into the depth of his soul . as he look up , he see the young couple stand on the middle of the floor . he push his iron - rim spectacle on to his forehead , and rise to greet the daughter of his old master and ever - honour mistress . 

 " God bless thee , lass ; God bless thee ! my old eye be glad to see thee again . " 

 Ruth spring forward to shake the horny hand stretch forward in the action of blessing . she press it between both of her , as she rapidly pour out question . Mr Bellingham be not altogether comfortable at see one whom he have already begin to appropriate as his own , so tenderly familiar with a hard - feature , meanly - dress day - labourer . he saunter to the window , and look out into the grass - grow farm - yard ; but he could not help overhear some of the conversation , which seem to he carry on too much in the tone of equality . " and who be yon ? " ask the old labourer at last . " be he your sweetheart ? your missis 's son , I reckon . he be a spruce young chap , anyhow . " 

 Mr Bellingham 's " blood of all the howard " rise and tingle about his ear , so that he could not hear Ruth 's answer . it begin by " Hush , Thomas ; pray hush ! " but how it go on he do not catch . the idea of his be Mrs Mason 's son ! it be really too ridiculous ; but , like most thing which be " too ridiculous , " it make he very angry . he be hardly himself again when Ruth shyly come to the window - recess and ask he if he would like to see the house - place , into which the front door enter ; many people think it very pretty , she say , half timidly , for his face have unconsciously assume a hard and haughty expression , which he could not instantly soften down . he follow she , however ; but before he leave the kitchen he see the old man stand , look at Ruth 's companion with a strange , grave air of dissatisfaction . 

 they go along one or two zigzag , damp - smell stone passage , and then enter the house - place , or common sitting - room for a farmer 's family in that part of the country . the front door open into it , and several other apartment issue out of it , such as the dairy , the state bedroom   which be half - parlour as well , and a small room which have be appropriate to the late Mrs Hilton , where she sit , or more frequently lay , command through the open door the coming and going of her household . in those day the house - place have be a cheerful room , full of life , with the passing to and fro of husband , child , and servant ; with a great merry wood fire crackling and blaze away every evening , and hardly let out in the very heat of summer ; for with the thick stone wall , and the deep window - seat , and the drapery of vine - leaf and ivy , that room , with its flag - floor , seem always to want the sparkle and cheery warmth of a fire . but now the green shadow from without seem to have become black in the uninhabited desolation . the oaken shovel - board , the heavy dresser , and the carved cupboard , be now dull and damp , which be formerly polished up to the brightness of a look - glass where the fire - blaze be for ever glinting ; they only add to the oppressive gloom ; the flag - floor be wet with heavy moisture . Ruth stand gaze into the room , see nothing of what be present . she see a vision of former day an evening in the day of her childhood ; her father sit in the " master 's corner " near the fire , sedately smoke his pipe , while he dreamily watch his wife and child ; her mother read to she , as she sit on a little stool at her foot . it be go all go into the land of shadow ; but for the moment it seem so present in the old room , that Ruth believe her actual life to be the dream . then , still silent , she go on into her mother 's parlour . but there , the bleak look of what have once be full of peace and mother 's love , strike cold on her heart . she utter a cry , and throw herself down by the sofa , hide her face in her hand , while her frame quiver with her repressed sob . 

 " Dearest Ruth , do not   give way so . it can do no good ; it can not bring back the dead , " say Mr Bellingham , distressed at witness her distress . 

 " I know it can not , " murmur Ruth ; " and that be why I cry . I cry because nothing will ever bring they back again . " she sob afresh , but more gently , for his kind word soothe she , and soften , if they could not take away , her sense of desolation . 

 " come away ; I can not have you stay here , full of painful association as these room must be . come " raise she with gentle violence ' show I your little garden you have often tell I about . near the window of this very room , be it not ? see how well I remember everything you tell I . " 

 he lead her round through the back part of the house into the pretty old - fashioned garden . there be a sunny border just under the window , and clip box and yew - tree by the grass - plat , far away from the house ; and she prattle again of her childish adventure and solitary play . when they turn round they see the old man , who have hobble out with the help of his stick , and be look at they with the same grave , sad look of anxiety . 

 Mr Bellingham speak rather sharply : 

 " why do that old man follow we about in that way ? it be excessively impertinent of he , I think . " 

 " oh , do not   call old Thomas impertinent . he be so good and kind , he be like a father to I . I remember sit on his knee many and many a time when I be a child , whilst he tell I story out of the ' Pilgrim 's Progress . ' he teach I to suck up milk through a straw . Mamma be very fond of he too . he use to sit with we always in the evening when papa be away at market , for mamma be rather afraid of have no man in the house , and use to beg old Thomas to stay ; and he would take I on his knee , and listen just as attentively as I do while mamma read aloud . " 

 " you do not   mean to say you have sit upon that old fellow 's knee ? " 

 " oh , yes ! many and many a time . " 

 Mr Bellingham look graver than he have do while witness Ruth 's passionate emotion in her mother 's room . but he lose his sense of indignity in admiration of his companion as she wander among the flower , seek for favourite bush or plant , to which some history or remembrance be attach . she wind in and out in natural , graceful , wavy line between the luxuriant and overgrown shrub , which be fragrant with a leafy smell of spring growth ; she go on , careless of watch eye , indeed unconscious , for the time , of their existence . once she stop to take hold of a spray of jessamine , and softly kiss it ; it have be her mother 's favourite flower . 

 Old Thomas be stand by the horse - mount , and be also an observer of all her going - on . but , while Mr Bellingham 's feeling be that of passionate admiration mingle with a selfish kind of love , the old man gaze with tender anxiety , and his lip move in word of blessing : 

 " she be a pretty creature , with a glint of her mother about she ; and she be the same kind lass as ever . not a bit set up with yon fine manty - maker 's shop she be in . I misdoubt that young fellow though , for all she call he a real gentleman , and check I when I ask if he be her sweetheart . if his be not sweetheart 's look , I have   forget all my young day . here ! they be go , I suppose . look ! he want she to go without a word to the old man ; but she be none so change as that , I reckon . " 

 not Ruth , indeed ! she never perceive the dissatisfied expression of Mr Bellingham 's countenance , visible to the old man 's keen eye ; but come run up to Thomas to send her love to his wife , and to shake he many time by the hand . 

 " tell Mary I will make she such a fine gown , as soon as ever I set up for myself ; it shall be all in the fashion , big gigot sleeve , that she shall not know herself in they ! mind you tell she that , Thomas , will you ? " 

 " Aye , that I will , lass ; and I reckon she will be pleased to hear thou hast not forget thy old merry way . the Lord bless thee the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon thee . " 

 Ruth be half - way towards the impatient Mr Bellingham when her old friend call she back . he long to give she a warning of the danger that he think she be in , and yet he do not know how . when she come up , all he could think of to say be a text ; indeed , the language of the Bible be the language in which he think , whenever his idea go beyond practical everyday life into expression of emotion or feeling . " my dear , remember the devil goeth about as a roar lion , seek whom he may devour ; remember that , Ruth . " 

 the word fall on her ear , but give no definite idea . the utmost they suggest be the remembrance of the dread she feel as a child when this verse come into her mind , and how she use to imagine a lion 's head with glare eye peer out of the bush in a dark shady part of the wood , which , for this reason , she have always avoid , and even now could hardly think of without a shudder . she never imagine that the grim warning relate to the handsome young man who await she with a countenance beam with love , and tenderly draw her hand within his arm . 

 the old man sigh as he watch they away . " the Lord may help she to guide her step aright . he may . but I be afeard she be treading in perilous place . I will put my missis up to go to the town and get speech of she , and tell she a bit of her danger . an old motherly woman like our Mary will set about it well nor a stupid fellow like I . " 

 the poor old labourer pray long and earnestly that night for Ruth . he call it " wrestle for her soul ; " and I think his prayer be hear , for " God judgeth not as man judgeth . " 

 Ruth go on her way , all unconscious of the dark phantom of the future that be gather around she ; her melancholy turn , with the pliancy of childish year , at sixteen not yet lose , into a soften manner which be infinitely charming . by - and - by she clear up into sunny happiness . the evening be still and full of mellow light , and the new - bear summer be so delicious that , in common with all young creature , she share its influence and be glad . 

 they stand together at the top of a steep ascent , " the hill " of the hundred . at the summit there be a level space , sixty or seventy yard square , of unenclosed and broken ground , over which the golden bloom of the gorse cast a rich hue , while its delicious scent perfume the fresh and nimble air . on one side of this common , the ground slop down to a clear bright pond , in which be mirror the rough sand - cliff that rise abrupt on the opposite bank ; hundred of marten find a home there , and be now wheel over the transparent water , and dip in their wing in their evening sport . indeed , all sort of bird seem to haunt the lonely pool ; the water - wagtail be scatter around its margin , the linnet perch on the topmost spray of the gorse - bush , and other hide warbler sing their vesper on the uneven ground beyond . on the far side of the green waste , close by the road , and well place for the requirement of horse or their rider who might be weary with the ascent of the hill , there be a public - house , which be more of a farm than an inn . it be a long , low building , rich in dormer - window on the weather side , which be necessary in such an exposed situation , and with odd projection and unlooke - for gable on every side ; there be a deep porch in front , on whose hospitable bench a dozen person might sit and enjoy the balmy air . a noble sycamore grow right before the house , with seat all round it   ' such tent the patriarch love " ; and a nondescript sign hang from a branch on the side next to the road , which , be wisely furnish with an interpretation , be find to mean King Charles in the oak . 

 near this comfortable , quiet , unfrequented inn , there be another pond , for household and farm - yard purpose , from which the cattle be drink , before return to the field after they have be milk . their very motion be so lazy and slow , that they serve to fill up the mind with the sensation of dreamy rest . Ruth and Mr Bellingham plunge through the broken ground to regain the road near the wayside inn . hand - in - hand , now prick by the far - spread gorse , now ankle - deep in sand ; now press the soft , thick heath , which should make so brave an autumn show ; and now over wild thyme and other fragrant herb , they make their way , with many a merry laugh . once on the road , at the summit , Ruth stand silent , in breathless delight at the view before she . the hill fall suddenly down into the plain , extend for a dozen mile or more . there be a clump of dark Scotch fir close to they , which cut clear against the western sky , and throw back the near level into distance . the plain below they be richly woode , and be tint by the young tender hue of the early summer , for all the tree of the wood have don their leaf except the cautious ash , which here and there give a soft , pleasant greyness to the landscape . far away in the champaign be spire , and tower , and stack of chimney belong to some distant hide farm - house , which be trace downwards through the golden air by the thin column of blue smoke send up from the evening fire . the view be bound by some rise ground in deep purple shadow against the sunset sky . 

 when first they stop , silent with sigh pleasure , the air seem full of pleasant noise ; distant church - bell make harmonious music with the little singing - bird near at hand ; nor be the lowing of the cattle , nor the call of the farm - servant discordant , for the voice seem to be hush by the brood consciousness of the Sabbath . they stand loiter before the house , quietly enjoy the view . the clock in the little inn strike eight , and it sound clear and sharp in the stillness . 

 " can it be so late ? " ask Ruth . 

 " I should not have think it possible , " answer Mr Bellingham . " but , never mind , you will be at home long before nine . Stay , there be a short road , I know , through the field ; just wait a moment , while I go in and ask the exact way . " he drop Ruth 's arm , and go into the public - house . 

 a gig have be slowly toil up the sandy hill behind , unperceive by the young couple , and now it reach the table - land , and be close upon they as they separate . Ruth turn round , when the sound of the horse 's footstep come distinctly as he reach the level . she face Mrs Mason ! 

 they be not ten no , not five yard apart . at the same moment they recognise each other , and , what be bad , Mrs Mason have clearly see , with her sharp , needle - like eye , the attitude in which Ruth have stand with the young man who have just quit she . Ruth 's hand have be lie in his arm , and fondly hold there by his other hand . 

 Mrs Mason be careless about the circumstance of temptation into which the girl entrust to she as apprentice be throw , but severely intolerant if their conduct be in any degree influence by the force of these temptation . she call this intolerance " keep up the character of her establishment . " it would have be a well and more christian thing , if she have keep up the character of her girl by tender vigilance and maternal care . 

 this evening , too , she be in an irritated state of temper . her brother have undertake to drive her round by Henbury , in order to give she the unpleasant information of the misbehaviour of her eld son , who be an assistant in a draper 's shop in a neighbouring town . she be full of indignation against want of steadiness , though not willing to direct her indignation against the right object her ne'er - do - well darling . while she be thus charge with anger   for her brother justly defend her son 's master and companion from her attack , she see Ruth stand with a lover , far away from home , at such a time in the evening , and she boil over with intemperate displeasure . 

 " come here directly , Miss Hilton , " she exclaim , sharply . then , drop her voice to low , bitter tone of concentrated wrath , she say to the trembling , guilty Ruth : 

 " do not   attempt to show your face at my house again after this conduct . I see you , and your spark , too . I will have no slur on the character of my apprentice . do not   say a word . I see enough . I shall write and tell your guardian to - morrow . " 

 the horse start away , for he be impatient to be off , and Ruth be leave stand there , stony , sick , and pale , as if the lightning have tear up the ground beneath her foot . she could not go on stand , she be so sick and faint ; she stagger back to the broken sand - bank , and sink down , and cover her face with her hand . 

 " my dear Ruth ! be you ill ? Speak , darling ! my love , my love , do speak to I ! " 

 what tender word after such harsh one ! they loosen the fountain of Ruth 's tear , and she cry bitterly . 

 " oh ! do you see she do you hear what she say ? " 

 " she ! who , my darling ? do not   sob so , Ruth ; tell I what it be . who have be near you ? who have be speak to you to make you cry so ? " 

 " oh , Mrs Mason . " and there be a fresh burst of sorrow . 

 " you do not   say so ! be you sure ? I be not away five minute . " 

 " oh , yes , sir , I be quite sure . she be so angry ; she say I must never show my face there again . oh , dear ! what shall I do ? " 

 it seem to the poor child as if Mrs Mason 's word be irrevocable , and , that be so , she be shut out from every house . she see how much she have do that be deserve of blame , now when it be too late to undo it . she know with what severity and taunt Mrs Mason have often treat she for involuntary failing , of which she have be quite unconscious ; and now she have really do wrong , and shrink with terror from the consequence . her eye be so blind by the fast - fall tear , she do not see   nor have she see would she have be able to interpret   the change in Mr Bellingham 's countenance , as he stand silently watch she . he be silent so long , that even in her sorrow she begin to wonder that he do not speak , and to wish to hear his soothe word once more . 

 " it be very unfortunate , " he begin , at last ; and then he stop ; then he begin again : " it be very unfortunate ; for , you see , I do not like to name it to you before , but , I believe I have business , in fact , which oblige I to go to town to - morrow to London , I mean ; and I do not   know when I shall be able to return . " 

 " to London ! " cry Ruth ; " be you go away ? oh , Mr Bellingham ! " she weep afresh , give herself up to the desolate feeling of sorrow , which absorb all the terror she have be experience at the idea of Mrs Mason 's anger . it seem to she at this moment as though she could have bear everything but his departure ; but she do not speak again ; and after two or three minute have elapse , he speak not in his natural careless voice , but in a sort of constrained , agitated tone . 

 " I can hardly bear the idea of leave you , my own Ruth . in such distress , too ; for where you can go I do not know at all . from all you have tell I of Mrs Mason , I do not   think she be likely to mitigate her severity in your case . " 

 no answer , but tear quietly , incessantly flow . Mrs Mason 's displeasure seem a distant thing ; his go away be the present distress . he go on : 

 " Ruth , would you go with I to London ? my darling , I can not leave you here without a home ; the thought of leave you at all be pain enough , but in these circumstance so friendless , so homeless it be impossible . you must come with I , love , and trust to I . " 

 still she do not speak . remember how young , and innocent , and motherless she be ! it seem to she as if it would be happiness enough to be with he ; and as for the future , he would arrange and decide for that . the future lie wrap in a golden mist , which she do not care to penetrate ; but if he , her sun , be out of sight and go , the golden mist become dark heavy gloom , through which no hope could come . he take her hand . 

 " will you not come with I ? do you not love I enough to trust I ? oh , Ruth , "   reproachfully , " can you not trust I ? " 

 she have stop cry , but be sob sadly . 

 " I can not bear this , love . your sorrow be absolute pain to I ; but it be bad to feel how indifferent you be how little you care about our separation . " 

 he drop her hand . she burst into a fresh fit of cry . 

 " I may have to join my mother in Paris ; I do not   know when I shall see you again . oh , Ruth ! " say he , vehemently , " do you love I at all ? " 

 she say something in a very low voice ; he could not hear it , though he bend down his head but he take her hand again . 

 " what be it you say , love ? be it not that you do love I ? my darling , you do ! I can tell it by the trembling of this little hand ; then you will not suffer I to go away alone and unhappy , most anxious about you ? there be no other course open to you ; my poor girl have no friend to receive she . I will go home directly , and return in an hour with a carriage . you make I too happy by your silence , Ruth . " 

 " oh , what can I do ! " exclaim Ruth . " Mr Bellingham , you should help I , and instead of that you only bewilder I . " 

 " how , my dear Ruth ? Bewilder you ! it seem so clear to I . look at the case fairly ! here you be , an orphan , with only one person to love you , poor child ! throw off , for no fault of your , by the only creature on whom you have a claim , that creature a tyrannical , inflexible woman ; what be more natural   and , be natural , more right   than that you should throw yourself upon the care of the one who love you dearly who would go through fire and water for you who would shelter you from all harm ? unless , indeed , as I suspect , you do not care for he . if so , Ruth ! if you do not care for I , we have well part I will leave you at once ; it will be well for I to go , if you do not care for I . " 

 he say this very sadly   it seem so to Ruth , at least , and make as though he would have draw his hand from her , but now she hold it with soft force . 

 " do not   leave I , please , sir . it be very true I have no friend but you . do not   leave I , please . but , oh ! do tell I what I must do ! " 

 " will you do it if I tell you ? if you will trust I , I will do my very good for you . I will give you my good advice . you see your position . Mrs Mason write and give her own exaggerated account to your guardian ; he be bind by no great love to you , from what I have hear you say , and throw you off ; I , who might be able to befriend you through my mother , perhaps I , who could at least comfort you a little   could not I , Ruth ? , be away , far away , for an indefinite time ; that be your position at present . now , what I advise be this . come with I into this little inn ; I will order tea for you   I be sure you require it sadly   and I will leave you there , and go home for the carriage . I will return in an hour at the late . then we be together , come what may ; that be enough for I ; be it not for you , Ruth ? Say , yes say it ever so low , but give I the delight of hear it . Ruth , say yes . " 

 low and soft , with much hesitation , come the " Yes ; " the fatal word of which she so little imagine the infinite consequence . the thought of be with he be all and everything . 

 " how you tremble , my darling ! you be cold , love ! come into the house , and I will order tea directly and be off . " 

 she rise , and , lean on his arm , go into the house . she be shake and dizzy with the agitation of the last hour . he speak to the civil farmer - landlord , who conduct they into a neat parlour , with window open into the garden at the back of the house . they have admit much of the evening 's fragrance through their open casement , before they be hastily close by the attentive host . 

 " Tea , directly , for this lady ! " the landlord vanish . 

 " Dearest Ruth , I must go ; there be not an instant to be lose ; promise I to take some tea , for you be shiver all over , and deadly pale with the fright that abominable woman have give you . I must go ; I shall be back in half an hour and then no more parting , darling . " 

 he kiss her pale cold face , and go away . the room whirl round before Ruth ; it be a dream a strange , varying , shift dream with the old home of her childhood for one scene , with the terror of Mrs Mason 's unexpected appearance for another ; and then , strangest , dizziest , happy of all , there be the consciousness of his love , who be all the world to she ; and the remembrance of the tender word , which still keep up their low soft echo in her heart . 

 her head ache so much that she could hardly see ; even the dusky twilight be a dazzling glare to her poor eye ; and when the daughter of the house bring in the sharp light of the candle , preparatory for tea , Ruth hide her face in the sofa pillow with a low exclamation of pain . 

 " do your head ache , miss ? " ask the girl , in a gentle , sympathise voice . " let I make you some tea , miss , it will do you good . many be the time poor mother 's headache be cure by good strong tea . " 

 Ruth murmur acquiescence ; the young girl   about Ruth 's own age , but who be the mistress of the little establishment , owe to her mother 's death   make tea , and bring Ruth a cup to the sofa where she lay . Ruth be feverish and thirsty , and eagerly drink it off , although she could not touch the bread and butter which the girl offer she . she feel well and fresher , though she be still faint and weak . 

 " thank you , " say Ruth . " do not   let I keep you ; perhaps you be busy . you have be very kind , and the tea have do I a great deal of good . " 

 the girl leave the room . Ruth become as hot as she have previously be cold , and go and open the window , and leant out into the still , sweet , evening air . the bush of sweetbri , underneath the window , scent the place , and the delicious fragrance remind she of her old home . I think scent affect and quicken the memory more than either sight or sound ; for Ruth have instantly before her eye the little garden beneath the window of her mother 's room , with the old man lean on his stick , watch she , just as he have do , not three hour before , on that very afternoon . 

 " dear old Thomas ! he and Mary would take I in , I think ; they would love I all the more if I be cast off . and Mr Bellingham would , perhaps , not be so very long away ; and he would know where to find I if I stay at Milham Grange . oh , would it not be well to go to they ? I wonder if he would be very sorry ! I could not bear to make he sorry , so kind as he have be to I ; but I do believe it would be well to go to they , and ask their advice , at any rate . he would follow I there ; and I could talk over what I have well do , with the three good friend I have in the world the only friend I have . " 

 she put on her bonnet , and open the parlour - door ; but then she see the square figure of the landlord stand at the open house - door , smoke his evening pipe , and loom large and distinct against the dark air and landscape beyond . Ruth remember the cup of tea that she have drink ; it must be pay for , and she have no money with she . she fear that he would not let she quit the house without pay . she think that she would leave a note for Mr Bellingham , say where she be go , and how she have leave the house in debt , for   like a child   all dilemma appear of equal magnitude to she ; and the difficulty of pass the landlord while he stand there , and of give he an explanation of the circumstance   as far as such explanation be due to he , appear insuperable , and as awkward , and fraught with inconvenience , as far more serious situation . she keep peep out of her room , after she have write her little pencil - note , to see if the outer door be still obstruct . there he stand , motionless , enjoy his pipe , and look out into the darkness which gather thick with the come night . the fume of the tobacco be carry by the air into the house , and bring back Ruth 's sick headache . her energy leave she ; she become stupid and languid , and incapable of spirited exertion ; she modify her plan of action , to the determination of ask Mr Bellingham to take she to Milham Grange , to the care of her humble friend , instead of to London . and she think , in her simplicity , that he would instantly consent when he have hear her reason . 

 she start up . a carriage dash up to the door . she hush her beat heart , and try to stop her throb head to listen . she hear he speak to the landlord , though she could not distinguish what he say ; hear the jingling of money , and , in another moment , he be in the room , and have take her arm to lead she to the carriage . 

 " oh , sir ! I want you to take I to Milham Grange , " say she , hold back . " Old Thomas would give I a home . " 

 " well , dearest , we will talk of all that in the carriage ; I be sure you will listen to reason . Nay , if you will go to Milham you must go in the carriage , " say he , hurriedly . she be little accustomed to oppose the wish of any one obedient and docile by nature , and unsuspicious and innocent of any harmful consequence . she enter the carriage , and drive towards London . 

 

 

 CHAPTER V 

 in North Wales 
 

 the June of 18 have be glorious and sunny , and full of flower ; but July come in with pour rain , and it be a gloomy time for traveller and for weather - bind tourist , who lounge away the day in touch up sketch , dress fly , and read over again for the twentieth time the few volume they have bring with they . a number of the Times , five day old , have be in constant demand in all the sitting - room of a certain inn in a little mountain village of North Wales , through a long July morning . the valley around be fill with thick cold mist , which have creep up the hillside till the hamlet itself be fold in its white dense curtain , and from the inn - windows nothing be see of the beautiful scenery around . the tourist who throng the room might as well have be " wi ' their dear little bairnie at hame ; " and so some of they seem to think , as they stand , with their face flatten against the window - pane , look abroad in search of an event to fill up the dreary time . how many dinner be hasten that day , by way of get through the morning , let the poor Welsh kitchen - maid say ! the very village child keep indoor ; or if one or two more adventurous steal out into the land of temptation and puddle , they be soon clutch back by angry and busy mother . 

 it be only four o'clock , but most of the inmate of the inn think it must be between six and seven , the morning have seem so long so many hour have pass since dinner when a Welsh car , draw by two horse , rattle briskly up to the door . every window of the ark be crowd with face at the sound ; the leathern curtain be undrawn to their curious eye , and out spring a gentleman , who carefully assist a well - cloak - up lady into the little inn , despite the landlady 's assurance of not have a room to spare . 

 the gentleman   it be Mr Bellingham   pay no attention to the speech of the hostess , but quietly superintend the unpacking of the carriage , and pay the postillion ; then , turn round with his face to the light , he speak to the landlady , whose voice have be rise during the last five minute : 

 " Nay , Jenny , you be strangely alter , if you can turn out an old friend on such an evening as this . if I remember right , Pen tre Voelas be twenty mile across the bleakest mountain road I ever see . " 

 " indeed , sir , and I do not know you ; Mr Bellingham , I believe . indeed , sir , Pen tre Voelas be not above eighteen mile we only charge for eighteen ; it may not be much above seventeen ; and we be quite full , indeed , more be the pity . " 

 " well , but Jenny , to oblige I , an old friend , you can find lodging out for some of your people the house across , for instance . " 

 " indeed , sir , and it be at liberty ; perhaps you would not mind lodge there yourself ; I could get you the good room , and send over a trifle or so of furniture , if they wern't   as you would wish they to be . " 

 " no , Jenny ! here I stay . you will not induce I to venture over into those room , whose dirt I know of old . can not   you persuade some one who be not an old friend to move across ? say , if you like , that I have write beforehand to bespeak the room . oh ! I know you can manage it I know your good - natured way . " 

 " indeed , sir well ! I will see , if you and the lady will just step into the back parlour , sir there be no one there just now ; the lady be keep her bed to - day for a cold , and the gentleman be have a rubber at whist in number three . I will see what I can do . " 

 " thank you , thank you . be there a fire ? if not , one must be light . Come , Ruthie , come . " 

 he lead the way into a large , bow - windowe room , which look gloomy enough that afternoon , but which I have see bright and buoyant with youth and hope within , and sunny light creep down the purple mountain slope , and steal over the green , soft meadow , till they reach the little garden , full of rose and lavender - bush , lie close under the window . I have see but I shall see no more . 

 " I do not know you have be here before , " say Ruth , as Mr Bellingham help she off with her cloak . 

 " oh , yes ; three year ago I be here on a reading party . we be here above two month , attract by Jenny 's kind heart and oddity ; but drive away finally by the insufferable dirt . however , for a week or two it will not   much signify . " 

 " but can she take we in , sir ? I think I hear she say her house be full . " 

 " oh , yes I dare say it be ; but I shall pay she well ; she can easily make excuse to some poor devil , and send he over to the other side ; and , for a day or two , so that we have shelter , it do not much signify . " 

 " could not we go to the house on the other side , sir ? " 

 " and have our meal carry across to we in a half - warm state , to say nothing of have no one to scold for bad cooking ! you do not   know these out - of - the - way Welsh inn yet , Ruthie . " 

 " no ! I only think it seem rather unfair " say Ruth , gently ; but she do not end her sentence , for Mr Bellingham form his lip into a whistle , and walk to the window to survey the rain . 

 the remembrance of his former good payment prompt many little lie of which Mrs Morgan be guilty that afternoon , before she succeed in turn out a gentleman and lady , who be only plan to remain till the ensue Saturday at the outside , so , if they do fulfil their threat , and leave on the next day , she would be no very great loser . 

 these household arrangement complete , she solace herself with tea in her own little parlour , and shrewdly review the circumstance of Mr Bellingham 's arrival . 

 " indeed ! and she be not his wife , " think Jenny , " that be clear as day . his wife would have bring she maid , and give herself twice as many air about the sitting - room ; while this poor miss never speak , but keep as still as a mouse . indeed , and young man will be young man ; and , as long as their father and mother shut their eye , it be none of my business to go about ask question . " 

 in this manner they settle down to a week 's enjoyment of that Alpine country . it be most true enjoyment to Ruth . it be open a new sense ; vast idea of beauty and grandeur fill her mind at the sight of the mountain now first beheld in full majesty . she be almost overpower by the vague and solemn delight ; but by - and - by her love for they equal her awe , and in the night - time she would softly rise , and steal to the window to see the white moonlight , which give a new aspect to the everlaste hill that girdle the mountain village . 

 their breakfast - hour be late , in accordance with Mr Bellingham 's taste and habit ; but Ruth be up betime , and out and away , brush the dew - drop from the short crisp grass ; the lark sing high above her head , and she know not if she move or stand still , for the grandeur of this beautiful earth absorb all idea of separate and individual existence . even rain be a pleasure to she . she sit in the window - seat of their parlour   she would have go out gladly , but that such a proceeding annoy Mr Bellingham , who usually at such time lounge away the listless hour on a sofa , and relieve himself by abuse the weather ; she see the swift - fleeting shower come athwart the sunlight like a rush of silver arrow ; she watch the purple darkness on the heathery mountain - side , and then the pale golden gleam which succeed . there be no change or alteration of nature that have not its own peculiar beauty in the eye of Ruth ; but if she have complain of the changeable climate , she would have please Mr Bellingham more ; her admiration and her content make he angry , until her pretty motion and love eye soothe down his impatience . 

 " really , Ruth , " he exclaim one day , when they have be imprison by rain a whole morning , " one would think you have never see a shower of rain before ; it quite weary I to see you sit there watch this detestable weather with such a placid countenance ; and for the last two hour you have say nothing more amusing or interesting than ' oh , how beautiful ! ' or , ' there be another cloud come across Moel Wynn . ' " 

 Ruth leave her seat very gently , and take up her work . she wish she have the gift of be amusing ; it must be dull for a man accustom to all kind of active employment to be shut up in the house . she be recall from her absolute self - forgetfulness . what could she say to interest Mr Bellingham ? while she think , he speak again : 

 " I remember when we be read here three year ago , we have a week of just such weather as this ; but Howard and Johnson be capital whist player , and Wilbraham not bad , so we get through the day famously . can you play ťcartť , Ruth , or picquet ? " 

 " no , sir ; I have sometimes play at beggar - my - neighbour , " answer Ruth , humbly , regret her own deficiency . 

 he murmur impatiently , and there be silence for another half - hour . then he spring up , and rung the bell violently . " ask Mrs Morgan for a pack of card . Ruthie , I will teach you ťcartť , " say he . 

 but Ruth be stupid , not so good as a dummy , he say ; and it be no fun bet against himself . so the card be fling across the table on the floor anywhere . Ruth pick they up . as she rise , she sigh a little with the depression of spirit consequent upon her own want of power to amuse and occupy he she love . 

 " you be pale , love ! " say he , half repenting of his anger at her blunder over the card . " go out before dinner ; you know you do not   mind this cursed weather ; and see that you come home full of adventure to relate . come , little blockhead ! give I a kiss , and begone . " 

 she leave the room with a feeling of relief ; for if he be dull without she , she should not feel responsible , and unhappy at her own stupidity . the open air , that kind soothe balm which gentle mother Nature offer to we all in our season of depression , relieve she . the rain have cease , though every leaf and blade be load with tremble glitter drop . Ruth go down to the circular dale , into which the brown - foaming mountain river fall and make a deep pool , and , after rest there for a while , run on between broken rock down to the valley below . the waterfall be magnificent , as she have anticipate ; she long to extend her walk to the other side of the stream , so she seek the stepping - stone , the usual crossing - place , which be over - shadow by tree , a few yard from the pool . the water run high and rapidly , as busy as life , between the piece of grey rock ; but Ruth have no fear , and go lightly and steadily on . about the middle , however , there be a great gap ; either one of the stone be so covered with water as to be invisible , or it have be wash lower down ; at any rate , the spring from stone to stone be long , and Ruth hesitate for a moment before take it . the sound of rushing water be in her ear to the exclusion of every other noise ; her eye be on the current run swiftly below her foot ; and thus she be startled to see a figure close before she on one of the stone , and to hear a voice offer help . 

 she look up and see a man , who be apparently long past middle life , and of the stature of a dwarf ; a second glance account for the low height of the speaker , for then she see he be deform . as the consciousness of this infirmity come into her mind , it must have tell itself in her soften eye , for a faint flush of colour come into the pale face of the deform gentleman , as he repeat his word : 

 " the water be very rapid ; will you take my hand ? perhaps I can help you . " 

 Ruth accept the offer , and with this assistance she be across in a moment . he make way for she to precede he in the narrow wood path , and then silently follow she up the glen . 

 when they have pass out of the wood into the pasture - land beyond , Ruth once more turn to mark he . she be strike afresh with the mild beauty of the face , though there be something in the countenance which tell of the body 's deformity , something more and beyond the pallor of habitual ill - health , something of a quick spiritual light in the deep set - eye , a sensibility about the mouth ; but altogether , though a peculiar , it be a most attractive face . 

 " will you allow I to accompany you if you be go the round by Cwm Dhu , as I imagine you be ? the hand - rail be blow away from the little wooden bridge by the storm last night , and the rush of water below may make you dizzy ; and it be really dangerous to fall there , the stream be so deep . " 

 they walk on without much speech . she wonder who her companion might be . she should have know he , if she have see he among the stranger at the inn ; and yet he speak English too well to be a Welshman ; he know the country and the path so perfectly , he must be a resident ; and so she toss he from England to Wales and back again in her imagination . 

 " I only come here yesterday , " say he , as a widening in the path permit they to walk abreast . " last night I go to the high waterfall ; they be most splendid . " 

 " do you go out in all that rain ? " ask Ruth , timidly . 

 " oh , yes . rain never hinder I from walk . indeed , it give a new beauty to such a country as this . besides , my time for my excursion be so short , I can not afford to waste a day . " 

 " then , you do not live here ? " ask Ruth . 

 " no ! my home be in a very different place . I live in a busy town , where at time it be difficult to feel the truth that 
 

 there be in this loud stunning tide 
 of human care and crime , 
 with whom the melody abide 
 of th ' everlaste chime ; 
 who carry music in their heart 
 through dusky lane and crowded mart , 
 ply their task with busy foot , 
 because their secret soul a holy strain repeat . 
 

 I have an annual holiday , which I generally spend in Wales ; and often in this immediate neighbourhood . " 

 " I do not wonder at your choice , " reply Ruth . " it be a beautiful country . " 

 " it be , indeed ; and I have be inoculate by an old innkeeper at Conway with a love for its people , and history , and tradition . I have pick up enough of the language to understand many of their legend ; and some be very fine and awe - inspire , other very poetic and fanciful . " 

 Ruth be too shy to keep up the conversation by any remark of her own , although his gentle , pensive manner be very win . 

 " for instance , " say he , touch a long bud - laden stem of fox - glove in the hedge - side , at the bottom of which one or two crimson - speckle flower be burst from their green sheath , " I dare say , you do not   know what make this fox - glove bend and sway so gracefully . you think it be blow by the wind , do not   you ? " he look at she with a grave smile , which do not enliven his thoughtful eye , but give an inexpressible sweetness to his face . 

 " I always think it be the wind . what be it ? " ask Ruth , innocently . 

 " oh , the Welsh tell you that this flower be sacred to the fairy , and that it have the power of recognise they , and all spiritual being who pass by , and that it bow in deference to they as they waft along . its Welsh name be Maneg Ellyllyn the good people 's glove ; and hence , I imagine , our folk's - glove or fox - glove . " 

 " it be a very pretty fancy , " say Ruth , much interested , and wish that he would go on , without expect she to reply . 

 but they be already at the wooden bridge ; he lead she across , and then , bow his adieu , he have take a different path even before Ruth have thank he for his attention . 

 it be an adventure to tell Mr Bellingham , however ; and it rouse and amuse he till dinner - time come , after which he saunter forth with a cigar . 

 " Ruth , " say he , when he return , " I have   see your little hunchback . he look like Riquet - with - the - Tuft . he be not a gentleman , though . if it have not be for his deformity , I should not have make he out from your description ; you call he a gentleman . " 

 " and do not   you , sir ? " ask Ruth , surprised . 

 " oh , no ! he be regularly shabby and seedy in his appearance ; lodge , too , the ostler tell I , over that horrible candle and cheese shop , the smell of which be insufferable twenty yard off no gentleman could endure it ; he must be a traveller or artist , or something of that kind . " 

 " do you see his face , sir ? " ask Ruth . 

 " no ; but a man 's back his tout ensemble have character enough in it to decide his rank . " 

 " his face be very singular ; quite beautiful ! " say she , softly ; but the subject do not interest Mr Bellingham , and he let it drop . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VI 

 Troubles Gather About Ruth 
 

 the next day the weather be brave and glorious ; a perfect " bridal of the earth and sky ; " and every one turn out of the inn to enjoy the fresh beauty of nature . Ruth be quite unconscious of be the object of remark , and , in her light , rapid passing to and fro , have never look at the door and window , where many watcher stand observe she , and comment upon her situation or her appearance . 

 " she be a very lovely creature , " say one gentleman , rise from the breakfast - table to catch a glimpse of she as she enter from her morning 's ramble . " not above sixteen , I should think . very modest and innocent - look in her white gown ! " 

 his wife , busy administer to the want of a fine little boy , could only say   without see the young girl 's modest way , and gentle , downcast countenance : 

 " well ! I do think it be a shame such people should be allow to come here . to think of such wickedness under the same roof ! do come away , my dear , and do not   flatter she by such notice . " 

 the husband return to the breakfast - table ; he smell the broiled ham and egg , and he hear his wife 's command . whether smell or hearing have most to do in cause his obedience , I can not tell ; perhaps you can . 

 " now , Harry , go and see if nurse and baby be ready to go out with you . you must lose no time this beautiful morning . " 

 Ruth find Mr Bellingham be not yet come down ; so she sally out for an additional half - hour 's ramble . flit about through the village , try to catch all the beautiful sunny peep at the scenery between the cold stone house , which throw the radiant distance into aŽrial perspective far away , she pass by the little shop ; and , just issue from it , come the nurse and baby , and little boy . the baby sit in placid dignity in her nurse 's arm , with a face of queenly calm . her fresh , soft , peachy complexion be really tempting ; and Ruth , who be always fond of child , go up to coo and to smile at the little thing , and , after some " peep - boe , " she be about to snatch a kiss , when Harry , whose face have be redden ever since the play begin , lift up his sturdy little right arm and hit Ruth a great blow on the face . 

 " oh , for shame , sir ! " say the nurse , snatch back his hand ; " how dare you do that to the lady who be so kind as to speak to Sissy . " 

 " she be not a lady ! " say he , indignantly . " she be a bad naughty girl mamma say so , she do ; and she shall not   kiss our baby . " 

 the nurse redden in her turn . she know what he must have hear ; but it be awkward to bring it out , stand face to face with the elegant young lady . 

 " child pick up such notion , ma'am , " say she at last , apologetically , to Ruth , who stand , white and still , with a new idea run through her mind . 

 " it be no notion ; it be true , nurse ; and I hear you say it yourself . go away , naughty woman ! " say the boy , in infantile vehemence of passion to Ruth . 

 to the nurse 's infinite relief , Ruth turn away , humbly and meekly , with bent head , and slow , uncertain step . but as she turn , she see the mild sad face of the deform gentleman , who be sit at the open window above the shop ; he look sad and graver than ever ; and his eye meet her glance with an expression of deep sorrow . and so , condemn alike by youth and age , she steal with timid step into the house . Mr Bellingham be await she come in the sitting - room . the glorious day restore all his buoyancy of spirit . he talk gaily away , without pause for a reply ; while Ruth make tea , and try to calm her heart , which be yet beat with the agitation of the new idea she have receive from the occurrence of the morning . luckily for she , the only answer require for some time be mono - syllable ; but those few word be utter in so depressed and mournful a tone , that at last they strike Mr Bellingham with surprise and displeasure , as the condition of mind they unconsciously imply do not harmonise with his own . 

 " Ruth , what be the matter this morning ? you really be very provoking . yesterday , when everything be gloomy , and you might have be aware that I be out of spirit , I hear nothing but expression of delight ; to - day , when every creature under heaven be rejoice , you look most deplorable and woe - begone . you really should learn to have a little sympathy . " 

 the tear fall quickly down Ruth 's cheek , but she do not speak . she could not put into word the sense she be just begin to entertain of the estimation in which she be henceforward to be hold . she think he would be as much grieve as she be at what have take place that morning ; she fancy she should sink in his opinion if she tell he how other regard she ; besides , it seem ungenerous to dilate upon the suffering of which he be the cause . 

 " I will not , " think she , " embitter his life ; I will try and be cheerful . I must not think of myself so much . if I can but make he happy , what need I care for chance speech ? " 

 accordingly , she make every effort possible to be as light - hearted as he be ; but , somehow , the moment she relax , thought would intrude , and wonder would force themselves upon her mind ; so that altogether she be not the gay and bewitch companion Mr Bellingham have previously find she . 

 they saunter out for a walk . the path they choose lead to a wood on the side of a hill , and they enter , glad of the shade of the tree . at first , it appear like any common grove , but they soon come to a deep descent , on the summit of which they stand , look down on the tree - top , which be softly wave far beneath their foot . there be a path lead sharp down , and they follow it ; the ledge of rock make it almost like go down step , and their walk grow into a bounding , and their bounding into a run , before they reach the low plane . a green gloom reign there ; it be the still hour of noon ; the little bird be quiet in some leafy shade . they go on a few yard , and then they come to a circular pool overshadow by the tree , whose high bough have be beneath their foot a few minute before . the pond be hardly below the surface of the ground , and there be nothing like a bank on any side . a heron be stand there motionless , but when he see they he flap his wing and slowly rise , and soar above the green height of the wood up into the very sky itself , for at that depth the tree appear to touch the round white cloud which brood over the earth . the speed - well grow in the shallow water of the pool , and all around its margin , but the flower be hardly see at first , so deep be the green shadow cast by the tree . in the very middle of the pond the sky be mirror clear and dark , a blue which look as if a black void lie behind . 

 " oh , there be water - lily , " say Ruth , her eye catch on the farth side . " I must go and get some . " 

 " no ; I will get they for you . the ground be spongy all round there . sit still , Ruth ; this heap of grass will make a capital seat . " 

 he go round , and she wait quietly for his return . when he come back he take off her bonnet , without speak , and begin to place his flower in her hair . she be quite still while he arrange her coronet , look up in his face with love eye , with a peaceful composure . she know that he be pleased from his manner , which have the joyousness of a child play with a new toy , and she do not think twice of his occupation . it be pleasant to forget everything except his pleasure . when he have deck she out , he say : 

 " there , Ruth ! now you will do . come and look at yourself in the pond . here , where there be no weed . come . " 

 she obey , and could not help see her own loveliness ; it give she a sense of satisfaction for an instant , as the sight of any other beautiful object would have do , but she never think of associate it with herself . she know that she be beautiful ; but that seem abstract , and remove from herself . her existence be in feeling , and thinking , and loving . 

 down in that green hollow they be quite in harmony . her beauty be all that Mr Bellingham care for , and it be supreme . it be all he recognise of she , and he be proud of it . she stand in her white dress against the tree which grow around ; her face be flush into a brilliancy of colour which resemble that of a rose in June ; the great heavy white flower droop on either side of her beautiful head , and if her brown hair be a little disorder , the very disorder only seem to add a grace . she please he more by look so lovely than by all her tender endeavour to fall in with his vary humour . 

 but when they leave the wood , and Ruth have take out her flower , and resume her bonnet , as they come near the inn , the simple thought of give he pleasure be not enough to secure Ruth 's peace . she become pensive and sad , and could not rally into gaiety . 

 " really , Ruth , " say he , that evening , " you must not encourage yourself in this habit of fall into melancholy revery without any cause . you have be sigh twenty time during the last half - hour . do be a little cheerful . remember , I have no companion but you in this out - of - the - way place . " 

 " I be very sorry , sir , " say Ruth , her eye fill with tear ; and then she remember that it be very dull for he to be alone with she , heavy - hearted as she have be all day . she say in a sweet , penitent tone : 

 " would you be so kind as to teach I one of those game at card you be speak about yesterday , sir ? I would do my good to learn . " 

 her soft , murmur voice win its way . they ring for the card , and he soon forget that there be such a thing as depression or gloom in the world , in the pleasure of teach such a beautiful ignoramus the mystery of card - playing . 

 " there ! " say he , at last , " that be enough for one lesson . do you know , little goose , your blunder have make I laugh myself into one of the bad headache I have have for year . " 

 he throw himself on the sofa , and in an instant she be by his side . 

 " let I put my cool hand on your forehead , " she beg ; " that use to do mamma good . " 

 he lie still , his face away from the light , and not speak . presently he fall asleep . Ruth put out the candle , and sit patiently by he for a long time , fancy he would awaken refresh . the room grow cool in the night air ; but Ruth dare not rouse he from what appear to be sound , restore slumber . she cover he with her shawl , which she have throw over a chair on come in from their twilight ramble . she have ample time to think ; but she try to banish thought . at last , his breathing become quick and oppress , and , after listen to it for some minute with increase affright , Ruth venture to waken he . he seem stupified and shivery . Ruth become more and more terrified ; all the household be asleep except one servant - girl , who be weary out of what little English she have knowledge of in more waking hour , and she could only answer , " Iss , indeed , ma'am , " to any question put to she by Ruth . 

 she sit by the bedside all night long . he moan and toss , but never speak sensibly . it be a new form of illness to the miserable Ruth . her yesterday 's suffering go into the black distance of long - past year . the present be all - in - all . when she hear people stir , she go in search of Mrs Morgan , whose shrewd , sharp manner , unsoftene by inward respect for the poor girl , have awe Ruth even when Mr Bellingham be by to protect she . 

 " Mrs Morgan , " say she , sit down in the little parlour appropriate to the landlady , for she feel her strength suddenly desert her " Mrs Morgan , I be afraid Mr Bellingham be very ill ; " here she burst into tear , but instantly check herself , " oh , what must I do ? " continue she ; " I do not   think he have know anything all through the night , and he look so strange and wild this morning . " 

 she gaze up into Mrs Morgan 's face , as if read an oracle . 

 " indeed , miss , ma'am , and it be a very awkward thing . but do not   cry , that can do no good , ' deed it can not . I will go and see the poor young man myself , and then I can judge if a doctor be want . " 

 Ruth follow Mrs Morgan upstairs . when they enter the sick - room Mr Bellingham be sit up in bed , look wildly about he , and as he see they , he exclaim : 

 " Ruth ! Ruth ! come here ; I will not   be leave alone ! " and then he fall down exhausted on the pillow . Mrs Morgan go up and speak to he , but he do not answer or take any notice . 

 " I will send for Mr Jones , my dear , ' deed and I will ; we will have he here in a couple of hour , please God . " 

 " oh , can not   he come soon ? " ask Ruth , wild with terror . 

 " ' deed no ; he live at Llangl s when he be at home , and that be seven mile away , and he may be go a round eight or nine mile on the other side Llangl s ; but I will send a boy on the pony directly . " 

 say this , Mrs Morgan leave Ruth alone . there be nothing to be do , for Mr Bellingham have again fall into a heavy sleep . sound of daily life begin , bell rang , breakfast - service clatter up and down the passage , and Ruth sit on shiver by the bedside in that darken room . Mrs Morgan send her breakfast upstairs by a chambermaid , but Ruth motion it away in her sick agony , and the girl have no right to urge she to partake of it . that alone break the monotony of the long morning . she hear the sound of merry party set out on excursion , on horseback or in carriage ; and once , stiff and wearied , she steal to the window , and look out on one side of the blind ; but the day look bright and discordant to her aching , anxious heart . the gloom of the darken room be well and more befitting . 

 it be some hour after he be summon before the doctor make his appearance . he question his patient , and , receive no coherent answer , he ask Ruth concern the symptom ; but when she question he in turn he only shake his head and look grave . he make a sign to Mrs Morgan to follow he out of the room , and they go down to her parlour , leave Ruth in a depth of despair , low than she could have think it possible there remain for she to experience , an hour before . 

 " I be afraid this be a bad case , " say Mr Jones to Mrs Morgan in Welsh . " a brain - fever have evidently set in . " 

 " poor young gentleman ! poor young man ! he look the very picture of health ! " 

 " that very appearance of robustness will , in all probability , make his disorder more violent . however , we must hope for the good , Mrs Morgan . who be to attend upon he ? he will require careful nursing . be that young lady his sister ? she look too young to be his wife ? " 

 " no , indeed ! gentleman like you must know , Mr Jones , that we can not   always look too closely into the way of young man who come to our house . not but what I be sorry for she , for she be an innocent , inoffensive young creature . I always think it right , for my own moral , to put a little scorn into my manner when such as she come to stay here ; but , indeed , she be so gentle , I have   find it hard work to show the proper contempt . " 

 she would have go on to her inattentive listener if she have not hear a low tap at the door , which recall she from her morality , and Mr Jones from his consideration of the necessary prescription . 

 " come in ! " say Mrs Morgan , sharply . and Ruth come in . she be white and tremble ; but she stand in that dignity which strong feeling , keep down by self - command , always impart . 

 " I wish you , sir , to be so kind as to tell I , clearly and distinctly , what I must do for Mr Bellingham . every direction you give I shall be most carefully attend to . you speak about leech I can put they on , and see about they . tell I everything , sir , that you wish to have do ! " 

 her manner be calm and serious , and her countenance and deportment show that the occasion be call out strength sufficient to meet it . Mr Jones speak with a deference which he have not think of use upstairs , even while he suppose she to be the sister of the invalid . Ruth listen gravely ; she repeat some of the injunction , in order that she might be sure that she fully comprehend they , and then , bow , leave the room . 

 " she be no common person , " say Mr Jones . " still she be too young to have the responsibility of such a serious case . have you any idea where his friend live , Mrs Morgan ? " 

 " indeed and I have . his mother , as haughty a lady as you would wish to see , come travel through Wales last year ; she stop here , and , I warrant you , nothing be good enough for she ; she be real quality . she leave some clothe and book behind she   for the maid be almost as fine as the mistress , and little thought of see after her lady 's clothe , have a taste for go to see scenery along with the man - servant , and we have several letter from she . I have they lock in the drawer in the bar , where I keep such thing . " 

 " well ! I should recommend your writing to the lady , and tell she her son 's state . " 

 " it would be a favour , Mr Jones , if you would just write it yourself . english writing come so strange to my pen . " 

 the letter be write , and , in order to save time , Mr Jones take it to the Llangl s post - office . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VII 

 the Crisis Watching and Waiting 
 

 Ruth put away every thought of the past or future ; everything that could unfit she for the duty of the present . exceed love supply the place of experience . she never leave the room after the first day ; she force herself to eat , because his service need her strength . she do not indulge in any tear , because the weeping she long for would make she less able to attend upon he . she watch , and wait , and pray : pray with an utter forgetfulness of self , only with a consciousness that God be all - powerful , and that he , whom she love so much , need the aid of the Mighty one . 

 Day and night , the summer night , seem merge into one . she lose count of time in the hushed and darken room . one morning Mrs Morgan beckon she out ; and she steal on tiptoe into the dazzle gallery , on one side of which the bedroom open . 

 " she be come , " whisper Mrs Morgan , look very much excited , and forget that Ruth have never hear that Mrs Bellingham have be summon . 

 " who be come ? " ask Ruth . the idea of Mrs Mason flash through her mind but with a more terrible , because a more vague dread , she hear that it be his mother ; the mother of whom he have always speak as a person whose opinion be to be regard more than that of any other individual . 

 " what must I do ? will she be angry with I ? " say she , relapse into her child - like dependence on other ; and feel that even Mrs Morgan be some one to stand between she and Mrs Bellingham . 

 Mrs Morgan herself be a little perplexed . her morality be rather shocked at the idea of a proper real lady like Mrs Bellingham discover that she have wink at the connexion between her son and Ruth . she be quite inclined to encourage Ruth in her inclination to shrink out of Mrs Bellingham 's observation , an inclination which arise from no definite consciousness of have do wrong , but principally from the representation she have always hear of the lady 's awfulness . Mrs Bellingham sweep into her son 's room as if she be unconscious what poor young creature have lately haunt it ; while Ruth hurry into some unoccupied bedroom , and , alone there , she feel her self - restraint suddenly give way , and burst into the sad , most utterly wretched weep she have ever know . she be wear out with watching , and exhaust by passionate crying , and she lie down on the bed and fall asleep . the day pass on ; she slumber unnoticed and unregarded ; she awake late in the evening with a sense of have do wrong in sleep so long ; the strain upon her responsibility have not yet leave she . Twilight be close fast around ; she wait until it have become night , and then she steal down to Mrs Morgan 's parlour . 

 " if you please , may I come in ? " ask she . 

 Jenny Morgan be do up the hieroglyphic which she call her account ; she answer sharply enough , but it be a permission to enter , and Ruth be thankful for it . 

 " will you tell I how he be ? do you think I may go back to he ? " 

 " no , indeed , that you may not . Nest , who have make his room tidy these many day , be not fit to go in now . Mrs Bellingham have bring her own maid , and the family nurse , and Mr Bellingham 's man ; such a tribe of servant and no end to package ; water - bed come by the carrier , and a doctor from London come down to - morrow , as if feather - bed and Mr Jones be not good enough . why , she will not   let a soul of we into the room ; there be no chance for you ! " 

 Ruth sigh . " how be he ? " she inquire , after a pause . 

 " how can I tell indeed , when I be not allow to go near he ? Mr Jones say to - night be a turning point ; but I doubt it , for it be four day since he be take ill , and who ever hear of a sick person take a turn on an even number of day ; it be always on the third , or the fifth , or seventh , or so on . he will not turn till to - morrow night , take my word for it , and their fine London doctor will get all the credit , and honest Mr Jones will be throw aside . I do not   think he will get well myself , though Gelert do not howl for nothing . my patience ! what be the matter with the girl ? lord , child , you be never go to faint , and be ill on my hand ? " her sharp voice recall Ruth from the sick unconsciousness that have be creep over she as she listen to the latter part of this speech . she sit down and could not speak the room whirl round and round her white feebleness touch Mrs Morgan 's heart . 

 " you have   have no tea , I guess . indeed , and the girl be very careless . " she ring the bell with energy , and second she pull by go to the door and shout out sharp direction , in Welsh , to Nest and Gwen , and three or four other rough , kind , slatternly servant . 

 they bring her tea , which be comfortable , accord to the idea of comfort prevalent in that rude , hospitable place ; there be plenty to eat , too much , indeed , for it revolt the appetite it be intend to provoke . but the heartiness with which the kind , rosy waiter press she to eat , and the scolding Mrs Morgan give she when she find the buttered toast untouched   toast on which she have herself desire that the butter might not be spar , do Ruth more good than the tea . she begin to hope , and to long for the morning when hope might have become certainty . it be all in vain that she be tell that the room she have be in all day be at her service ; she do not say a word , but she be not go to bed that night , of all night in the year , when life or death hung tremble in the balance . she go into the bedroom till the bustling house be still , and hear busy foot pass to and fro in the room she might not enter ; and voice , imperious , though hush down to a whisper , ask for innumerable thing . then there be silence ; and when she think that all be dead asleep , except the watcher , she steal out into the gallery . on the other side be two window , cut into the thick stone wall , and flower pot be place on the shelf thus form , where great , untrimmed , straggle geranium grow , and strove to reach the light . the window near Mr Bellingham 's door be open ; the soft , warm - scented night air come sigh in in faint gust , and then be still . it be summer ; there be no black darkness in the twenty - four hour ; only the light grow dusky , and colour disappear from object , of which the shape and form remain distinct . a soft grey oblong of bar light fall on the flat wall opposite to the window , and deep grey shadow mark out the tracery of the plant , more graceful thus than in reality . Ruth crouch where no light fall . she sit on the ground close by the door ; her whole existence be absorb in listening ; all be still ; it be only her heart beat with the strong , heavy , regular sound of a hammer . she wish she could stop its rushing , incessant clang . she hear a rustle of a silken gown , and know it ought not to have be wear in a sick - room ; for her sens seem to have pass into the keeping of the invalid , and to feel only as he feel . the noise be probably occasion by some change of posture in the watcher inside , for it be once more dead - still . the soft wind outside sink with a low , long , distant moan among the winding of the hill , and lose itself there , and come no more again . but Ruth 's heart beat loud . she rise with as little noise as if she be a vision , and creep to the open window to try and lose the nervous listening for the ever - recur sound . out beyond , under the calm sky , veil with a mist rather than with a cloud , rise the high , dark outline of the mountain , shut in that village as if it lie in a nest . they stand , like giant , solemnly watch for the end of Earth and Time . here and there a black round shadow remind Ruth of some " Cwm , " or hollow , where she and her lover have ramble in sun and in gladness . she then think the land enchant into everlasting brightness and happiness ; she fancy , then , that into a region so lovely no bale or woe could enter , but would be charm away and disappear before the sight of the glorious guardian mountain . now she know the truth , that earth have no barrier which avail against agony . it come lightning - like down from heaven , into the mountain house and the town garret ; into the palace and into the cottage . the garden lie close under the house ; a bright spot enough by day ; for in that soil , whatever be plant grow and blossom in spite of neglect . the white rose glimmer out in the dusk all the night through ; the red be lose in shadow . between the low boundary of the garden and the hill sweep one or two green meadow ; Ruth look into the grey darkness till she trace each separate wave of outline . then she hear a little restless bird chirp out its wakefulness from a nest in the ivy round the wall of the house . but the mother - bird spread her soft feather , and hush it into silence . presently , however , many little bird begin to scent the come dawn , and rustle among the leaf , and chirrup loud and clear . just above the horizon , too , the mist become a silvery grey cloud hang on the edge of the world ; presently it turn shimmer white ; and then , in an instant , it flush into rose , and the mountain - top spring into heaven , and bath in the presence of the shadow of God . with a bound , the sun of a molten fiery red come above the horizon , and immediately thousand of little bird sing out for joy , and a soft chorus of mysterious , glad murmur come forth from the earth ; the low whisper wind leave its hiding - place among the cleft and hollow of the hill , and wander among the rustle herb and tree , wake the flower - bud to the life of another day . Ruth give a sigh of relief that the night be over and go ; for she know that soon suspense would be end , and the verdict know , whether for life or for death . she grow faint and sick with anxiety ; it almost seem as if she must go into the room and learn the truth . then she hear movement , but they be not sharp or rapid , as if prompt by any emergency ; then , again , it be still . she sit curl up upon the floor , with her head throw back against the wall , and her hand clasp round her knee . she have yet to wait . meanwhile , the invalid be slowly rouse himself from a long , deep , sound , health - give sleep . his mother have sit by he the night through , and be now dare to change her position for the first time ; she be even venture to give direction in a low voice to the old nurse , who have doze away in an arm - chair , ready to obey any summon of her mistress . Mrs Bellingham go on tiptoe towards the door , and chide herself because her stiff , weary limb make some slight noise . she have an irrepressible longing for a few minute ' change of scene after her night of watch . she feel that the crisis be over ; and the relief to her mind make she conscious of every bodily feeling and irritation , which have pass unheeded as long as she have be in suspense . 

 she slowly open the door . Ruth spring upright at the first sound of the creak handle . her very lip be stiff and unpliable with the force of the blood which rush to her head . it seem as if she could not form word . she stand right before Mrs Bellingham . " how be he , madam ? " 

 Mrs Bellingham be for a moment surprise at the white apparition which seem to rise out of the ground . but her quick , proud mind understand it all in an instant . this be the girl , then , whose profligacy have lead her son astray ; have raise up barrier in the way of her favourite scheme of his marriage with Miss Duncombe ; nay , this be the real cause of his illness , his mortal danger at this present time , and of her bitter , keen anxiety . if , under any circumstance , Mrs Bellingham could have be guilty of the ill - breeding of not answer a question , it be now ; and for a moment she be tempt to pass on in silence . Ruth could not wait ; she speak again : 

 " for the love of God , madam , speak ! how be he ? will he live ? " 

 if she do not answer she , she think the creature be desperate enough to force her way into his room . so she speak . 

 " he have sleep well : he be well . " 

 " oh ! my God , I thank Thee , " murmur Ruth , sink back against the wall . 

 it be too much to hear this wretched girl thank God for her son 's life ; as if , in fact , she have any lot or part in he , and to dare to speak to the Almighty on her son 's behalf ! Mrs Bellingham look at she with cold , contemptuous eye , whose glance be like ice - bolt , and make Ruth shiver up away from they . 

 " young woman , if you have any propriety or decency leave , I trust that you will not dare to force yourself into his room . " 

 she stand for a moment as if await an answer , and half expect it to be a defiance . but she do not understand Ruth . she do not imagine the faithful trustfulness of her heart . Ruth believe that if Mr Bellingham be alive and likely to live , all be well . when he want she , he would send for she , ask for she , yearn for she , till every one would yield before his steadfast will . at present she imagine that he be probably too weak to care or know who be about he ; and though it would have be an infinite delight to she to hover and brood around he , yet it be of he she think and not of herself . she gently draw herself on one side to make way for Mrs Bellingham to pass . 

 by - and - by Mrs Morgan come up . Ruth be still near the door , from which it seem as if she could not tear herself away . 

 " indeed , miss , and you must not hang about the door in this way ; it be not pretty manner . Mrs Bellingham have be speak very sharp and cross about it , and I shall lose the character of my inn if people take to talk as she do . do not I give you a room last night to keep in , and never be see or hear of ; and do I not tell you what a particular lady Mrs Bellingham be , but you must come out here right in her way ? indeed , it be not pretty , nor grateful to I , Jenny Morgan , and that I must say . " 

 Ruth turn away like a chidden child . Mrs Morgan follow she to her room , scold as she go ; and then , have clear her heart after she will not by utter hasty word , her real kindness make she add , in a softened tone : 

 " you stop up here like a good girl . I will send you your breakfast by - and - by , and let you know from time to time how he be ; and you can go out for a walk , you know ; but if you do , I will take it as a favour if you will go out by the side door . it will , maybe , save scandal . " 

 all that day long , Ruth keep herself close prisoner in the room to which Mrs Morgan accord she ; all that day , and many succeed day . but at night , when the house be still , and even the little brown mouse have gather up the crumb , and dart again to their hole , Ruth steal out , and creep to his door to catch , if she could , the sound of his beloved voice . she could tell by its tone how he feel , and how he be get on , as well as any of the watcher in the room . she yearn and pin to see he once more ; but she have reason herself down into something like patience . when he be well enough to leave his room , when he have not always one of the nurse with he , then he would send for she , and she would tell he how very patient she have be for his dear sake . but it be long to wait even with this thought of the manner in which the waiting would end . poor Ruth ! her faith be only build up vain castle in the air ; they tower up into heaven , it be true , but , after all , they be but vision . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 Mrs Bellingham " do the Thing handsomely " 
 

 if Mr Bellingham do not get rapidly well , it be more owing to the morbid querulous fancy attendant on great weakness than from any unfavourable medical symptom . but he turn away with peevish loathing from the very sight of food , prepare in the slovenly manner which have almost disgust he when he be well . it be of no use tell he that Simpson , his mother 's maid , have superintend the preparation at every point . he offend she by detect something offensive and to be avoid in her dainty mess , and make Mrs Morgan mutter many a hasty speech , which , however , Mrs Bellingham think it well not to hear until her son should be strong enough to travel . 

 " I think you be well to - day , " say she , as his man wheel his sofa to the bedroom window . " we shall get you downstairs to - morrow . " 

 " if it be to get away from this abominable place , I could go down to - day ; but I believe I be to be keep prisoner here for ever . I shall never get well here , I be sure . " 

 he sink back on his sofa in impatient despair . the surgeon be announce , and eagerly question by Mrs Bellingham as to the possibility of her son 's removal ; and he , have hear the same anxiety for the same end express by Mrs Morgan in the region below , throw no great obstacle in the way . after the doctor have take his departure , Mrs Bellingham clear her throat several time . Mr Bellingham know the prelude of old , and wince with nervous annoyance . 

 " Henry , there be something I must speak to you about ; an unpleasant subject , certainly , but one which have be force upon I by the very girl herself ; you must be aware to what I refer without give I the pain of explain myself . " 

 Mr Bellingham turn himself sharply round to the wall , and prepare himself for a lecture by conceal his face from her notice ; but she herself be in too nervous a state to be capable of observation . 

 " of course , " she continue , " it be my wish to be as blind to the whole affair as possible , though you can not   imagine how Mrs Mason have blazon it abroad ; all Fordham ring with it ; but of course it could not be pleasant , or , indeed , I may say correct , for I to be aware that a person of such improper character be under the same I beg your pardon , dear Henry , what do you say ? " 

 " Ruth be no improper character , mother ; you do her injustice ! " 

 " my dear boy , you do not   mean to uphold she as a paragon of virtue ! " 

 " no , mother , but I lead she wrong ; I " 

 " we will let all discussion into the cause or duration of her present character drop , if you please , " say Mrs Bellingham , with the sort of dignified authority which retain a certain power over her son a power which originate in childhood , and which he only defy when he be rouse into passion . he be too weak in body to oppose himself to she , and fight the ground inch by inch . " as I have imply , I do not wish to ascertain your share of blame ; from what I see of her one morning , I be convinced of she forward , intrusive manner , utterly without shame , or even common modesty . " 

 " what be you refer to ? " ask Mr Bellingham , sharply . 

 " why , when you be at the bad , and I have be watch you all night , and have just go out in the morning for a breath of fresh air , this girl push herself before I , and insist upon speak to I . I really have to send Mrs Morgan to she before I could return to your room . a more impudent , harden manner , I never see . " 

 " Ruth be neither impudent nor harden ; she be ignorant enough , and might offend from know no well . " 

 he be get weary of the discussion , and wish it have never be begin . from the time he have become conscious of his mother 's presence , he have feel the dilemma he be in in regard to Ruth , and various plan have directly cross his brain ; but it have be so troublesome to weigh and consider they all properly , that they have be put aside to be settle when he grow strong . but this difficulty in which he be place by his connexion with Ruth , associate the idea of she in his mind with annoyance and angry regret at the whole affair . he wish , in the languid way in which he wish and feel everything not immediately relate to his daily comfort , that he have never see she . it be a most awkward , a most unfortunate affair . notwithstanding this annoyance connect with and arise out of Ruth , he would not submit to hear she abuse ; and something in his manner impress this on his mother , for she immediately change her mode of attack . 

 " we may as well drop all dispute as to the young woman 's manner ; but I suppose you do not mean to defend your connexion with she ; I suppose you be not so lost to all sense of propriety as to imagine it fit or desirable that your mother and this degraded girl should remain under the same roof , liable to meet at any hour of the day ? " she wait for an answer , but no answer come . 

 " I ask you a simple question ; be it , or be it not desirable ? " 

 " I suppose it be not , " he reply , gloomily . 

 " and I suppose , from your manner , that you think the difficulty would be well solve by my take my departure , and leave you with your vicious companion ? " 

 again no answer , but inward and increase annoyance , of which Mr Bellingham consider Ruth the cause . at length he speak . 

 " Mother , you be not help I in my difficulty . I have no desire to banish you , nor to hurt you , after all your care for I . Ruth have not be so much to blame as you imagine , that I must say ; but I do not wish to see she again , if you can tell I how to arrange it otherwise , without behave unhandsomely . only spare I all this worry while I be so weak . I put myself in your hand . dismiss she , as you wish it ; but let it be do handsomely , and let I hear no more about it ; I can not bear it ; let I have a quiet life , without be lecture while I be pen up here , and unable to shake off unpleasant thought . " 

 " my dear Henry , rely upon I . " 

 " no more , mother ; it be a bad business , and I can hardly avoid blame myself in the matter ; I do not   want to dwell upon it . " 

 " do not   be too severe in your self - reproach while you be so feeble , dear Henry ; it be right to repent , but I have no doubt in my own mind she lead you wrong with her artifice . but , as you say , everything should be do handsomely . I confess I be deeply grieve when I first hear of the affair , but since I have see the girl well ! I will say no more about she , since I see it displease you ; but I be thankful to God that you see the error of your way . " 

 she sit silent , think for a little while , and then send for her writing - case , and begin to write . her son become restless , and nervously irritated . 

 " Mother , " he say , " this affair worry I to death . I can not shake off the thought of it . " 

 " leave it to I , I will arrange it satisfactorily . " 

 " could we not leave to - night ? I should not be so haunted by this annoyance in another place . I dread see she again , because I fear a scene ; and yet I believe I ought to see she , in order to explain . " 

 " you must not think of such a thing , Henry , " say she , alarm at the very idea . " soon than that , we will leave in half an hour , and try to get to Pen tre Voelas to - night . it be not yet three , and the evening be very long . Simpson should stay and finish the packing ; she could go straight to London and meet we there . Macdonald and nurse could go with we . could you bear twenty mile , do you think ? " 

 anything to get rid of his uneasiness . he feel that he be not behave as he should do , to Ruth , though the really right never enter his head . but it would extricate he from his present dilemma , and save he many lecture ; he know that his mother , always liberal where money be concern , would " do the thing handsomely , " and it would always be easy to write and give Ruth what explanation he feel inclined , in a day or two ; so he consent , and soon lose some of his uneasiness in watch the bustle of the preparation for their departure . 

 all this time Ruth be quietly spend in her room , beguile the waiting , weary hour , with picture of the meeting at the end . her room look to the back , and be in a side - wing away from the principal state apartment , consequently she be not rouse to suspicion by any of the commotion ; but , indeed , if she have hear the banging of door , the sharp direction , the carriage - wheel , she would still not have suspect the truth ; her own love be too faithful . 

 it be four o'clock and past , when some one knock at her door , and , on enter , give she a note , which Mrs Bellingham have leave . that lady have find some difficulty in word it , so as to satisfy herself , but it be as follow : 
 

 my son , on recover from his illness , be , I thank God , happily conscious of the sinful way in which he have be live with you . by his earnest desire , and in order to avoid see you again , we be on the point of leave this place ; but before I go , I wish to exhort you to repentance , and to remind you that you will not have your own guilt alone upon your head , but that of any young man whom you may succeed in entrap into vice . I shall pray that you may turn to an honest life , and I strongly recommend you , if indeed you be not ' dead in trespass and sin , ' to enter some penitentiary . in accordance with my son 's wish , I forward you in this envelope a bank - note of fifty pound . 

 Margaret Bellingham . 
 

 be this the end of all ? have he , indeed , go ? she start up , and ask this last question of the servant , who , half guess at the purport of the note , have linger about the room , curious to see the effect produce . 

 " Iss , indeed , miss ; the carriage drive from the door as I come upstairs . you will see it now on the Yspytty road , if you will please to come to the window of No . 24 . " 

 Ruth start up , and follow the chambermaid . aye , there it be , slowly wind up the steep white road , on which it seem to move at a snail 's pace . 

 she might overtake he she might she might speak one farewell word to he , print his face on her heart with a last look nay , when he see she he might retract , and not utterly , for ever , leave she . thus she think ; and she fly back to her room , and snatch up her bonnet , run , tie the string with her tremble hand as she go down the stair , out at the near door , little heed the angry word of Mrs Morgan ; for the hostess , more irritated at Mrs Bellingham 's severe upbraid at parting , than mollify by her ample payment , be offend by the circumstance of Ruth , in her wild haste , pass through the prohibit front door . 

 but Ruth be away before Mrs Morgan have finish her speech , out and away , scud along the road , think - lose in the breathless rapidity of her motion . though her heart and head beat almost to burst , what do it signify if she could but overtake the carriage ? it be a nightmare , constantly evade the most passionate wish and endeavour , and constantly gain ground . every time it be visible it be in fact more distant , but Ruth would not believe it . if she could but gain the summit of that weary , everlasting hill , she believe that she could run again , and would soon be nigh upon the carriage . as she run , she pray with wild eagerness ; she pray that she might see his face once more , even if she die on the spot before he . it be one of those prayer which God be too merciful to grant ; but despairing and wild as it be , Ruth put her soul into it , and pray it again , and yet again . 

 wave above wave of the ever - rise hill be gain , be cross , and at last Ruth struggle up to the very top and stand on the bare table of moor , brown and purple , stretch far away till it be lose in the haze of the summer afternoon ; and the white road be all flat before she , but the carriage she seek and the figure she seek have disappear . there be no human being there ; a few wild , black - faced mountain sheep quietly graze near the road , as if it be long since they have be disturb by the passing of any vehicle , be all the life she see on the bleak moorland . 

 she throw herself down on the ling by the side of the road in despair . her only hope be to die , and she believe she be die . she could not think ; she could believe anything . surely life be a horrible dream , and God would mercifully awaken she from it . she have no penitence , no consciousness of error or offence ; no knowledge of any one circumstance but that he be go . yet afterwards , long afterwards , she remember the exact motion of a bright green beetle busily meander among the wild thyme near she , and she recall the musical , balanced , waver drop of a skylark into her nest near the heather - bed where she lay . the sun be sink low , the hot air have cease to quiver near the hotter earth , when she bethink she once more of the note which she have impatiently throw down before half master its content . " oh , perhaps , " she think , " I have be too hasty . there may be some word of explanation from he on the other side of the page , to which , in my blind anguish , I never turn . I will go and find it . " 

 she lift herself heavily and stiffly from the crush heather . she stand dizzy and confused with her change of posture ; and be so unable to move at first , that her walk be but slow and tottering ; but , by - and - by , she be task and goad by thought which force she into rapid motion , as if , by it , she could escape from her agony . she come down on the level ground , just as many gay or peaceful group be saunter leisurely home with heart at ease ; with low laugh and quiet smile , and many an exclamation at the beauty of the summer evening . 

 ever since her adventure with the little boy and his sister , Ruth have habitually avoid encounter these happy innocent , may I call they ? these happy fellow - mortal ! and even now , the habit ground on sorrowful humiliation have power over she ; she pause , and then , on look back , she see more people who have come into the main road from a side path . she open a gate into a pasture - field , and creep up to the hedge - bank until all should have pass by , and she could steal into the inn unseen . she sit down on the slop turf by the root of an old hawthorn - tree which grow in the hedge ; she be still tearless with hot burn eye ; she hear the merry walker pass by ; she hear the footstep of the village child as they run along to their evening play ; she see the small black cow come into the field after be milk ; and life seem yet abroad . when would the world be still and dark , and fit for such a deserted , desolate creature as she be ? even in her hiding - place she be not long at peace . the little child , with their curious eye peer here and there , have peep through the hedge , and through the gate , and now they gather from all the four corner of the hamlet , and crowd round the gate ; and one more adventurous than the rest have run into the field to cry , " Gi ' I a halfpenny , " which set the example to every little one , emulous of his boldness ; and there , where she sit , low on the ground , and longing for the sure hiding - place earth give to the weary , the child keep run in , and push one another forwards , and laugh . poor thing ; their time have not come for understand what sorrow be . Ruth would have beg they to leave she alone , and not madden she utterly ; but they know no English save the one eternal " Gi ' I a halfpenny . " she feel in her heart that there be no pity anywhere . suddenly , while she thus doubt God , a shadow fall across her garment , on which her miserable eye be bent . she look up . the deformed gentleman she have twice before see , stand there . he have be attract by the noisy little crowd , and have question they in Welsh , but not understand enough of the language to comprehend their answer , he have obey their sign , and enter the gate to which they point . there he see the young girl whom he have notice at first for her innocent beauty , and the second time for the idea he have gain respect her situation ; there he see she , crouch up like some hunt creature , with a wild , scared look of despair , which almost make her lovely face seem fierce ; he see her dress soil and dim , her bonnet crush and batter with her tossing to and fro on the moorland bed ; he see the poor , lost wanderer , and when he see she , he have compassion on she . 

 there be some look of heavenly pity in his eye , as gravely and sadly they meet her upturned gaze , which touch her stony heart . still look at he , as if draw some good influence from he , she say low and mournfully , " he have leave I , sir ! sir , he have indeed he have go and leave I ! " 

 before he could speak a word to comfort she , she have burst into the wildest , dreariest cry ever mortal cry . the settle form of the event , when put into word , go sharp to her heart ; her moan and sobs wrung his soul ; but as no speech of his could be hear , if he have be able to decide what good to say , he stand by she in apparent calmness , while she , wretched , wail and utter her woe . but when she lie wear out , and stupefy into silence , she hear he say to himself , in a low voice : 

 " oh , my God ! for Christ 's sake , pity she ! " 

 Ruth lift up her eye , and look at he with a dim perception of the meaning of his word . she regard he fixedly in a dreamy way , as if they strike some chord in her heart , and she be listen to its echo ; and so it be . his pitiful look , or his word , remind she of the childish day when she kneel at her mother 's knee , and she be only conscious of a straining , longing desire to recall it all . 

 he let she take her time , partly because he be powerfully affect himself by all the circumstance , and by the sad pale face upturned to his ; and partly by an instinctive consciousness that the soft patience be require . but suddenly she startle he , as she herself be startle into a keen sense of the suffering agony of the present ; she spring up and push he aside , and go rapidly towards the gate of the field . he could not move as quickly as most man , but he put forth his utmost speed . he follow across the road , on to the rocky common ; but as he go along , with his uncertain gait , in the dusk gloame , he stumble , and fall over some sharp project stone . the acute pain which shoot up his back force a short cry from he ; and , when bird and beast be hush into rest and the stillness of the night be over all , a high - pitch sound , like the voice of pain , be carry far in the quiet air . Ruth , speed on in her despair , hear the sharp utterance , and stop suddenly short . it do what no remonstrance could have do ; it call she out of herself . the tender nature be in she still , in that hour when all good angel seem to have abandon she . in the old day she could never bear to hear or see bodily suffering in any of God 's mean creature , without try to succour they ; and now , in her rush to the awful death of the suicide , she stay her wild step , and turn to find from whom that sharp sound of anguish have issue . 

 he lie among the white stone , too faint with pain to move , but with an agony in his mind far keener than any bodily pain , as he think that by his unfortunate fall he have lose all chance of save she . he be almost overpower by his intense thankfulness when he see her white figure pause , and stand listening , and turn again with slow footstep , as if search for some lose thing . he could hardly speak , but he make a sound which , though his heart be inexpressibly glad , be like a groan . she come quickly towards he . 

 " I be hurt , " say he ; " do not leave I ; " his disabled and tender frame be overcome by the accident and the previous emotion , and he faint away . Ruth fly to the little mountain stream , the dash sound of whose water have be tempt she , but a moment before , to seek forgetfulness in the deep pool into which they fall . she make a basin of she joined hand , and carry enough of the cold fresh water back to dash into his face and restore he to consciousness . while he still keep silence , uncertain what to say well fit to induce she to listen to he , she say softly : 

 " be you well , sir ? be you very much hurt ? " 

 " not very much ; I be well . any quick movement be apt to cause I a sudden loss of power in my back , and I believe I stumble over some of these project stone . it will soon go off , and you will help I to go home , I be sure . " 

 " oh , yes ! can you go now ? I be afraid of your lie too long on this heather ; there be a heavy dew . " 

 he be so anxious to comply with her wish , and not weary out her thought for he , and so turn she back upon herself , that he try to rise . the pain be acute , and this she see . 

 " do not   hurry yourself , sir ; I can wait . " 

 then come across her mind the recollection of the business that be thus defer ; but the few homely word which have be exchange between they seem to have awaken she from her madness . she sit down by he , and , cover her face with her hand , cry mournfully and unceasingly . she forget his presence , and yet she have a consciousness that some one look for her kind office , that she be want in the world , and must not rush hastily out of it . the consciousness do not take this definite form , it do not become a thought , but it keep she still , and it be gradually soothe she . 

 " can you help I to rise now ? " say he , after a while . she do not speak , but she help he up , and then he take her arm , and she lead he tenderly through all the little velvet path , where the turf grow short and soft between the rugged stone . once more on the highway , they slowly pass along in the moonlight . he guide she by a slight motion of the arm , through the more unfrequented lane , to his lodging at the shop ; for he think for she , and conceive the pain she would have in see the light window of the inn . he leant more heavily on her arm , as they await the opening of the door . 

 " come in , " say he , not relax his hold , and yet dread to tighten it , lest she should defy restraint , and once more rush away . 

 they go slowly into the little parlour behind the shop . the bonny - look hostess , Mrs Hughes by name , make haste to light the candle , and then they see each other , face to face . the deformed gentleman look very pale , but Ruth look as if the shadow of death be upon she . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IX 

 the Storm - Spirit subdue 
 

 Mrs Hughes bustle about with many a sympathetic exclamation , now in pretty broken English , now in more fluent Welsh , which sound as soft as russian or italian , in her musical voice . Mr Benson , for that be the name of the hunchback , lie on the sofa , thinking ; while the tender Mrs Hughes make every arrangement for his relief from pain . he have lodge with she for three successive year , and she know and love he . 

 Ruth stand in the little bow - window , look out . across the moon , and over the deep blue heaven , large , torn , irregular - shape cloud go hurry , as if summon by some storm - spirit . the work they be command to do be not here ; the mighty gathering - place lie eastward , immeasurable league , and on they go , chase each other over the silent earth , now black , now silver - white at one transparent edge , now with the moon shin like Hope through their dark centre , now again with a silver lining ; and now , utterly black , they sail lower in the lift , and disappear behind the immovable mountain ; they be rush in the very direction in which Ruth have strive and struggle to go that afternoon ; they , in their wild career , would soon pass over the very spot where he   her world 's he   be lie sleep , or perhaps not sleep , perhaps think of she . the storm be in her mind , and rent and tear her purpose into form as wild and irregular as the heavenly shape she be look at . if , like they , she could pass the barrier horizon in the night , she might overtake he . 

 Mr Benson see she look , and read it partially . he see her longing gaze outward upon the free , broad world , and think that the syren water , whose deadly music yet ring in her ear , be again tempt she . he call she to he , pray that his feeble voice might have power . 

 " my dear young lady , I have much to say to you ; and God have take my strength from I now when I most need it . oh , I sin to speak so but , for his sake , I implore you to be patient here , if only till to - morrow morning . " he look at she , but her face be immovable , and she do not speak . she could not give up her hope , her chance , her liberty till to - morrow . 

 " God help I , " say he , mournfully , " my word do not touch she ; " and , still hold her hand , he sink back on the pillow . indeed , it be true that his word do not vibrate in her atmosphere . the storm - spirit rag there , and fill her heart with the thought that she be an outcast ; and the holy word , " for his sake , " be answer by the demon , who hold possession , with a blasphemous defiance of the merciful God : 

 " what have I to do with Thee ? " 

 he think of every soften influence of religion which over his own disciplined heart have power , but put they aside as useless . then the still small voice whisper , and he spake : 

 " in your mother 's name , whether she be dead or alive , I command you to stay here until I be able to speak to you . " 

 she kneel down at the foot of the sofa , and shake it with her sob . her heart be touch , and he hardly dare to speak again . at length he say : 

 " I know you will not go you could not for her sake . you will not , will you ? " 

 " no , " whisper Ruth ; and then there be a great blank in her heart . she have give up her chance . she be calm , in the utter absence of all hope . 

 " and now you will do what I tell you , " say he , gently , but , unconsciously to himself , in the tone of one who have find the hidden spell by which to rule spirit . 

 she slowly say , " yes . " but she be subdue . 

 he call Mrs Hughes . she come from her adjoining shop . 

 " you have a bedroom within your , where your daughter use to sleep , I think ? I be sure you will oblige I , and I shall consider it as a great favour , if you will allow this young lady to sleep there to - night . will you take she there now ? go , my dear . I have full trust in your promise not to leave until I can speak to you . " his voice die away to silence ; but as Ruth rise from her knee at his bidding , she look at his face through her tear . his lip be move in earnest , unspoken prayer , and she know it be for she . 

 that night , although his pain be relieve by rest , he could not sleep ; and , as in fever , the come event keep unroll themselves before he in every change and fantastic form . he meet Ruth in all possible place and way , and address she in every manner he could imagine most calculated to move and affect she to penitence and virtue . towards morning he fall asleep , but the same thought haunt his dream ; he speak , but his voice refuse to utter aloud ; and she flee , relentless , to the deep , black pool . 

 but God work in his own way . 

 the vision melt into deep , unconscious sleep . he be awaken by a knock at the door , which seem a repetition of what he have hear in his last sleep moment . 

 it be Mrs Hughes . she stand at the first word of permission within the room . 

 " please , sir , I think the young lady be very ill indeed , sir ; perhaps you would please to come to she . " 

 " how be she ill ? " say he , much alarmed . 

 " quite quiet - like , sir ; but I think she be die , that be all , indeed , sir ! " 

 " go away , I will be with you directly ! " he reply , his heart sink within he . 

 in a very short time he be stand with Mrs Hughes by Ruth 's bedside . she lie as still as if she be dead , her eye shut , her wan face numb into a fix anguish of expression . she do not speak when they speak , though after a while they think she strive to do so . but all power of motion and utterance have leave she . she be dress in everything , except her bonnet , as she have be the day before ; although sweet , thoughtful Mrs Hughes have provide she with nightgear , which lie on the little chest of drawer that serve as a dressing - table . Mr Benson lift up her arm to feel her feeble , flutter pulse ; and when he let go her hand , it fall upon the bed in a dull , heavy way , as if she be already dead . 

 " you give she some food ? " say he , anxiously , to Mrs Hughes . 

 " indeed , and I offer she the good in the house , but she shake her poor pretty head , and only ask if I would please to get she a cup of water . I bring she some milk though , and ' deed , I think she would rather have have the water ; but not to seem sour and cross , she take some milk . " by this time Mrs Hughes be fairly cry . 

 " when do the doctor come up here ? " 

 " indeed , sir , and he be up nearly every day now , the inn be so full . " 

 " I will go for he . and can you manage to undress she and lie she in bed ? open the window too , and let in the air ; if her foot be cold , put bottle of hot water to they . " 

 it be a proof of the true love , which be the nature of both , that it never cross their mind to regret that this poor young creature have be thus throw upon their hand . on the contrary , Mrs Hughes call it " a blessing . " 
 

 " it blesseth he that give , and he that take . " 
 

 

 

 CHAPTER x 

 A note and the Answer 
 

 at the inn everything be life and bustle . Mr Benson have to wait long in Mrs Morgan 's little parlour before she could come to he , and he keep grow more and more impatient . at last she make her appearance and hear his story . 

 People may talk as they will about the little respect that be pay to virtue , unaccompanie by the outward accident of wealth or station ; but I rather think it will be find that , in the long run , true and simple virtue always have its proportionate reward in the respect and reverence of every one whose esteem be worth have . to be sure , it be not reward after the way of the world as mere worldly possession be , with low obeisance and lip - service ; but all the well and more noble quality in the heart of other make ready and go forth to meet it on its approach , provide only it be pure , simple , and unconscious of its own existence . 

 Mr Benson have little thought for outward token of respect just then , nor have Mrs Morgan much time to spare ; but she smooth her ruffled brow , and calm her bustling manner , as soon as ever she see who it be that await she ; for Mr Benson be well know in the village where he have take up his summer holiday among the mountain year after year , always a resident at the shop , and seldom spend a shilling at the inn . 

 Mrs Morgan listen patiently for she . 

 " Mr Jones will come this afternoon . but it be a shame you should be trouble with such as she . I have but little time yesterday , but I guess there be something wrong , and Gwen have just be tell I her bed have not be sleep in . they be in a pretty hurry to be go yesterday , for all that the gentleman be not fit to travel , to my way of thinking ; indeed , William Wynn , the post - boy , say he be weary enough before he get to the end of that Yspytty road ; and he think they would have to rest there a day or two before they could go far than Pen tre Voelas . indeed , and anyhow , the servant be to follow they with the baggage this very morning ; and now I remember , William Wynn say they would wait for she . you would well write a note , Mr Benson , and tell they her state . " 

 it be good , though unpalatable advice . it come from one accustomed to bring excellent , if unrefined sense , to bear quickly upon any emergency , and to decide rapidly . she be , in truth , so little accustomed to have her authority question , that before Mr Benson have make up his mind , she have produce paper , pen , and ink from the drawer in her bureau , place they before he , and be go to leave the room . 

 " leave the note on this shelf , and trust I that it go by the maid . the boy that drive she there in the car shall bring you an answer back . " 

 she be go before he could rally his scatter sens enough to remember that he have not the least idea of the name of the party to whom he be to write . the quiet leisure and peace of his little study at home favour his habit of reverie and long deliberation , just as her position as mistress of an inn oblige she to quick , decisive way . 

 her advice , though good in some point , be unpalatable in other . it be true that Ruth 's condition ought to be know by those who be her friend ; but be these people to whom he be now go to write , friend ? he know there be a rich mother , and a handsome , elegant son ; and he have also some idea of the circumstance which might a little extenuate their mode of quit Ruth . he have wide enough sympathy to understand that it must have be a most painful position in which the mother have be place , on find herself under the same roof with a girl who be live with her son , as Ruth be . and yet he do not like to apply to she ; to write to the son be still more out of the question , as it seem like ask he to return . but through one or the other lie the only clue to her friend , who certainly ought to be make acquainted with her position . at length he write : 
 

 MADAM , I write to tell you of the condition of the poor young woman   here come a long pause of deliberation   who accompany your son on his arrival here , and who be leave behind on your departure yesterday . she be lie   as it appear to I   in a very dangerous state at my lodging ; and , if I may suggest , it would be kind to allow your maid to return and attend upon she until she be sufficiently recover to be restore to her friend , if , indeed , they could not come to take charge of her themselves . 

 I remain , madam , 
 your obedient servant , 

 Thurstan Benson . 
 

 the note be very unsatisfactory after all his consideration , but it be the good he could do . he make inquiry of a pass servant as to the lady 's name , direct the note , and place it on the indicate shelf . he then return to his lodging , to await the doctor 's come and the post - boy 's return . there be no alteration in Ruth ; she be as one stun into unconsciousness ; she do not move her posture , she hardly breathe . from time to time Mrs Hughes wet her mouth with some liquid , and there be a little mechanical motion of the lip ; that be the only sign of life she give . the doctor come and shake his head , " a thorough prostration of strength , occasion by some great shock on the nerve , " and prescribe care and quiet , and mysterious medicine , but acknowledge that the result be doubtful , very doubtful . after his departure , Mr Benson take his Welsh grammar and try again to master the ever - puzzle rule for the mutation of letter ; but it be of no use , for his thought be absorb by the life - in - death condition of the young creature , who be lately bound and joyous . 

 the maid and the luggage , the car and the driver , have arrive before noon at their journey 's end , and the note have be deliver . it annoy Mrs Bellingham exceedingly . it be the bad of these kind of connexion , there be no calculate the consequence ; they be never - end . all sort of claim seem to be establish , and all sort of people to step in to their settlement . the idea of send she maid ! why , Simpson would not go if she ask she . she soliloquise thus while read the letter ; and then , suddenly turn round to the favourite attendant , who have be listen to her mistress 's remark with no inattentive ear , she ask : 

 " Simpson , would you go and nurse this creature , as this " she look at the signature " Mr Benson , whoever he be , propose ? " 

 " I ! no , indeed , ma'am , " say the maid , draw herself up , stiff in her virtue . " I be sure , ma'am , you would not expect it of I ; I could never have the face to dress a lady of character again . " 

 " well , well ! do not   be alarm ; I can not spare you ; by the way , just attend to the string on my dress ; the chambermaid here pull they into knot , and break they terribly , last night . it be awkward though , very , " say she , relapse into a musing fit over the condition of Ruth . 

 " if you will allow I , ma'am , I think I might say something that would alter the case . I believe , ma'am , you put a bank - note into the letter to the young woman yesterday ? " 

 Mrs Bellingham bow acquiescence , and the maid go on : 

 " because , ma'am , when the little deformed man write that note   he be Mr Benson , ma'am , I have reason to believe neither he nor Mrs Morgan know of any provision be make for the young woman . I and the chambermaid find your letter and the bank - note lie quite promiscuous , like waste paper , on the floor of her room ; for I believe she rush out like mad after you leave . " 

 " that , as you say , alter the case . this letter , then , be principally a sort of delicate hint that some provision ought to have be make , which be true enough , only it have be attend to already ; what become of the money ? " 

 " Law , ma'am ! do you ask ? of course , as soon as I see it , I pick it up and take it to Mrs Morgan , in trust for the young person . " 

 " oh , that be right . what friend have she ? do you ever hear from Mason ? perhaps they ought to know where she be . " 

 " Mrs Mason do tell I , ma'am , she be an orphan ; with a guardian who be no - way akin , and who wash his hand of she when she run off ; but Mrs Mason be sadly put out , and go into hysteric , for fear you would think she have not see after she enough , and that she might lose your custom ; she say it be no fault of her , for the girl be always a forward creature , boasting of her beauty , and say how pretty she be , and strive to get where her good look could be see and admire , one night in particular , ma'am , at a county ball ; and how Mrs Mason have find out she use to meet Mr Bellingham at an old woman 's house , who be a regular old witch , ma'am , and live in the low part of the town , where all the bad character haunt . " 

 " there ! that be enough , " say Mrs Bellingham , sharply , for the maid 's chattering have outrun her tact ; and in her anxiety to vindicate the character of her friend Mrs Mason by blacken that of Ruth , she have forget that she a little implicate her mistress 's son , whom his proud mother do not like to imagine as ever pass through a low and degraded part of the town . 

 " if she have no friend , and be the creature you describe   which be confirm by my own observation , the good place for she be , as I say before , the Penitentiary . her fifty pound will keep she for a week or so , if she be really unable to travel , and pay for her journey ; and if on her return to Fordham she will let I know , I will undertake to obtain her admission immediately . " 

 " I be sure it be well for she she have to do with a lady who will take any interest in she , after what have happen . " 

 Mrs Bellingham call for her writing - desk , and write a few hasty line to be send back by the post - boy , who be on the point of starting : 
 

 Mrs Bellingham present her compliment to her unknown correspondent , Mr Benson , and beg to inform he of a circumstance of which she believe he be ignorant when he write the letter with which she have be favour ; namely , that provision to the amount of L50 be leave for the unfortunate young person who be the subject of Mr Benson 's letter . this sum be in the hand of Mrs Morgan , as well as a note from Mrs Bellingham to the miserable girl , in which she propose to procure her admission into the Fordham Penitentiary , the good place for such a character , as by this profligate action she have forfeit the only friend remain to she in the world . this proposition , Mrs Bellingham repeat ; and they be the young woman 's good friend who most urge she to comply with the course now point out . 
 

 " take care Mr Bellingham hear nothing of this Mr Benson 's note , " say Mrs Bellingham , as she deliver the answer to she maid ; " he be so sensitive just now that it would annoy he sadly , I be sure . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XI 

 Thurstan and Faith Benson 
 

 you have now see the note which be deliver into Mr Benson 's hand , as the cool shade of evening steal over the glowing summer sky . when he have read it , he again prepare to write a few hasty line before the post go out . the post - boy be even now sound his horn through the village as a signal for letter to be ready ; and it be well that Mr Benson , in his long morning 's meditation , have decide upon the course to be pursue , in case of such an answer as that which he have receive from Mrs Bellingham . his present note be as follow : 
 

 Dear Faith , you must come to this place directly , where I earnestly desire you and your advice . I be well myself , so do not be alarm . I have no time for explanation , but I be sure you will not refuse I ; let I trust that I shall see you on Saturday at the late . you know the mode by which I come ; it be the good for expedition and cheapness . Dear faith , do not fail I . 

 your affectionate brother , 

 Thurstan Benson . 

 P.S. I be afraid the money I leave may be run short . do not let this stop you . take my Facciolati to Johnson 's , he will advance upon it ; it be the third row , bottom shelf . only come . 
 

 when this letter be despatch he have do all he could ; and the next two day pass like a long monotonous dream of watch , think , and care , undisturbe by any event , hardly by the change from day to night , which , now the harvest moon be at her full , be scarcely perceptible . on Saturday morning the answer come . 
 

 Dearest Thurstan , your incomprehensible summon have just reach I , and I obey , thereby prove my right to my name of Faith . I shall be with you almost as soon as this letter . I can not help feel anxious , as well as curious . I have money enough , and it be well I have ; for Sally , who guard your room like a dragon , would rather see I walk the whole way , than have any of your thing disturb . 

 your affectionate sister , 

 Faith Benson . 
 

 it be a great relief to Mr Benson to think that his sister would so soon be with he . he have be accustom from childhood to rely on her prompt judgment and excellent sense ; and to her care he feel that Ruth ought to be consign , as it be too much to go on tax good Mrs Hughes with night watching and sick nursing , with all her other claim on her time . he ask she once more to sit by Ruth , while he go to meet his sister . 

 the coach pass by the foot of the steep ascent which lead up to Llan - dhu . he take a boy to carry his sister 's luggage when she arrive ; they be too soon at the bottom of the hill , and the boy begin to make duck and drake in the shallowest part of the stream , which there flow glassy and smooth , while Mr Benson sit down on a great stone , under the shadow of an alder bush which grow where the green , flat meadow skirt the water . it be delightful to be once more in the open air , and away from the scene and thought which have be press on he for the last three day . there be new beauty in everything : from the blue mountain which glimmer in the distant sunlight , down to the flat , rich , peaceful vale , with its calm round shadow , where he sit . the very margin of white pebble which lie on the bank of the stream have a sort of cleanly beauty about it . he feel calm and more at ease than he have do for some day ; and yet , when he begin to think , it be rather a strange story which he have to tell his sister , in order to account for his urgent summon . here be he , sole friend and guardian of a poor sick girl , whose very name he do not know ; about whom all that he do know be , that she have be the mistress of a man who have desert she , and that he fear he believe she have contemplate suicide . the offence , too , be one for which his sister , good and kind as she be , have little compassion . well , he must appeal to her love for he , which be a very unsatisfactory mode of proceeding , as he would far rather have have her interest in the girl found on reason , or some less personal basis than show it merely because her brother wish it . 

 the coach come slowly rumble over the stony road . his sister be outside , but get down in a brisk active way , and greet her brother heartily and affectionately . she be considerably tall than he be , and must have be very handsome ; her black hair be part plainly over her forehead , and her dark , expressive eye and straight nose still retain the beauty of her youth . I do not know whether she be old than her brother , but , probably owe to his infirmity require her care , she have something of a mother 's manner towards he . 

 " Thurstan , you be look pale ! I do not believe you be well , whatever you may say . have you have the old pain in your back ? " 

 " no a little never mind that , dear faith . sit down here , while I send the boy up with your box . " and then , with some little desire to show his sister how well he be acquaint with the language , he blunder out his direction in very grammatical Welsh ; so grammatical , in fact , and so badly pronounce , that the boy , scratch his head , make answer , 

 " Dim Saesoneg . " 

 so he have to repeat it in English . 

 " well now , Thurstan , here I sit as you bid I . but do not   try I too long ; tell I why you send for I . " 

 now come the difficulty , and oh ! for a seraph 's tongue , and a seraph 's power of representation ! but there be no seraph at hand , only the soft running water sing a quiet tune , and predispose Miss Benson to listen with a soothe spirit to any tale , not immediately involve her brother 's welfare , which have be the cause of she see that lovely vale . 

 " it be an awkward story to tell , Faith , but there be a young woman lie ill at my lodging whom I want you to nurse . " 

 he think he see a shadow on his sister 's face , and detect a slight change in her voice as she speak . 

 " nothing very romantic , I hope , Thurstan . remember , I can not stand much romance ; I always distrust it . " 

 " I do not   know what you mean by romance . the story be real enough , and not out of the common way , I be afraid . " 

 he pause ; he do not get over the difficulty . 

 " well , tell it I at once , Thurstan . I be afraid you have let some one , or perhaps only your own imagination , impose upon you ; but do not   try my patience too much ; you know I have   no great stock . " 

 " then I will tell you . the young girl be bring to the inn here by a gentleman , who have leave she ; she be very ill , and have no one to see after she . " 

 Miss Benson have some masculine trick , and one be whistle a long , low whistle when surprised or displeased . she have often find it a useful vent for feeling , and she whistle now . her brother would rather she have speak . 

 " have you send for her friend ? " she ask at last . 

 " she have none . " 

 another pause and another whistle , but rather soft and more wavering than the last . 

 " how be she ill ? " 

 " pretty nearly as quiet as if she be dead . she do not speak , or move , or even sigh . " 

 " it would be well for she to die at once , I think . " 

 " faith ! " 

 that one word put they right . it be speak in the tone which have authority over she ; it be so full of grieve surprise and mournful upbraiding . she be accustom to exercise a sway over he , owe to her great decision of character , and , probably , if everything be trace to its cause , to her superior vigour of constitution ; but at time she be humble before his pure , childlike nature , and feel where she be inferior . she be too good and true to conceal this feeling , or to resent its being force upon she . after a time she say , 

 " Thurstan , dear , let we go to she . " 

 she help he with tender care , and give he her arm up the long and tedious hill ; but when they approach the village , without speak a word on the subject , they change their position , and she leant   apparently   on he . he stretch himself up into as vigorous a gait as he could , when they draw near to the abode of man . 

 on the way they have speak but little . he have ask after various member of his congregation , for he be a dissenting minister in a country town , and she have answer ; but they neither of they speak of Ruth , though their mind be full of she . 

 Mrs Hughes have tea ready for the traveller on her arrival . Mr Benson chafe a little internally at the leisurely way in which his sister sip and sip , and pause to tell he some trifle particular respect home affair , which she have forget before . 

 " Mr Bradshaw have refuse to let the child associate with the Dixons any long , because one evening they play at act charade . " 

 " indeed ; a little more bread and butter , faith ? " 

 " thank you . this Welsh air do make one hungry . Mrs Bradshaw be pay poor old Maggie 's rent , to save she from be send into the workhouse . " 

 " that be right . will not   you have another cup of tea ? " 

 " I have have two . however , I think I will take another . " 

 Mr Benson could not refrain from a little sigh as he pour it out . he think he have never see his sister so deliberately hungry and thirsty before . he do not guess that she be feel the meal rather a respite from a distasteful interview , which she be aware be await she at its conclusion . but all thing come to an end , and so do Miss Benson 's tea . 

 " now , will you go and see she ? " 

 " yes . " 

 and so they go . Mrs Hughes have pin up a piece of green calico , by way of a venetian blind , to shut out the afternoon sun ; and in the light thus shade lie Ruth , still , and wan , and white . even with her brother 's account of Ruth 's state , such death - like quietness startle Miss Benson startle she into pity for the poor lovely creature who lie thus stricken and fell . when she see she , she could no long imagine she to be an impostor , or a hardened sinner ; such prostration of woe belong to neither . Mr Benson look more at his sister 's face than at Ruth 's ; he read her countenance as a book . 

 Mrs Hughes stand by , cry . 

 Mr Benson touch his sister , and they leave the room together . 

 " do you think she will live ? " ask he . 

 " I can not tell , " say Miss Benson , in a softened voice . " but how young she look ! quite a child , poor creature ! when will the doctor come , Thurstan ? tell I all about she ; you have never tell I the particular . " 

 Mr Benson might have say , she have never care to hear they before , and have rather avoid the subject ; but he be too happy to see this awakening of interest in his sister 's warm heart to say anything in the least reproachful . he tell she the story as well as he could ; and , as he feel it deeply , he tell it with heart 's eloquence ; and , as he end and look at she , there be tear in the eye of both . 

 " and what do the doctor say ? " ask she , after a pause . 

 " he insist upon quiet ; he order medicine and strong broth . I can not tell you all ; Mrs Hughes can . she have be so truly good . ' do good , hop for nothing again . ' " 

 " she look very sweet and gentle . I shall sit up to - night and watch she myself ; and I shall send you and Mrs Hughes early to bed , for you have both a worn look about you I do not   like . be you sure the effect of that fall have go off ? do you feel anything of it in your back still ? after all , I owe she something for turn back to your help . be you sure she be go to drown herself ? " 

 " I can not be sure , for I have not question she . she have not be in a state to be question ; but I have no doubt whatever about it . but you must not think of sit up after your journey , Faith . " 

 " answer I , Thurstan . do you feel any bad effect from that fall ? " 

 " no , hardly any . do not   sit up , Faith , to - night ! " 

 " Thurstan , it be no use talk , for I shall ; and , if you go on oppose I , I dare say I shall attack your back , and put a blister on it . do tell I what that ' hardly any ' mean . besides , to set you quite at ease , you know I have never see mountain before , and they fill I and oppress I so much that I could not sleep ; I must keep awake this first night , and see that they do not   fall on the earth and overwhelm it . and now answer my question about yourself . " 

 Miss Benson have the power , which some people have , of carry she wish through to their fulfilment ; her will be strong , her sense be excellent , and people yield to she they do not know why . before ten o'clock she reign sole power and potentate in Ruth 's little chamber . nothing could have be well devise for give she an interest in the invalid . the very dependence of one so helpless upon her care incline her heart towards she . she think she perceive a slight improvement in the symptom during the night , and she be a little pleased that this progress should have be make while she reign monarch of the sick - room . yes , certainly there be an improvement . there be more consciousness in the look of the eye , although the whole countenance still retain its painful trace of acute suffering , manifest in an anxious , startled , uneasy aspect . it be broad morning light , though barely five o'clock , when Miss Benson catch the sight of Ruth 's lip move , as if in speech . Miss Benson stoop down to listen . 

 " who be you ? " ask Ruth , in the faint of whisper . 

 " Miss Benson Mr Benson 's sister , " she reply . 

 the word convey no knowledge to Ruth ; on the contrary , weak as a babe in mind and body as she be , her lip begin to quiver , and her eye to show a terror similar to that of any little child who waken in the presence of a stranger , and see no dear , familiar face of mother or nurse to reassure its trembling heart . 

 Miss Benson take her hand in her , and begin to stroke it caressingly . 

 " do not   be afraid , dear ; I be a friend come to take care of you . would you like some tea now , my love ? " 

 the very utterance of these gentle word be unlock Miss Benson 's heart . her brother be surprised to see she so full of interest , when he come to inquire later on in the morning . it require Mrs Hughes 's persuasion , as well as his own , to induce she to go to bed for an hour or two after breakfast ; and , before she go , she make they promise that she should be call when the doctor come . he do not come until late in the afternoon . the invalid be rally fast , though rally to a consciousness of sorrow , as be evince by the tear which come slowly roll down her pale sad cheek tear which she have not the power to wipe away . 

 Mr Benson have remain in the house all day to hear the doctor 's opinion ; and now that he be relieve from the charge of Ruth by his sister 's presence , he have the more time to dwell upon the circumstance of her case so far as they be know to he . he remember his first sight of she ; her little figure sway to and fro as she balance herself on the slippery stone , half smile at her own dilemma , with a bright , happy light in the eye that seem like a reflection from the glance water sparkle below . then he recall the change , affright look of those eye as they meet his , after the child 's rebuff of her advance ; how that little incident fill up the tale at which Mrs Hughes have hint , in a kind of sorrowful way , as if loath   as a Christian should be   to believe evil . then that fearful evening , when he have only just save she from commit suicide , and that nightmare sleep ! and now , lose , forsaken , and but just deliver from the jaw of death , she lie dependent for everything on his sister and he , utter stranger a few week ago . where be her lover ? could he be easy and happy ? could he grow into perfect health , with these great sin press on his conscience with a strong and hard pain ? or have he a conscience ? 

 into whole labyrinth of social ethic Mr Benson 's thought wander , when his sister enter suddenly and abruptly . 

 " what do the doctor say ? be she well ? " 

 " oh , yes ! she be well , " answer Miss Benson , sharp and short . her brother look at she in dismay . she bump down into a chair in a cross , disconcert manner . they be both silent for a few minute ; only Miss Benson whistle and cluck alternately . 

 " what be the matter , Faith ? you say she be well . " 

 " why , Thurstan , there be something so shocking the matter , that I can not tell you . " 

 Mr Benson change colour with affright . all thing possible and impossible cross his mind but the right one . I say , " all thing possible ; " I make a mistake . he never believe Ruth to be more guilty than she seem . 

 " Faith , I wish you would tell I , and not bewilder I with those noise of your , " say he , nervously . 

 " I beg your pardon ; but something so shocking have just be discover I do not   know how to word it she will have a child . the doctor say so . " 

 she be allow to make noise unnoticed for a few minute . her brother do not speak . at last she want his sympathy . 

 " be not   it shocking , Thurstan ? you might have knock I down with a straw when he tell I . " 

 " do she know ? " 

 " yes ; and I be not sure that that be not   the bad part of all . " 

 " how ? what do you mean ? " 

 " oh ! I be just begin to have a good opinion of she , but I be afraid she be very depraved . after the doctor be go , she pull the bed - curtain aside , and look as if she want to speak to I .   I can not   think how she hear , for we be close to the window , and speak very low .   well , I go to she , though I really have take quite a turn against she . and she whisper , quite eagerly , ' do he say I should have a baby ? ' of course , I could not keep it from she ; but I think it my duty to look as cold and severe as I could . she do not seem to understand how it ought to be view , but take it just as if she have a right to have a baby . she say , ' oh , my God , I thank Thee ! oh ! I will be so good ! ' I have no patience with she then , so I leave the room . " 

 " who be with she ? " 

 " Mrs Hughes . she be not see the thing in a moral light , as I should have expect . " 

 Mr Benson be silent again . after some time he begin : 

 " Faith , I do not   see this affair quite as you do . I believe I be right . " 

 " you surprise I , brother ! I do not   understand you . " 

 " wait awhile ! I want to make my feeling very clear to you , but I do not   know where to begin , or how to express myself . " 

 " it be , indeed , an extraordinary subject for we to have to talk about ; but if once I get clear of this girl , I will wash my hand of all such case again . " 

 her brother be not attend to she ; he be reduce his own idea to form . 

 " Faith , do you know I rejoice in this child 's advent ? " 

 " may God forgive you , Thurstan ! if you know what you be say . but , surely , it be a temptation , dear Thurstan . " 

 " I do not think it be a delusion . the sin appear to I to be quite distinct from its consequence . " 

 " Sophistry and a temptation , " say Miss Benson , decidedly . 

 " no , it be not , " say her brother , with equal decision . " in the eye of God , she be exactly the same as if the life she have lead have leave no trace behind . we know her error before , Faith . " 

 " yes , but not this disgrace this badge of her shame ! " 

 " Faith , Faith ! let I beg of you not to speak so of the little innocent babe , who may be God 's messenger to lead she back to he . think again of her first word the burst of nature from her heart ! do she not turn to God , and enter into a covenant with he ' I will be so good ? ' why , it draw she out of herself ! if her life have hitherto be self - seeking , and wickedly thoughtless , here be the very instrument to make she forget herself , and be thoughtful for another . teach she   and God will teach she , if man do not come between   to reverence her child ; and this reverence will shut out sin , will be purification . " 

 he be very much excited ; he be even surprised at his own excitement ; but his thought and meditation through the long afternoon have prepare his mind for this manner of view the subject . 

 " these be quite new idea to I , " say Miss Benson , coldly . " I think you , Thurstan , be the first person I ever hear rejoice over the birth of an illegitimate child . it appear to I , I must own , rather questionable morality . " 

 " I do not rejoice . I have be all this afternoon mourn over the sin which have blight this young creature ; I have be dread lest , as she recover consciousness , there should be a return of her despair . I have be think of every holy word , every promise to the penitent of the tenderness which lead the Magdalen aright . I have be feel , severely and reproachfully , the timidity which have hitherto make I blink all encounter with evil of this particular kind . oh , Faith ! once for all , do not accuse I of questionable morality , when I be try more than ever I do in my life to act as my blessed Lord would have do . " 

 he be very much agitated . his sister hesitate , and then she speak more softly than before . 

 " but , Thurstan , everything might have be do to ' lead her right '   as you call it , without this child , this miserable offspring of sin . " 

 " the world have , indeed , make such child miserable , innocent as they be ; but I doubt if this be accord to the will of God , unless it be his punishment for the parent ' guilt ; and even then the world 's way of treatment be too apt to harden the mother 's natural love into something like hatred . Shame , and the terror of friend ' displeasure , turn her mad defile her holy instinct ; and , as for the father God forgive they ! I can not at least , not just now . " 

 Miss Benson think on what her brother say . at length she ask , " Thurstan   remember I be not convinced , how would you have this girl treat accord to your theory ? " 

 " it will require some time , and much christian love , to find out the good way . I know I be not very wise ; but the way I think it would be right to act in , would be this " he think for some time before he speak , and then say : 

 " she have incur a responsibility that we both acknowledge . she be about to become a mother , and have the direction and guidance of a little tender life . I fancy such a responsibility must be serious and solemn enough , without make it into a heavy and oppressive burden , so that human nature recoil from bear it . while we do all we can to strengthen her sense of responsibility , I would likewise do all we can to make she feel that it be responsibility for what may become a blessing . " 

 " whether the child be legitimate or illegitimate ? " ask Miss Benson , drily . 

 " yes ! " say her brother , firmly . " the more I think , the more I believe I be right . no one , " say he , blush faintly as he speak , " can have a great recoil from profligacy than I have . you yourself have not great sorrow over this young creature 's sin than I have : the difference be this , you confuse the consequence with the sin . " 

 " I do not   understand metaphysics . " 

 " I be not aware that I be talk metaphysic . I can imagine that if the present occasion be take rightly , and use well , all that be good in she may be raise to a height unmeasured but by God ; while all that be evil and dark may , by his blessing , fade and disappear in the pure light of her child 's presence . oh , Father ! listen to my prayer , that her redemption may date from this time . help we to speak to she in the love spirit of thy Holy Son ! " 

 the tear be full in his eye ; he almost tremble in his earnestness . he be faint with the strong power of his own conviction , and with his inability to move his sister . but she be shake . she sit very still for a quarter of an hour or more , while he lean back , exhaust by his own feeling . 

 " the poor child ! " say she , at length " the poor , poor child ! what it will have to struggle through and endure ! do you remember Thomas Wilkins , and the way he throw the registry of his birth and baptism back in your face ? why , he would not have the situation ; he go to sea and be drown , rather than present the record of his shame . " 

 " I do remember it all . it have often haunt I . she must strengthen her child to look to God , rather than to man 's opinion . it will be the discipline , the penance , she have incur . she must teach it to be   humanly speak   self - dependent . " 

 " but after all , " say Miss Benson   for she have know and esteem poor Thomas Wilkins , and have mourn over his untimely death , and the recollection thereof soften she   " after all , it might be conceal . the very child need never know its illegitimacy . " 

 " how ? " ask her brother . 

 " why we know so little about she yet ; but in that letter , it say she have no friend ; now , could she not go into quite a fresh place , and be pass off as a widow ? " 

 ah , tempter ! unconscious tempter ! here be a way of evade the trial for the poor little unborn child , of which Mr Benson have never think . it be the decision the pivot , on which the fate of year move ; and he turn it the wrong way . but it be not for his own sake . for himself , he be brave enough to tell the truth ; for the little helpless baby , about to enter a cruel , bite world , he be tempt to evade the difficulty . he forget what he have just say , of the discipline and penance to the mother consist in strengthen her child to meet , trustfully and bravely , the consequence of her own weakness . he remember more clearly the wild fierceness , the Cain - like look , of Thomas Wilkins , as the obnoxious word in the baptismal registry tell he that he must go forth brand into the world , with his hand against every man 's , and every man be against he . 

 " how could it be manage , faith ? " 

 " Nay , I must know much more , which she alone can tell we , before I can see how it be to be manage . it be certainly the good plan . " 

 " perhaps it be , " say her brother , thoughtfully , but no long clearly or decidedly ; and so the conversation drop . 

 Ruth move the bed - curtain aside , in her soft manner , when Miss Benson re - enter the room ; she do not speak , but she look at she as if she wish she to come near . Miss Benson go and stand by she . Ruth take her hand in hers and kiss it ; then , as if fatigue even by this slight movement , she fall asleep . 

 Miss Benson take up her work , and think over her brother 's speech . she be not convince , but she be soften and bewilder . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XII 

 lose Sight of the Welsh Mountains 
 

 Miss Benson continue in an undecided state of mind for the two next day ; but on the third , as they sit at breakfast , she begin to speak to her brother . 

 " that young creature 's name be Ruth Hilton . " 

 " indeed ! how do you find it out ? " 

 " from herself , of course . she be much strong . I sleep with her last night , and I be aware she be awake long before I like to speak , but at last I begin . I do not   know what I say , or how it go on , but I think it be a little relief to she to tell I something about herself . she sob and cry herself to sleep ; I think she be asleep now . " 

 " tell I what she say about herself . " 

 " oh , it be really very little ; it be evidently a most painful subject . she be an orphan , without brother or sister , and with a guardian , whom , I think she say , she never see but once . he apprentice she   after her father 's death   to a dressmaker . this Mr Bellingham get acquaint with she , and they use to meet on Sunday afternoon . one day they be late , linger on the road , when the dressmaker come up by accident . she seem to have be very angry , and not unnaturally so . the girl take fright at her threat , and the lover persuade she to go off with he to London , there and then . last May , I think it be . that be all . " 

 " do she express any sorrow for her error ? " 

 " no , not in word , but her voice be break with sob , though she try to make it steady . after a while she begin to talk about her baby , but shyly , and with much hesitation . she ask I how much I think she could earn as a dressmaker , by work very , very hard ; and that bring we round to her child . I think of what you have say , Thurstan , and I try to speak to she as you wish I . I be not sure if it be right ; I be doubtful in my own mind still . " 

 " do not   be doubtful , Faith ! Dear Faith , I thank you for your kindness . " 

 " there be really nothing to thank I for . it be almost impossible to help be kind to she ; there be something so meek and gentle about she , so patient , and so grateful ! " 

 " what do she think of do ? " 

 " poor child ! she think of take lodging very cheap one , she say ; there she mean to work night and day to earn enough for her child . for , she say to I , with such pretty earnestness , ' it must never know want , whatever I do . I have deserve suffering , but it will be such a little innocent darling ! ' her utmost earning would not be more than seven or eight shilling a week , I be afraid ; and then she be so young and so pretty ! " 

 " there be that fifty pound Mrs Morgan bring I , and those two letter . do she know about they yet ? " 

 " no ; I do not like to tell she till she be a little strong . oh , Thurstan ! I wish there be not this prospect of a child . I can not help it . I do I could see a way in which we might help she , if it be not for that . " 

 " how do you mean ? " 

 " oh , it be no use thinking of it , as it be ! or else we might have take her home with we , and keep she till she have get a little dress - making in the congregation , but for this meddlesome child ; that spoil everything . you must let I grumble to you , Thurstan . I be very good to she , and speak as tenderly and respectfully of the little thing as if it be the Queen 's , and bear in lawful matrimony . " 

 " that be right , my dear faith ! grumble away to I , if you like . I will forgive you , for the kind thought of take her home with we . but do you think her situation be an insuperable objection ? " 

 " why , Thurstan ! it be so insuperable , it put it quite out of the question . " 

 " how ? that be only repeat your objection . why be it out of the question ? " 

 " if there have be no child come , we might have call she by her right name Miss Hilton ; that be one thing . then , another be , the baby in our house . why , Sally would go distraught ! " 

 " never mind Sally . if she be an orphan relation of our own , leave widow , " say he , pausing , as if in doubt . " you yourself suggest she should be consider as a widow , for the child 's sake . I be only take up your idea , dear Faith . I respect you for thinking of take her home ; it be just what we ought to do . thank you for remind I of my duty . " 

 " Nay , it be only a pass thought . think of Mr Bradshaw . oh ! I tremble at the thought of his grim displeasure . " 

 " we must think of a high than Mr Bradshaw . I own I should be a very coward , if he know . he be so severe , so inflexible . but after all he see so little of we ; he never come to tea , you know , but be always engage when Mrs Bradshaw come . I do not   think he know of what our household consist . " 

 " not know Sally ? oh yes , but he do . he ask Mrs Bradshaw one day , if she know what wage we give she , and say we might get a far more efficient and young servant for the money . and , speak about money , think what our expense would be if we take her home for the next six month . " 

 that consideration be a puzzle one ; and both sit silent and perplex for a time . Miss Benson be as sorrowful as her brother , for she be become as anxious as he be to find it possible that her plan could be carry out . 

 " there be the fifty pound , " say he , with a sigh of reluctance at the idea . 

 " yes , there be the fifty pound , " echo his sister , with the same sadness in her tone . " I suppose it be her . " 

 " I suppose it be ; and be so , we must not think who give it to she . it will defray her expense . I be very sorry , but I think we must take it . " 

 " it would never do to apply to he under the present circumstance , " say Miss Benson , in a hesitate manner . 

 " no , that we will not , " say her brother , decisively . " if she consent to let we take care of she , we will never let her stoop to request anything from he , even for his child . she can live on bread and water . we can all live on bread and water rather than that . " 

 " then I will speak to she and propose the plan . oh , Thurstan ! from a child you could persuade I to anything ! I hope I be do right . however much I oppose you at first , I be sure to yield soon ; almost in proportion to my violence at first . I think I be very weak . " 

 " no , not in this instance . we be both right : I , in the way in which the child ought to be view ; you , dear good Faith , for thinking of take her home with we . God bless you , dear , for it ! " 

 when Ruth begin to sit up   and the strange , new , delicious prospect of become a mother seem to give she some mysterious source of strength , so that her recovery be rapid and swift from that time , Miss Benson bring she the letter and the bank - note . 

 " do you recollect receive this letter , Ruth ? " ask she , with grave gentleness . Ruth change colour , and take it and read it again without make any reply to Miss Benson . then she sigh , and think a while ; and then take up and read the second note the note which Mrs Bellingham have send to Mr Benson in answer to his . after that she take up the bank - note and turn it round and round , but not as if she see it . Miss Benson notice that her finger tremble sadly , and that her lip be quiver for some time before she speak . 

 " if you please , Miss Benson , I should like to return this money . " 

 " why , my dear ? " 

 " I have a strong feeling against take it . while he , " say she , deeply blush , and let her large white lid drop down and veil her eye , " love I , he give I many thing my watch oh , many thing ; and I take they from he gladly and thankfully because he love I for I would have give he anything and I think of they as sign of love . but this money pain my heart . he have leave off love I , and have go away . this money seem oh , Miss Benson it seem as if he could comfort I , for be forsake , by money . " and at that word the tear , so long keep back and repressed , force their way like rain . 

 she check herself , however , in the violence of her emotion , for she think of her child . 

 " so , will you take the trouble of send it back to Mrs Bellingham ? " 

 " that I will , my dear . I be glad of it , that I be ! they do not   deserve to have the power of giving : they do not   deserve that you should take it . " 

 Miss Benson go and enclose it up , there and then ; simply write these word in the envelope , " from Ruth Hilton . " 

 " and now we wash our hand of these bellingham , " say she , triumphantly . but Ruth look tearful and sad ; not about return the note , but from the conviction that the reason she have give for the ground of her determination be true he no long love she . 

 to cheer she , Miss Benson begin to speak of the future . Miss Benson be one of those people who , the more she speak of a plan in its detail , and the more she realise it in her own mind , the more firmly she become a partisan of the project . thus she grow warm and happy in the idea of take Ruth home ; but Ruth remain depressed and languid under the conviction that he no long love she . no home , no future , but the thought of her child , could wean she from this sorrow . Miss Benson be a little pique ; and this pique show itself afterwards in talk to her brother of the morning 's proceeding in the sick - chamber . 

 " I admire she at the time for send away her fifty pound so proudly ; but I think she have a cold heart : she hardly thank I at all for my proposal of take her home with we . " 

 " her thought be full of other thing just now ; and people have such different way of show feeling : some by silence , some by word . at any rate , it be unwise to expect gratitude . " 

 " what do you expect not indifference or ingratitude ? " 

 " it be well not to expect or calculate consequence . the long I live , the more fully I see that . let we try simply to do right action , without think of the feeling they be to call out in other . we know that no holy or self - deny effort can fall to the ground vain and useless ; but the sweep of eternity be large , and God alone know when the effect be to be produce . we be try to do right now , and to feel right ; do not   let we perplex ourselves with endeavouring to map out how she should feel , or how she should show her feeling . " 

 " that be all very fine , and I dare say very true , " say Miss Benson , a little chagrined . " but ' a bird in the hand be worth two in the bush ; ' and I would rather have have one good , hearty ' thank you , ' now , for all I have be plan to do for she , than the grand effect you promise I in the ' sweep of eternity . ' do not   be grave and sorrowful , Thurstan , or I will go out of the room . I can stand Sally 's scolding , but I can not   bear your look of quiet depression whenever I be a little hasty or impatient . I have rather you would give I a good box on the ear . " 

 " and I would often rather you would speak , if ever so hastily , instead of whistle . so , if I box your ear when I be vex with you , will you promise to scold I when you be put out of the way , instead of whistle ? " 

 " very well ! that be a bargain . you box , and I scold . but , seriously , I begin to calculate our money when she so cavalierly send off the fifty - pound note   I can not   help admire she for it , and I be very much afraid we shall not have enough to pay the doctor 's bill , and take she home with we . " 

 " she must go inside the coach whatever we do , " say Mr Benson , decidedly . " who be there ? come in ! oh ! Mrs Hughes ! sit down . " 

 " indeed , sir , and I can not stay ; but the young lady have just make I find up her watch for she , and ask I to get it sell to pay the doctor , and the little thing she have have since she come ; and please , sir , indeed , I do not   know where to sell it near than Carnarvon . " 

 " that be good of she , " say Miss Benson , her sense of justice satisfy ; and , remember the way in which Ruth have speak of the watch , she feel what a sacrifice it must have be to resolve to part with it . 

 " and her goodness just help we out of our dilemma , " say her brother , who be unaware of the feeling with which Ruth regard her watch , or , perhaps , he might have part with his Facciolati . 

 Mrs Hughes patiently await their leisure for answer her practical question . where could the watch be sell ? suddenly her face brighten . 

 " Mr Jones , the doctor , be go to be marry , perhaps he would like nothing well than to give this pretty watch to his bride ; indeed , and I think it be very likely ; and he will pay money for it as well as let alone his bill . I will ask he , sir , at any rate . " 

 Mr Jones be only too glad to obtain possession of so elegant a present at so cheap a rate . he even , as Mrs Hughes have foretell , " pay money for it ; " more than be require to defray the expense of Ruth 's accommodation ; as the most of the article of food she have be pay for at the time by Mr or Miss Benson , but they strictly forbid Mrs Hughes to tell Ruth of this . 

 " would you object to my buy you a black gown ? " say Miss Benson to she the day after the sale of the watch . she hesitate a little , and then go on : 

 " my brother and I think it would be well to call you as if in fact you be a widow . it will save much awkwardness , and it will spare your child much " mortification she be go to have add , but that word do not exactly do . but , at the mention of her child , Ruth start and turn ruby - red ; as she always do when allusion be make to it . 

 " oh , yes ! certainly . thank you much for thinking of it . indeed , " say she , very low , as if to herself , " I do not   know how to thank you for all you be do ; but I do love you , and will pray for you , if I may . " 

 " if you may , Ruth ! " repeat Miss Benson , in a tone of surprise . 

 " yes , if I may . if you will let I pray for you . " 

 " certainly , my dear . my dear Ruth , you do not   know how often I sin ; I do so wrong , with my few temptation . we be both of we great sinner in the eye of the Most Holy ; let we pray for each other . do not   speak so again , my dear ; at least , not to I ! " 

 Miss Benson be actually cry . she have always look upon herself as so inferior to her brother in real goodness ; have see such height above she , that she be distress by Ruth 's humility . after a short time she resume the subject . 

 " then I may get you a black gown ? and we may call you Mrs Hilton ? " 

 " no ; not Mrs Hilton ! " say Ruth , hastily . 

 Miss Benson , who have hitherto keep her eye avert from Ruth 's face from a motive of kindly delicacy , now look at she with surprise . 

 " why not ? " ask she . 

 " it be my mother 's name , " say Ruth , in a low voice . " I have well not be call by it . " 

 " then , let we call you by my mother 's name , " say Miss Benson , tenderly . " she would have but I will talk to you about my mother some other time . let I call you Mrs Denbigh . it will do very well , too . People will think you be a distant relation . " 

 when she tell Mr Benson this choice of name , he be rather sorry ; it be like his sister 's impulsive kindness impulsive in everything and he could imagine how Ruth 's humility have touch she . he be sorry , but he say nothing . 

 and now the letter be write home , announce the probable arrival of the brother and sister on a certain day , " with a distant relation , early leave a widow , " as Miss Benson express it . she desire the spare room might be prepare , and make every provision she could think of for Ruth 's comfort ; for Ruth still remain feeble and weak . 

 when the black gown , at which she have stitch away incessantly , be finish when nothing remain but to rest for the next day 's journey Ruth could not sit still . she wander from window to window , learn off each rock and tree by heart . each have its tale , which it be agony to remember ; but which it would have be bad agony to forget . the sound of running water she hear that quiet evening , be in her ear as she lie on her death - bed ; so well have she learn their tune . 

 and now all be over . she have drive in to Llan - dhu , sit by her lover 's side , live in the bright present , and strangely forgetful of the past or the future ; she have dream out her dream , and she have awaken from the vision of love . she walk slowly and sadly down the long hill , her tear fast fall , but as quickly wipe away ; while she strove to make steady the low quivering voice which be often call upon to answer some remark of Miss Benson 's . 

 they have to wait for the coach . Ruth bury her face in some flower which Mrs Hughes have give she on parting ; and be startle when the mail draw up with a sudden pull , which almost throw the horse on their haunch . she be place inside , and the coach have set off again , before she be fully aware that Mr and Miss Benson be travel on the outside ; but it be a relief to feel she might now cry without excite their notice . the shadow of a heavy thunder - cloud be on the valley , but the little upland village church   that show the spot in which so much of her life have pass   stand out clear in the sunshine . she grudge the tear that blind she as she gaze . there be one passenger , who try after a while to comfort she . 

 " do not   cry , miss , " say the kind - hearted woman . " you be part from friend , maybe ? well , that be bad enough , but when you come to my age , you will think none of it . why , I have   three son , and they be soldier and sailor , all of they here , there , and everywhere . one be in America , beyond sea ; another be in China , make tea ; and another be at Gibraltar , three mile from Spain ; and yet , you see , I can laugh and eat and enjoy myself . I sometimes think I will try and fret a bit , just to make myself a well figure ; but , Lord ! it be no use , it be against my nature ; so I laugh and grow fat again . I would be quite thankful for a fit of anxiety as would make I feel easy in my clothe , which they manty - maker will make so tight I be fairly throttle . " 

 Ruth durst cry no more ; it be no relief , now she be watch and notice , and ply with a sandwich or a gingerbread each time she look sad . she lie back with her eye shut , as if asleep , and go on , and on , the sun never seem to move from his high place in the sky , nor the bright hot day to show the least sign of waning . every now and then , Miss Benson scramble down , and make kind inquiry of the pale , weary Ruth ; and once they change coach , and the fat old lady leave she with a hearty shake of the hand . 

 " it be not much far now , " say Miss Benson , apologetically , to Ruth . " see ! we be lose sight of the Welsh mountain . we have about eighteen mile of plain , and then we come to the moor and the rise ground , amidst which Eccleston lie . I wish we be there , for my brother be sadly tired . " 

 the first wonder in Ruth 's mind be , why then , if Mr Benson be so tired , do they not stop where they be for the night ; for she know little of the expense of a night at an inn . the next thought be , to beg that Mr Benson would take her place inside the coach , and allow she to mount up by Miss Benson . she propose this , and Miss Benson be evidently pleased . 

 " well , if you be not tired , it would make a rest and a change for he , to be sure ; and if you be by I I could show you the first sight of Eccleston , if we reach there before it be quite dark . " 

 so Mr Benson get down , and change place with Ruth . 

 she hardly yet understand the numerous small economy which he and his sister have to practise the little daily self - denial , all endure so cheerfully , and simply , that they have almost cease to require an effort , and it have become natural to they to think of other before themselves . Ruth have not understand that it be for economy that their place have be take on the outside of the coach , while her , as an invalid require rest , be to be the inside ; and that the biscuit which supply the place of a dinner be , in fact , choose because the difference in price between the two would go a little way towards fulfil their plan for receive she as an inmate . her think about money have be hitherto a child 's thought ; the subject have never touch she ; but afterwards , when she have live a little with the Bensons , her eye be open , and she remember their simple kindness on the journey , and treasure the remembrance of it in her heart . 

 a low grey cloud be the first sign of Eccleston ; it be the smoke of the town hang over the plain . beyond the place where she be expect to believe it exist , arise round , wave upland ; nothing to the fine outline of the Welsh mountain , but still go up near to heaven than the rest of the flat world into which she have now enter . rumble stone , lamp - post , a sudden stop , and they be in the town of Eccleston ; and a strange , uncouth voice , on the dark side of the coach , be hear to say , 

 " be ye there , measter ? " 

 " yes , yes ! " say Miss Benson , quickly . " do Sally send you , Ben ? get the ostler 's lantern , and look out the luggage . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 the Dissenting Minister 's Household 
 

 Miss Benson have resume every morsel of the briskness which she have rather lose in the middle of the day ; her foot be on her native stone , and a very rough set they be , and she be near her home and among known people . even Mr Benson speak very cheerfully to Ben , and make many inquiry of he respect people whose name be strange to Ruth . she be cold , and utterly weary . she take Miss Benson 's offer arm , and could hardly drag herself as far as the little quiet street in which Mr Benson 's house be situate . the street be so quiet that their footstep sound like a loud disturbance , and announce their approach as effectually as the " trumpet 's lordly blare " do the coming of Abdallah . a door fly open , and a light passage stand before they . as soon as they have enter , a stout , elderly servant emerge from behind the door , her face radiant with welcome . 

 " eh , bless ye ! be ye back again ? I think I should ha ' be lose without ye . " 

 she give Mr Benson a hearty shake of the hand , and kiss Miss Benson warmly ; then , turn to Ruth , she say , in a loud whisper , 

 " who be yon ? " 

 Mr Benson be silent , and walk a step onwards . Miss Benson say boldly out , 

 " the lady I name in my note , Sally Mrs Denbigh , a distant relation . " 

 " Aye , but you say hoo be a widow . be this chit a widow ? " 

 " yes , this be Mrs Denbigh , " answer Miss Benson . 

 " if I have be her mother , I would ha ' give she a lollypop instead of a husband . Hoo look fitter for it . " 

 " Hush ! Sally , Sally ! look , there be your master try to move that heavy box . " Miss Benson calculate well when she call Sally 's attention to her master ; for it be well believe by every one , and by Sally herself , that his deformity be owe to a fall he have have when he be scarcely more than a baby , and entrust to her care a little nurse - girl , as she then be , not many year old than himself . for year the poor girl have cry herself to sleep on her pallet - bed , moan over the blight her carelessness have bring upon her darling ; nor be this self - reproach diminish by the forgiveness of the gentle mother , from whom Thurstan Benson derive so much of his character . the way in which comfort steal into Sally 's heart be in the gradually - form resolution that she would never leave he nor forsake he , but serve he faithfully all her life long ; and she have keep to her word . she love Miss Benson , but she almost worship the brother . the reverence for he be in her heart , however , and do not always show itself in her manner . but if she scold he herself , she allow no one else that privilege . if Miss Benson differ from her brother , and venture to think his saying or doing might have be improve , Sally come down upon she like a thunder - clap . 

 " my goodness gracious , Master Thurstan , when will you learn to leave off meddle with other folk ' business ! here , Ben ! help I up with these trunk . " 

 the little narrow passage be clear , and Miss Benson take Ruth into the sitting - room . there be only two sit - room on the ground - floor , one behind the other . out of the back room the kitchen open , and for this reason the back parlour be use as the family sitting - room ; or else , be , with its garden aspect , so much the pleasanter of the two , both Sally and Miss Benson would have appropriate it for Mr Benson 's study . as it be , the front room , which look to the street , be his room ; and many a person come for help help of which give money be the low kind be admit , and let forth by Mr Benson , unknown to any one else in the house . to make amend for his have the least cheerful room on the ground - floor , he have the garden bedroom , while his sister sleep over his study . there be two more room again over these , with slop ceiling , though otherwise large and airy . the attic look into the garden be the spare bedroom ; while the front belong to Sally . there be no room over the kitchen , which be , in fact , a supplement to the house . the sitting - room be call by the pretty , old - fashioned name of the parlour , while Mr Benson 's room be style the study . 

 the curtain be draw in the parlour ; there be a bright fire and a clean hearth ; indeed , exquisite cleanliness seem the very spirit of the household , for the door which be open to the kitchen show a delicately - white and spotless floor , and bright glitter tin , on which the ruddy firelight dance . 

 from the place in which Ruth sit she could see all Sally 's movement ; and though she be not conscious of close or minute observation at the time   her body be weary , and her mind full of other thought , yet it be curious how faithfully that scene remain depict on her memory in after year . the warm light fill every corner of the kitchen , in strong distinction to the faint illumination of the one candle in the parlour , whose radiance be confine , and be lose in the dead fold of window - curtain , carpet , and furniture . the square , stout , bustling figure , neat and clean in every respect , but dress in the peculiar , old - fashioned costume of the county , namely , a dark - strip linsey - woolsey petticoat , make very short , display sturdy leg in woollen stocking beneath ; a loose kind of jacket call there a " bedgown , " make of pink print ; a snow - white apron and cap , both of linen , and the latter make in the shape of a " mutch ; " these article complete Sally 's costume , and be paint on Ruth 's memory . Whilst Sally be busy in prepare tea , Miss Benson take off Ruth 's thing ; and the latter instinctively feel that Sally , in the midst of her movement , be watch their proceeding . occasionally she also put in a word in the conversation , and these little sentence be utter quite in the tone of an equal , if not of a superior . she have drop the more formal " you , " with which at first she have address Miss Benson , and thou'd she quietly and habitually . 

 all these particular sink unconsciously into Ruth 's mind ; but they do not rise to the surface , and become perceptible , for a length of time . she be weary , and much depressed . even the very kindness that minister to she be overpower . but over the dark , misty moor a little light shone , a beacon ; and on that she fix her eye , and struggle out of her present deep dejection the little child that be come to she ! 

 Mr Benson be as languid and weary as Ruth , and be silent during all this bustle and preparation . his silence be more grateful to Ruth than Miss Benson 's many word , although she feel their kindness . after tea , Miss Benson take she upstairs to her room . the white dimity bed , and the wall , stain green , have something of the colouring and purity of effect of a snowdrop ; while the floor , rub with a mixture that turn it into a rich dark brown , suggest the idea of the garden - mould out of which the snowdrop grow . as Miss Benson help the pale Ruth to undress , her voice become less full - toned and hurry ; the hush of approach night subdue she into a soften , solemn kind of tenderness , and the murmured blessing sound like grant prayer . 

 when Miss Benson come downstairs , she find her brother read some letter which have be receive during his absence . she go and softly shut the door of communication between the parlour and the kitchen ; and then , fetch a grey worst stocking which she be knit , sit down near he , her eye not look at her work but fix on the fire ; while the eternal rapid click of the knitting - needle break the silence of the room , with a sound as monotonous and incessant as the noise of a hand - loom . she expect he to speak , but he do not . she enjoy an examination into , and discussion of , her feeling ; it be an interest and amusement to she , while he dread and avoid all such conversation . there be time when his feeling , which be always earnest , and sometimes morbid , burst forth , and defied control , and overwhelm he ; when a force be upon he compel he to speak . but he , in general , strove to preserve his composure , from a fear of the compelling pain of such time , and the consequent exhaustion . his heart have be very full of Ruth all day long , and he be afraid of his sister begin the subject ; so he read on , or seem to do so , though he hardly see the letter he hold before he . it be a great relief to he when Sally throw open the middle door with a bang , which do not indicate either calmness of mind or sweetness of temper . 

 " be yon young woman go to stay any length o ' time with we ? " ask she of Miss Benson . 

 Mr Benson put his hand gently on his sister 's arm , to check she from make any reply , while he say , 

 " we can not exactly tell , Sally . she will remain until after her confinement . " 

 " Lord bless we and save we ! a baby in the house ! Nay , then my time 's come , and I will pack up and begone . I never could abide they thing . I would soon have rat in the house . " 

 Sally really do look alarmed . 

 " why , Sally ! " say Mr Benson , smile , " I be not much more than a baby when you come to take care of I . " 

 " yes , you be , Master Thurstan ; you be a fine bounce lad of three year old and well . " 

 then she remember the change she have work in the " fine bounce lad , " and her eye fill with tear , which she be too proud to wipe away with her apron ; for , as she sometimes say to herself , ' she could not abide cry before folk . " 

 " well , it be no use talk , Sally , " say Miss Benson , too anxious to speak to be any long repress . " we have   promise to keep she , and we must do it ; you will have none of the trouble , Sally , so do not   be afraid . " 

 " well , I never ! as if I minded trouble ! you might ha ' know I well nor that . I have   scour master 's room twice over , just to make the board look white , though the carpet be to cover they , and now you go and cast up about I mind my trouble . if they be the fashion you have   learn in Wales , I be thankful I have   never be there . " 

 Sally look red , indignant , and really hurt . Mr Benson come in with his musical voice and soft word of healing . 

 " faith know you do not   care for trouble , Sally ; she be only anxious about this poor young woman , who have no friend but ourselves . we know there will be more trouble in consequence of she come to stay with we ; and I think , though we never speak about it , that in make our plan we reckon on your kind help , Sally , which have never fail we yet when we need it . " 

 " you have   twice the sense of your sister , Master Thurstan , that you have . boy always have . it be truth there will be more trouble , and I shall have my share on't , I reckon . I can face it if I be tell out and out , but I can not abide the way some folk have of deny there be trouble or pain to be meet ; just as if their say there be none , would do away with it . some folk treat one like a babby , and I do not   like it . I be not mean you , Master Thurstan . " 

 " no , Sally , you need not say that . I know well enough who you mean when you say ' some folk . ' however , I admit I be wrong in speak as if you minded trouble , for there never be a creature minded it less . but I want you to like Mrs Denbigh , " say Miss Benson . 

 " I dare say I should , if you would let I alone . I do na like she sit down in master 's chair . set she up , indeed , in an arm - chair wi ' cushion ! wench in my day be glad enough of stool . " 

 " she be tired to - night , " say Mr Benson . " we be all tired ; so if you have do your work , Sally , come in to read . " 

 the three quiet people kneel down side by side , and two of they pray earnestly for " they that have go astray . " before ten o'clock , the household be in bed . 

 Ruth , sleepless , weary , restless with the oppression of a sorrow which she dare not face and contemplate bravely , keep awake all the early part of the night . many a time do she rise , and go to the long casement window , and look abroad over the still and quiet town over the grey stone wall , and chimney , and old high - pointed roof on to the far - away hilly line of the horizon , lie calm under the bright moonshine . it be late in the morning when she wake from her long - defer slumber ; and when she go downstairs , she find Mr and Miss Benson await she in the parlour . that homely , pretty , old - fashioned little room ! how bright and still and clean it look ! the window   all the window at the back of the house be casement   be open , to let in the sweet morning air , and stream eastern sunshine . the long jessamine spray , with their white - scented star , force themselves almost into the room . the little square garden beyond , with grey stone wall all round , be rich and mellow in its autumnal colouring , run from deep crimson hollyhock up to amber and gold nasturtium , and all tone down by the clear and delicate air . it be so still , that the gossamer - webs , laden with dew , do not tremble or quiver in the least ; but the sun be draw to himself the sweet incense of many flower , and the parlour be scented with the odour of mignonette and stock . Miss Benson be arrange a bunch of China and damask rose in an old - fashioned jar ; they lay , all dewy and fresh , on the white breakfast - cloth when Ruth enter . Mr Benson be read in some large folio . with gentle morning speech they greet she ; but the quiet repose of the scene be instantly break by Sally pop in from the kitchen , and glance at Ruth with sharp reproach . she say : 

 " I reckon I may bring in breakfast , now ? " with a strong emphasis on the last word . 

 " I be afraid I be very late , " say Ruth . 

 " oh , never mind , " say Mr Benson , gently . " it be our fault for not tell you our breakfast hour . we always have prayer at half - past seven ; and , for Sally 's sake , we never vary from that time ; for she can so arrange her work , if she know the hour of prayer , as to have her mind calm and untroubled . " 

 " Ahem ! " say Miss Benson , rather inclined to " testify " against the invariable calmness of Sally 's mind at any hour of the day ; but her brother go on as if he do not hear she . 

 " but the breakfast do not signify be delay a little ; and I be sure you be sadly tired with your long day yesterday . " 

 Sally come slap in , and put down some wither , tough , dry toast , with 

 " it be not my do if it be like leather ; " but as no one appear to hear she , she withdraw to her kitchen , leave Ruth 's cheek like crimson at the annoyance she have cause . 

 all day long , she have that feel common to those who go to stay at a fresh house among comparative stranger : a feeling of the necessity that she should become accustomed to the new atmosphere in which she be place , before she could move and act freely ; it be , indeed , a purer ether , a diviner air , which she be breathe in now , than what she have be accustom to for long month . the gentle , blessed mother , who have make her childhood 's home holy ground , be in her very nature so far remove from any of earth 's stain and temptation , that she seem truly one of those 
 

 who ask not if Thine eye 
 be on they ; who , in love and truth , 
 where no misgiving be , rely 
 upon the genial sense of youth . 
 

 in the Bensons ' house there be the same unconsciousness of individual merit , the same absence of introspection and analysis of motive , as there have be in her mother ; but it seem that their life be pure and good , not merely from a lovely and beautiful nature , but from some law , the obedience to which be , of itself , harmonious peace , and which govern they almost implicitly , and with as little questioning on their part , as the glorious star which haste not , rest not , in their eternal obedience . this household have many failing : they be but human , and , with all their love desire to bring their life into harmony with the will of God , they often err and fall short ; but , somehow , the very error and fault of one individual serve to call out high excellence in another , and so they react upon each other , and the result of short discord be exceed harmony and peace . but they have themselves no idea of the real state of thing ; they do not trouble themselves with mark their progress by self - examination ; if Mr Benson do sometimes , in hour of sick incapacity for exertion , turn inward , it be to cry aloud with almost morbid despair , " God be merciful to I a sinner ! " but he strove to leave his life in the hand of God , and to forget himself . 

 Ruth sit still and quiet through the long first day . she be languid and weary from her journey ; she be uncertain what help she might offer to give in the household duty , and what she might not . and , in her languor and in her uncertainty , it be pleasant to watch the new way of the people among whom she be place . after breakfast , Mr Benson withdraw to his study , Miss Benson take away the cup and saucer , and , leave the kitchen door open , talk sometimes to Ruth , sometimes to Sally , while she wash they up . Sally have upstairs duty to perform , for which Ruth be thankful , as she keep receive rather angry glance for her unpunctuality as long as Sally remain downstairs . Miss Benson assist in the preparation for the early dinner , and bring some kidney - bean to shred into a basin of bright , pure spring - water , which catch and dance in the sunbeam as she sit near the open casement of the parlour , talk to Ruth of thing and people which as yet the latter do not understand , and could not arrange and comprehend . she be like a child who get a few piece of a dissect map , and be confuse until a glimpse of the whole unity be show he . Mr and Mrs Bradshaw be the centre piece in Ruth 's map ; their child , their servant , be the accessory ; and one or two other name be occasionally mention . Ruth wonder and almost weary at Miss Benson 's perseverance in talk to she about people whom she do not know ; but , in truth , Miss Benson hear the long - draw , quivering sigh which come from the poor heavy heart , when it be leave to silence , and have leisure to review the past ; and her quick accustomed ear catch also the low muttering of the thunder in the distance , in the shape of Sally 's soliloquy , which , like the aside at a theatre , be intend to be hear . suddenly , Miss Benson call Ruth out of the room , upstairs into her own bed - chamber , and then begin rummage in little old - fashioned box , draw out of an equally old - fashioned bureau , half desk , half table , and wholly drawer . 

 " my dear , I have   be very stupid and thoughtless . oh ! I be so glad I think of it before Mrs Bradshaw come to call . here it be ! " and she pull out an old wedding - ring , and hurry it on Ruth 's finger . Ruth hang down her head , and redden deep with shame ; her eye smart with the hot tear that fill they . Miss Benson talk on , in a nervous hurried way : 

 " it be my grandmother 's ; it be very broad ; they make they so then , to hold a posy inside : there be one in that ; 
 

 thine own sweetheart 
 till death doth part , 
 

 I think it be . there , there ! run away , and look as if you would always wear it . " 

 Ruth go up to her room , and throw herself down on her knee by the bedside , and cry as if her heart would break ; and then , as if a light have come down into her soul , she calm herself and pray no word can tell how humbly , and with what earnest feeling . when she come down , she be tear - stain and wretchedly pale ; but even Sally look at she with new eye , because of the dignity with which she be invest by an earnestness of purpose which have her child for its object . she sit and think , but she no long heave those bitter sigh which have wring Miss Benson 's heart in the morning . in this way the day wear on ; early dinner , early tea , seem to make it preternaturally long to Ruth ; the only event be some unexplained absence of Sally 's , who have disappear out of the house in the evening , much to Miss Benson 's surprise , and somewhat to her indignation . 

 at night , after Ruth have go up to her room , this absence be explain to she at least . she have let down her long wave glossy hair , and be stand absorb in thought in the middle of the room , when she hear a round clumping knock at her door , different from that give by the small knuckle of delicate finger , and in walk Sally , with a judge - like severity of demeanour , hold in her hand two widow 's cap of commonest make and coarse texture . Queen Eleanor herself , when she present the bowl to Fair Rosamond , have not a more relentless purpose stamp on her demeanour than have Sally at this moment . she walk up to the beautiful , astonished Ruth , where she stand in her long , soft , white dressing - gown , with all her luxuriant brown hair hang dishevel down her figure , and thus Sally speak : 

 " Missus or miss , as the case may be I have   my doubt as to you . I be not go to have my master and Miss Faith put upon , or shame come near they . widow wear these sort o ' cap , and have their hair cut off ; and whether widow wear wedding - ring or not , they shall have their hair cut off they shall . I will have no half work in this house . I have   live with the family forty - nine year come Michaelmas , and I will not see it disgrace by any one 's fine long curl . sit down and let I snip off your hair , and let I see you sham decently in a widow 's cap to - morrow , or I will leave the house . Whatten 's come over Miss Faith , as use to be as mim a lady as ever be , to be take by such as you , I dunnot know . here ! sit down with ye , and let I crop you . " 

 she lay no light hand on Ruth 's shoulder ; and the latter , partly intimidate by the old servant , who have hitherto only turn her vixen lining to observation , and partly because she be break - spirited enough to be indifferent to the measure propose , quietly sit down . Sally produce the formidable pair of scissor that always hang at her side , and begin to cut in a merciless manner . she expect some remonstrance or some opposition , and have a torrent of word ready to flow forth at the least sign of rebellion ; but Ruth be still and silent , with meekly - bow head , under the strange hand that be shear her beautiful hair into the clip shortness of a boy 's . long before she have finish , Sally have some slight misgiving as to the fancied necessity of her task ; but it be too late , for half the curl be go , and the rest must now come off . when she have do , she lift up Ruth 's face by place her hand under the round white chin . she gaze into the countenance , expect to read some anger there , though it have not come out in word ; but she only meet the large , quiet eye , that look at she with sad gentleness out of their finely - hollow orbit . Ruth 's soft , yet dignified submission , touch Sally with compunction , though she do not choose to show the change in her feeling . she try to hide it , indeed , by stoop to pick up the long bright tress ; and , hold they up admiringly , and let they drop down and float on the air   like the pendant branch of the weeping birch , she say : " I think we should ha ' have some cry I do . they be pretty curl enough ; you have   not be so bad to let they be cut off neither . you see , Master Thurstan be no wise than a babby in some thing ; and Miss Faith just let he have his own way ; so it be all leave to I to keep he out of scrape . I will wish you a very good night . I have   hear many a one say as long hair be not wholesome . good night . " 

 but in a minute she pop her head into Ruth 's room once more : 

 " you will put on they cap to - morrow morning . I will make you a present on they . " 

 Sally have carry away the beautiful curl , and she could not find it in her heart to throw such lovely chestnut tresse away , so she fold they up carefully in paper , and place they in a safe corner of her drawer . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 Ruth 's First Sunday at Eccleston 
 

 Ruth feel very shy when she come down   at half - past seven   the next morning , in her widow 's cap . her smooth , pale face , with its oval untouched by time , look more young and childlike than ever , when contrast with the head - gear usually associate with idea of age . she blush very deeply as Mr and Miss Benson show the astonishment , which they could not conceal , in their look . she say in a low voice to Miss Benson , 

 " Sally think I have well wear it . " 

 Miss Benson make no reply ; but be startle at the intelligence , which she think be convey in this speech , of Sally 's acquaintance with Ruth 's real situation . she notice Sally 's look particularly this morning . the manner in which the old servant treat Ruth have in it far more of respect than there have be the day before ; but there be a kind of satisfied way of brave out Miss Benson 's glance which make the latter uncertain and uncomfortable . 

 she follow her brother into his study . 

 " do you know , Thurstan , I be almost certain Sally suspect . " 

 Mr Benson sigh . the deception grieve he , and yet he think he see its necessity . 

 " what make you think so ? " ask he . 

 " oh ! many little thing . it be her odd way of duck her head about , as if to catch a good view of Ruth 's left hand , that make I think of the wedding - ring ; and once , yesterday , when I think I have make up quite a natural speech , and be say how sad it be for so young a creature to be leave a widow , she break in with ' widow be farre ! ' in a very strange , contemptuous kind of manner . " 

 " if she suspect , we have far well tell she the truth at once . she will never rest till she find it out , so we must make a virtue of necessity . " 

 " well , brother , you shall tell she then , for I be sure I dare not . I do not   mind do the thing , since you talk to I that day , and since I have   get to know Ruth ; but I do mind all the clatter people will make about it . " 

 " but Sally be not ' people . ' " 

 " oh , I see it must be do ; she will talk as much as all the other person put together , so that be the reason I call she ' people . ' shall I call she ? "   for the house be too homely and primitive to have bell . 

 Sally come , fully aware of what be now go to be tell she , and determine not to help they out in tell their awkward secret , by understand the nature of it before it be put into the plainest language . in every pause , when they hop she have catch the meaning they be hint at , she persist in look stupid and perplexed , and in say , " well , " as if quite unenlightened as to the end of the story . when it be all complete and plain before she , she say , honestly enough , 

 " it be just as I think it be ; and I think you may thank I for have have the sense to put she into widow 's cap , and clip off that bonny brown hair that be fitter for a bride in lawful matrimony than for such as she . she take it very well , though . she be as quiet as a lamb , and I clip she pretty roughly at first . I must say , though , if I would ha ' know who your visitor be , I would ha ' pack up my thing and clear myself out of the house before such as she come into it . as it be do , I suppose I must stand by you , and help you through with it ; I only hope I shall not   lose my character , and I a parish clerk 's daughter . " 

 " oh , Sally ! people know you too well to think any ill of you , " say Miss Benson , who be pleased to find the difficulty so easily get over ; for , in truth , Sally have be much soften by the unresisting gentleness with which Ruth have submit to the " clipping " of the night before . 

 " if I have be with you , Master Thurstan , I would ha ' see sharp after you , for you be always pick up some one or another as nobody else would touch with a pair of tong . why , there be that Nelly Brandon 's child as be leave at our door , if I have not   go to th ' overseer we should have have that irish tramp 's babby saddle on we for life ; but I go off and tell th ' overseer , and th ' mother be catch . " 

 " yes , " say Mr Benson , sadly , " and I often lie awake and wonder what be the fate of that poor little thing , force back on the mother who try to get quit of it . I often doubt whether I do right ; but it be no use think about it now . " 

 " I be thankful it be not , " say Sally ; " and now , if we have   talk doctrine long enough , I will go make th ' bed . Yon girl 's secret be safe enough for I . " 

 say this she leave the room , and Miss Benson follow . she find Ruth busy wash the breakfast thing ; and they be do in so quiet and orderly a manner , that neither Miss Benson nor Sally , both particular enough , have any of their little fancy or prejudice annoy . she seem to have an instinctive knowledge of the exact period when her help be likely to become a hindrance , and withdraw from the busy kitchen just at the right time . 

 that afternoon , as Miss Benson and Ruth sit at their work , Mrs and Miss Bradshaw call . Miss Benson be so nervous as to surprise Ruth , who do not understand the probable and possible question which might be ask respect any visitor at the minister 's house . Ruth go on sewing , absorb in her own thought , and glad that the conversation between the two elder lady and the silence of the young one , who sit at some distance from she , give she an opportunity of retreat into the haunt of memory ; and soon the work fall from her hand , and her eye be fix on the little garden beyond , but she do not see its flower or its wall ; she see the mountain which girdle Llan - dhu , and see the sun rise from behind their iron outline , just as it have do how long ago ? be it month or be it year ? since she have watch the night through , crouch up at his door . which be the dream and which the reality ? that distant life , or this ? his moan ring more clearly in her ear than the buzzing of the conversation between Mrs Bradshaw and Miss Benson . 

 at length the subdue , scared - look little lady and her bright - eyed silent daughter rise to take leave ; Ruth start into the present , and stand up and curtsey , and turn sick at heart with sudden recollection . 

 Miss Benson accompany Mrs Bradshaw to the door ; and in the passage give she a long explanation of Ruth 's   fictitious   history . Mrs Bradshaw look so much interested and please , that Miss Benson enlarge a little more than be necessary , and round off her invention with one or two imaginary detail , which , she be quite unconscious , be overhear by her brother through the half - open study door . 

 she be rather dismayed when he call she into his room after Mrs Bradshaw 's departure , and ask she what she have be say about Ruth ? 

 " oh ! I think it be well to explain it thoroughly I mean , to tell the story we wish to have believe once for all you know we agree about that , Thurstan ? " deprecatingly . 

 " yes ; but I hear you say you believe her husband have be a young surgeon , do I not ? " 

 " well , Thurstan , you know he must have be something ; and young surgeon be so in the way of die , it seem very natural . besides , " say she , with sudden boldness , " I do think I have   a talent for fiction , it be so pleasant to invent , and make the incident dovetail together ; and after all , if we be to tell a lie , we may as well do it thoroughly , or else it be of no use . a bungling lie would be bad than useless . and , Thurstan it may be very wrong but I believe I be afraid I enjoy not be fetter by truth . do not   look so grave . you know it be necessary , if ever it be , to tell falsehood now ; and do not   be angry with I because I do it well . " 

 he be shade his eye with his hand , and do not speak for some time . at last he say : 

 " if it be not for the child , I would tell all ; but the world be so cruel . you do not   know how this apparent necessity for falsehood pain I , Faith , or you would not invent all these detail , which be so many additional lie . " 

 " well , well ! I will restrain myself if I have to talk about Ruth again . but Mrs Bradshaw will tell every one who need to know . you do not   wish I to contradict it , Thurstan , surely it be such a pretty , probable story . " 

 " Faith ! I hope God will forgive we if we be do wrong ; and pray , dear , do not   add one unnecessary word that be not true . " 

 another day elapse , and then it be Sunday ; and the house seem fill with a deep peace . even Sally 's movement be less hasty and abrupt . Mr Benson seem invest with a new dignity , which make his bodily deformity be forget in his calm , grave composure of spirit . every trace of week - day occupation be put away ; the night before , a bright new handsome tablecloth have be smooth down over the table , and the jar have be freshly fill with flower . Sunday be a festival and a holy day in the house . after the very early breakfast , little foot patter into Mr Benson 's study , for he have a class for boy a sort of domestic Sunday - school , only that there be more talk between teacher and pupil , than dry , absolute lesson go on . Miss Benson , too , have her little , neat - tippete maiden sit with she in the parlour ; and she be far more particular in keep they to their reading and spelling , than her brother be with his boy . Sally , too , put in her word of instruction from the kitchen , help , as she fancy , though her assistance be often rather malapropos ; for instance , she call out , to a little fat , stupid , roly - poly girl , to whom Miss Benson be busy explain the meaning of the word quadrupe , 

 " Quadruped , a thing wi ' four leg , Jenny ; a chair be a quadrupe , child ! " 

 but Miss Benson have a deaf manner sometimes when her patience be not too severely try , and she put it on now . Ruth sit on a low hassock , and coax the least of the little creature to she , and show it picture till it fall asleep in her arm , and send a thrill through she , at the thought of the tiny darling who would lie on her breast before long , and whom she would have to cherish and to shelter from the storm of the world . 

 and then she remember , that she be once white and sinless as the wee lassie who lie in her arm ; and she know that she have go astray . by - and - by the child troop away , and Miss Benson summon she to put on her thing for chapel . 

 the chapel be up a narrow street , or rather cul - de - sac , close by . it stand on the outskirt of the town , almost in field . it be build about the time of Matthew and Philip Henry , when the Dissenters be afraid of attract attention or observation , and hide their place of worship in obscure and out - of - the - way part of the town in which they be build . accordingly , it often happen , as in the present case , that the building immediately surround , as well as the chapel themselves , look as if they carry you back to a period a hundred and fifty year ago . the chapel have a picturesque and old - world look , for luckily the congregation have be too poor to rebuild it , or new - face it , in George the Third 's time . the staircase which lead to the gallery be outside , at each end of the building , and the irregular roof and wear stone step look grey and stain by time and weather . the grassy hillock , each with a little upright headstone , be shade by a grand old wych - elm . a lilac - bush or two , a white rose - tree , and a few laburnum , all old and gnarl enough , be plant round the chapel yard ; and the casement window of the chapel be make of heavy - leaded , diamond - shape pane , almost cover with ivy , produce a green gloom , not without its solemnity , within . this ivy be the home of an infinite number of little bird , which twitter and warble , till it might have be think that they be emulous of the power of praise possess by the human creature within , with such earnest , long - draw strain do this crowd of wing songster rejoice and be glad in their beautiful gift of life . the interior of the building be plain and simple as plain and simple could be . when it be fit up , oak - timber be much cheap than it be now , so the wood - work be all of that description ; but roughly hew , for the early builder have not much wealth to spare . the wall be whitewash , and be recipient of the shadow of the beauty without ; on their " white plain " the tracery of the ivy might be see , now still , now stir by the sudden flight of some little bird . the congregation consist of here and there a farmer with his labourer , who come down from the upland beyond the town to worship where their father worship , and who love the place because they know how much those father have suffer for it , although they never trouble themselves with the reason why they leave the parish church ; of a few shopkeeper , far more thoughtful and reasoning , who be dissenter from conviction , unmixe with old ancestral association ; and of one or two family of still high worldly station . with many poor , who be draw there by love for Mr Benson 's character , and by a feeling that the faith which make he what he be could not be far wrong , for the base of the pyramid , and with Mr Bradshaw for its apex , the congregation stand complete . 

 the country people come in sleek down their hair , and treading with earnest attempt at noiseless lightness of step over the floor of the aisle ; and by - and - by , when all be assemble , Mr Benson follow , unmarshalled and unattended . when he have close the pulpit - door , and kneel in prayer for an instant or two , he give out a psalm from the dear old scottish paraphrase , with its primitive inversion of the simple perfect Bible word ; and a kind of precentor stand up , and , have sound the note on a pitch - pipe , sing a couple of line by way of indicate the tune ; then all the congregation stand up , and sing aloud , Mr Bradshaw 's great bass voice be half a note in advance of the other , in accordance with his place of precedence as principal member of the congregation . his powerful voice be like an organ very badly play , and very much out of tune ; but as he have no ear , and no diffidence , it please he very much to hear the fine loud sound . he be a tall , large - boned , iron man ; stern , powerful , and authoritative in appearance ; dress in clothe of the fine broadcloth , and scrupulously ill - make , as if to show that he be indifferent to all outward thing . his wife be sweet and gentle - looking , but as if she be thoroughly break into submission . 

 Ruth do not see this , or hear aught but the word which be reverently oh , how reverently ! speak by Mr Benson . he have have Ruth present in his thought all the time he have be prepare for his Sunday duty ; and he have try carefully to eschew everything which she might feel as an allusion to her own case . he remember how the good Shepherd , in Poussin 's beautiful picture , tenderly carry the lamb which have weary themselves by go astray , and feel how like tenderness be require towards poor Ruth . but where be the chapter which do not contain something which a broken and contrite spirit may not apply to itself ? and so it fall out that , as he read , Ruth 's heart be smite , and she sink down , and down , till she be kneel on the floor of the pew , and speak to God in the spirit , if not in the word , of the Prodigal Son : " Father ! I have sin against Heaven and before Thee , and be no more worthy to be call Thy child ! " Miss Benson be thankful   although she love Ruth the well for this self - abandonment   that the minister 's seat be far in the shade of the gallery . she try to look most attentive to her brother , in order that Mr Bradshaw might not suspect anything unusual , while she stealthily take hold of Ruth 's passive hand , as it lie helpless on the cushion , and press it softly and tenderly . but Ruth sit on the ground , bow down and crush in her sorrow , till all be end . 

 Miss Benson loitered in her seat , divide between the consciousness that she , as locum tenen for the minister 's wife , be expect to be at the door to receive the kind greeting of many after her absence from home , and her unwillingness to disturb Ruth , who be evidently pray , and , by her quiet breathing , receive grave and solemn influence into her soul . at length she rise up , calm and compose even to dignity . the chapel be still and empty ; but Miss Benson hear the buzz of voice in the chapel - yard without . they be probably those of people wait for she ; and she summon courage , and take Ruth 's arm in her , and hold her hand affectionately , they go out into the broad daylight . as they issue forth , Miss Benson hear Mr Bradshaw 's strong bass voice speak to her brother , and wince , as she know he would be wince , under the broad praise , which be impertinence , however little it may be intend or esteem as such . 

 " oh , yes ! my wife tell I yesterday about she her husband be a surgeon ; my father be a surgeon too , as I think you have hear . very much to your credit , I must say , Mr Benson , with your limited mean , to burden yourself with a poor relation . very creditable indeed . " 

 Miss Benson glance at Ruth ; she either do not hear or do not understand , but pass on into the awful sphere of Mr Bradshaw 's observation unmove . he be in a bland and condescend humour of universal approval , and when he see Ruth , he nod his head in token of satisfaction . that ordeal be over , Miss Benson think , and in the thought rejoice . 

 " after dinner , you must go and lie down , my dear , " say she , untie Ruth 's bonnet - string , and kiss she . " Sally go to church again , but you will not   mind stay alone in the house . I be sorry we have so many people to dinner , but my brother will always have enough on Sundays for any old or weak people , who may have come from a distance , to stay and dine with we ; and to - day they all seem to have come , because it be his first Sabbath at home . " 

 in this way Ruth 's first Sabbath pass over . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XV 

 Mother and Child 
 

 " here be a parcel for you , Ruth ! " say Miss Benson on the Tuesday morning . 

 " for I ! " say Ruth , all sort of rush thought and hope fill her mind , and turn she dizzy with expectation . if it have be from " he , " the new - bear resolution would have have a hard struggle for existence . 

 " it be direct ' Mrs Denbigh , ' " say Miss Benson , before give it up . " it be in Mrs Bradshaw 's handwriting ; " and , far more curious than Ruth , she await the untying of the close - knot string . when the paper be open , it display a whole piece of delicate cambric - muslin ; and there be a short note from Mrs Bradshaw to Ruth , say her husband have wish she to send this muslin in aid of any preparation Mrs Denbigh might have to make . Ruth say nothing , but colour up , and sit down again to her employment . 

 " very fine muslin indeed , " say Miss Benson , feel it , and hold it up against the light , with the air of a connoisseur ; yet all the time she be glance at Ruth 's grave face . the latter keep silence , and show no wish to inspect her present far . at last she say , in a low voice , 

 " I suppose I may send it back again ? " 

 " my dear child ! send it back to Mr Bradshaw ! you would offend he for life . you may depend upon it , he mean it as a mark of high favour ! " 

 " what right have he to send it I ? " ask Ruth , still in her quiet voice . 

 " what right ? Mr Bradshaw think I do not   know exactly what you mean by ' right . ' " 

 Ruth be silent for a moment , and then say : 

 " there be people to whom I love to feel that I owe gratitude gratitude which I can not express , and have well not talk about but I can not see why a person whom I do not know should lay I under an obligation . oh ! do not   say I must take this muslin , please , Miss Benson ! " 

 what Miss Benson might have say if her brother have not just then enter the room , neither he nor any other person could tell ; but she feel his presence be most opportune , and call he in as umpire . he have come hastily , for he have much to do ; but he no soon hear the case than he sit down , and try to draw some more explicit declaration of her feeling from Ruth , who have remain silent during Miss Benson 's explanation . 

 " you would rather send this present back ? " say he . 

 " yes , " she answer , softly . " be it wrong ? " 

 " why do you want to return it ? " 

 " because I feel as if Mr Bradshaw have no right to offer it I . " 

 Mr Benson be silent . 

 " it be beautifully fine , " say Miss Benson , still examine the piece . 

 " you think that it be a right which must be earn ? " 

 " yes , " say she , after a minute 's pause . " do not   you ? " 

 " I understand what you mean . it be a delight to have gift make to you by those whom you esteem and love , because then such gift be merely to be consider as fringe to the garment as inconsiderable addition to the mighty treasure of their affection , add a grace , but no additional value , to what before be precious , and proceed as naturally out of that as leaf burgeon out upon the tree ; but you feel it to be different when there be no regard for the giver to idealise the gift when it simply take its stand among your property as so much money 's value . be this it , Ruth ? " 

 " I think it be . I never reason why I feel as I do ; I only know that Mr Bradshaw 's give I a present hurt I , instead of make I glad . " 

 " well , but there be another side of the case we have not look at yet we must think of that , too . you know who say , ' do unto other as ye would that they should do unto you ' ? Mr Bradshaw may not have have that in his mind when he desire his wife to send you this ; he may have be self - seeking , and only anxious to gratify his love of patronising that be the bad motive we can give he ; and that would be no excuse for your thinking only of yourself , and return his present . " 

 " but you would not have I pretend to be oblige ? " ask Ruth . 

 " no , I would not . I have often be similarly situate to you , Ruth ; Mr Bradshaw have frequently oppose I on the point on which I feel the warm be the most earnestly convinced . he , no doubt , think I quixotic , and often speak of I , and to I , with great contempt when he be angry . I suppose he have a little fit of penitence afterwards , or perhaps he think he can pay for ungracious speech by a present ; so , formerly , he invariably send I something after these occasion . it be a time , of all other , to feel as you be do now ; but I become convinced it would be right to accept they , give only the very cool thank which I feel . this omission of all show of much gratitude have the good effect the present have much diminish ; but if the gift have lessen , the unjustifiable speech have decrease in still great proportion , and I be sure we respect each other more . take this muslin , Ruth , for the reason I name ; and thank he as your feeling prompt you . overstrained expression of gratitude always seem like an endeavour to place the receiver of these expression in the position of debtor for future favour . but you will not   fall into this error . " 

 Ruth listen to Mr Benson ; but she have not yet fall sufficiently into the tone of his mind to understand he fully . she only feel that he comprehend she well than Miss Benson , who once more try to reconcile she to her present , by call her attention to the length and breadth thereof . 

 " I will do what you wish I , " she say , after a little pause of thoughtfulness . " may we talk of something else ? " 

 Mr Benson see that his sister 's frame of mind be not particularly congenial with Ruth 's , any more than Ruth 's be with Miss Benson 's ; and , put aside all thought of return to the business which have appear to he so important when he come into the room   but which principally related to himself , he remain above an hour in the parlour , interesting they on subject far remove from the present , and leave they at the end of that time soothe and calm . 

 but the present give a new current to Ruth 's idea . her heart be as yet too sore to speak , but her mind be crowd with plan . she ask Sally to buy she   with the money produce by the sale of a ring or two   the coarse linen , the homely dark blue print , and similar material ; on which she set busily to work to make clothe for herself ; and as they be make , she put they on ; and as she put they on , she give a grace to each , which such homely material and simple shaping have never have before . then the fine linen and delicate soft white muslin , which she have choose in preference to more expensive article of dress when Mr Bellingham have give her carte blanche in London , be cut into small garment , most daintily stitch and make ready for the little creature , for whom in its white purity of soul nothing could be too precious . 

 the love which dictate this extreme simplicity and coarseness of attire , be take for stiff , hard economy by Mr Bradshaw , when he deign to observe it . and economy by itself , without any soul or spirit in it to make it live and holy , be a great merit in his eye . indeed , Ruth altogether find favour with he . her quiet manner , subdue by an internal consciousness of a deep cause for sorrow than he be aware of , he interpret into a very proper and become awe of he . he look off from his own prayer to observe how well she attend to hers at chapel ; when he come to any verse in the hymn relate to immortality or a future life , he sing it unusually loud , think he should thus comfort she in her sorrow for her deceased husband . he desire Mrs Bradshaw to pay she every attention she could ; and even once remark , that he think she so respectable a young person that he should not object to she be ask to tea the next time Mr and Miss Benson come . he add , that he think , indeed , Benson have look last Sunday as if he rather hop to get an invitation ; and it be right to encourage the minister , and to show they respect , even though their salary be small . the only thing against this Mrs Denbigh be the circumstance of she have marry too early , and without any provision for a family . though Ruth plead delicacy of health , and decline accompany Mr and Miss Benson on their visit to Mr Bradshaw , she still preserve her place in his esteem ; and Miss Benson have to call a little upon her " talent for fiction " to spare Ruth from the infliction of further present , in make which his love of patronise delighted . 

 the yellow and crimson leaf come float down on the still October air ; November follow , bleak and dreary ; it be more cheerful when the earth put on her beautiful robe of white , which cover up all the grey naked stem , and load the leaf of the holly and evergreen each with its burden of feathery snow . when Ruth sink down to languor and sadness , Miss Benson trot upstairs , and rummage up every article of spare or wear - out clothing , and bring down a variety of strange material , she try to interest Ruth in make they up into garment for the poor . but though Ruth 's finger fly through the work , she still sigh with thought and remembrance . Miss Benson be at first disappoint , and then she be angry . when she hear the low , long sigh , and see the dreamy eye fill with glitter tear , she would say , " what be the matter , Ruth ? " in a half - reproachful tone , for the sight of suffering be painful to she ; she have do all in her power to remedy it ; and , though she acknowledge a cause beyond her reach for Ruth 's deep sorrow , and , in fact , love and respect she all the more for these manifestation of grief , yet at the time they irritate she . then Ruth would snatch up the drop work , and stitch away with droop eye , from which the hot tear fall fast ; and Miss Benson be then angry with herself , yet not at all inclined to agree with Sally when she ask her mistress " why she keep ' mithere ' the poor lass with ask she for ever what be the matter , as if she do not know well enough . " some element of harmony be want some little angel of peace , in love whom all heart and nature should be draw together , and their discord hush . 

 the earth be still " hide her guilty front with innocent snow , " when a little baby be lay by the side of the pale white mother . it be a boy ; beforehand she have wish for a girl , as be less likely to feel the want of a father as be what a mother , bad than widow , could most effectually shelter . but now she do not think or remember this . what it be , she would not have exchange for a wilderness of girl . it be her own , her darling , her individual baby , already , though not an hour old , separate and sole in her heart , strangely fill up its measure with love and peace , and even hope . for here be a new , pure , beautiful , innocent life , which she fondly imagine , in that early passion of maternal love , she could guard from every touch of corrupt sin by ever watchful and most tender care . and her mother have think the same , most probably ; and thousand of other think the same , and pray to God to purify and cleanse their soul , that they may be fit guardian for their little child . oh , how Ruth pray , even while she be yet too weak to speak ; and how she feel the beauty and significance of the word , " our Father ! " 

 she be rouse from this holy abstraction by the sound of Miss Benson 's voice . it be very much as if she have be cry . 

 " look , Ruth ! " it say , softly , " my brother send you these . they be the first snowdrop in the garden . " and she put they on the pillow by Ruth ; the baby lie on the opposite side . 

 " will not   you look at he ? " say Ruth ; " he be so pretty ! " 

 Miss Benson have a strange reluctance to see he . to Ruth , in spite of all that have come and go , she be reconcile nay , more , she be deeply attach ; but over the baby there hang a cloud of shame and disgrace . poor little creature ! her heart be close against it firmly , as she think . but she could not resist Ruth 's low faint voice , nor her plead eye , and she go round to peep at he as he lie in his mother 's arm , as yet his shield and guard . 

 " Sally say he will have black hair , she think , " say Ruth . " his little hand be quite a man 's , already . just feel how firmly he close it ; " and with her own weak finger she open his little red fist , and take Miss Benson 's reluctant hand , place one of her finger in his grasp . that baby - touch call out her love ; the door of her heart be throw open wide for the little infant to go in and take possession . 

 " ah , my darling ! " say Ruth , fall back weak and weary . " if God will but spare you to I , never mother do more than I will . I have do you a grievous wrong but , if I may but live , I will spend my life in serve you ! " 

 " and in serve God ! " say Miss Benson , with tear in her eye . " you must not make he into an idol , or God will , perhaps , punish you through he . " 

 a pang of affright shoot through Ruth 's heart at these word ; have she already sin and make her child into an idol , and be there punishment already in store for she through he ? but then the internal voice whisper that God be " our Father , " and that he know our frame , and know how natural be the first outburst of a mother 's love ; so , although she treasure up the warning , she cease to affright herself for what have already gush forth . 

 " now go to sleep , Ruth , " say Miss Benson , kiss she , and darken the room . but Ruth could not sleep ; if her heavy eye close , she open they again with a start , for sleep seem to be an enemy steal from she the consciousness of be a mother . that one think exclude all remembrance and all anticipation , in those first hour of delight . 

 but soon remembrance and anticipation come . there be the natural want of the person , who alone could take an interest similar in kind , though not in amount , to the mother 's . and sadness grow like a giant in the still watch of the night , when she remember that there would be no father to guide and strengthen the child , and place he in a favourable position for fight the hard " Battle of Life . " she hop and believe that no one would know the sin of his parent , and that that struggle might be spar to he . but a father 's powerful care and mighty guidance would never be his ; and then , in those hour of spiritual purification , come the wonder and the doubt of how far the real father would be the one to whom , with her desire of heaven for her child , whatever might become of herself , she would wish to entrust he . slight speech , tell of a selfish , worldly nature , unnoticed at the time , come back upon her ear , have a new significance . they tell of a low standard , of impatient self - indulgence , of no acknowledgment of thing spiritual and heavenly . even while this examination be force upon she , by the new spirit of maternity that have enter into she , and make her child 's welfare supreme , she hat and reproach herself for the necessity there seem upon she of examine and judge the absent father of her child . and so the compelling presence that have take possession of she weary she into a kind of feverish slumber ; in which she dream that the innocent babe that lie by her side in soft ruddy slumber have start up into man 's growth , and , instead of the pure and noble being whom she have pray to present as her child to " our Father in heaven , " he be a repetition of his father ; and , like he , lure some maiden   who in her dream seem strangely like herself , only more utterly sad and desolate even than she   into sin , and leave she there to even a bad fate than that of suicide . for Ruth believe there be a bad . she dream she see the girl , wandering , lost ; and that she see her son in high place , prosperous but with more than blood on his soul . she see her son drag down by the cling girl into some pit of horror into which she dare not look , but from whence his father 's voice be hear , cry aloud , that in his day and generation he have not remember the word of God , and that now he be " torment in this flame . " then she start in sick terror , and see , by the dim rushlight , Sally , nod in an arm - chair by the fire ; and feel her little soft warm babe , nestle up against her breast , rock by her heart , which yet beat hard from the effect of the evil dream . she dare not go to sleep again , but pray . and every time she pray , she ask with a more complete wisdom , and a more utter and self - forget faith . little child ! thy angel be with God , and draw her nearer and nearer to he , whose face be continually behold by the angel of little child . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 Sally Tells of her Sweethearts , 
 and discourse on the Duties of Life 
 

 Sally and Miss Benson take it in turn to sit up , or rather , they take it in turn to nod by the fire ; for if Ruth be awake she lie very still in the moonlight calm of her sick bed . that time resemble a beautiful August evening , such as I have see . the white , snowy rolling mist cover up under its great sheet all tree and meadow , and token of earth ; but it can not rise high enough to shut out the heaven , which on such night seem bend very near , and to be the only real and present object ; and so near , so real and present , do heaven , and eternity , and God seem to Ruth , as she lie encircle her mysterious holy child . 

 one night Sally find out she be not asleep . 

 " I be a rare hand at talk folk to sleep , " say she . " I will try on thee , for thou must get strength by sleep and eat . what must I talk to thee about , I wonder . shall I tell thee a love story or a fairy story , such as I have   tell Master Thurstan many a time and many a time , for all his father set his face again fairy , and call it vain talk ; or shall I tell you the dinner I once cook , when Mr Harding , as be Miss Faith 's sweetheart , come unlooked for , and we would nought in the house but a neck of mutton , out of which I make seven dish , all with a different name ? " 

 " who be Mr Harding ? " ask Ruth . 

 " oh , he be a grand gentleman from Lunnon , as have see Miss Faith , and be strike by her pretty look when she be out on a visit , and come here to ask she to marry he . she say , ' no , she would never leave Master Thurstan , as could never marry ; ' but she pin a deal at after he go away . she keep up afore Master Thurstan , but I seed her fretting , though I never let on that I do , for I think she would soon get over it and be thankful at after she have the strength to do right . however , I have   no business to be talk of Miss Benson 's concern . I will tell you of my own sweetheart and welcome , or I will tell you of the dinner , which be the grand thing I ever do in my life , but I think a Lunnoner should never think country folk know nothing ; and , my word ! I puzzle he with his dinner . I be doubt whether to this day he know whether what he be eat be fish , flesh , or fowl . shall I tell you how I manage ? " 

 but Ruth say she would rather hear about Sally 's sweetheart , much to the disappointment of the latter , who consider the dinner by far the great achievement . 

 " well , you see , I do not   know as I should call they sweetheart ; for except John Rawson , who be shut up in the mad - house the next week , I never have what you may call a downright offer of marriage but once . but I have once ; and so I may say I have a sweetheart . I be begin to be afeard though , for one like to be ax ; that be but civility ; and I remember , after I have turn forty , and afore Jeremiah Dixon have speak , I begin to think John Rawson have perhaps not be so very mad , and that I have do ill to lightly his offer , as a madman 's , if it be to be the only one I be ever to have ; I do not   mean as I would have have he , but I think , if it be to come o'er again , I would speak respectful of he to folk , and say it be only his way to go about on all four , but that he be a sensible man in most thing . however , I would have my laugh , and so have other , at my crazy lover , and it be late now to set he up as a Solomon . however , I think it would be no bad thing to be try again ; but I little think the trial would come when it do . you see , Saturday night be a leisure night in counting - house and such - like place , while it be the busy of all for servant . well ! it be a Saturday night , and I would my baize apron on , and the tail of my bed - gown pin together behind , down on my knee , pipeclaye the kitchen , when a knock come to the back door . ' come in ! ' say I ; but it knock again , as if it be too stately to open the door for itself ; so I get up , rather cross , and open the door ; and there stand Jerry Dixon , Mr Holt 's head clerk ; only he be not head clerk then . so I stand , stop up the door , fancy he want to speak to master ; but he kind of push past I , and tell I summut about the weather   as if I could not see it for myself , he take a chair , and sit down by the oven . ' cool and easy ! ' think I ; mean hisself , not his place , which I know must be pretty hot . well ! it seem no use stand wait for my gentleman to go ; not that he have much to say either ; but he keep twirl his hat round and round , and smooth the nap on't   with the back of his hand . so at last I squat down to my work , and think I , I shall be on my knee all ready if he put up a prayer , for I know he be a Methodee by bringing - up , and have only lately turn to master 's way of thinking ; and they Methodees be terrible hand at unexpected prayer when one least look for them . I can not   say I like their way of take one by surprise , as it be ; but then I be a parish clerk 's daughter , and could never demean myself to dissent fashion , always save and except Master Thurstan 's , bless he . however , I would be catch once or twice unaware , so this time I think I would be up to it , and I move a dry duster wherever I go , to kneel upon in case he begin when I be in a wet place . by - and - by I think , if the man would pray it would be a blessing , for it would prevent his send his eye after I wherever I go ; for when they take to pray they shut their eye , and quiver th ' lid in a queer kind o ' way they Dissenters do . I can speak pretty plain to you , for you be breed in the Church like mysel ' , and must find it as out o ' the way as I do to be among dissent folk . God forbid I should speak disrespectful of Master Thurstan and Miss Faith , though ; I never think on they as Church or dissenter , but just as Christians . but to come back to Jerry . first , I try always to be clean at his back ; but when he wheel round , so as always to face I , I think I would try a different game . so , say I , ' Master Dixon , I ax your pardon , but I must pipeclay under your chair . will you please to move ? ' well , he move ; and by - and - by I be at he again with the same word ; and at after that , again and again , till he be always move about wi ' his chair behind he , like a snail as carry its house on its back . and the great gaupus never seed that I be pipeclaye the same place twice over . at last I get desperate cross , he be so in my way ; so I make two big cross on the tail of his brown coat ; for you see , whenever he go , up or down , he draw out the tail of his coat from under he , and stick they through the bar of the chair ; and flesh and blood could not resist pipeclaye they for he ; and a pretty brushing he would have , I reckon , to get it off again . well ! at length he clear his throat uncommon loud ; so I spread my duster , and shut my eye all ready ; but when nought come of it , I open my eye a little bit to see what he be about . my word ! if there he be not   down on his knee right face I , star as hard as he could . well ! I think it would be hard work to stand that , if he make a long ado ; so I shut my eye again , and try to think serious , as become what I fancy be come ; but , forgive I ! but I think why could not   the fellow go in and pray wi ' Master Thurstan , as have always a calm spirit ready for prayer , instead o ' I , who have my dresser to scour , let alone an apron to iron . at last he say , say he , ' Sally ! will you oblige I with your hand ? ' so I think it be , maybe , Methodee fashion to pray hand in hand ; and I will not deny but I wish I would wash it well after black - lead the kitchen fire . I think I would well tell he it be not so clean as I could wish , so say I , ' Master Dixon , you shall have it , and welcome , if I may just go and wash them first . ' but , say he , ' my dear Sally , dirty or clean it be all the same to I , see I be only speak in a figuring way . what I be ask on my bended knee be , that you would please to be so kind as to be my wed wife ; week after next will suit I , if it be agreeable to you ! ' my word ! I be up on my foot in an instant ! it be odd now , be not   it ? I never think of take the fellow , and get marry ; for all , I will not deny , I have be think it would be agreeable to be ax . but all at once , I could not   abide the chap . ' Sir , ' say I , try to look shame - face as become the occasion , but for all that , feel a twittering round my mouth that I be afeard might end in a laugh ' Master Dixon , I be obleege to you for the compliment , and thank ye all the same , but I think I would prefer a single life . ' he look mighty take aback ; but in a minute he clear up , and be as sweet as ever . he still keep on his knee , and I wish he would take himself up ; but , I reckon , he think it would give force to his word ; say he , ' think again , my dear Sally . I have   a four - room house , and furniture conformable ; and eighty pound a year . you may never have such a chance again . ' there be truth enough in that , but it be not pretty in the man to say it ; and it put I up a bit . ' as for that , neither you nor I can tell , Master Dixon . you be not the first chap as I have   have down on his knee afore I , ax I to marry he   you see I be think of John Rawson , only I think there be no need to say he be on all four it be truth he be on his knee , you know , and maybe you will not be the last . anyhow , I have   no wish to change my condition just now . ' ' I will wait till Christmas , ' say he . ' I have   a pig as will be ready for kill then , so I must get marry before that . ' well now ! would you believe it ? the pig be a temptation . I have a receipt for cure ham , as Miss Faith would never let I try , say the old way be good enough . however , I resist . say I , very stern , because I feel I would be waver , ' Master Dixon , once for all , pig or no pig , I will not marry you . and if you will take my advice , you will get up off your knee . the flag be but damp yet , and it would be an awkward thing to have rheumatiz just before winter . ' with that he get up , stiff enough . he look as sulky a chap as ever I clap eye on . and as he be so black and cross , I think I would do well   whatever come of the pig   to say ' no ' to he . ' you may live to repent this , ' say he , very red . ' but I will not be too hard upon ye , I will give you another chance . I will let you have the night to think about it , and I will just call in to hear your second thought , after chapel to - morrow . ' well now ! do ever you hear the like ? but that be the way with all of they man , think so much of theirselve , and that it be but ask and have . they have   never have I , though ; and I shall be sixty - one next Martinmas , so there be not much time leave for they to try I , I reckon . well ! when Jeremiah say that , he put I up more than ever , and I say , ' my first thought , second thought , and third thought be all one and the same ; you have   but tempt I once , and that be when you speak of your pig . but of yoursel ' you be nothing to boast on , and so I will bid you good night , and I will keep my manner , or else , if I tell the truth , I should say it have be a great loss of time listen to you . but I will be civil so good night . ' he never say a word , but go off as black as thunder , slam the door after he . the master call I in to prayer , but I can not   say I could put my mind to they , for my heart be beat so . however , it be a comfort to have have an offer of holy matrimony ; and though it fluster I , it make I think more of myself . in the night , I begin to wonder if I have not be cruel and hard to he . you see , I be feverish - like ; and the old song of Barbary Allen would keep run in my head , and I think I be Barbary , and he be young Jemmy Gray , and that maybe he would die for love of I ; and I picture he to mysel ' , lie on his death - bed , with his face turn to the wall , ' wi ' deadly sorrow sigh , ' and I could ha ' pinched mysel ' for have be so like cruel Barbary Allen . and when I get up next day , I find it hard to think on the real Jerry Dixon I have see the night before , apart from the sad and sorrowful Jerry I think on a - dying , when I be between sleep and wake . and for many a day I turn sick , when I hear the pass bell , for I think it be the bell loud - knelling which be to break my heart wi ' a sense of what I have miss in say ' no ' to Jerry , and so kill he with cruelty . but in less than a three week , I hear parish bell a - ring merrily for a wedding ; and in the course of a morning , some one say to I , ' Hark ! how the bell be ring for Jerry Dixon 's wedding ! ' and , all on a sudden , he change back again from a heart - break young fellow , like Jemmy Gray , into a stout , middle - aged man , ruddy - complexion , with a wart on his left cheek like life ! " 

 Sally wait for some exclamation at the conclusion of her tale ; but receive none , she step softly to the bedside , and there lie Ruth , peaceful as death , with her baby on her breast . 

 " I think I would lose some of my gift if I could not talk a body to sleep , " say Sally , in a satisfied and self - complacent tone . 

 Youth be strong and powerful , and make a hard battle against sorrow . so Ruth strove and strengthen , and her baby flourish accordingly ; and before the little celandine be out on the hedge - bank , or the white violet have send forth their fragrance from the border under the south wall of Miss Benson 's small garden , Ruth be able to carry her baby into that shelter place on sunny day . 

 she often wish to thank Mr Benson and his sister , but she do not know how to tell the deep gratitude she feel , and therefore she be silent . but they understand her silence well . one day , as she watch her sleep child , she speak to Miss Benson , with whom she happen to be alone . 

 " do you know of any cottage where the people be clean , and where they would not mind take I in ? " ask she . 

 " take you in ! what do you mean ? " say Miss Benson , drop her knitting , in order to observe Ruth more closely . 

 " I mean , " say Ruth , " where I might lodge with my baby any very poor place would do , only it must be clean , or he might be ill . " 

 " and what in the world do you want to go and lodge in a cottage for ? " say Miss Benson , indignantly . 

 Ruth do not lift up her eye , but she speak with a firmness which show that she have consider the subject . 

 " I think I could make dress . I know I do not learn as much as I might , but perhaps I might do for servant , and people who be not particular . " 

 " servant be as particular as any one , " say Miss Benson , glad to lay hold of the first objection that she could . 

 " well ! somebody who would be patient with I , " say Ruth . 

 " nobody be patient over an ill - fitting gown , " put in Miss Benson . " there be the stuff spoilt , and what not ! " 

 " perhaps I could find plain work to do , " say Ruth , very meekly . " that I can do very well ; mamma teach I , and I like to learn from she . if you would be so good , Miss Benson , you might tell people I could do plain work very neatly , and punctually , and cheaply . " 

 " you would get sixpence a day , perhaps , " say Miss Benson , " and who would take care of baby , I should like to know ? prettily he would be neglect , would not he ? why , he would have the croup and the typhus fever in no time , and be burn to ash after . " 

 " I have think of all . look how he sleep ! Hush , darling ; " for just at this point he begin to cry , and to show his determination to be awake , as if in contradiction to his mother 's word . Ruth take he up , and carry he about the room while she go on speak . 

 " yes , just now I know he will not sleep ; but very often he will , and in the night he always do . " 

 " and so you would work in the night and kill yourself , and leave your poor baby an orphan . Ruth ! I be ashamed of you . now , brother "   Mr Benson have just come in , " be not this too bad of Ruth ; here she be plan to go away and leave we , just as we as I , at least , have grow so fond of baby , and he be begin to know I . " 

 " where be you think of go to , Ruth ? " interrupt Mr Benson , with mild surprise . 

 " anywhere to be near you and Miss Benson ; in any poor cottage where I might lodge very cheaply , and earn my livelihood by take in plain sewing , and perhaps a little dressmaking ; and where I could come and see you and dear Miss Benson sometimes and bring baby . " 

 " if he be not dead before then of some fever , or burn , or scald , poor neglect child ; or you have not work yourself to death with never sleep , " say Miss Benson . 

 Mr Benson think a minute or two , and then he speak to Ruth . 

 " whatever you may do when this little fellow be a year old , and able to dispense with some of a mother 's care , let I beg you , Ruth , as a favour to I as a still great favour to my sister , be it not , Faith ? " 

 " yes ; you may put it so if you like . " 

 " to stay with we , " continue he , " till then . when baby be twelve month old , we will talk about it again , and very likely before then some opening may be show we . never fear lead an idle life , Ruth . we will treat you as a daughter , and set you all the household task ; and it be not for your sake that we ask you to stay , but for this little dumb helpless child 's ; and it be not for our sake that you must stay , but for his . " 

 Ruth be sob . 

 " I do not deserve your kindness , " say she , in a broken voice ; " I do not deserve it . " 

 her tear fall fast and soft like summer rain , but no further word be speak . Mr Benson quietly pass on to make the inquiry for which he have enter the room . 

 but when there be nothing to decide upon , and no necessity for enter upon any new course of action , Ruth 's mind relax from its string - up state . she fall into train of reverie , and mournful regretful recollection which render her languid and tearful . this be notice both by Miss Benson and Sally , and as each have keen sympathy , and feel depressed when they see any one near they depressed , and as each , without much reasoning on the cause or reason for such depression , feel irritated at the uncomfortable state into which they themselves be throw , they both resolve to speak to Ruth on the next fitting occasion . 

 accordingly , one afternoon the morning of that day have be spend by Ruth in housework , for she have insist on Mr Benson 's word , and have take Miss Benson 's share of the more active and fatigue household duty , but she go through they heavily , and as if her heart be far away in the afternoon when she be nurse her child , Sally , on come into the back parlour , find she there alone , and easily detect the fact that she have be cry . 

 " where be Miss Benson ? " say Sally , gruffly . 

 " go out with Mr Benson , " answer Ruth , with an absent sadness in her voice and manner . her tear , scarce check while she speak , begin to fall afresh ; and as Sally stand and gaze she see the babe look back in his mother 's face , and his little lip begin to quiver , and his open blue eye to grow over - clouded , as with some mysterious sympathy with the sorrowful face bent over he . Sally take he briskly from his mother 's arm ; Ruth look up in grave surprise , for in truth she have forget Sally 's presence , and the suddenness of the motion startle she . 

 " my bonny boy ! be they let the salt tear drop on thy sweet face before thou'rt wean ! little somebody know how to be a mother I could make a well myself . ' dance , thumbkin , dance dance , ye merry man every one . ' Aye , that be it ! smile , my pretty . any one but a child like thee , " continue she , turn to Ruth , " would have know well than to bring ill - luck on thy babby by let tear fall on its face before it be wean . but thou'rt not fit to have a babby , and so I have   say many a time . I have   a great mind to buy thee a doll , and take thy babby mysel ' . " 

 Sally do not look at Ruth , for she be too much engage in amuse the baby with the tassel of the string to the window - blind , or else she would have see the dignity which the mother 's soul put into Ruth at that moment . Sally be quell into silence by the gentle composure , the self - command over her passionate sorrow , which give to Ruth an unconscious grandeur of demeanour as she come up to the old servant . 

 " give he back to I , please . I do not know it bring ill - luck , or if my heart break I would not have let a tear drop on his face I never will again . thank you , Sally , " as the servant relinquish he to she who come in the name of a mother . Sally watch Ruth 's grave , sweet smile , as she follow up Sally 's play with the tassel , and imitate , with all the docility inspire by love , every movement and sound which have amuse her babe . 

 " thou'lt be a mother , after all , " say Sally , with a kind of admiration of the control which Ruth be exercise over herself . " but why talk of thy heart break ? I do not   question thee about what be past and go ; but now thou'rt want for nothing , nor thy child either ; the time to come be the Lord 's , and in his hand ; and yet thou goest about a - sigh and a - moaning in a way that I can not   stand or thole . " 

 " what do I do wrong ? " say Ruth ; " I try to do all I can . " 

 " yes , in a way , " say Sally , puzzle to know how to describe her meaning . " Thou dost it but there be a right and a wrong way of set about everything and to my thinking , the right way be to take a thing up heartily , if it be only make a bed . why ! dear ah I , make a bed may be do after a christian fashion , I take it , or else what be to come of such as I in heaven , who have   have little enough time on earth for clap ourselves down on our knee for set prayer ? when I be a girl , and wretche enough about Master Thurstan , and the crook on his back which come of the fall I give he , I take to pray and sighing , and give up the world ; and I think it be wicked to care for the flesh , so I make heavy pudding , and be careless about dinner and the room , and think I be do my duty , though I do call myself a miserable sinner . but one night , the old missus   Master Thurstan 's mother   come in , and sit down by I , as I be a - scold myself , without think of what I be say ; and , say she , ' Sally ! what be you blame yourself about , and groan over ? we hear you in the parlour every night , and it make my heart ache . ' ' oh , ma'am , ' say I , ' I be a miserable sinner , and I be travail in the new birth . ' ' be that the reason , ' say she , ' why the pudding be so heavy to - day ? ' ' oh , ma'am , ma'am , ' say I , ' if you would not think of the thing of the flesh , but trouble yourself about your immortal soul . ' and I sit a - shake my head to think about her soul . ' but , ' say she , in her sweet - drop voice , ' I do try to think of my soul every hour of the day , if by that you mean try to do the will of God , but we will talk now about the pudding ; Master Thurstan could not eat it , and I know you will be sorry for that . ' well ! I be sorry , but I do not   choose to say so , as she seem to expect I ; so say I , ' it be a pity to see child bring up to care for thing of the flesh ; ' and then I could have bite my tongue out , for the missus look so grave , and I think of my darling little lad pin for want of his food . at last , say she , ' Sally , do you think God have put we into the world just to be selfish , and do nothing but see after our own soul ? or to help one another with heart and hand , as Christ do to all who want help ? ' I be silent , for , you see , she puzzle I . so she go on , ' what be that beautiful answer in your church catechism , Sally ? ' I be pleased to hear a Dissenter , as I do not think would have do it , speak so knowledgeably about the catechism , and she go on : ' " to do my duty in that station of life unto which it shall please God to call I ; " well , your station be a servant , and it be as honourable as a king 's , if you look at it right ; you be to help and serve other in one way , just as a king be to help other in another . now what way be you to help and serve , or to do your duty , in that station of life unto which it have please God to call you ? do it answer God 's purpose , and serve he , when the food be unfit for a child to eat , and unwholesome for any one ? ' well ! I would not give it up , I be so pig - head about my soul ; so say I , ' I wish folk would be content with locust and wild honey , and leave other folk in peace to work out their salvation ; ' and I groan out pretty loud to think of missus 's soul . I often think since she smile a bit at I ; but she say , ' well , Sally , to - morrow , you shall have time to work out your salvation ; but as we have no locust in England , and I do not   think they would agree with Master Thurstan if we have , I will come and make the pudding ; but I shall try and do it well , not only for he to like it , but because everything may be do in a right way or a wrong ; the right way be to do it as well as we can , as in God 's sight ; the wrong be to do it in a self - seek spirit , which either lead we to neglect it to follow out some device of our own for our own end , or to give up too much time and think to it both before and after the doing . ' well ! I think of all old missus 's word this morning , when I see you make the bed . you sigh so , you could not half shake the pillow ; your heart be not in your work ; and yet it be the duty God have set you , I reckon ; I know it be not the work parson preach about ; though I do not   think they go so far off the mark when they read , ' whatsoever thy hand findeth to do , that do with all thy might . ' just try for a day to think of all the odd job as have to be do well and truly as in God 's sight , not just slur over anyhow , and you will go through they twice as cheerfully , and have no thought to spare for sigh or cry . " 

 Sally bustle off to set on the kettle for tea , and feel half ashamed , in the quiet of the kitchen , to think of the oration she have make in the parlour . but she see with much satisfaction , that henceforward Ruth nurse her boy with a vigour and cheerfulness that be reflect back from he ; and the household work be no long perform with a languid indifference , as if life and duty be distasteful . Miss Benson have her share in this improvement , though Sally placidly take all the credit to herself . one day as she and Ruth sit together , Miss Benson speak of the child , and thence go on to talk about her own childhood . by degree they speak of education , and the book - learning that form one part of it ; and the result be that Ruth determine to get up early all through the bright summer morning , to acquire the knowledge hereafter to be give to her child . her mind be uncultivate , her read scant ; beyond the mere mechanical art of education she know nothing ; but she have a refined taste , and excellent sense and judgment to separate the true from the false . with these quality , she set to work under Mr Benson 's direction . she read in the early morning the book that he mark out ; she train herself with strict perseverance to do all thoroughly ; she do not attempt to acquire any foreign language , although her ambition be to learn Latin , in order to teach it to her boy . those summer morning be happy , for she be learn neither to look backwards nor forwards , but to live faithfully and earnestly in the present . she rise while the hedge - sparrow be yet sing his rťveillť to his mate ; she dress and open her window , shade the soft - blow air and the sunny eastern light from her baby . if she grow tired , she go and look at he , and all her thought be holy prayer for he . then she would gaze awhile out of the high upper window on to the moorland , that swell in wave one behind the other , in the grey , cool morning light . these be her occasional relaxation , and after they she return with strength to her work . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVII 

 Leonard 's christening 
 

 in that body of Dissenters to which Mr Benson belong , it be not consider necessary to baptize infant as early as the ceremony can be perform ; and many circumstance concur to cause the solemn thanksgiving and dedication of the child   for so these dissenter look upon christening   to be defer until it be probably somewhere about six month old . there have be many conversation in the little sit - room between the brother and sister and their protegťe , which have consist more of question betray a thoughtful wonder kind of ignorance on the part of Ruth , and answer more suggestive than explanatory from Mr Benson ; while Miss Benson keep up a kind of running commentary , always simple and often quaint , but with that intuition into the very heart of all thing truly religious which be often the gift of those who seem , at first sight , to be only affectionate and sensible . when Mr Benson have explain his own view of what a christening ought to be consider , and , by call out Ruth 's latent feeling into pious earnestness , bring she into a right frame of mind , he feel that he have do what he could to make the ceremony more than a mere form , and to invest it , quiet , humble , and obscure as it must necessarily be in outward shape mournful and anxious as much of its antecedent have render it with the severe grandeur of an act do in faith and truth . 

 it be not far to carry the little one , for , as I say , the chapel almost adjoin the minister 's house . the whole procession be to have consist of Mr and Miss Benson , Ruth carry her baby , and Sally , who feel herself , as a Church - of - England woman , to be condescend and kind in request leave to attend a baptism among " they dissenter ; " but unless she have ask permission , she would not have be desire to attend , so careful be the habit of her master and mistress that she should be allow that freedom which they claim for themselves . but they be glad she wish to go ; they like the feeling that all be of one household , and that the interest of one be the interest of all . it produce a consequence , however , which they do not anticipate . Sally be full of the event which her presence be to sanction , and , as it be , to redeem from the character of be utterly schismatic ; she speak about it with an air of patronage to three or four , and among they to some of the servant at Mr Bradshaw 's . 

 Miss Benson be rather surprised to receive a call from Jemima Bradshaw , on the very morning of the day on which little Leonard be to be baptize ; Miss Bradshaw be rosy and breathless with eagerness . although the second in the family , she have be at school when her young sister have be christen , and she be now come , in the full warmth of a girl 's fancy , to ask if she might be present at the afternoon 's service . she have be strike with Mrs Denbigh 's grace and beauty at the very first sight , when she have accompany her mother to call upon the Bensons on their return from Wales ; and have keep up an enthusiastic interest in the widow only a little old than herself , whose very reserve and retirement but add to her unconscious power of enchantment . 

 " oh , Miss Benson ! I never see a christening ; papa say I may go , if you think Mr Benson and Mrs Denbigh would not dislike it ; and I will be quite quiet , and sit up behind the door , or anywhere ; and that sweet little baby ! I should so like to see he christen ; be he to be call Leonard , do you say ? after Mr Denbigh , be it ? " 

 " no not exactly , " say Miss Benson , rather discomfited . 

 " be not Mr Denbigh 's name Leonard , then ? Mamma think it would be sure to be call after he , and so do I. but I may come to the christening , may I not , dear Miss Benson ? " 

 Miss Benson give her consent with a little inward reluctance . both her brother and Ruth share in this feeling , although no one express it ; and it be presently forget . 

 Jemima stand grave and quiet in the old - fashioned vestry adjoin the chapel , as they enter with step subdue to slowness . she think Ruth look so pale and awe because she be leave a solitary parent ; but Ruth come to the presence of God , as one who have go astray , and doubt her own worthiness to be call his child ; she come as a mother who have incur a heavy responsibility , and who entreat his almighty aid to enable she to discharge it ; full of passionate , yearn love which crave for more faith in God , to still her distrust and fear of the future that might hang over her darling . when she think of her boy , she sicken and tremble ; but when she hear of God 's love - kindness , far beyond all tender mother 's love , she be hush into peace and prayer . there she stand , her fair pale cheek rest on her baby 's head , as he slumber on her bosom ; her eye go slant down under their half - close white lid ; but their gaze be not on the primitive cottage - like room , it be earnestly fix on a dim mist , through which she fain would have see the life that lie before her child ; but the mist be still and dense , too thick a veil for anxious human love to penetrate . the future be hide with God . 

 Mr Benson stand right under the casement window that be place high up in the room ; he be almost in shade , except for one or two mark light which fall on hair already silvery white ; his voice be always low and musical when he speak to few ; it be too weak to speak so as to be hear by many without become harsh and strange ; but now it fill the little room with a love sound , like the stock - dove 's brood murmur over her young . he and Ruth forget all in their earnestness of thought ; and when he say " let we pray , " and the little congregation kneel down , you might have hear the baby 's faint breathing , scarcely sigh out upon the stillness , so absorbed be all in the solemnity . but the prayer be long ; think follow thought , and fear crowd upon fear , and all be to be lay bare before God , and his aid and counsel ask . before the end Sally have shuffle quietly out of the vestry into the green chapel - yard , upon which the door open . Miss Benson be alive to this movement , and so full of curiosity as to what it might mean that she could no long attend to her brother , and feel inclined to rush off and question Sally the moment all be end . Miss Bradshaw hang about the babe and Ruth , and beg to be allow to carry the child home , but Ruth press he to she , as if there be no safe harbour for he but in his mother 's breast . Mr Benson see her feeling , and catch Miss Bradshaw 's look of disappointment . 

 " come home with we , " say he , " and stay to tea . you have never drink tea with we since you go to school . " 

 " I wish I might , " say Miss Bradshaw , colour with pleasure . " but I must ask papa . may I run home and ask ? " 

 " to be sure , my dear ! " 

 Jemima fly off ; and fortunately her father be at home ; for her mother 's permission would have be deem insufficient . she receive many direction about her behaviour . 

 " take no sugar in your tea , Jemima . I be sure the Bensons ought not to be able to afford sugar , with their mean . and do not eat much ; you can have plenty at home on your return ; remember Mrs Denbigh 's keep must cost they a great deal . " 

 so Jemima return considerably sober , and very much afraid of her hunger lead she to forget Mr Benson 's poverty . meanwhile Miss Benson and Sally , acquaint with Mr Benson 's invitation to Jemima , set about make some capital tea - cake on which they pique themselves . they both enjoy the office of hospitality ; and be glad to place some home - make tempting dainty before their guest . 

 " what make ye leave the chapel - vestry before my brother have end ? " inquire Miss Benson . 

 " indeed , ma'am , I think master have pray so long he would be drouthy . so I just slip out to put on the kettle for tea . " 

 Miss Benson be on the point of reprimand she for thinking of anything besides the object of the prayer , when she remember how she herself have be unable to attend after Sally 's departure for wonder what have become of she ; so she be silent . 

 it be a disappointment to Miss Benson 's kind and hospitable expectation when Jemima , as hungry as a hound , confine herself to one piece of the cake which her hostess have have such pleasure in make . and Jemima wish she have not a prophetic feeling all tea - time of the manner in which her father would inquire into the particular of the meal , elevate his eyebrow at every viand name beyond plain bread - and - butter , and wind up with some such sentence as this : " well , I marvel how , with Benson 's salary , he can afford to keep such a table . " Sally could have tell of self - denial when no one be by , when the left hand do not know what the right hand do , on the part of both her master and mistress , practise without think even to themselves that it be either a sacrifice or a virtue , in order to enable they to help those who be in need , or even to gratify Miss Benson 's kind , old - fashioned feeling on such occasion as the present , when a stranger come to the house . her homely , affectionate pleasure in make other comfortable , might have show that such little occasional extravagance be not waste , but a good work ; and be not to be gauge by the standard of money - spending . this evening her spirit be damp by Jemima 's refusal to eat . poor Jemima ! the cake be so good , and she be so hungry ; but still she refuse . 

 while Sally be clear away the tea - thing , Miss Benson and Jemima accompany Ruth upstairs , when she go to put little Leonard to bed . 

 " a christening be a very solemn service , " say Miss Bradshaw ; " I have no idea it be so solemn . Mr Benson seem to speak as if he have a weight of care on his heart that God alone could relieve or lighten . " 

 " my brother feel these thing very much , " say Miss Benson , rather wish to cut short the conversation , for she have be aware of several part in the prayer which she know be suggest by the peculiarity and sadness of the case before he . 

 " I could not quite follow he all through , " continue Jemima ; " what do he mean by say , ' this child , rebuke by the world and bid to stand apart , Thou wilt not rebuke , but wilt suffer it to come to Thee and be bless with Thine almighty blessing ' ? why be this little darling to be rebuke ? I do not think I remember the exact word , but he say something like that . " 

 " my dear ! your gown be dripping wet ! it must have dip into the tub ; let I wring it out . " 

 " oh , thank you ! never mind my gown ! " say Jemima , hastily , and want to return to her question ; but just then she catch the sight of tear fall fast down the cheek of the silent Ruth as she bent over her child , crow and splash away in his tub . with a sudden consciousness that unwittingly she have touch on some painful chord , Jemima rush into another subject , and be eagerly second by Miss Benson . the circumstance seem to die away , and leave no trace ; but in after - year it rise , vivid and significant , before Jemima 's memory . at present it be enough for she , if Mrs Denbigh would let she serve she in every possible way . her admiration for beauty be keen , and little indulge at home ; and Ruth be very beautiful in her quiet mournfulness ; her mean and homely dress leave herself only the more open to admiration , for she give it a charm by her unconscious wear of it that make it seem like the drapery of an old greek statue subordinate to the figure it cover , yet imbue by it with an unspeakable grace . then the pretend circumstance of her life be such as to catch the imagination of a young romantic girl . altogether , Jemima could have kiss her hand and profess herself Ruth 's slave . she move away all the article use at this little coucher ; she fold up Leonard 's day - clothe ; she feel only too much honour when Ruth trust he to she for a few minute only too amply reward when Ruth thank she with a grave , sweet smile , and a grateful look of her love eye . 

 when Jemima have go away with the servant who be send to fetch she , there be a little chorus of praise . 

 " she be a warm - hearted girl , " say Miss Benson . " she remember all the old day before she go to school . she be worth two of Mr Richard . they be each of they just the same as they be when they be child , when they break that window in the chapel , and he run away home , and she come knock at our door , with a single knock , just like a beggar 's , and I go to see who it be , and be quite startled to see her round , brown , honest face look up at I , half - frightened , and tell I what she have do , and offer I the money in her saving bank to pay for it . we never should have hear of Master Richard 's share in the business if it have not be for Sally . " 

 " but remember , " say Mr Benson , " how strict Mr Bradshaw have always be with his child . it be no wonder if poor Richard be a coward in those day . " 

 " he be now , or I be much mistaken , " answer Miss Benson . " and Mr Bradshaw be just as strict with Jemima , and she be no coward . but I have   no faith in Richard . he have a look about he that I do not   like . and when Mr Bradshaw be away on business in Holland last year , for those month my young gentleman do not come half as regularly to chapel , and I always believe that story of his be see out with the hound at Smithiles . " 

 " those be neither of they great offence in a young man of twenty , " say Mr Benson , smile . 

 " no ! I do not   mind they in themselves ; but when he could change back so easily to be regular and mim when his father come home , I do not   like that . " 

 " Leonard shall never be afraid of I , " say Ruth , follow her own train of thought . " I will be his friend from the very first ; and I will try and learn how to be a wise friend , and you will teach I , will not   you , sir ? " 

 " what make you wish to call he Leonard , Ruth ? " ask Miss Benson . 

 " it be my mother 's father 's name ; and she use to tell I about he and his goodness , and I think if Leonard could be like he " 

 " do you remember the discussion there be about Miss Bradshaw 's name , Thurstan ? her father want she to be call Hepzibah , but insist that she be to have a scripture name at any rate ; and Mrs Bradshaw want she to be Juliana , after some novel she have read not long before ; and at last Jemima be fix upon , because it would do either for a scripture name or a name for a heroine out of a book . " 

 " I do not know Jemima be a scripture name , " say Ruth . 

 " oh yes , it be . one of Job 's daughter ; Jemima , Kezia , and Keren - Happuch . there be a good many Jemimas in the world , and some Kezias , but I never hear of a Keren - Happuch ; and yet we know just as much of one as of another . People really like a pretty name , whether in Scripture or out of it . " 

 " when there be no particular association with the name , " say Mr Benson . 

 " now , I be call Faith after the cardinal virtue ; and I like my name , though many people would think it too Puritan ; that be accord to our gentle mother 's pious desire . and Thurstan be call by his name because my father wish it ; for , although he be what people call a radical and a democrat in his way of talk and thinking , he be very proud in his heart of be descend from some old Sir Thurstan , who figure away in the french war . " 

 " the difference between theory and practice , think and be , " put in Mr Benson , who be in a mood for allow himself a little social enjoyment . he leant back in his chair , with his eye look at , but not see the ceiling . Miss Benson be click away with her eternal knitting - needle , look at her brother , and see he , too . Ruth be arrange her child 's clothe against the morrow . it be but their usual way of spend an evening ; the variety be give by the different tone which the conversation assume on the different night . yet , somehow , the peacefulness of the time , the window open into the little garden , the scent that come steal in , and the clear summer heaven above , make the time be remember as a happy festival by Ruth . even Sally seem more placid than usual when she come in to prayer ; and she and Miss Benson follow Ruth to her bedroom , to look at the beautiful sleep Leonard . 

 " God bless he ! " say Miss Benson , stoop down to kiss his little dimpled hand , which lie outside the coverlet , toss abroad in the heat of the evening . 

 " now , do not   get up too early , Ruth ! injure your health will be short - sighted wisdom and poor economy . good night ! " 

 " good night , dear Miss Benson . good night , Sally . " when Ruth have shut her door , she go again to the bed , and look at her boy till her eye fill with tear . 

 " God bless thee , darling ! I only ask to be one of his instrument , and not throw aside as useless or bad than useless . " 

 so end the day of Leonard 's christening . 

 Mr Benson have sometimes teach the child of different people as an especial favour , when request by they . but then his pupil be only child , and by their progress he be little prepared for Ruth 's . she have have early teaching , of that kind which need never be unlearn , from her mother ; enough to unfold many of her power ; they have remain inactive now for several year , but have grow strong in the dark and quiet time . her tutor be surprised at the bound by which she surmount obstacle , the quick perception and ready adaptation of truth and first principle , and her immediate sense of the fitness of thing . her delight in what be strong and beautiful call out her master 's sympathy ; but , most of all , he admire the complete unconsciousness of uncommon power , or unusual progress . it be less of a wonder than he consider it to be , it be true , for she never think of compare what she be now with her former self , much less with another . indeed , she do not think of herself at all , but of her boy , and what she must learn in order to teach he to be and to do as suit her hope and her prayer . if any one 's devotion could have flatter she into self - consciousness , it be Jemima 's . Mr Bradshaw never dream that his daughter could feel herself inferior to the minister 's protegťe , but so it be ; and no knight - errant of old could consider himself more honour by his ladye 's command than do Jemima , if Ruth allow she to do anything for she or for her boy . Ruth love she heartily , even while she be rather annoyed at the open expression Jemima use of admiration . 

 " please , I really would rather not be tell if people do think I pretty . " 

 " but it be not merely beautiful ; it be sweet - looking and good , Mrs Postlethwaite call you , " reply Jemima . 

 " all the more I would rather not hear it . I may be pretty , but I know I be not good . besides , I do not   think we ought to hear what be say of we behind our back . " 

 Ruth speak so gravely , that Jemima fear lest she be displeased . 

 " Dear Mrs Denbigh , I never will admire or praise you again . only let I love you . " 

 " and let I love you ! " say Ruth , with a tender kiss . 

 Jemima would not have be allow to come so frequently if Mr Bradshaw have not be possess with the idea of patronise Ruth . if the latter have choose , she might have go dress from head to foot in the present which he wish to make she , but she refuse they constantly ; occasionally to Miss Benson 's great annoyance . but if he could not load she with gift , he could show his approbation by ask she to his house ; and after some deliberation , she consent to accompany Mr and Miss Benson there . the house be square and massy - look , with a great deal of drab - colour about the furniture . Mrs Bradshaw , in her lackadaisical , sweet - temper way , second her husband in his desire of be kind to Ruth ; and as she cherish privately a great taste for what be beautiful or interesting , as oppose to her husband 's love of the purely useful , this taste of hers have rarely have so healthy and true a mode of gratification as when she watch Ruth 's movement about the room , which seem in its unobtrusiveness and poverty of colour to receive the requisite ornament of light and splendour from Ruth 's presence . Mrs Bradshaw sigh , and wish she have a daughter as lovely , about whom to weave a romance ; for castle - building , after the manner of the Minerva press , be the outlet by which she escape from the pressure of her prosaic life , as Mr Bradshaw 's wife . her perception be only of external beauty , and she be not always alive to that , or she might have see how a warm , affectionate , ardent nature , free from all envy or cark care of self , give an unspeakable charm to her plain , bright - faced daughter Jemima , whose dark eye keep challenge admiration for her friend . the first evening spend at Mr Bradshaw 's pass like many succeed visit there . there be tea , the equipage for which be as handsome and as ugly as money could purchase . then the lady produce their sewing , while Mr Bradshaw stand before the fire , and give the assemble party the benefit of his opinion on many subject . the opinion be as good and excellent as the opinion of any man can be who see one side of a case very strongly , and almost ignore the other . they coincide in many point with those hold by Mr Benson , but he once or twice interpose with a plea for those who might differ ; and then he be hear by Mr Bradshaw with a kind of evident and indulgent pity , such as one feel for a child who unwittingly talk nonsense . by - and - by , Mrs Bradshaw and Miss Benson fall into one tete a tete , and Ruth and Jemima into another . two well - behave but unnaturally quiet child be send to bed early in the evening , in an authoritative voice , by their father , because one of they have speak too loud while he be enlarge on an alteration in the tariff . just before the supper - tray be bring in , a gentleman be announce whom Ruth have never previously see , but who appear well known to the rest of the party . it be Mr Farquhar , Mr Bradshaw 's partner ; he have be on the continent for the last year , and have only recently return . he seem perfectly at home , but speak little . he lean back in his chair , screw up his eye , and watch everybody ; yet there be nothing unpleasant or impertinent in his keenness of observation . Ruth wonder to hear he contradict Mr Bradshaw , and almost expect some rebuff ; but Mr Bradshaw , if he do not yield the point , admit , for the first time that evening , that it be possible something might be say on the other side . Mr Farquhar differ also from Mr Benson , but it be in a more respectful manner than Mr Bradshaw have do . for these reason , although Mr Farquhar have never speak to Ruth , she come away with the impression that he be a man to be respect , and perhaps like . 

 Sally would have think herself mightily aggrieve if , on their return , she have not hear some account of the evening . as soon as Miss Benson come in , the old servant begin : 

 " well , and who be there ? and what do they give you for supper ? " 

 " only Mr Farquhar besides ourselves ; and sandwich , sponge - cake , and wine ; there be no occasion for anything more , " reply Miss Benson , who be tired and prepare to go upstairs . 

 " Mr Farquhar ! why they do say he be think of Miss Jemima ! " 

 " Nonsense , Sally ! why he be old enough to be her father ! " say Miss Benson , half way up the first flight . 

 " there be no need for it to be call nonsense , though he may be ten year old , " mutter Sally , retreat towards the kitchen . " Bradshaw 's Betsy know what she be about , and would not   have say it for nothing . " 

 Ruth wonder a little about it . she love Jemima well enough to be interested in what relate to she ; but , after think for a few minute , she decide that such a marriage be , and would ever be , very unlikely . 

 

 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 Ruth become a Governess in Mr Bradshaw 's Family 
 

 one afternoon , not long after this , Mr and Miss Benson set off to call upon a farmer , who attend the chapel , but live at some distance from the town . they intend to stay to tea if they be invite , and Ruth and Sally be leave to spend a long afternoon together . at first , Sally be busy in her kitchen , and Ruth employ herself in carry her baby out into the garden . it be now nearly a year since she come to the benson ' ; it seem like yesterday , and yet as if a lifetime have go between . the flower be bud now , that be all in bloom when she come down , on the first autumnal morning , into the sunny parlour . the yellow jessamine , that be then a tender plant , have now take firm root in the soil , and be send out strong shoot ; the wall - flower , which Miss Benson have sow on the wall a day or two after her arrival , be scent the air with their fragrant flower . Ruth know every plant now ; it seem as though she have always live here , and always know the inhabitant of the house . she hear Sally sing her accustomed song in the kitchen , a song she never vary over her afternoon 's work . it begin , 
 

 as I be go to Derby , sir , 
 upon a market - day . 
 

 and if music be a necessary element in a song , perhaps I have well call it by some other name . 

 but the strange change be in Ruth herself . she be conscious of it though she could not define it , and do not dwell upon it . life have become significant and full of duty to she . she delight in the exercise of her intellectual power , and like the idea of the infinite amount of which she be ignorant ; for it be a grand pleasure to learn to crave , and be satisfied . she strove to forget what have go before this last twelve month . she shudder up from contemplate it ; it be like a bad , unholy dream . and yet , there be a strange yearning kind of love for the father of the child whom she press to her heart , which come , and she could not bid it begone as sinful , it be so pure and natural , even when think of it , as in the sight of God . little Leonard coo to the flower , and stretch after their bright colour ; and Ruth lay he on the dry turf , and pelt he with the gay petal . he chink and crow with laugh delight , and clutch at her cap , and pull it off . her short rich curl be golden - brown in the slanting sunlight , and by their very shortness make she look more child - like . she hardly seem as if she could be the mother of the noble babe over whom she knelt , now snatch kiss , now match his cheek with rose - leaf . all at once , the bell of the old church strike the hour ; and far away , high up in the air , begin slowly to play the old tune of " life let we cherish ; " they have play it for year for the life of man and it always sound fresh and strange and aŽrial . Ruth be still in a moment , she know not why ; and the tear come into her eye as she listen . when it be end , she kiss her baby , and bade God bless he . 

 just then Sally come out , dress for the evening , with a leisurely look about she . she have do her work , and she and Ruth be to drink tea together in the exquisitely clean kitchen ; but while the kettle be boil , she come out to enjoy the flower . she gather a piece of southern - wood , and stuff it up her nose , by way of smell it . 

 " Whatten you call this in your country ? " ask she . 

 " old - man , " reply Ruth . 

 " we call it here lad's - love . it and peppermint - drop always remind I of go to church in the country . here ! I will get you a black - currant leaf to put in the teapot . it give it a flavour . we have bee once against this wall ; but when missus die , we forget to tell them , and put them in mourning , and , in course , they swarm away without our knowing , and the next winter come a hard frost , and they die . now , I dare say , the water will be boil ; and it be time for little master there to come in , for the dew be fall . see , all the daisy be shut themselves up . " 

 Sally be most gracious as a hostess . she quite put on her company manner to receive Ruth in the kitchen . they lay Leonard to sleep on the sofa in the parlour , that they might hear he the more easily , and then they sit quietly down to their sewing by the bright kitchen fire . Sally be , as usual , the talker ; and , as usual , the subject be the family of whom for so many year she have form a part . 

 " aye ! thing be different when I be a girl , " quoth she . " Eggs be thirty for a shilling , and butter only sixpence a pound . my wage when I come here be but three pound , and I do on it , and be always clean and tidy , which be more than many a lass can say now who get her seven and eight pound a year ; and tea be keep for an afternoon drink , and pudding be eat afore meat in they day , and the upshot be , people pay their debt well ; aye , aye ! we'n go backwards , and we thinken we'n go forrard . " 

 after shake her head a little over the degeneracy of the time , Sally return to a part of the subject on which she think she have give Ruth a wrong idea . 

 " you will not go for to think now that I have   not more than three pound a year . I have   a deal above that now . first of all , old missus give I four pound , for she say I be worth it , and I think in my heart that I be ; so I take it without more ado ; but after her death , Master Thurstan and Miss Faith take a fit of spending , and say they to I , one day as I carry tea in , ' Sally , we think your wage ought to be raise . ' ' what matter what you think ! ' say I , pretty sharp , for I think they would ha ' show more respect to missus if they would let thing stand as they be in her time ; and they would go and move the sofa away from the wall to where it stand now , already that very day . so I speak up sharp , and , say I , ' as long as I be content , I think it be no business of yours to be meddle wi ' I and my money matter . ' ' but , ' say Miss Faith   she be always the one to speak first if you will notice , though it be master that come in and clinch the matter with some reason she would never ha ' thought of he be always a sensible lad , ' Sally , all the servant in the town have six pound and well , and you have as hard a place as any of them . ' ' do you ever hear I grumble about my work that you talk about it in that way ? wait till I grumble , ' say I , ' but do not   meddle wi ' I till then . ' so I fling off in a huff ; but in the course of the evening , Master Thurstan come in and sit down in the kitchen , and he be such win way he wile one over to anything ; and besides , a notion have come into my head now , you will not tell , " say she , glance round the room , and hitch her chair nearer to Ruth in a confidential manner ; Ruth promise , and Sally go on : 

 " I think I should like to be an heiress wi ' money , and leave it all to Master and Miss Faith ; and I think if I have six pound a year I could , maybe , get to be an heiress ; all I be fear on be that some chap or other might marry I for my money , but I have   manage to keep the fellow off ; so I look mim and grateful , and I thanks Master Thurstan for his offer , and I take the wage ; and what do you think I have   do ? " ask Sally , with an exultant air . 

 " what have you do ? " ask Ruth . 

 " why , " reply Sally , slowly and emphatically , " I have   save thirty pound ! but that be not it . I have   getten a lawyer to make I a will ; that be it , wench ! " say she , slap Ruth on the back . 

 " how do you manage it ? " ask Ruth . 

 " Aye , that be it , " say Sally ; " I thowt about it many a night before I hit on the right way . I be afeard the money might be throw into Chancery , if I do not   make it all safe , and yet I could na ' ask Master Thurstan . at last and at length , John Jackson , the grocer , have a nephew come to stay a week with he , as be ' prentice to a lawyer in Liverpool ; so now be my time , and here be my lawyer . wait a minute ! I could tell you my story well if I have my will in my hand ; and I will scomfish you if ever you go for to tell . " 

 she hold up her hand , and threaten Ruth as she leave the kitchen to fetch the will . 

 when she come back , she bring a parcel tie up in a blue pocket - handkerchief ; she sit down , square her knee , untie the handkerchief , and display a small piece of parchment . 

 " now , do you know what this be ? " say she , hold it up . " it be parchment , and it be the right stuff to make will on . People get into Chancery if they do not   make they o ' this stuff , and I reckon Tom Jackson thowt he would have a fresh job on it if he could get it into Chancery ; for the rascal go and write it on a piece of paper at first , and come and read it I out loud off a piece of paper no well than what one write letter upon . I be up to he ; and , think I , Come , come , my lad , I be not a fool , though you may think so ; I know a paper will will not   stand , but I will let you run your rig . so I sit and I listen . and would you belie ' I , he read it out as if it be as clear a business as your give I that thimble no more ado , though it be thirty pound ! I could understand it mysel ' that be no law for I . I want summat to consider about , and for th ' meaning to be wrap up as I wrap up my good gown . so say I , ' Tom ! it be not on parchment . I mun have it on parchment . ' ' this ' ill do as well , ' say he . ' we will get it witness , and it will stand good . ' well ! I like the notion of have it witness , and for a while that soothe I ; but after a bit , I feel I should like it do accord to law , and not plain out as anybody might ha ' do it ; I mysel ' , if I could have write . so say I , ' Tom ! I mun have it on parchment . ' ' parchment cost money , ' say he , very grave . ' oh , oh , my lad ! be ye there ? ' think I. ' that be the reason I be clip of law . ' so say I , ' Tom ! I mun have it on parchment . I will pay the money and welcome . it be thirty pound , and what I can lay to it . I will make it safe . it shall be on parchment , and I will tell thee what , lad ! I will gie ye sixpence for every good law - word you put in it , sound like , and not to be catch up as a person run . your master have need to be ashamed of you as a ' prentice if you can not   do a thing more tradesman - like than this ! ' well ! he laugh above a bit , but I be firm , and stand to it . so he make it out on parchment . now , woman , try and read it ! " say she , give it to Ruth . 

 Ruth smile , and begin to read ; Sally listen with rapt attention . when Ruth come to the word " testatrix , " Sally stop she . 

 " that be the first sixpence , " say she . " I thowt he be go to fob I off again wi ' plain language ; but when that word come , I out wi ' my sixpence , and give it to he on the spot . now go on . " 

 presently Ruth read , " accrue . " 

 " that be the second sixpence . four sixpence it be in all , besides six - and - eightpence as we bargain at first , and three - and - fourpence parchment . there ! that be what I call a will ; witness accord to law , and all . Master Thurstan will be prettily take in when I die , and he find all his extra wage leave back to he . but it will teach he it be not so easy as he think for , to make a woman give up her way . " 

 the time be now draw near when little Leonard might be wean the time appoint by all three for Ruth to endeavour to support herself in some way more or less independent of Mr and Miss Benson . this prospect dwelt much in all of their mind , and be in each shade with some degree of perplexity ; but they none of they speak of it for fear of accelerate the event . if they have feel clear and determined as to the good course to be pursue , they be none of they deficient in courage to commence upon that course at once . Miss Benson would , perhaps , have object the most to any alteration in their present daily mode of life ; but that be because she have the habit of speak out her thought as they arise , and she particularly dislike and dread change . besides this , she have feel her heart open out , and warm towards the little helpless child , in a strong and powerful manner . nature have intend her warm instinct to find vent in a mother 's duty ; her heart have yearn after child , and make her restless in her childless state , without her well know why ; but now , the delight she experience in tending , nursing , and contrive for the little boy even contrive to the point of sacrifice many of her cherish whim make her happy and satisfied and peaceful . it be more difficult to sacrifice her whim than her comfort ; but all have be give up when and where require by the sweet lordly baby , who reign paramount in his very helplessness . 

 from some cause or other , an exchange of minister for one Sunday be to be effect with a neighbouring congregation , and Mr Benson go on a short absence from home . when he return on Monday , he be meet at the house - door by his sister , who have evidently be look out for he for some time . she step out to greet he . 

 " do not   hurry yourself , Thurstan ! all be well ; only I want to tell you something . do not   fidget yourself baby be quite well , bless he ! it be only good news . come into your room , and let I talk a little quietly with you . " 

 she draw he into his study , which be near the outer door , and then she take off his coat , and put his carpet - bag in a corner , and wheel a chair to the fire , before she would begin . 

 " well , now ! to think how often thing fall out just as we want they , Thurstan ! have not you often wonder what be to be do with Ruth when the time come at which we promise she she should earn her living ? I be sure you have , because I have so often think about it myself . and yet I never dare to speak out my fear , because that seem give it a shape . and now Mr Bradshaw have put all to right . he invite Mr Jackson to dinner yesterday , just as we be go into chapel ; and then he turn to I and ask I if I would come to tea straight from afternoon chapel , because Mrs Bradshaw want to speak to I . he make it very clear I be not to bring Ruth ; and , indeed , she be only too happy to stay at home with baby . and so I go ; and Mrs Bradshaw take I into her bedroom , and shut the door , and say Mr Bradshaw have tell she , that he do not like Jemima be so much confine with the young one while they be at their lesson , and that he want some one above a nursemaid to sit with they while their master be there some one who would see about their learn their lesson , and who would walk out with they ; a sort of nursery governess , I think she mean , though she do not say so ; and Mr Bradshaw   for , of course , I see his thought and word constantly peep out , though he have tell she to speak to I   believe that our Ruth would be the very person . now , Thurstan , do not   look so surprised , as if she have never come into your head ! I be sure I see what Mrs Bradshaw be drive at , long before she come to the point ; and I could scarcely keep from smile , and say , ' we would jump at the proposal ' long before I ought to have know anything about it . " 

 " oh , I wonder what we ought to do ! " say Mr Benson . " or rather , I believe I see what we ought to do , if I durst but do it . " 

 " why , what ought we to do ? " ask his sister , in surprise . 

 " I ought to go and tell Mr Bradshaw the whole story " 

 " and get Ruth turn out of our house , " say Miss Benson , indignantly . 

 " they can not   make we do that , " say her brother . " I do not think they would try . " 

 " yes , Mr Bradshaw would try ; and he would blazon out poor Ruth 's sin , and there would not be a chance for she left . I know he well , Thurstan ; and why should he be tell now , more than a year ago ? " 

 " a year ago he do not want to put she in a situation of trust about his child . " 

 " and you think she will abuse that trust , do you ? you have   live a twelvemonth in the house with Ruth , and the end of it be , you think she will do his child harm ! besides , who encourage Jemima to come to the house so much to see Ruth ? do you not say it would do they both good to see something of each other ? " 

 Mr Benson sit think . 

 " if you have not know Ruth as well as you do if during her stay with we you have mark anything wrong , or forward , or deceitful , or immodest , I would say at once , ' do not   allow Mr Bradshaw to take she into his house ; ' but still I would say , ' do not   tell of her sin and her sorrow to so severe a man so unpitiful a judge . ' but here I ask you , Thurstan , can you , or I , or Sally   quick - eyed as she be , say , that in any one thing we have have true , just occasion to find fault with Ruth ? I do not   mean that she be perfect she act without think , her temper be sometimes warm and hasty ; but have we any right to go and injure her prospect for life , by tell Mr Bradshaw all we know of her error only sixteen when she do so wrong , and never to escape from it all her many year to come to have the despair which would arise from its being know , clutch she back into bad sin ? what harm do you think she can do ? what be the risk to which you think you be expose Mr Bradshaw 's child ? " she pause , out of breath , her eye glitter with tear of indignation , and impatient for an answer , that she might knock it to piece . 

 " I do not see any danger that can arise , " say he at length , and with slow difficulty , as if not fully convince . " I have watch Ruth , and I believe she be pure and truthful ; and the very sorrow and penitence she have feel the very suffering she have go through have give she a thoughtful conscientiousness beyond her age . " 

 " that and the care of her baby , " say Miss Benson , secretly delight at the tone of her brother 's thought . 

 " ah , Faith ! that baby you so much dread once , be turn out a blessing , you see , " say Thurstan , with a faint , quiet smile . 

 " yes ! any one might be thankful , and well too , for Leonard ; but how could I tell that it would be like he ? " 

 " but to return to Ruth and Mr Bradshaw . what do you say ? " 

 " oh ! with my feeling , of course , I be only too glad to accept the proposal , and so I tell Mrs Bradshaw then ; and I afterwards repeat it to Mr Bradshaw , when he ask I if his wife have mention their plan . they would understand that I must consult you and Ruth , before it could be consider as finally settle . " 

 " and have you name it to she ? " 

 " yes , " answer Miss Benson , half afraid lest he should think she have be too precipitate . 

 " and what do she say ? " ask he , after a little pause of grave silence . 

 " at first she seem very glad , and fall into my mood of plan how it should all be manage ; how Sally and I should take care of the baby the hour that she be away at Mr Bradshaw 's ; but by - and - by she become silent and thoughtful , and kneel down by I and hide her face in my lap , and shake a little as if she be cry ; and then I hear she speak in a very low smothered voice , for her head be still bent down quite hang down , indeed , so that I could not see her face , so I stoop to listen , and I hear she say , ' do you think I should be good enough to teach little girl , Miss Benson ? ' she say it so humbly and fearfully that all I think of be how to cheer she , and I answer and ask she if she do not hope to be good enough to bring up her own darling to be a brave christian man ? and she lift up her head , and I see her eye look wild and wet and earnest , and she say , ' with God 's help , that will I try to make my child . ' and I say then , ' Ruth , as you strive and as you pray for your own child , so you must strive and pray to make Mary and Elizabeth good , if you be trust with they . ' and she say out quite clear , though her face be hide from I once more , ' I will strive , and I will pray . ' you would not have have any fear , Thurstan , if you could have hear and see she last night . " 

 " I have no fear , " say he , decidedly . " let the plan go on . " after a minute , he add , " but I be glad it be so far arrange before I hear of it . my indecision about right and wrong my perplexity as to how far we be to calculate consequence grow upon I , I fear . " 

 " you look tired and weary , dear . you should blame your body rather than your conscience at these time . " 

 " a very dangerous doctrine . " 

 the scroll of Fate be closed , and they could not foresee the Future ; and yet , if they could have see it , though they might have shrink fearfully at first , they would have smile and thank God when all be do and say . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 after five year 
 

 the quiet day grow into week and month , and even year , without any event to startle the little circle into the consciousness of the lapse of time . one who have know they at the date of Ruth 's become a governess in Mr Bradshaw 's family , and have be absent until the time of which I be now go to tell you , would have note some change which have imperceptibly come over all ; but he , too , would have think , that the life which have bring so little of turmoil and vicissitude must have be calm and tranquil , and in accordance with the bygone activity of the town in which their existence pass away . 

 the alteration that he would have perceive be those cause by the natural progress of time . the Benson home be brighten into vividness by the presence of the little Leonard , now a noble boy of six , large and grand in limb and stature , and with a face of marked beauty and intelligence . indeed , he might have be consider by many as too intelligent for his year ; and often the living with old and thoughtful people give he , beyond most child , the appearance of ponder over the mystery which meet the young on the threshold of life , but which fade away as advance year bring we more into contact with the practical and tangible fade away and vanish , until it seem to require the agitation of some great storm of the soul before we can again realise spiritual thing . 

 but , at time , Leonard seem oppress and bewilder , after listening intent , with grave and wonder eye , to the conversation around he ; at other , the bright animal life shine forth radiant , and no three - month ' kitten no foal , suddenly toss up its heel by the side of its sedate dam , and career around the pasture in pure mad enjoyment no young creature of any kind , could show more merriment and gladness of heart . 

 " for ever in mischief , " be Sally 's account of he at such time ; but it be not intentional mischief ; and Sally herself would have be the first to scold any one else who have use the same word in reference to her darling . indeed , she be once nearly give warning , because she think the boy be be ill - use . the occasion be this : Leonard have for some time show a strange , odd disregard of truth ; he invent story , and tell they with so grave a face , that unless there be some internal evidence of their incorrectness   such as describe a cow with a bonnet on , he be generally believe , and his statement , which be give with the full appearance of relate a real occurrence , have once or twice lead to awkward result . all the three , whose heart be pain by this apparent unconsciousness of the difference between truth and falsehood , be unaccustomed to child , or they would have recognise this as a stage through which most infant , who have lively imagination , pass ; and , accordingly , there be a consultation in Mr Benson 's study one morning . Ruth be there , quiet , very pale , and with compress lip , sick at heart as she hear Miss Benson 's argument for the necessity of whipping , in order to cure Leonard of his story - telling . Mr Benson look unhappy and uncomfortable . education be but a series of experiment to they all , and they all have a secret dread of spoil the noble boy , who be the darling of their heart . and , perhaps , this very intensity of love beget an impatient , unnecessary anxiety , and make they resolve on sterner measure than the parent of a large family   where love be more spread abroad   would have dare to use . at any rate , the vote for whip carry the day ; and even Ruth , trembling and cold , agree that it must be do ; only she ask , in a meek , sad voice , if she need be present   Mr Benson be to be the executioner the scene , the study ; and be instantly tell that she have well not , she go slowly and languidly up to her room , and kneel down , she close her ear , and pray . 

 Miss Benson , have carry her point , be very sorry for the child , and would have beg he off ; but Mr Benson have listen more to her argument than now to her pleading , and only answer , " if it be right , it shall be do ! " he go into the garden , and deliberately , almost as if he wish to gain time , choose and cut off a little switch from the laburnum - tree . then he return through the kitchen , and gravely take the awed and wonder little fellow by the hand , he lead he silently into the study , and place he before he , begin an admonition on the importance of truthfulness , mean to conclude with what he believe to be the moral of all punishment : " as you can not remember this of yourself , I must give you a little pain to make you remember it . I be very sorry it be necessary , and that you can not recollect without my do so . " 

 but before he have reach this very proper and desirable conclusion , and while he be yet work his way , his heart ache with the terrified look of the child at the solemnly sad face and word of upbraid , Sally burst in : 

 " and what may ye be go to do with that fine switch I see ye gathering , Master Thurstan ? " ask she , her eye gleam with anger at the answer she know must come , if answer she have at all . 

 " go away , Sally , " say Mr Benson , annoy at the fresh difficulty in his path . 

 " I will not stir never a step till you give I that switch , as you have   get for some mischief , I will be bind . " 

 " Sally ! remember where it be say , ' he that spareth the rod , spoileth the child , ' " say Mr Benson , austerely . 

 " Aye , I remember ; and I remember a bit more than you want I to remember , I reckon . it be King Solomon as speak they word , and it be King Solomon 's son that be King Rehoboam , and no great shake either . I can remember what be say on he , 2 Chronicles , xii . chapter , 14th verse : ' and he , ' that be King Rehoboam , the lad that taste the rod , ' do evil , because he prepare not his heart to seek the Lord . ' I have   not be read my chapter every night for fifty year to be catch nap by a Dissenter , neither ! " say she , triumphantly . " come along , Leonard . " she stretch out her hand to the child , think that she have conquer . 

 but Leonard do not stir . he look wistfully at Mr Benson . " come ! " say she , impatiently . the boy 's mouth quiver . 

 " if you want to whip I , uncle , you may do it . I do not   much mind . " 

 put in this form , it be impossible to carry out his intention ; and so Mr Benson tell the lad he might go that he would speak to he another time . Leonard go away , more subdue in spirit than if he have be whip . Sally linger a moment . she stop to add : " I think it be for they without sin to throw stone at a poor child , and cut up good laburnum - branch to whip he . I only do as my better do , when I call Leonard 's mother Mrs Denbigh . " the moment she have say this she be sorry ; it be an ungenerous advantage after the enemy have acknowledge himself defeat . Mr Benson drop his head upon his hand , and hide his face , and sigh deeply . 

 Leonard fly in search of his mother , as in search of a refuge . if he have find her calm , he would have burst into a passion of cry after his agitation ; as it be , he come upon her kneeling and sobbing , and he stand quite still . then he throw his arm round her neck , and say : " Mamma ! mamma ! I will be good I make a promise ; I will speak true I make a promise . " and he keep his word . 

 Miss Benson pique herself upon be less carry away by her love for this child than any one else in the house ; she talk severely , and have capital theory ; but her severity end in talk , and her theory would not work . however , she read several book on education , knit sock for Leonard all the while ; and , upon the whole , I think , the hand be more usefully employ than the head , and the good honest heart well than either . she look old than when we first know she , but it be a ripe , kindly age that be come over she . her excellent practical sense , perhaps , make she a more masculine character than her brother . he be often so much perplex by the problem of life , that he let the time for action go by ; but she keep he in check by her clear , pithy talk , which bring back his wander thought to the duty that lie straight before he , wait for action ; and then he remember that it be the faithful part to " wait patiently upon God , " and leave the end in his hand , who alone know why evil exist in this world , and why it ever hover on either side of Good . in this respect , Miss Benson have more faith than her brother or so it seem ; for quick , resolute action in the next step of life be all she require , while he deliberate and tremble , and often do wrong from his very deliberation , when his first instinct would have lead he right . 

 but although decide and prompt as ever , Miss Benson be grow old since the summer afternoon when she dismount from the coach at the foot of the long Welsh hill that lead to Llan - dhu , where her brother await she to consult she about Ruth . though her eye be as bright and straight - look as ever , quick and brave in its glance , her hair have become almost snowy white ; and it be on this point she consult Sally , soon after the date of Leonard 's last untruth . the two be arrange Miss Benson 's room one morning , when , after dust the look - glass , she suddenly stop in her operation , and after a close inspection of herself , startle Sally by this speech : 

 " Sally ! I be look a great deal old than I use to do ! " 

 Sally , who be busy dilate on the increase price of flour , consider this remark of Miss Benson 's as strangely irrelevant to the matter in hand , and only notice it by a 

 " to be sure ! I suppose we all on we do . but two - and - fourpence a dozen be too much to make we pay for it . " 

 Miss Benson go on with her inspection of herself , and Sally with her economical project . 

 " Sally ! " say Miss Benson , " my hair be nearly white . the last time I look it be only pepper - and - salt . what must I do ? " 

 " do why , what would the wench do ? " ask Sally , contemptuously . " Ye're never go to be take in , at your time of life , by hair - dye and such gimcrack , as can only take in young girl whose wisdom - tooth be not cut . " 

 " and who be not very likely to want they , " say Miss Benson , quietly . " no ! but you see , Sally , it be very awkward have such grey hair , and feel so young . do you know , Sally , I have   as great a mind for dancing , when I hear a lively tune on the street - organ , as ever ; and as great a mind to sing when I be happy to sing in my old way , Sally , you know . " 

 " Aye , you have it from a girl , " say Sally ; " and many a time , when the door 's be shut , I do not know if it be you in the parlour , or a big bumble - bee in the kitchen , as be make that drumbling noise . I hear you at it yesterday . " 

 " but an old woman with grey hair ought not to have a fancy for dancing or singing , " continue Miss Benson . 

 " Whatten nonsense be ye talk ? " say Sally , rouse to indignation . " call yoursel ' an old woman when you be well than ten year young than I ! and many a girl have grey hair at five - and - twenty . " 

 " but I be more than five - and - twenty , Sally . I be fifty - seven next May ! " 

 " More shame for ye , then , not to know well than to talk of dye your hair . I can not abide such vanity ! " 

 " oh , dear ! Sally , when will you understand what I mean ? I want to know how I be to keep remember how old I be , so as to prevent myself from feel so young ? I be quite startled just now to see my hair in the glass , for I can generally tell if my cap be straight by feel . I will tell you what I will do I will cut off a piece of my grey hair , and plait it together for a marker in my Bible ! " Miss Benson expect applause for this bright idea , but Sally only make answer : 

 " you will be take to paint your cheek next , now you have   once think of dye your hair . " so Miss Benson plait her grey hair in silence and quietness , Leonard hold one end of it while she weave it , and admire the colour and texture all the time , with a sort of imply dissatisfaction at the auburn colour of his own curl , which be only half - comfort away by Miss Benson 's information , that , if he live long enough , his hair would be like her . 

 Mr Benson , who have look old and frail while he be yet but young , be now stationary as to the date of his appearance . but there be something more of nervous restlessness in his voice and way than formerly ; that be the only change six year have bring to he . and as for Sally , she choose to forget age and the passage of year altogether , and have as much work in she , to use her own expression , as she have at sixteen ; nor be her appearance very explicit as to the flight of time . fifty , sixty , or seventy , she might be not more than the last , not less than the first though her usual answer to any circuitous inquiry as to her age be now   what it have be for many year past , " I be fear I shall never see thirty again . " 

 then as to the house . it be not one where the sitting - room be refurnish every two or three year ; not now , even   since Ruth come to share their living   a place where , as an article grow shabby or wear , a new one be purchase . the furniture look poor , and the carpet almost threadbare ; but there be such a dainty spirit of cleanliness abroad , such exquisite neatness of repair , and altogether so bright and cheerful a look about the room everything so above - board no shift to conceal poverty under flimsy ornament that many a splendid drawing - room would give less pleasure to those who could see evidence of character in inanimate thing . but whatever poverty there might be in the house , there be full luxuriance in the little square wall - encircled garden , on two side of which the parlour and kitchen look . the laburnum - tree , which when Ruth come be like a twig stick into the ground , be now a golden glory in spring , and a pleasant shade in summer . the wild hop , that Mr Benson have bring home from one of his country ramble , and plant by the parlour - window , while Leonard be yet a baby in his mother 's arm , be now a garland over the casement , hang down long tendril , that wave in the breeze , and throw pleasant shadow and tracery , like some bacchanalian carving , on the parlour - wall , at " morn or dusky eve . " the yellow rise have clamber up to the window of Mr Benson 's bedroom , and its blossom - laden branch be support by a jargonelle pear - tree rich in autumnal fruit . 

 but , perhaps , in Ruth herself there be the great external change ; for of the change which have go on in her heart , and mind , and soul , or if there have be any , neither she nor any one around she be conscious ; but sometimes Miss Benson do say to Sally , " how very handsome Ruth be grow ! " to which Sally make ungracious answer , " yes ! she be well enough . beauty be deceitful , and favour a snare , and I be thankful the Lord have spar I from such man - trap and spring - gun . " but even Sally could not help secretly admire Ruth . if her early brilliancy of colour be go , a clear ivory skin , as smooth as satin , tell of complete and perfect health , and be as lovely , if not so strike in effect , as the banish lily and rose . her hair have grow dark and deeply , in the shadow that linger in its mass ; her eye , even if you could have guess that they have shed bitter tear in their day , have a thoughtful , spiritual look about they , that make you wonder at their depth , and look and look again . the increase of dignity in her face have be impart to her form . I do not know if she have grow tall since the birth of her child , but she look as if she have . and although she have live in a very humble home , yet there be something about either it or she , or the people amongst whom she have be throw during the last few year , which have so change she , that whereas , six or seven year ago , you would have perceive that she be not altogether a lady by birth and education , yet now she might have be place among the high in the land , and would have be take by the most critical judge for their equal , although ignorant of their conventional etiquette an ignorance which she would have acknowledge in a simple child - like way , be unconscious of any false shame . 

 her whole heart be in her boy . she often fear that she love he too much more than God himself yet she could not bear to pray to have her love for her child lessen . but she would kneel down by his little bed at night at the deep , still midnight with the star that keep watch over Rizpah shin down upon she , and tell God what I have now tell you , that she fear she love her child too much , yet could not , would not , love he less ; and speak to he of her one treasure as she could speak to no earthly friend . and so , unconsciously , her love for her child lead she up to love to God , to the all - knowing , who read her heart . 

 it might be superstition I dare say it be but , somehow , she never lie down to rest without say , as she look she last on her boy , " Thy will , not mine , be do ; " and even while she tremble and shrink with infinite dread from sound the depth of what that will might be , she feel as if her treasure be more secure to waken up rosy and bright in the morning , as one over whose slumber God 's holy angel have watch , for the very word which she have turn away in sick terror from realise the night before . 

 her daily absence at her duty to the Bradshaw child only minister to her love for Leonard . everything do minister to love when its foundation lie deep in a true heart , and it be with an exquisite pang of delight that , after a moment of vague fear , 
 

  oh , mercy ! to myself I say , 
 if Lucy should be dead ! , 
 

 she see her child 's bright face of welcome as he throw open the door every afternoon on her return home . for it be his silently - appoint work to listen for her knock , and rush breathless to let she in . if he be in the garden , or upstairs among the treasure of the lumber - room , either Miss Benson , or her brother , or Sally , would fetch he to his happy little task ; no one so sacred as he to the allotted duty . and the joyous meeting be not deaden by custom , to either mother or child . 

 Ruth give the Bradshaws the high satisfaction , as Mr Bradshaw often say both to she and to the Bensons ; indeed , she rather wince under his pompous approbation . but his favourite recreation be patronise ; and when Ruth see how quietly and meekly Mr Benson submit to gift and praise , when an honest word of affection , or a tacit , imply acknowledgment of equality , would have be worth everything say and do , she try to be more meek in spirit , and to recognise the good that undoubtedly exist in Mr Bradshaw . he be rich and more prosperous than ever ; a keen , far - see man of business , with an undisguised contempt for all who fail in the success which he have achieve . but it be not alone those who be less fortunate in obtain wealth than himself that he visit with severity of judgment ; every moral error or delinquency come under his unsparing comment . stain by no vice himself , either in his own eye or in that of any human being who care to judge he , have nicely and wisely proportion and adapt his mean to his end , he could afford to speak and act with a severity which be almost sanctimonious in its ostentation of thankfulness as to himself . not a misfortune or a sin be bring to light but Mr Bradshaw could trace it to its cause in some former mode of action , which he have long ago foretold would lead to shame . if another 's son turn out wild or bad , Mr Bradshaw have little sympathy ; it might have be prevent by a strict rule , or more religious life at home ; young Richard Bradshaw be quiet and steady , and other father might have have son like he if they have take the same pain to enforce obedience . Richard be an only son , and yet Mr Bradshaw might venture to say , he have never have his own way in his life . Mrs Bradshaw be , he confess   Mr Bradshaw do not dislike confess his wife 's error , rather less firm than he should have like with the girl ; and with some people , he believe , Jemima be rather headstrong ; but to his wish she have always show herself obedient . all child be obedient , if their parent be decide and authoritative ; and every one would turn out well , if properly manage . if they do not prove good , they must take the consequence of their error . 

 Mrs Bradshaw murmur faintly at her husband when his back be turn ; but if his voice be hear , or his footstep sound in the distance , she be mute , and hurry her child into the attitude or action most pleasing to their father . Jemima , it be true , rebel against this manner of proceeding , which savour to she a little of deceit ; but even she have not , as yet , overcome her awe of her father sufficiently to act independently of he , and accord to her own sense of right or rather , I should say , accord to her own warm , passionate impulse . before he the wilfulness which make her dark eye blaze out at time be hush and still ; he have no idea of her self - tormenting , no notion of the almost southern jealousy which seem to belong to her brunette complexion . Jemima be not pretty ; the flatness and shortness of her face make she almost plain ; yet most people look twice at her expressive countenance , at the eye which flame or melt at every trifle , at the rich colour which come at every express emotion into her usually sallow face , at the faultless tooth which make her smile like a sunbeam . but then , again , when she think she be not kindly treat , when a suspicion cross her mind , or when she be angry with herself , her lip be tight - press together , her colour be wan and almost livid , and a stormy gloom cloud her eye as with a film . but before her father her word be few , and he do not notice look or tone . 

 her brother Richard have be equally silent before his father in boyhood and early youth ; but since he have go to be clerk in a London house , preparatory to assume his place as junior partner in Mr Bradshaw 's business , he speak more on his occasional visit at home . and very proper and highly moral be his conversation ; set sentence of goodness , which be like the flower that child stick in the ground , and that have not spring upwards from root deep down in the hidden life and experience of the heart . he be as severe a judge as his father of other people 's conduct , but you feel that Mr Bradshaw be sincere in his condemnation of all outward error and vice , and that he would try himself by the same law as he try other ; somehow , Richard 's word be frequently hear with a lurking distrust , and many shake their head over the pattern son ; but then it be those whose son have go astray , and be condemn , in no private or tender manner , by Mr Bradshaw , so it might be revenge in they . still , Jemima feel that all be not right ; her heart sympathise in the rebellion against his father 's command , which her brother have confess to she in an unusual moment of confidence , but her uneasy conscience condemn the deceit which he have practise . 

 the brother and sister be sit alone over a blaze Christmas fire , and Jemima hold an old newspaper in her hand to shield her face from the hot light . they be talk of family event , when , during a pause , Jemima 's eye catch the name of a great actor , who have lately give prominence and life to a character in one of Shakspeare 's play . the criticism in the paper be fine , and warm Jemima 's heart . 

 " how I should like to see a play ! " exclaim she . 

 " should you ? " say her brother , listlessly . 

 " yes , to be sure ! just hear this ! " and she begin to read a fine passage of criticism . 

 " those newspaper people can make an article out of anything , " say he , yawn . " I have   see the man myself , and it be all very well , but nothing to make such a fuss about . " 

 " you ! you see ! have you see a play , Richard ? oh , why do you never tell I before ? tell I all about it ! why do you never name see in your letter ? " 

 he half smile , contemptuously enough . " oh ! at first it strike one rather , but after a while one care no more for the theatre than one do for mince - pie . " 

 " oh , I wish I might go to London ! " say Jemima , impatiently . " I have   a great mind to ask papa to let I go to the George Smiths ' , and then I could see . I would not think he like mince - pie . " 

 " you must not do any such thing ! " say Richard , now neither yawn nor contemptuous . " my father would never allow you to go to the theatre ; and the George Smiths be such old fogey they would be sure to tell . " 

 " how do you go , then ? do my father give you leave ? " 

 " oh ! many thing be right for man which be not for girl . " 

 Jemima sit and ponder . Richard wish he have not be so confidential . 

 " you need not name it , " say he , rather anxiously . 

 " name what ? " say she , startle , for her thought have go far afield . 

 " oh , name my go once or twice to the theatre ! " 

 " no , I shall not   name it ! " say she . " no one here would care to hear it . " 

 but it be with some little surprise , and almost with a feeling of disgust , that she hear Richard join with her father in condemn some one , and add to Mr Bradshaw 's list of offence , by allege that the young man be a playgoer . he do not think his sister hear his word . 

 Mary and Elizabeth be the two girl whom Ruth have in charge ; they resemble Jemima more than their brother in character . the household rule be occasionally a little relaxed in their favour , for Mary , the elder , be nearly eight year young than Jemima , and three intermediate child have die . they love Ruth dearly , make a great pet of Leonard , and have many profound secret together , most of which relate to their wonder if Jemima and Mr Farquhar would ever be marry . they watch their sister closely ; and every day have some fresh confidence to make to each other , confirm or discourage to their hope . 

 Ruth rise early , and share the household work with Sally and Miss Benson till seven ; and then she help Leonard to dress , and have a quiet time alone with he till prayer and breakfast . at nine she be to be at Mr Bradshaw 's house . she sit in the room with Mary and Elizabeth during the Latin , the writing , and arithmetic lesson , which they receive from master ; then she read , and walk with they , they cling to she as to an eld sister ; she din with her pupil at the family lunch , and reach home by four . that happy home those quiet day ! 

 and so the peaceful day pass on into week , and month , and year , and Ruth and Leonard grow and strengthen into the riper beauty of their respective age ; while as yet no touch of decay have come on the quaint , primitive elder of the household . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XX 

 Jemima refuse to be manage 
 

 it be no wonder that the looker - on be perplex as to the state of affair between Jemima and Mr Farquhar , for they too be sorely puzzle themselves at the sort of relationship between they . be it love , or be it not ? that be the question in Mr Farquhar 's mind . he hop it be not ; he believe it be not ; and yet he feel as if it be . there be something preposterous , he think , in a man nearly forty year of age be in love with a girl of twenty . he have go on reasoning through all the day of his manhood on the idea of a staid , noble - minded wife , grave and sedate , the fit companion in experience of her husband . he have speak with admiration of reticent character , full of self - control and dignity ; and he hop he trust , that all this time he have not be allow himself unconsciously to fall in love with a wild - hearte , impetuous girl , who know nothing of life beyond her father 's house , and who chafe under the strict discipline enforce there . for it be rather a suspicious symptom of the state of Mr Farquhar 's affection , that he have discover the silent rebellion which continue in Jemima 's heart , unperceive by any of her own family , against the severe law and opinion of her father . Mr Farquhar share in these opinion ; but in he they be modify , and take a milder form . still , he approve of much that Mr Bradshaw do and say ; and this make it all the more strange that he should wince so for Jemima , whenever anything take place which he instinctively know that she would dislike . after an evening at Mr Bradshaw 's , when Jemima have go to the very verge of question or dispute some of her father 's severe judgment , Mr Farquhar go home in a dissatisfied , restless state of mind , which he be almost afraid to analyse . he admire the inflexible integrity and almost the pomp of principle evince by Mr Bradshaw on every occasion ; he wonder how it be that Jemima could not see how grand a life might be , whose every action be shape in obedience to some eternal law ; instead of which , he be afraid she rebel against every law , and be only guide by impulse . Mr Farquhar have be teach to dread impulse as prompting of the devil . sometimes , if he try to present her father 's opinion before she in another form , so as to bring himself and her rather more into that state of agreement he long for , she flash out upon he with the indignation of difference that she dare not show to , or before , her father , as if she have some diviner instinct which teach she more truly than they know , with all their experience ; at least , in her first expression there seem something good and fine ; but opposition make she angry and irritable , and the argument which he be constantly provoke   whenever he be with she in her father 's absence   frequently end in some vehemence of expression on her part that offend Mr Farquhar , who do not see how she expiate her anger in tear and self - reproach when alone in her chamber . then he would lecture himself severely on the interest he could not help feel in a wilful girl ; he would determine not to interfere with her opinion in future , and yet , the very next time they differ , he strive to argue she into harmony with himself , in spite of all resolution to the contrary . 

 Mr Bradshaw see just enough of this interest which Jemima have excite in his partner 's mind , to determine he in consider their future marriage as a settled affair . the fitness of the thing have long ago strike he ; her father 's partner so the fortune he mean to give she might continue in the business ; a man of such steadiness of character , and such a capital eye for a desirable speculation as Mr Farquhar just the right age to unite the paternal with the conjugal affection , and consequently the very man for Jemima , who have something unruly in she , which might break out under a rťgime less wisely adjust to the circumstance than be Mr Bradshaw 's   in his own opinion   a house ready - furnish , at a convenient distance from her home no near relation on Mr Farquhar 's side , who might be incline to consider his residence as their own for an indefinite time , and so add to the household expense in short , what could be more suitable in every way ? Mr Bradshaw respect the very self - restraint he think he see in Mr Farquhar 's demeanour , attribute it to a wise desire to wait until trade should be rather more slack , and the man of business more at leisure to become the lover . 

 as for Jemima , at time she think she almost hat Mr Farquhar . 

 " what business have he , " she would think , " to lecture I ? often I can hardly bear it from papa , and I will not bear it from he . he treat I just like a child , and as if I should lose all my present opinion when I know more of the world . I be sure I should like never to know the world , if it be to make I think as he do , hard man that he be ! I wonder what make he take Jem Brown on as gardener again , if he do not believe that above one criminal in a thousand be restore to goodness . I will ask he , some day , if that be not act on impulse rather than principle . poor impulse ! how you do get abuse . but I will tell Mr Farquhar I will not let he interfere with I . if I do what papa bid I , no one have a right to notice whether I do it willingly or not . " 

 so then she try to defy Mr Farquhar , by do and say thing that she know he would disapprove . she go so far that he be seriously grieve , and do not even remonstrate and " lecture , " and then she be disappointed and irritated ; for , somehow , with all her indignation at interference , she like to be lecture by he ; not that she be aware of this liking of her , but still it would have be more pleasant to be scold than so quietly pass over . her two little sister , with their wide - awake eye , have long ago put thing together , and conjecture . every day they have some fresh mystery together , to be impart in garden walk and whisper talk . 

 " Lizzie , do you see how the tear come into Mimie 's eye when Mr Farquhar look so displeased when she say good people be always dull ? I think she be in love . " Mary say the last word with grave emphasis , and feel like an oracle of twelve year of age . 

 " I do not , " say Lizzie . " I know I cry often enough when papa be cross , and I be not in love with he . " 

 " yes ! but you do not   look as Mimie do . " 

 " do not   call she Mimie you know papa do not like it . " 

 " yes ; but there be so many thing papa do not like I can never remember they all . never mind about that ; but listen to something I have   get to tell you , if you will never , never tell . " 

 " no , indeed I will not , Mary . what be it ? " 

 " not to Mrs Denbigh ? " 

 " no , not even to Mrs Denbigh . " 

 " well , then , the other day last Friday , Mimie " 

 " Jemima ! " interrupt the more conscientious Elizabeth . 

 " Jemima , if it must be so , " jerk out Mary , ' send I to her desk for an envelope , and what do you think I see ? " 

 " what ? " ask Elizabeth , expect nothing less than a red - hot Valentine , sign Walter Farquhar , pro Bradshaw , Farquhar , and Co. , in full . 

 " why , a piece of paper , with dull - look line upon it , just like the scientific dialogue ; and I remember all about it . it be once when Mr Farquhar have be tell we that a bullet do not go in a straight line , but in a something curve , and he draw some line on a piece of paper ; and Mimie " 

 " Jemima , " put in Elizabeth . 

 " well , well ! she have treasure it up , and write in a corner , ' W. F. , April 3rd . ' now , that be rather like love , be not it ? for Jemima hat useful information just as much as I do , and that be say a great deal ; and yet she have keep this paper , and date it . " 

 " if that be all , I know Dick keep a paper with Miss Benson 's name write on it , and yet he be not in love with she ; and perhaps Jemima may like Mr Farquhar , and he may not like she . it seem such a little while since her hair be turn up , and he have always be a grave middle - aged man ever since I can recollect ; and then , have you never notice how often he find fault with she almost lecture she ? " 

 " to be sure , " say Mary ; " but he may be in love , for all that . just think how often papa lecture mamma ; and yet , of course , they be in love with each other . " 

 " well ! we shall see , " say Elizabeth . 

 Poor Jemima little thought of the four sharp eye that watch her daily course while she sit alone , as she fancy , with her secret in her own room . for , in a passionate fit of grieve , at the impatient , hasty temper which have make she so seriously displease Mr Farquhar that he have go away without remonstrance , without more leave - taking than a distant bow , she have begin to suspect that rather than not be notice at all by he , rather than be an object of indifference to he oh ! far rather would she be an object of anger and upbraiding ; and the thought that follow this confession to herself , stunned and bewilder she ; and for once that they make she dizzy with hope , ten time they make she sick with fear . for an instant she plan to become and to be all he could wish she ; to change she very nature for he . and then a great gush of pride come over she , and she set her tooth tight together , and determine that he should either love she as she be , or not at all . unless he could take she with all her fault , she would not care for his regard ; " love " be too noble a word to call such cold , calculate feeling as his must be , who go about with a pattern idea in his mind , try to find a wife to match . besides , there be something degrade , Jemima think , in try to alter herself to gain the love of any human creature . and yet , if he do not care for she , if this late indifference be to last , what a great shroud be draw over life ! could she bear it ? 

 from the agony she dare not look at , but which she be go to risk encountering , she be arouse by the presence of her mother . 

 " Jemima ! your father want to speak to you in the dining - room . " 

 " what for ? " ask the girl . 

 " oh ! he be fidget by something Mr Farquhar say to I , and which I repeat . I be sure I think there be no harm in it , and your father always like I to tell he what everybody say in his absence . " 

 Jemima go with a heavy heart into her father 's presence . 

 he be walk up and down the room , and do not see she at first . 

 " oh , Jemima ! be that you ? have your mother tell you what I want to speak to you about ? " 

 " no ! " say Jemima . " not exactly . " 

 " she have be tell I what prove to I how very seriously you must have displease and offend Mr Farquhar , before he could have express himself to she as he do , when he leave the house . you know what he say ? " 

 " no ! " say Jemima , her heart swell within she . " he have no right to say anything about I . " she be desperate , or she durst not have say this before her father . 

 " no right ! what do you mean , Jemima ? " say Mr Bradshaw , turn sharp round . " surely you must know that I hope he may one day be your husband ; that be to say , if you prove yourself worthy of the excellent training I have give you . I can not suppose Mr Farquhar would take any undisciplined girl as a wife . " 

 Jemima hold tight by a chair near which she be stand . she do not speak ; her father be pleased by her silence it be the way in which he like his project to be receive . 

 " but you can not suppose , " he continue , " that Mr Farquhar will consent to marry you " 

 " consent to marry I ! " repeat Jemima , in a low tone of brood indignation ; be those the term upon which her rich woman 's heart be to be give , with a calm consent of acquiescent acceptance , but a little above resignation on the part of the receiver ? 

  " if you give way to a temper which , although you have never dare to show it to I , I be well aware exist , although I hop the habit of self - examination I have instill have do much to cure you of manifest it . at one time , Richard promise to be the more headstrong of the two ; now , I must desire you to take pattern by he . yes , " he continue , fall into his old train of thought , " it would be a most fortunate connexion for you in every way . I should have you under my own eye , and could still assist you in the formation of your character , and I should be at hand to strengthen and confirm your principle . Mr Farquhar 's connexion with the firm would be convenient and agreeable to I in a pecuniary point of view . he " Mr Bradshaw be go on in his enumeration of the advantage which he in particular , and Jemima in the second place , would derive from this marriage , when his daughter speak , at first so low that he could not hear she , as he walk up and down the room with his creak boot , and he have to stop to listen . 

 " have Mr Farquhar ever speak to you about it ? " Jemima 's cheek be flush as she ask the question ; she wish that she might have be the person to whom he have first address himself . 

 Mr Bradshaw answer , 

 " no , not speak . it have be imply between we for some time . at least , I have be so aware of his intention that I have make several allusion , in the course of business , to it , as a thing that might take place . he can hardly have misunderstood ; he must have see that I perceive his design , and approve of it , " say Mr Bradshaw , rather doubtfully ; as he remember how very little , in fact , pass between he and his partner which could have reference to the subject , to any but a mind prepare to receive it . perhaps Mr Farquhar have not really think of it ; but then again , that would imply that his own penetration have be mistake , a thing not impossible certainly , but quite beyond the range of probability . so he reassure himself , and   as he think   his daughter , by say , 

 " the whole thing be so suitable the advantage arise from the connexion be so obvious ; besides which , I be quite aware , from many little speech of Mr Farquhar 's , that he contemplate marriage at no very distant time ; and he seldom leave Eccleston , and visit few family besides our own certainly , none that can compare with ours in the advantage you have all receive in moral and religious training . " but then Mr Bradshaw be check in his imply praise of himself   and only himself could be his martingale when he once set out on such a career   by a recollection that Jemima must not feel too secure , as she might become if he dwelt too much on the advantage of she be her father 's daughter . accordingly , he say : " but you must be aware , Jemima , that you do very little credit to the education I have give you , when you make such an impression as you must have do to - day , before Mr Farquhar could have say what he do of you ! " 

 " what do he say ? " ask Jemima , still in the low , husky tone of suppress anger . 

 " your mother say he remark to she , ' what a pity it be , that Jemima can not maintain her opinion without go into a passion ; and what a pity it be , that her opinion be such as to sanction , rather than curb , these fit of rudeness and anger ! ' " 

 " do he say that ? " say Jemima , in a still low tone , not question her father , but speak rather to herself . 

 " I have no doubt he do , " reply her father , gravely . " your mother be in the habit of repeat accurately to I what take place in my absence ; besides which , the whole speech be not one of her ; she have not alter a word in the repetition , I be convinced . I have train she to habit of accuracy very unusual in a woman . " 

 at another time , Jemima might have be incline to rebel against this system of carry constant intelligence to headquarters , which she have long ago feel as an insurmountable obstacle to any free communication with her mother ; but now , her father 's mean of acquire knowledge fade into insignificance before the nature of the information he impart . she stand quite still , grasp the chair - back , long to be dismiss . 

 " I have say enough now , I hope , to make you behave in a become manner to Mr Farquhar ; if your temper be too unruly to be always under your own control , at least have respect to my injunction , and take some pain to curb it before he . " 

 " may I go ? " ask Jemima , chafe more and more . 

 " you may , " say her father . when she leave the room he gently rub his hand together , satisfied with the effect he have produce , and wonder how it be , that one so well bring up as his daughter could ever say or do anything to provoke such a remark from Mr Farquhar as that which he have hear repeat . 

 " nothing can be more gentle and docile than she be when speak to in the proper manner . I must give Farquhar a hint , " say Mr Bradshaw to himself . 

 Jemima rush upstairs , and lock herself into her room . she begin pace up and down at first , without shed a tear ; but then she suddenly stop , and burst out cry with passionate indignation . 

 " so ! I be to behave well , not because it be right not because it be right but to show off before Mr Farquhar . oh , Mr Farquhar ! " say she , suddenly change to a sort of upbraid tone of voice , " I do not think so of you an hour ago . I do not think you could choose a wife in that cold - hearted way , though you do profess to act by rule and line ; but you think to have I , do you ? because it be fitting and suitable , and you want to be marry , and can not   spare time for wooing "   she be lash herself up by an exaggeration of all her father have say . " and how often I have think you be too grand for I ! but now I know well . now I can believe that all you do be do from calculation ; you be good because it add to your business credit you talk in that high strain about principle because it sound well , and be respectable and even these thing be well than your cold way of look out for a wife , just as you would do for a carpet , to add to your comfort , and settle you respectably . but I will not   be that wife . you shall see something of I which shall make you not acquiesce so quietly in the arrangement of the firm . " she cry too vehemently to go on thinking or speak . then she stop , and say : 

 " only an hour ago I be hop I do not   know what I be hop but I think oh ! how I be deceive ! I think he have a true , deep , loving , manly heart , which God might let I win ; but now I know he have only a calm , calculate head " 

 if Jemima have be vehement and passionate before this conversation with her father , it be well than the sullen reserve she assume now whenever Mr Farquhar come to the house . he feel it deeply ; no reasoning with himself take off the pain he experience . he try to speak on the subject she like , in the manner she like , until he despise himself for the unsuccessful effort . 

 he stand between she and her father once or twice , in obvious inconsistency with his own previously express opinion ; and Mr Bradshaw pique himself upon his admirable management , in make Jemima feel that she owe his indulgence or forbearance to Mr Farquhar 's interference ; but Jemima perverse , miserable Jemima think that she hat Mr Farquhar all the more . she respect her father inflexible , much more than her father pompously give up to Mr Farquhar 's subdue remonstrance on her behalf . even Mr Bradshaw be perplexed , and shut himself up to consider how Jemima be to be make more fully to understand his wish and her own interest . but there be nothing to take hold of as a ground for any further conversation with she . her action be so submissive that they be spiritless ; she do all her father desire ; she do it with a nervous quickness and haste , if she think that otherwise Mr Farquhar would interfere in any way . she wish evidently to owe nothing to he . she have begin by leave the room when he come in , after the conversation she have have with her father ; but at Mr Bradshaw 's first expression of his wish that she should remain , she remain silent , indifferent , inattentive to all that be go on ; at least there be this appearance of inattention . she would work away at her sewing as if she be to earn her livelihood by it ; the light be go out of her eye as she lift they up heavily before reply to any question , and the eyelid be often swollen with cry . 

 but in all this there be no positive fault . Mr Bradshaw could not have tell she not to do this , or to do that , without she do it ; for she have become much more docile of late . 

 it be a wonderful proof of the influence Ruth have gain in the family , that Mr Bradshaw , after much deliberation , congratulate himself on the wise determination he have make of request she to speak to Jemima , and find out what feeling be at the bottom of all this change in her way of go on . 

 he ring the bell . 

 " be Mrs Denbigh here ? " he inquire of the servant who answer it . 

 " yes , sir ; she be just come . " 

 " beg she to come to I in this room as soon as she can leave the young lady . " 

 Ruth come . 

 " sit down , Mrs Denbigh ; sit down . I want to have a little conversation with you ; not about your pupil , they be go on well under your care , I be sure ; and I often congratulate myself on the choice I make I assure you I do . but now I want to speak to you about Jemima . she be very fond of you , and perhaps you could take some opportunity of observe to she in short , of say to she , that she be behave very foolishly in fact , disgusting Mr Farquhar   who be , I know , incline to like she   by the sullen , sulky way she behave in , when he be by . " 

 he pause for the ready acquiescence he expect . but Ruth do not quite comprehend what be require of she , and dislike the glimpse she have gain of the task very much . 

 " I hardly understand , sir . you be displeased with Miss Bradshaw 's manner to Mr Farquhar . " 

 " well , well ! not quite that ; I be displeased with her manner they be sulky and abrupt , particularly when he be by and I want you   of whom she be so fond   to speak to she about it . " 

 " but I have never have the opportunity of notice they . whenever I have see she , she have be most gentle and affectionate . " 

 " but I think you do not hesitate to believe I , when I say that I have notice the reverse , " say Mr Bradshaw , draw himself up . 

 " no , sir . I beg your pardon if I have express myself so badly as to seem to doubt . but be I to tell Miss Bradshaw that you have speak of her fault to I ? " ask Ruth , a little astonished , and shrink more than ever from the propose task . 

 " if you would allow I to finish what I have get to say , without interruption , I could then tell you what I do wish . " 

 " I beg your pardon , sir , " say Ruth , gently . 

 " I wish you to join our circle occasionally in an evening ; Mrs Bradshaw shall send you an invitation when Mr Farquhar be likely to be here . warn by I , and , consequently , with your observation quicken , you can hardly fail to notice instance of what I have point out ; and then I will trust to your own good sense "   Mr Bradshaw bow to she at this part of his sentence   " to find an opportunity to remonstrate with she . " 

 Ruth be begin to speak , but he wave his hand for another minute of silence . 

 " only a minute , Mrs Denbigh . I be quite aware that , in request your presence occasionally in the evening , I shall be trespass upon the time which be , in fact , your money ; you may be assure that I shall not forget this little circumstance , and you can explain what I have say on this head to Benson and his sister . " 

 " I be afraid I can not do it , " Ruth begin ; but while she be choose word delicate enough to express her reluctance to act as he wish , he have almost bow she out of the room ; and think that she be modest in her estimate of her qualification for remonstrate with his daughter , he add , blandly , 

 " no one so able , Mrs Denbigh . I have observe many quality in you observe when , perhaps , you have little think it . " 

 if he have observe Ruth that morning , he would have see an absence of mind , and depression of spirit , not much to her credit as a teacher ; for she could not bring herself to feel that she have any right to go into the family purposely to watch over and find fault with any one member of it . if she have see anything wrong in Jemima , Ruth love she so much that she would have tell she of it in private ; and with many doubt , how far she be the one to pull out the mote from any one 's eye , even in the most tender manner ; she would have have to conquer reluctance before she could have do even this ; but there be something undefinably repugnant to she in the manner of act which Mr Bradshaw have propose , and she determine not to accept the invitation which be to place she in so false a position . 

 but as she be leave the house , after the end of the lesson , while she stand in the hall tie on her bonnet , and listen to the last small confidence of her two pupil , she see Jemima come in through the garden - door , and be strike by the change in her look . the large eye , so brilliant once , be dim and clouded ; the complexion sallow and colourless ; a lower expression be on the dark brow , and the corner of her mouth droop as with sorrowful thought . she look up , and her eye meet Ruth 's . 

 " oh ! you beautiful creature ! " think Jemima , " with your still , calm , heavenly face , what be you to know of earth 's trial ! you have lose your beloved by death but that be a blessed sorrow ; the sorrow I have pull I down and down , and make I despise and hate every one not you , though . " and , her face change to a soft , tender look , she go up to Ruth , and kiss she fondly ; as if it be a relief to be near some one on whose true , pure heart she rely . Ruth return the caress ; and even while she do so , she suddenly rescind her resolution to keep clear of what Mr Bradshaw have desire she to do . on her way home she resolve , if she could , to find out what be Jemima 's secret feeling ; and if   as , from some previous knowledge , she suspect   they be morbid and exaggerate in any way , to try and help she right with all the wisdom which true love give . it be time that some one should come to still the storm in Jemima 's turbulent heart , which be daily and hourly know less and less of peace . the irritate difficulty be to separate the two character , which at two different time she have attribute to Mr Farquhar the old one , which she have formerly believe to be true , that he be a man act up to a high standard of lofty principle , and act up without a struggle   and this last have be the circumstance which have make her rebellious and irritable once ; the new one , which her father have excite in her suspicious mind , that Mr Farquhar be cold and calculate in all he do , and that she be to be transfer by the former , and accept by the latter , as a sort of stock - in - trade these be the two Mr Farquhars who clash together in her mind . and in this state of irritation and prejudice , she could not bear the way in which he give up his opinion to please she ; that be not the way to win she ; she like he far well when he inflexibly and rigidly adhere to his idea of right and wrong , not even allow any force to temptation , and hardly any grace to repentance , compare with that beauty of holiness which have never yield to sin . he have be her idol in those day , as she find out now , however much at the time she have oppose he with violence . 

 as for Mr Farquhar , he be almost weary of himself ; no reasoning , even no principle , seem to have influence over he , for he see that Jemima be not at all what he approve of in woman . he see she uncurbed and passionate , affect to despise the rule of life he hold most sacred , and indifferent to , if not positively dislike he ; and yet he love she dearly . but he resolve to make a great effort of will , and break loose from these trammel of sense . and while he resolve , some old recollection would bring she up , hang on his arm , in all the confidence of early girlhood , look up in his face with her soft , dark eye , and question he upon the mysterious subject which have so much interest for both of they at that time , although they have become only matter for dissension in these later day . 

 it be also true , as Mr Bradshaw have say , Mr Farquhar wish to marry , and have not much choice in the small town of Eccleston . he never put this so plainly before himself , as a reason for choose Jemima , as her father have do to she ; but it be an unconscious motive all the same . however , now he have lecture himself into the resolution to make a pretty long absence from Eccleston , and see if , amongst his distant friend , there be no woman more in accordance with his ideal , who could put the naughty , wilful , plague Jemima Bradshaw out of his head , if he do not soon perceive some change in she for the well . 

 a few day after Ruth 's conversation with Mr Bradshaw , the invitation she have be expect , yet dread , come . it be to she alone . Mr and Miss Benson be pleased at the compliment to she , and urge her acceptance of it . she wish that they have be include ; she have not think it right , or kind to Jemima , to tell they why she be go , and she fear now lest they should feel a little hurt that they be not ask too . but she need not have be afraid . they be glad and proud of the attention to she , and never think of themselves . 

 " Ruthie , what gown shall you wear to - night ? your dark grey one , I suppose ? " ask Miss Benson . 

 " yes , I suppose so . I never think of it ; but that be my good . " 

 " well ; then , I shall quill up a ruff for you . you know I be a famous quiller of net . " 

 Ruth come downstairs with a little flush on her cheek when she be ready to go . she hold her bonnet and shawl in her hand , for she know Miss Benson and Sally would want to see she dress . 

 " be not mamma pretty ? " ask Leonard , with a child 's pride . 

 " she look very nice and tidy , " say Miss Benson , who have an idea that child should not talk or think about beauty . 

 " I think my ruff look so nice , " say Ruth , with gentle pleasure . and indeed it do look nice , and set off the pretty round throat most becomingly . her hair , now grow long and thick , be smooth as close to her head as its wave nature would allow , and plait up in a great rich knot low down behind . the grey gown be as plain as plain could be . 

 " you should have light glove , Ruth , " say Miss Benson . she go upstairs , and bring down a delicate pair of Limerick one , which have be long treasure up in a walnut - shell . 

 " they say they glove be make of chickens'-skins , " say Sally , examine they curiously . " I wonder how they set about skin them . " 

 " here , Ruth , " say Mr Benson , come in from the garden , " here be a rose or two for you . I be sorry there be no more ; I hop I should have have my yellow rise out by this time , but the damask and the white be in a warm corner , and have get the start . " 

 Miss Benson and Leonard stand at the door , and watch she down the little passage - street till she be out of sight . 

 she have hardly touch the bell at Mr Bradshaw 's door , when Mary and Elizabeth open it with boisterous glee . 

 " we see you come we have   be watch for you we want you to come round the garden before tea ; papa be not come in yet . do come ! " 

 she go round the garden with a little girl cling to each arm . it be full of sunshine and flower , and this make the contrast between it and the usual large family room   which front the north - east , and therefore have no evening sun to light up its cold , drab furniture   more striking than usual . it look very gloomy . there be the great dining - table , heavy and square ; the range of chair , straight and square ; the work - box , useful and square ; the colouring of wall , and carpet , and curtain , all of the cold description ; everything be handsome , and everything be ugly . Mrs Bradshaw be asleep in her easy - chair when they come in . Jemima have just put down her work , and , lose in thought , she leant her cheek on her hand . when she see Ruth she brighten a little , and go to she and kiss she . Mrs Bradshaw jump up at the sound of their entrance , and be wide awake in a moment . 

 " oh ! I think your father be here , " say she , evidently relieve to find that he have not come in and catch she sleep . 

 " thank you , Mrs Denbigh , for come to we to - night , " say she , in the quiet tone in which she generally speak in her husband 's absence . when he be there , a sort of constant terror of displease he make her voice sharp and nervous ; the child know that many a thing pass over by their mother when their father be away , be sure to be notice by she when he be present ; and notice , too , in a cross and querulous manner , for she be so much afraid of the blame which on any occasion of their misbehaviour fall upon she . and yet she look up to her husband with a reverence and regard , and a faithfulness of love , which his decision of character be likely to produce on a weak and anxious mind . he be a rest and a support to she , on whom she cast all her responsibility ; she be an obedient , unremonstrate wife to he ; no strong affection have ever bring her duty to he into conflict with any desire of her heart . she love her child dearly , though they all perplex she very frequently . her son be her especial darling , because he very seldom bring she into any scrape with his father ; he be so cautious and prudent , and have the art of " keep a calm sough " about any difficulty he might be in . with all her dutiful sense of the obligation , which her husband enforce upon she , to notice and tell he everything that be go wrong in the household , and especially among his child , Mrs Bradshaw , somehow , contrive to be honestly blind to a good deal that be not praiseworthy in Master Richard . 

 Mr Bradshaw come in before long , bring with he Mr Farquhar . Jemima have be talk to Ruth with some interest before then ; but , on see Mr Farquhar , she bend her head down over her work , go a little paler , and turn obstinately silent . Mr Bradshaw long to command she to speak ; but even he have a suspicion that what she might say , when so command , might be rather bad in its effect than her gloomy silence ; so he hold his peace , and a discontent , angry kind of peace it be . Mrs Bradshaw see that something be wrong , but could not tell what ; only she become every moment more trembling , and nervous , and irritable , and send Mary and Elizabeth off on all sort of contradictory errand to the servant , and make the tea twice as strong , and sweeten it twice as much as usual , in hope of pacify her husband with good thing . 

 Mr Farquhar have go for the last time , or so he think . he have resolve   for the fifth time   that he would go and watch Jemima once more , and if her temper get the well of she , and she show the old sullenness again , and give the old proof of indifference to his good opinion , he would give she up altogether , and seek a wife elsewhere . he sit watch she with fold arm , and in silence . altogether they be a pleasant family party ! 

 Jemima want to wind a skein of wool . Mr Farquhar see it , and come to she , anxious to do she this little service . she turn away pettishly , and ask Ruth to hold it for she . 

 Ruth be hurt for Mr Farquhar , and look sorrowfully at Jemima ; but Jemima would not see her glance of upbraiding , as Ruth , hop that she would relent , delay a little to comply with her request . Mr Farquhar do ; and go back to his seat to watch they both . he see Jemima turbulent and stormy in look ; he see Ruth , to all appearance heavenly calm as the angel , or with only that little tinge of sorrow which her friend 's behaviour have call forth . he see the unusual beauty of her face and form , which he have never notice before ; and he see Jemima , with all the brilliancy she once possess in eye and complexion , dim and fade . he watch Ruth , speak low and soft to the little girl , who seem to come to she in every difficulty ; and he remark her gentle firmness when their bedtime come , and they plead to stay up long   their father be absent in his counting - house , or they would not have dare to do so . he like Ruth 's soft , distinct , unwavere " no ! you must go . you must keep to what be right , " far well than the good - natured yielding to entreaty he have formerly admire in Jemima . he be wander off into this comparison , while Ruth , with delicate and unconscious tact , be try to lead Jemima into some subject which should take she away from the thought , whatever they be , that make she so ungracious and rude . 

 Jemima be ashamed of herself before Ruth , in a way which she have never be before any one else . she value Ruth 's good opinion so highly , that she dread lest her friend should perceive her fault . she put a check upon herself a check at first ; but after a little time she have forget something of her trouble , and listen to Ruth , and question she about Leonard , and smile at his little witticism ; and only the sigh , that would come up from the very force of habit , bring back the consciousness of her unhappiness . before the end of the evening , Jemima have allow herself to speak to Mr Farquhar in the old way questioning , differing , disputing . she be recall to the remembrance of that miserable conversation by the entrance of her father . after that she be silent . but he have see she face more animate , and bright with a smile , as she speak to Mr Farquhar ; and although he regret the loss of her complexion   for she be still very pale , he be highly pleased with the success of his project . he never doubt but that Ruth have give she some sort of private exhortation to behave well . he could not have understand the pretty art with which , by simply banish unpleasant subject , and throw a wholesome natural sunlit tone over other , Ruth have insensibly draw Jemima out of her gloom . he resolve to buy Mrs Denbigh a handsome silk gown the very next day . he do not believe she have a silk gown , poor creature ! he have notice that dark grey stuff , this long , long time , as her Sunday dress . he like the colour ; the silk one should be just the same tinge . then he think that it would , perhaps , be well to choose a light shade , one which might be notice as different to the old gown . for he have no doubt she would like to have it remark , and , perhaps , would not object to tell people , that it be a present from Mr Bradshaw a token of his approbation . he smile a little to himself as he think of this additional source of pleasure to Ruth . she , in the meantime , be get up to go home . while Jemima be light the bed - candle at the lamp , Ruth come round to bid good night . Mr Bradshaw could not allow she to remain till the morrow , uncertain whether he be satisfied or not . 

 " good night , Mrs Denbigh , " say he . " good night . thank you . I be oblige to you I be exceedingly oblige to you . " 

 he lay emphasis on these word , for he be pleased to see Mr Farquhar step forward to help Jemima in her little office . 

 Mr Farquhar offer to accompany Ruth home ; but the street that intervene between Mr Bradshaw 's and the Chapel - house be so quiet that he desist , when he learn from Ruth 's manner how much she dislike his proposal . Mr Bradshaw , too , instantly observe : 

 " oh ! Mrs Denbigh need not trouble you , Farquhar . I have servant at liberty at any moment to attend on she , if she wish it . " 

 in fact , he want to make hay while the sun shine , and to detain Mr Farquhar a little long , now that Jemima be so gracious . she go upstairs with Ruth to help she to put on her thing . 

 " Dear Jemima ! " say Ruth , " I be so glad to see you look well to - night ! you quite frighten I this morning , you look so ill . " 

 " do I ? " reply Jemima . " oh , Ruth ! I have be so unhappy lately . I want you to come and put I to right , " she continue , half smile . " you know I be a sort of out - pupil of your , though we be so nearly of an age . you ought to lecture I , and make I good . " 

 " should I , dear ? " say Ruth . " I do not   think I be the one to do it . " 

 " oh , yes ! you be you have   do I good to - night . " 

 " well , if I can do anything for you , tell I what it be ? " ask Ruth , tenderly . 

 " oh , not now not now , " reply Jemima . " I could not tell you here . it be a long story , and I do not   know that I can tell you at all . Mamma might come up at any moment , and papa would be sure to ask what we have be talk about so long . " 

 " take your own time , love , " say Ruth ; " only remember , as far as I can , how glad I be to help you . " 

 " you be too good , my darling ! " say Jemima , fondly . 

 " do not   say so , " reply Ruth , earnestly , almost as if she be afraid . " God know I be not . " 

 " well ! we be none of we too good , " answer Jemima ; " I know that . but you be very good . Nay , I will not   call you so , if it make you look so miserable . but come away downstairs . " 

 with the fragrance of Ruth 's sweetness linger about she , Jemima be her good self during the next half - hour . Mr Bradshaw be more and more pleased , and raise the price of the silk , which he be go to give Ruth , sixpence a yard during the time . Mr Farquhar go home through the garden - way , happy than he have be this long time . he even catch himself hum the old refrain : 
 

 on revient , on revient toujour , 
 a ses premier amours . 
 

 but as soon as he be aware of what he be do , he clear away the remnant of the song into a cough , which be sonorous , if not perfectly real . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 Mr Farquhar 's Attentions transfer 
 

 the next morning , as Jemima and her mother sit at their work , it come into the head of the former to remember her father 's very marked way of thank Ruth the evening before . 

 " what a favourite Mrs Denbigh be with papa , " say she . " I be sure I do not   wonder at it . do you notice , mamma , how he thank she for come here last night ? " 

 " yes , dear ; but I do not   think it be all " Mrs Bradshaw stop short . she be never certain if it be right or wrong to say anything . 

 " not all what ? " ask Jemima , when she see her mother be not go to finish the sentence . 

 " not all because Mrs Denbigh come to tea here , " reply Mrs Bradshaw . 

 " why , what else could he be thank she for ? what have she do ? " ask Jemima , stimulate to curiosity by her mother 's hesitate manner . 

 " I do not   know if I ought to tell you , " say Mrs Bradshaw . 

 " oh , very well ! " say Jemima , rather annoyed . 

 " Nay , dear ! your papa never say I be not to tell ; perhaps I may . " 

 " never mind ! I do not   want to hear , " in a pique tone . 

 there be silence for a little while . Jemima be try to think of something else , but her thought would revert to the wonder what Mrs Denbigh could have do for her father . 

 " I think I may tell you , though , " say Mrs Bradshaw , half question . 

 Jemima have the honour not to urge any confidence , but she be too curious to take any active step towards repress it . 

 Mrs Bradshaw go on . " I think you deserve to know . it be partly your do that papa be so pleased with Mrs Denbigh . he be go to buy she a silk gown this morning , and I think you ought to know why . " 

 " why ? " ask Jemima . 

 " because papa be so pleased to find that you mind what she say . " 

 " I mind what she say ! to be sure I do , and always do . but why should papa give she a gown for that ? I think he ought to give it I rather , " say Jemima , half laugh . 

 " I be sure he would , dear ; he will give you one , I be certain , if you want one . he be so pleased to see you like your old self to Mr Farquhar last night . we neither of we could think what have come over you this last month ; but now all seem right . " 

 a dark cloud come over Jemima 's face . she do not like this close observation and constant comment upon her manner ; and what have Ruth to do with it ? 

 " I be glad you be pleased , " say she , very coldly . then , after a pause , she add , " but you have not tell I what Mrs Denbigh have to do with my good behaviour . " 

 " do not she speak to you about it ? " ask Mrs Bradshaw , look up . 

 " no ; why should she ? she have no right to criticise what I do . she would not be so impertinent , " say Jemima , feel very uncomfortable and suspicious . 

 " yes , love ! she would have have a right , for papa have desire she to do it . " 

 " Papa desire she ! what do you mean , mamma ? " 

 " oh , dear ! I dare say I should not have tell you , " say Mrs Bradshaw , perceiving , from Jemima 's tone of voice , that something have go wrong . " only you speak as if it would be impertinent in Mrs Denbigh , and I be sure she would not do anything that be impertinent . you know , it would be but right for she to do what papa tell she ; and he say a great deal to she , the other day , about find out why you be so cross , and bring you right . and you be right now , dear ! " say Mrs Bradshaw , soothingly , think that Jemima be annoy   like a good child   at the recollection of how naughty she have be . 

 " then papa be go to give Mrs Denbigh a gown because I be civil to Mr Farquhar last night ? " 

 " yes , dear ! " say Mrs Bradshaw , more and more frightened at Jemima 's angry manner of speak low - tone , but very indignant . 

 Jemima remember , with smouldered anger , Ruth 's plead way of wile she from her sullenness the night before . management everywhere ! but in this case it be peculiarly revolt ; so much so , that she could hardly bear to believe that the seemingly - transparent Ruth have lend herself to it . 

 " be you sure , mamma , that papa ask Mrs Denbigh to make I behave differently ? it seem so strange . " 

 " I be quite sure . he speak to her last Friday morning in the study . I remember it be Friday , because Mrs Dean be work here . " 

 Jemima remember now that she have go into the school - room on the Friday , and find her sister lounge about , and wonder what papa could possibly want with Mrs Denbigh . 

 after this conversation , Jemima repulse all Ruth 's timid effort to ascertain the cause of her disturbance , and to help she if she could . Ruth 's tender , sympathise manner , as she see Jemima daily look more wretched , be distasteful to the latter in the high degree . she could not say that Mrs Denbigh 's conduct be positively wrong it might even be quite right ; but it be inexpressibly repugnant to she to think of her father consult with a stranger   a week ago she almost consider Ruth as a sister   how to manage his daughter , so as to obtain the end he wish for ; yes , even if that end be for her own good . 

 she be thankful and glad to see a brown paper parcel lie on the hall - table , with a note in Ruth 's handwriting , address to her father . she know what it be , the grey silk dress . that she be sure Ruth would never accept . 

 no one henceforward could induce Jemima to enter into conversation with Mr Farquhar . she suspect manouvre in the simple action , and be miserable in this constant state of suspicion . she would not allow herself to like Mr Farquhar , even when he say thing the most after her own heart . she hear he , one evening , talk with her father about the principle of trade . her father stand out for the keen , sharp work , consistent with honesty ; if he have not be her father she would , perhaps , have think some of his saying inconsistent with true christian honesty . he be for drive hard bargain , exact interest and payment of just bill to a day . that be   he say   the only way in which trade could be conduct . once allow a margin of uncertainty , or where feeling , instead of maxim , be to be the guide , and all hope of there ever be any good man of business be end . 

 " suppose a delay of a month in require payment might save a man 's credit prevent his become a bankrupt ? " put in Mr Farquhar . 

 " I would not give it he . I would let he have money to set up again as soon as he have pass the Bankruptcy Court ; if he never pass , I might , in some case , make he an allowance ; but I would always keep my justice and my charity separate . " 

 " and yet charity   in your sense of the word   degrade ; justice , temper with mercy and consideration , elevate . " 

 " that be not justice justice be certain and inflexible . no ! Mr Farquhar , you must not allow any quixotic notion to mingle with your conduct as a tradesman . " 

 and so they go on ; Jemima 's face glow with sympathy in all Mr Farquhar say ; till once , on look up suddenly with sparkle eye , she see a glance of her father 's which tell she , as plain as word could say , that he be watch the effect of Mr Farquhar 's speech upon his daughter . she be chill thenceforward ; she think her father prolong the argument , in order to call out those sentiment which he know would most recommend his partner to his daughter . she would so fain have let herself love Mr Farquhar ; but this constant manouvring , in which she do not feel clear that he do not take a passive part , make she sick at heart . she even wish that they might not go through the form of pretend to try to gain her consent to the marriage , if it involve all this premeditate action and speech - make such move about of every one into their right place , like piece at chess . she feel as if she would rather be buy openly , like an oriental daughter , where no one be degrade in their own eye by be party to such a contract . the consequence of all this " admirable management " of Mr Bradshaw 's would have be very unfortunate to Mr Farquhar   who be innocent of all connivance in any of the plot indeed , would have be as much annoyed at they as Jemima , have he be aware of they , but that the impression make upon he by Ruth on the evening I have so lately describe , be deepen by the contrast which her behaviour make to Miss Bradshaw 's on one or two more recent occasion . 

 there be no use , he think , in continue attention so evidently distasteful to Jemima . to she , a young girl hardly out of the schoolroom , he probably appear like an old man ; and he might even lose the friendship with which she use to regard he , and which be , and ever would be , very dear to he , if he persevere in try to be consider as a lover . he should always feel affectionately towards she ; her very fault give she an interest in his eye , for which he have blame himself most conscientiously and most uselessly when he be look upon she as his future wife , but which the say conscience would learn to approve of when she sink down to the place of a young friend , over whom he might exercise a good and salutary interest . Mrs Denbigh , if not many month old in year , have know sorrow and care so early that she be much old in character . besides , her shy reserve , and her quiet daily walk within the line of duty , be much in accordance with Mr Farquhar 's notion of what a wife should be . still , it be a wrench to take his affection away from Jemima . if she have not help he to do so by every mean in her power , he could never have accomplish it . 

 yes ! by every mean in her power have Jemima alienate her lover , she belove for so he be in fact . and now her quick - sighted eye see he be go for ever past recall ; for do not her jealous , sore heart feel , even before he himself be conscious of the fact , that he be draw towards sweet , lovely , compose , and dignify Ruth one who always think before she speak   as Mr Farquhar use to bid Jemima do   who never be tempt by sudden impulse , but walk the world calm and self - govern . what now avail Jemima 's reproach , as she remember the day when he have watch she with earnest , attentive eye , as he now watch Ruth ; and the time since , when , lead astray by her morbid fancy , she have turn away from all his advance ! 

 " it be only in March last March , he call I ' dear Jemima . ' ah , do not   I remember it well ? the pretty nosegay of green - house flower that he give I in exchange for the wild daffodil and how he seem to care for the flower I give he and how he look at I , and thank I that be all go and over now . " 

 her sister come in bright and glowing . 

 " oh , Jemima , how nice and cool you be , sit in this shady room ! "   she have feel it even chilly .   " we have be such a long walk ! we be so tired . it be so hot . " 

 " why do you go , then ? " say she . 

 " oh ! we want to go . we would not have stay at home on any account . it have be so pleasant , " say Mary . 

 " we have   be to Scaurside Wood , to gather wild strawberry , " say Elizabeth . " such a quantity ! we have   leave a whole basketful in the dairy . Mr Farquhar say he will teach we how to dress they in the way he learn in Germany , if we can get he some hock . do you think papa will let we have some ? " 

 " be Mr Farquhar with you ? " ask Jemima , a dull light come into her eye . 

 " yes ; we tell he this morning that mamma want we to take some old linen to the lame man at Scaurside Farm , and that we mean to coax Mrs Denbigh to let we go into the wood and gather strawberry , " say Elizabeth . 

 " I think he would make some excuse and come , " say the quick - witted Mary , as eager and thoughtless an observer of one love - affair as of another , and quite forget that , not many week ago , she have fancy an attachment between he and Jemima . 

 " do you ? I do not , " reply Elizabeth . " at least I never think about it . I be quite startled when I hear his horse 's foot behind we on the road . " 

 " he say he be go to the farm , and could take our basket . be not it kind of he ? " Jemima do not answer , so Mary continue : 

 " you know it be a great pull up to the farm , and we be so hot already . the road be quite white and baked ; it hurt my eye terribly . I be so glad when Mrs Denbigh say we might turn into the wood . the light be quite green there , the branch be so thick overhead . " 

 " and there be whole bed of wild strawberry , " say Elizabeth , take up the tale now Mary be out of breath . Mary fan herself with her bonnet , while Elizabeth go on : 

 " you know where the grey rock crop out , do not   you , Jemima ? well , there be a complete carpet of strawberry runner . so pretty ! and we could hardly step without tread the little bright scarlet berry under foot . " 

 " we do so wish for Leonard , " put in Mary . 

 " yes ! but Mrs Denbigh gather a great many for he . and Mr Farquhar give she all his . " 

 " I think you say he have go on to Dawson 's farm , " say Jemima . 

 " oh , yes ! he just go up there ; and then he leave his horse there , like a wise man , and come to we in the pretty , cool , green wood . oh , Jemima , it be so pretty little fleck of light come down here and there through the leaf , and quiver on the ground . you must go with we to - morrow . " 

 " yes , " say Mary , " we be go again to - morrow . we could not gather nearly all the strawberry . " 

 " and Leonard be to go too , to - morrow . " 

 " yes ! we think of such a capital plan . that be to say , Mr Farquhar think of it we want to carry Leonard up the hill in a king 's cushion , but Mrs Denbigh would not hear of it . " 

 " she say it would tire we so ; and yet she want he to gather strawberry ! " 

 " and so , " interrupt Mary , for by this time the two girl be almost speak together , " Mr Farquhar be to bring he up before he on his horse . " 

 " you will go with we , will not   you , dear Jemima ? " ask Elizabeth ; " it will be at " 

 " no ! I can not   go ! " say Jemima , abruptly . " do not   ask I I can not . " 

 the little girl be hush into silence by her manner ; for whatever she might be to those above she in age and position , to those below her Jemima be almost invariably gentle . she feel that they be wonder at she . 

 " go upstairs and take off your thing . you know papa do not like you to come into this room in the shoe in which you have be out . " 

 she be glad to cut her sister short in the detail which they be so mercilessly inflict detail which she must harden herself to , before she could hear they quietly and unmove . she see that she have lose her place as the first object in Mr Farquhar 's eye a position she have hardly care for while she be secure in the enjoyment of it ; but the charm of it now be redouble , in her acute sense of how she have forfeit it by her own doing , and her own fault . for if he be the cold , calculate man her father have believe he to be , and have represent he as be to she , would he care for a portionless widow in humble circumstance like Mrs Denbigh ; no money , no connexion , encumber with her boy ? the very action which prove Mr Farquhar to be lose to Jemima reinstate he on his throne in her fancy . and she must go on in hush quietness , quiver with every fresh token of his preference for another ! that other , too , one so infinitely more worthy of he than herself ; so that she could not have even the poor comfort of think that he have no discrimination , and be throw himself away on a common or worthless person . Ruth be beautiful , gentle , good , and conscientious . the hot colour flush up into Jemima 's sallow face as she become aware that , even while she acknowledge these excellence on Mrs Denbigh 's part , she hat she . the recollection of her marble face weary she even to sickness ; the tone of her low voice be irritate from their very softness . her goodness , undoubted as it be , be more distasteful than many fault which have more savour of human struggle in they . 

 " what be this terrible demon in her heart ? " ask Jemima 's well angel . " be she , indeed , give up to possession ? be not this the old stinging hatred which have prompt so many crime ? the hatred of all sweet virtue which might win the love deny to we ? the old anger that work in the eld brother 's heart , till it end in the murder of the gentle Abel , while yet the world be young ? " 

 " oh , God ! help I ! I do not know I be so wicked , " cry Jemima aloud in her agony . it have be a terrible glimpse into the dark , lurid gulf the capability for evil , in her heart . she wrestle with the demon , but he would not depart ; it be to be a struggle whether or not she be to be give up to he , in this her time of sore temptation . 

 all the next day long she sit and picture the happy strawberry gathering go on , even then , in pleasant Scaurside Wood . every touch of fancy which could heighten her idea of their enjoyment , and of Mr Farquhar 's attention to the blushing , conscious Ruth every such touch which would add a pang to her self - reproach and keen jealousy , be add by her imagination . she get up and walk about , to try and stop she over - busy fancy by bodily exercise . but she have eat little all day , and be weak and faint in the intense heat of the sunny garden . even the long grass - walk under the filbert - hedge , be parch and dry in the glowing August sun . yet her sister find she there when they return , walk quickly up and down , as if to warm herself on some winter 's day . they be very weary ; and not half so communicative as on the day before , now that Jemima be crave for every detail to add to her agony . 

 " yes ! Leonard come up before Mr Farquhar . oh ! how hot it be , Jemima ; do sit down , and I will tell you about it , but I can not   if you keep walk so ! " 

 " I can not   sit still to - day , " say Jemima , spring up from the turf as soon as she have sit down . " tell I ! I can hear you while I walk about . " 

 " oh ! but I can not   shout ; I can hardly speak I be so tired . Mr Farquhar bring Leonard " 

 " you have   tell I that before , " say Jemima , sharply . 

 " well ! I do not   know what else to tell . somebody have be since yesterday , and gather nearly all the strawberry off the grey rock . Jemima ! Jemima ! " say Elizabeth , faintly , " I be so dizzy I think I be ill . " 

 the next minute the tired girl lie swoon on the grass . it be an outlet for Jemima 's fierce energy . with a strength she have never again , and never have know before , she lift up her fainting sister , and bid Mary run and clear the way , she carry she in through the open garden - door , up the wide old - fashioned stair , and lay she on the bed in her own room , where the breeze from the window come softly and pleasantly through the green shade of the vine - leaf and jessamine . 

 " give I the water . run for mamma , Mary , " say Jemima , as she see that the fainting - fit do not yield to the usual remedy of a horizontal position and the water sprinkling . 

 " dear ! dear Lizzie ! " say Jemima , kiss the pale , unconscious face . " I think you love I , darling . " 

 the long walk on the hot day have be too much for the delicate Elizabeth , who be fast outgrow her strength . it be many day before she regain any portion of her spirit and vigour . after that fainting - fit , she lie listless and weary , without appetite or interest , through the long sunny autumn weather , on the bed or on the couch in Jemima 's room , whither she have be carry at first . it be a comfort to Mrs Bradshaw to be able at once to discover what it be that have knock up Elizabeth ; she do not rest easily until she have settle upon a cause for every ailment or illness in the family . it be a stern consolation to Mr Bradshaw , during his time of anxiety respect his daughter , to be able to blame somebody . he could not , like his wife , have take comfort from an inanimate fact ; he want the satisfaction of feeling that some one have be in fault , or else this never could have happen . poor Ruth do not need his imply reproach . when she see her gentle Elizabeth lie feeble and languid , her heart blame she for thoughtlessness so severely as to make she take all Mr Bradshaw 's word and hint as too light censure for the careless way in which , to please her own child , she have allow her two pupil to fatigue themselves with such long walk . she beg hard to take her share of nursing . every spare moment she go to Mr Bradshaw 's , and ask , with earnest humility , to be allow to pass they with Elizabeth ; and , as it be often a relief to have her assistance , Mrs Bradshaw receive these entreaty very kindly , and desire she to go upstairs , where Elizabeth 's pale countenance brighten when she see she , but where Jemima sit in silent annoyance that her own room be now become open ground for one , whom her heart rise up against , to enter in and be welcome . whether it be that Ruth , who be not an inmate of the house , bring with she a fresher air , more change of thought to the invalid , I do not know , but Elizabeth always give she a peculiarly tender greeting ; and if she have sink down into languid fatigue , in spite of all Jemima 's endeavour to interest she , she rouse up into animation when Ruth come in with a flower , a book , or a brown and ruddy pear , send out the warm fragrance it retain from the sunny garden - wall at Chapel - house . 

 the jealous dislike which Jemima be allow to grow up in her heart against Ruth be , as she think , never show in word or deed . she be cold in manner , because she could not be hypocritical ; but her word be polite and kind in purport ; and she take pain to make her action the same as formerly . but rule and line may measure out the figure of a man ; it be the soul that give it life ; and there be no soul , no inner meaning , breathe out in Jemima 's action . Ruth feel the change acutely . she suffer from it some time before she venture to ask what have occasion it . but , one day , she take Miss Bradshaw by surprise , when they be alone together for a few minute , by ask she if she have vex she in any way , she be so change ? it be sad when friendship have cool so far as to render such a question necessary . Jemima go rather pale than usual , and then make answer : 

 " change ! how do you mean ? how be I change ? what do I say or do different from what I use to do ? " 

 but the tone be so constrained and cold , that Ruth 's heart sink within she . she know now , as well as word could have tell she , that not only have the old feeling of love pass away from Jemima , but that it have go unregrette , and no attempt have be make to recall it . love be very precious to Ruth now , as of old time . it be one of the fault of her nature to be ready to make any sacrifice for those who love she , and to value affection almost above its price . she have yet to learn the lesson , that it be more blessed to love than to be belove ; and lonely as the impressible year of her youth have be without parent , without brother or sister it be , perhaps , no wonder that she cling tenaciously to every symptom of regard , and could not relinquish the love of any one without a pang . 

 the doctor who be call in to Elizabeth prescribe sea - air as the good mean of recruit her strength . Mr Bradshaw , who like to spend money ostentatiously , go down straight to Abermouth , and engage a house for the remainder of the autumn ; for , as he tell the medical man , money be no object to he in comparison with his child 's health ; and the doctor care too little about the mode in which his remedy be administer , to tell Mr Bradshaw that lodging would have do as well , or well , than the complete house he have see fit to take . for it be now necessary to engage servant , and take much trouble , which might have be obviate , and Elizabeth 's removal effect more quietly and speedily , if she have go into lodging . as it be , she be weary of hear all the planning and talking , and decide and un - decide , and re - decide , before it be possible for she to go . her only comfort be in the thought that dear Mrs Denbigh be to go with she . 

 it have not be entirely by way of pompously spend his money that Mr Bradshaw have engage this seaside house . he be glad to get his little girl and their governess out of the way ; for a busy time be impend , when he should want his head clear for electioneer purpose , and his house clear for electioneer hospitality . he be the mover of a project for bring forward a man on the Liberal and dissenting interest , to contest the election with the old Tory member , who have on several successive occasion walk over the course , as he and his family own half the town , and vote and rent be pay alike to the landlord . 

 king of Eccleston have Mr Cranworth and his ancestor be this many a long year ; their right be so little dispute that they never think of acknowledge the allegiance so readily pay to they . the old feudal feeling between land - owner and tenant do not quake prophetically at the introduction of manufacture ; the Cranworth family ignore the grow power of the manufacturer , more especially as the principal person engage in the trade be a Dissenter . but notwithstanding this lack of patronage from the one great family in the neighbourhood , the business flourish , increase , and spread wide ; and the dissenting head thereof look around , about the time of which I speak , and feel himself powerful enough to defy the great Cranworth interest even in their hereditary stronghold , and , by so do , avenge the slight of many year slight which rankle in Mr Bradshaw 's mind as much as if he do not go to chapel twice every Sunday , and pay the large pew - rent of any member of Mr Benson 's congregation . 

 accordingly , Mr Bradshaw have apply to one of the liberal parliamentary agent in London a man whose only principle be to do wrong on the liberal side ; he would not act , right or wrong , for a Tory , but for a Whig the latitude of his conscience have never yet be discover . it be possible Mr Bradshaw be not aware of the character of this agent ; at any rate , he know he be the man for his purpose , which be to hear of some one who would come forward as a candidate for the representation of Eccleston on the dissenting interest . 

 " there be in round number about six hundred voter , " say he ; " two hundred be decidedly in the Cranworth interest dare not offend Mr Cranworth , poor soul ! two hundred more we may calculate upon as pretty certain factory hand , or people connect with our trade in some way or another who be indignant at the stubborn way in which cranworth have contest the right of water ; two hundred be doubtful . " 

 " do not   much care either way , " say the parliamentary agent . " of course , we must make they care . " 

 Mr Bradshaw rather shrink from the know look with which this be say . he hop that Mr Pilson do not mean to allude to bribery ; but he do not express this hope , because he think it would deter the agent from use this mean , and it be possible it might prove to be the only way . and if he   Mr Bradshaw   once embark on such an enterprise , there must be no failure . by some expedient or another , success must be certain , or he could have nothing to do with it . 

 the parliamentary agent be well accustomed to deal with all kind and shade of scruple . he be most at home with man who have none ; but still he could allow for human weakness ; and he perfectly understand Mr Bradshaw . 

 " I have a notion I know of a man who will just suit your purpose . plenty of money do not know what to do with it , in fact tired of yachting , travelling ; want something new . I hear , through some of the mean of intelligence I employ , that not very long ago he be wish for a seat in Parliament . " 

 " a Liberal ? " say Mr Bradshaw . 

 " decidedly . belong to a family who be in the Long Parliament in their day . " 

 Mr Bradshaw rub his hand . 

 " Dissenter ? " ask he . 

 " no , no ! not so far as that . but very lax Church . " 

 " what be his name ? " ask Mr Bradshaw , eagerly . 

 " excuse I . until I be certain that he would like to come forward for Eccleston , I think I have well not mention his name . " 

 the anonymous gentleman do like to come forward , and his name prove to be Donne . he and Mr Bradshaw have be in correspondence during all the time of Mr Ralph Cranworth 's illness ; and when he die , everything be arrange ready for a start , even before the cranworth have determine who should keep the seat warm till the eld son come of age , for the father be already member for the county . Mr Donne be to come down to canvass in person , and be to take up his abode at Mr Bradshaw 's ; and therefore it be that the seaside house , within twenty mile ' distance of Eccleston , be find to be so convenient as an infirmary and nursery for those member of his family who be likely to be useless , if not positive encumbrance , during the forthcoming election . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 the Liberal Candidate and his Precursor 
 

 Jemima do not know whether she wish to go to Abermouth or not . she long for change . she weary of the sight and sound of home . but yet she could not bear to leave the neighbourhood of Mr Farquhar ; especially as , if she go to Abermouth , Ruth would in all probability be leave to take her holiday at home . 

 when Mr Bradshaw decide that she be to go , Ruth try to feel glad that he give she the mean of repair her fault towards Elizabeth ; and she resolve to watch over the two girl most faithfully and carefully , and to do all in her power to restore the invalid to health . but a tremor come over she whenever she think of leave Leonard ; she have never quit he for a day , and it seem to she as if her brooding , constant care be his natural and necessary shelter from all evil from very death itself . she would not go to sleep at night , in order to enjoy the blessed consciousness of have he near she ; when she be away from he teach her pupil , she keep try to remember his face , and print it deep on her heart , against the time when day and day would elapse without her see that little darling countenance . Miss Benson would wonder to her brother that Mr Bradshaw do not propose that Leonard should accompany his mother ; he only beg she not to put such an idea into Ruth 's head , as he be sure Mr Bradshaw have no thought of do any such thing , yet to Ruth it might be a hope , and then a disappointment . his sister scold he for be so cold - hearted ; but he be full of sympathy , although he do not express it , and make some quiet little sacrifice in order to set himself at liberty to take Leonard a long walk expedition on the day when his mother leave Eccleston . 

 Ruth cry until she could cry no long , and feel very much ashamed of herself as she see the grave and wonder look of her pupil , whose only feeling on leave home be delight at the idea of Abermouth , and into whose mind the possibility of death to any of their beloved one never enter . Ruth dry her eye , and speak cheerfully as soon as she catch the perplexed expression of their face ; and by the time they arrive at Abermouth , she be as much delighted with all the new scenery as they be , and find it hard work to resist their entreaty to go ramble out on the seashore at once ; but Elizabeth have undergo more fatigue that day than she have have before for many week , and Ruth be determined to be prudent . 

 meanwhile , the Bradshaws ' house at Eccleston be be rapidly adapt for electioneer hospitality . the partition - wall between the unused drawing - room and the school - room be break down , in order to admit of fold door ; the " ingenious " upholsterer of the town   and what town do not boast of the upholsterer full of contrivance and resource , in opposition to the upholsterer of steady capital and no imagination , who look down with uneasy contempt on ingenuity ?   have come in to give his opinion , that " nothing could be easy than to convert a bathroom into a bedroom , by the assistance of a little drapery to conceal the shower - bath , " the string of which be to be carefully conceal , for fear that the unconscious occupier of the bath - bed might innocently take it for a bell - rope . the professional cook of the town have be already engage to take up her abode for a month at Mr Bradshaw 's , much to the indignation of Betsy , who become a vehement partisan of Mr Cranworth , as soon as ever she hear of the plan of her deposition from sovereign authority in the kitchen , in which she have reign supreme for fourteen year . Mrs Bradshaw sigh and bemoan herself in all her leisure moment , which be not many , and wonder why their house be to be turn into an inn for this Mr Donne , when everybody know that the George be good enough for the Cranworths , who never think of ask the elector to the Hall ; and they have live at cranworth ever since Julius Caesar 's time , and if that be not be an old family , she do not know what be . the excitement soothe Jemima . there be something to do . it be she who plan with the upholsterer ; it be she who soothe Betsy into angry silence ; it be she who persuade her mother to lie down and rest , while she herself go out to buy the heterogeneous thing require to make the family and house presentable to Mr Donne and his precursor the friend of the parliamentary agent . this latter gentleman never appear himself on the scene of action , but pull all the string notwithstanding . the friend be a Mr Hickson , a lawyer a briefless barrister , some people call he ; but he himself profess a great disgust to the law , as a " great sham , " which involve an immensity of underhand action , and truckling , and time - serve , and be perfectly encumber by useless form and ceremony , and dead obsolete word . so , instead of put his shoulder to the wheel to reform the law , he talk eloquently against it , in such a high - priest style , that it be occasionally a matter of surprise how he could ever have make a friend of the parliamentary agent before mention . but , as Mr Hickson himself say , it be the very corruptness of the law which he be fight against , in do all he could to effect the return of certain member to Parliament ; these certain member be pledge to effect a reform in the law , accord to Mr Hickson . and , as he once observe confidentially , " if you have to destroy a hydra - head monster , would you measure sword with the demon as if he be a gentleman ? would you not rather seize the first weapon that come to hand ? and so do I. my great object in life , sir , be to reform the law of England , sir . once get a majority of liberal member into the House , and the thing be do . and I consider myself justify , for so high for , I may say , so holy an end , in use man 's weakness to work out my purpose . of course , if man be angel , or even immaculate man invulnerable to bribe , we would not bribe . " 

 " could you ? " ask Jemima , for the conversation take place at Mr Bradshaw 's dinner - table , where a few friend be gather together to meet Mr Hickson ; and among they be Mr Benson . 

 " we neither would nor could , " say the ardent barrister , disregard in his vehemence the point of the question , and float on over the bar of argument into the wide ocean of his own eloquence : " as it be as the world stand , they who would succeed even in good deed must come down to the level of expediency ; and therefore , I say once more , if Mr Donne be the man for your purpose , and your purpose be a good one , a lofty one , a holy one "   for Mr Hickson remember the dissenting character of his little audience , and privately consider the introduction of the word " holy " a most happy hit , " then , I say , we must put all the squeamish scruple which might befit Utopia , or some such place , on one side , and treat man as they be . if they be avaricious , it be not we who have make they so ; but as we have to do with they , we must consider their failing in deal with they ; if they have be careless or extravagant , or have have their little peccadillo , we must administer the screw . the glorious reform of the law will justify , in my idea , all mean to obtain the end that law , from the profession of which I have withdraw myself from perhaps a too scrupulous conscience ! " he conclude softly to himself . 

 " we be not to do evil that good may come , " say Mr Benson . he be startle at the deep sound of his own voice as he utter these word ; but he have not be speak for some time , and his voice come forth strong and unmodulated . 

 " true , sir ; most true , " say Mr Hickson , bow . " I honour you for the observation . " and he profit by it , insomuch that he confine his further remark on election to the end of the table , where he sit near Mr Bradshaw , and one or two equally eager , though not equally influential partisan of Mr Donne 's . meanwhile , Mr Farquhar take up Mr Benson 's quotation , at the end where he and Jemima sit near to Mrs Bradshaw and he . 

 " but in the present state of the world , as Mr Hickson say , it be rather difficult to act upon that precept . " 

 " oh , Mr Farquhar ! " say Jemima , indignantly , the tear spring to her eye with a feeling of disappointment . for she have be chafe under all that Mr Hickson have be say , perhaps the more for one or two attempt on his part at a flirtation with the daughter of his wealthy host , which she resent with all the loathing of a pre - occupied heart ; and she have long to be a man , to speak out her wrath at this paltering with right and wrong . she have feel grateful to Mr Benson for his one clear , short precept , come down with a divine force against which there be no appeal ; and now to have Mr Farquhar take the side of expediency ! it be too bad . 

 " Nay , Jemima ! " say Mr Farquhar , touch , and secretly flatter by the visible pain his speech have give . " do not   be indignant with I till I have explain myself a little more . I do not   understand myself yet ; and it be a very intricate question , or so it appear to I , which I be go to put , really , earnestly , and humbly , for Mr Benson 's opinion . now , Mr Benson , may I ask , if you always find it practicable to act strictly in accordance with that principle ? for if you do not , I be sure no man live can ! be there not occasion when it be absolutely necessary to wade through evil to good ? I be not speak in the careless , presumptuous way of that man yonder , " say he , lower his voice , and address himself to Jemima more exclusively ; " I be really anxious to hear what Mr Benson will say on the subject , for I know no one to whose candid opinion I should attach more weight . " 

 but Mr Benson be silent . he do not see Mrs Bradshaw and Jemima leave the room . he be really , as Mr Farquhar suppose he , completely absent , question himself as to how far his practice tally with his principle . by degree he come to himself ; he find the conversation still turn on the election ; and Mr Hickson , who feel that he have jar against the little minister 's principle , and yet know , from the carte du pay which the scout of the parliamentary agent have give he , that Mr Benson be a person to be conciliate , on account of his influence over many of the work people , begin to ask he question with an air of defer to superior knowledge , that almost surprise Mr Bradshaw , who have be accustom to treat " Benson " in a very different fashion , of civil condescending indulgence , just as one listen to a child who can have have no opportunity of know well . 

 at the end of a conversation that Mr Hickson hold with Mr Benson , on a subject in which the latter be really interested , and on which he have express himself at some length , the young barrister turn to Mr Bradshaw , and say very audibly , 

 " I wish Donne have be here . this conversation during the last half - hour would have interest he almost as much as it have do I . " 

 Mr Bradshaw little guess the truth , that Mr Donne be , at that very moment , coach up the various subject of public interest in Eccleston , and privately curse the particular subject on which Mr Benson have be hold forth , as be an unintelligible piece of Quixotism ; or the lead Dissenter of the town need not have experience a pang of jealousy at the possible future admiration his minister might excite in the possible future member for Eccleston . and if Mr Benson have be clairvoyant , he need not have make an especial subject of gratitude out of the likelihood that he might have an opportunity of so far interesting Mr Donne in the condition of the people of Eccleston as to induce he to set his face against any attempt at bribery . 

 Mr Benson think of this half the night through ; and end by determine to write a sermon on the christian view of political duty , which might be good for all , both elector and member , to hear on the eve of an election . for Mr Donne be expect at Mr Bradshaw 's before the next Sunday ; and , of course , as Mr and Miss Benson have settle it , he would appear at the chapel with they on that day . but the stinging conscience refuse to be quiet . no present plan of usefulness allay the aching remembrance of the evil he have do that good might come . not even the look of Leonard , as the early dawn fall on he , and Mr Benson 's sleepless eye see the rosy glow on his firm round cheek ; his open mouth , through which the soft , long - draw breath come gently quiver ; and his eye not fully shut , but close to outward sight not even the aspect of the quiet , innocent child could soothe the troubled spirit . 

 Leonard and his mother dream of each other that night . her dream of he be one of undefined terror terror so great that it waken she up , and she strove not to sleep again , for fear that ominous ghastly dream should return . he , on the contrary , dream of her sit watch and smile by his bedside , as her gentle self have be many a morning ; and when she see he awake   so it fall out in the dream , she smile still more sweetly , and bend down she kiss he , and then spread out large , soft , white - feather wing   which in no way surprise her child he seem to have know they be there all along , and sail away through the open window far into the blue sky of a summer 's day . Leonard waken up then , and remember how far away she really be far more distant and inaccessible than the beautiful blue sky to which she have betake herself in his dream and cry himself to sleep again . 

 in spite of her absence from her child , which make one great and abide sorrow , Ruth enjoy her seaside visit exceedingly . in the first place , there be the delight of see Elizabeth 's daily and almost hourly improvement . then , at the doctor 's express order , there be so few lesson to be do , that there be time for the long explore ramble , which all three delight in . and when the rain come and the storm blow , the house , with its wild sea - view , be equally delightful . 

 it be a large house , build on the summit of a rock , which nearly overhang the shore below ; there be , to be sure , a series of zigzag tacking path down the face of this rock , but from the house they could not be see . old or delicate people would have consider the situation bleak and expose ; indeed , the present proprietor want to dispose of it on this very account ; but by its present inhabitant , this exposure and bleakness be call by other name , and consider as charm . from every part of the room they see the grey storm gather on the sea - horizon , and put themselves in march array ; and soon the march become a sweep , and the great dome of the heaven be cover with the lurid cloud , between which and the vivid green earth below there seem to come a purple atmosphere , make the very threatening beautiful ; and by - and - by the house be wrap in sheet of rain shut out sky , and sea , and inland view ; till , of a sudden , the storm be go by , and the heavy rain - drop glisten in the sun as they hang on leaf and grass , and the " little bird sing east , and the little bird sing west , " and there be a pleasant sound of running water all abroad . 

 " oh ! if papa would but buy this house ! " exclaim Elizabeth , after one such storm , which she have watch silently from the very beginning of the " little cloud no big than a man 's hand . " 

 " Mamma would never like it , I be afraid , " say Mary . " she would call our delicious gush of air , draught , and think we should catch cold . " 

 " Jemima would be on our side . but how long Mrs Denbigh be ! I hope she be near enough the post - office when the rain come on ! " 

 Ruth have go to " the shop " in the little village , about half - a - mile distant , where all letter be leave till fetch . she only expect one , but that one be to tell she of Leonard . she , however , receive two ; the unexpected one be from Mr Bradshaw , and the news it contain be , if possible , a great surprise than the letter itself . Mr Bradshaw inform she , that he plan arrive by dinner - time the follow Saturday at Eagle 's Crag ; and more , that he intend bring Mr Donne and one or two other gentleman with he , to spend the Sunday there ! the letter go on to give every possible direction regard the household preparation . the dinner - hour be fix to be at six ; but , of course , Ruth and the girl would have din long before . the   professional   cook would arrive the day before , laden with all the provision that could not be obtain on the spot . Ruth be to engage a waiter from the inn , and this it be that detain she so long . while she sit in the little parlour , await the coming of the landlady , she could not help wonder why Mr Bradshaw be bring this strange gentleman to spend two day at Abermouth , and thus give himself so much trouble and fuss of preparation . 

 there be so many small reason that go to make up the large one which have convince Mr Bradshaw of the desirableness of this step , that it be not likely that Ruth should guess at one half of they . in the first place , Miss Benson , in the pride and fulness of her heart , have tell Mrs Bradshaw what her brother have tell she ; how he mean to preach upon the christian view of the duty involve in political right ; and as , of course , Mrs Bradshaw have tell Mr Bradshaw , he begin to dislike the idea of attend chapel on that Sunday at all ; for he have an uncomfortable idea that by the christian standard that divine test of the true and pure bribery would not be altogether approve of ; and yet he be tacitly come round to the understanding that " packet " would be require , for what purpose both he and Mr Donne be to be suppose to remain ignorant . but it would be very awkward , so near to the time , if he be to be clearly convince that bribery , however disguise by name and word , be in plain term a sin . and yet he know Mr Benson have once or twice convince he against his will of certain thing , which he have thenceforward find it impossible to do , without such great uneasiness of mind , that he have leave off do they , which be sadly against his interest . and if Mr Donne   whom he have intend to take with he to chapel , as fair dissenting prey   should also become convinced , why , the Cranworths would win the day , and he should be the laugh - stock of Eccleston . no ! in this one case bribery must be allow be allowable ; but it be a great pity human nature be so corrupt , and if his member succeed , he would double his subscription to the school , in order that the next generation might be teach well . there be various other reason , which strengthen Mr Bradshaw in the bright idea of go down to Abermouth for the Sunday ; some connect with the out - of - door politic , and some with the domestic . for instance , it have be the plan of the house to have a cold dinner on the Sundays Mr Bradshaw have pique himself on this strictness and yet he have an instinctive feeling that Mr Donne be not quite the man to partake of cold meat for conscience ' sake with cheerful indifference to his fare . 

 Mr Donne have , in fact , take the Bradshaw household a little by surprise . before he come , Mr Bradshaw have please himself with thinking , that more unlikely thing have happen than the espousal of his daughter with the member of a small borough . but this pretty airy bubble burst as soon as he see Mr Donne ; and its very existence be forget in less than half an hour , when he feel the quiet but incontestible difference of rank and standard that there be , in every respect , between his guest and his own family . it be not through any circumstance so palpable , and possibly accidental , as the bringing down a servant , whom Mr Donne seem to consider as much a matter of course as a carpet - bag   though the smart gentleman 's arrival " flutter the Volscians in Corioli " considerably more than his gentle - speak master 's . it be nothing like this ; it be something indescribable a quiet be at ease , and expect every one else to be so an attention to woman , which be so habitual as to be unconsciously exercise to those subordinate person in Mr Bradshaw 's family a happy choice of simple and expressive word , some of which it must be confess be slang , but fashionable slang , and that make all the difference a measured , graceful way of utterance , with a style of pronunciation quite different to that of Eccleston . all these put together make but a part of the indescribable whole which unconsciously affect Mr Bradshaw , and establish Mr Donne in his estimation as a creature quite different to any he have see before , and as most unfit to mate with Jemima . Mr Hickson , who have appear as a model of gentlemanly ease before Mr Donne 's arrival , now become vulgar and coarse in Mr Bradshaw 's eye . and yet , such be the charm of that languid , high - breed manner , that Mr Bradshaw " cotton "   as he express it to Mr Farquhar   to his new candidate at once . he be only afraid lest Mr Donne be too indifferent to all thing under the sun to care whether he gain or lose the election ; but he be reassure after the first conversation they have together on the subject . Mr Donne 's eye lighten with an eagerness that be almost fierce , though his tone be as musical , and nearly as slow , as ever ; and when Mr Bradshaw allude distantly to " probable expense " and " packet , " Mr Donne reply , 

 " oh , of course ! disagreeable necessity ! well speak as little about such thing as possible ; other people can be find to arrange all the dirty work . neither you nor I would like to soil our finger by it , I be sure . four thousand pound be in Mr Pilson 's hand , and I shall never inquire what become of they ; they may , very probably , be absorb in the law expense , you know . I shall let it be clearly understand from the husting , that I most decidedly disapprove of bribery , and leave the rest to Hickson 's management . he be accustomed to these sort of thing . I be not . " 

 Mr Bradshaw be rather perplex by this want of bustle energy on the part of the new candidate ; and if it have not be for the four thousand pound aforesaid , would have doubt whether Mr Donne care sufficiently for the result of the election . Jemima think differently . she watch her father 's visitor attentively , with something like the curious observation which a naturalist bestow on a new specie of animal . 

 " do you know what Mr Donne remind I of , mamma ? " say she , one day , as the two sit at work , while the gentleman be absent canvassing . 

 " no ! he be not like anybody I ever see . he quite frighten I , by be so ready to open the door for I if I be go out of the room , and by give I a chair when I come in . I never see any one like he . who be it , Jemima ? " 

 " not any person not any human being , mamma , " say Jemima , half smile . " do you remember our stop at Wakefield once , on our way to Scarborough , and there be horse - race go on somewhere , and some of the racer be in the stable at the inn where we din ? " 

 " yes ! I remember it ; but what about that ? " 

 " why , Richard , somehow , know one of the jockey , and , as we be come in from our ramble through the town , this man , or boy , ask we to look at one of the racer he have the charge of . " 

 " well , my dear ! " 

 " well , mamma ! Mr Donne be like that horse ! " 

 " Nonsense , Jemima ; you must not say so . I do not   know what your father would say , if he hear you liken Mr Donne to a brute . " 

 " brute be sometimes very beautiful , mamma . I be sure I should think it a compliment to be liken to a race - horse , such as the one we see . but the thing in which they be alike , be the sort of repressed eagerness in both . " 

 " Eager ! why , I should say there never be any one cool than Mr Donne . think of the trouble your papa have have this month past , and then remember the slow way in which Mr Donne move when he be go out to canvass , and the low , drawl voice in which he question the people who bring he intelligence . I can see your papa stand by , ready to shake they to get out their news . " 

 " but Mr Donne 's question be always to the point , and force out the grain without the chaff . and look at he , if any one tell he ill news about the election ! have you never see a dull red light come into his eye ? that be like my race - horse . her flesh quiver all over , at certain sound and noise which have some meaning to she ; but she stand quite still , pretty creature ! now , Mr Donne be just as eager as she be , though he may be too proud to show it . though he seem so gentle , I almost think he be very headstrong in follow out his own will . " 

 " well ! do not   call he like a horse again , for I be sure papa would not like it . do you know , I think you be go to say he be like little Leonard , when you ask I who he be like . " 

 " Leonard ! oh , mamma , he be not in the least like Leonard . he be twenty time more like my race - horse . 

 " now , my dear Jemima , do be quiet . your father think race so wrong , that I be sure he would be very seriously displeased if he be to hear you . " 

 to return to Mr Bradshaw , and to give one more of his various reason for wish to take Mr Donne to Abermouth . the wealthy Eccleston manufacturer be uncomfortably impressed with an indefinable sense of inferiority to his visitor . it be not in education , for Mr Bradshaw be a well - educate man ; it be not in power , for , if he choose , the present object of Mr Donne 's life might be utterly defeat ; it do not arise from anything overbear in manner , for Mr Donne be habitually polite and courteous , and be just now anxious to propitiate his host , whom he look upon as a very useful man . whatever this sense of inferiority arise from , Mr Bradshaw be anxious to relieve himself of it , and imagine that if he could make more display of his wealth his object would be obtain . now his house in Eccleston be old - fashioned , and ill - calculate to exhibit money 's worth . his mode of living , though strain to a high pitch just at this time , he become aware be no more than Mr Donne be accustom to every day of his life . the first day at dessert , some remark   some opportune remark , as Mr Bradshaw in his innocence have think   be make regard the price of pine - apple , which be rather exorbitant that year , and Mr Donne ask Mrs Bradshaw , with quiet surprise , if they have no pinery , as if to be without a pinery be indeed a depth of pitiable destitution . in fact , Mr Donne have be bear and cradle in all that wealth could purchase , and so have his ancestor before he for so many generation , that refinement and luxury seem the natural condition of man , and they that dwelt without be in the position of monster . the absence be notice ; but not the presence . 

 now , Mr Bradshaw know that the house and ground of Eagle 's Crag be exorbitantly dear , and yet he really think of purchase they . and as one mean of exhibit his wealth , and so raise himself up to the level of Mr Donne , he think that if he could take the latter down to Abermouth , and show he the place for which , " because his little girl have take a fancy to it , " he be willing to give the fancy - price of fourteen thousand pound , he should at last make those half - shut dreamy eye open wide , and their owner confess that , in wealth at least , the Eccleston manufacturer stand on a par with he . 

 all these mingle motif cause the determination which make Ruth sit in the little inn - parlour at Abermouth during the wild storm 's passage . 

 she wonder if she have fulfil all Mr Bradshaw 's direction . she look at the letter . yes ! everything be do . and now home with her news , through the wet lane , where the little pool by the roadside reflect the deep blue sky and the round white cloud with even deep blue and clear white ; and the rain - drop hang so thick on the tree , that even a little bird 's flight be enough to shake they down in a bright shower as of rain . when she tell the news , Mary exclaim , 

 " oh , how charming ! then we shall see this new member after all ! " while Elizabeth add , 

 " yes ! I shall like to do that . but where must we be ? papa will want the dining - room and this room , and where must we sit ? " 

 " oh ! " say Ruth , " in the dressing - room next to my room . all that your papa want always , be that you be quiet and out of the way . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 Recognition 
 

 Saturday come . tear , ragged cloud be drive across the sky . it be not a become day for the scenery , and the little girl regret it much . first they hop for a change at twelve o'clock , and then at the afternoon tide - turning . but at neither time do the sun show his face . 

 " Papa will never buy this dear place , " say Elizabeth , sadly , as she watch the weather . " the sun be everything to it . the sea look quite leaden to - day , and there be no sparkle on it . and the sand , that be so yellow and sun - speckle on Thursday , be all one dull brown now . " 

 " never mind ! to - morrow may be well , " say Ruth , cheerily . 

 " I wonder what time they will come at ? " inquire Mary . 

 " your papa say they would be at the station at five o'clock . and the landlady at the Swan say it would take they half an hour to get here . " 

 " and they be to dine at six ? " ask Elizabeth . 

 " yes , " answer Ruth . " and I think if we have our tea half an hour early , at half - past four , and then go out for a walk , we should be nicely out of the way just during the bustle of the arrival and dinner ; and we could be in the drawing - room ready against your papa come in after dinner . " 

 " oh ! that would be nice , " say they ; and tea be order accordingly . 

 the south - westerly wind have drop , and the cloud be stationary , when they go out on the sand . they dig little hole near the in - come tide , and make canal to they from the water , and blow the light sea - foam against each other ; and then steal on tiptoe near to the group of grey and white sea - gull , which despise their caution , fly softly and slowly away to a little distance as soon as they draw near . and in all this Ruth be as great a child as any . only she long for Leonard with a mother 's longing , as indeed she do every day , and all hour of the day . by - and - by the cloud thicken yet more , and one or two drop of rain be feel . it be very little , but Ruth fear a shower for her delicate Elizabeth , and besides , the September evening be fast closing in the dark and sunless day . as they turn homeward in the rapidly increase dusk , they see three figure on the sand near the rock , come in their direction . 

 " Papa and Mr Donne ! " exclaim Mary . " now we shall see he ! " 

 " which do you make out be he ? " ask Elizabeth . 

 " oh ! the tall one , to be sure . do not   you see how papa always turn to he , as if he be speak to he and not to the other ? " 

 " who be the other ? " ask Elizabeth . 

 " Mr Bradshaw say that Mr Farquhar and Mr Hickson would come with he . but that be not Mr Farquhar , I be sure , " say Ruth . 

 the girl look at each other , as they always do , when Ruth mention Mr Farquhar 's name ; but she be perfectly unconscious both of the look and of the conjecture which give rise to it . 

 as soon as the two party draw near , Mr Bradshaw call out in his strong voice , 

 " well , my dear ! we find there be an hour before dinner , so we come down upon the sand , and here you be . " 

 the tone of his voice assure they that he be in a bland and indulgent mood , and the two little girl run towards he . he kiss they , and shake hand with Ruth ; tell his companion that these be the little girl who be tempt he to this extravagance of purchase Eagle 's Crag ; and then , rather doubtfully , and because he see that Mr Donne expect it , he introduce " my daughter ' governess , Mrs Denbigh . " 

 it be grow dark every moment , and it be time they should hasten back to the rock , which be even now indistinct in the grey haze . Mr Bradshaw hold a hand of each of his daughter , and Ruth walk alongside , the two strange gentleman be on the outskirt of the party . 

 Mr Bradshaw begin to give his little girl some home news . he tell they that Mr Farquhar be ill , and could not accompany they ; but Jemima and their mamma be quite well . 

 the gentleman near to Ruth speak to she . 

 " be you fond of the sea ? " ask he . there be no answer , so he repeat his question in a different form . 

 " do you enjoy stay by the seaside ? I should rather ask . " 

 the reply be " yes , " rather breathe out in a deep inspiration than speak in a sound . the sand heave and tremble beneath Ruth . the figure near she vanish into strange nothingness ; the sound of their voice be as distant sound in a dream , while the echo of one voice thrill through and through . she could have catch at his arm for support , in the awful dizziness which wrap she up , body and soul . that voice ! no ! if name , and face , and figure be all change , that voice be the same which have touch her girlish heart , which have speak most tender word of love , which have win , and wreck she , and which she have last hear in the low muttering of fever . she dare not look round to see the figure of he who speak , dark as it be . she know he be there she hear he speak in the manner in which he use to address stranger year ago ; perhaps she answer he , perhaps she do not God know . it seem as if weight be tie to her foot as if the steadfast rock recede as if time stand still ; it be so long , so terrible , that path across the reeling sand . 

 at the foot of the rock they separate . Mr Bradshaw , afraid lest dinner should cool , prefer the short way for himself and his friend . on Elizabeth 's account , the girl be to take the long and easy path , which wound upwards through a rocky field , where lark ' nest abound , and where wild thyme and heather be now throw out their sweet to the soft night air . 

 the little girl speak in eager discussion of the stranger . they appeal to Ruth , but Ruth do not answer , and they be too impatient to convince each other to repeat the question . the first little ascent from the sand to the field surmount , Ruth sit down suddenly and cover her face with her hand . this be so unusual their wish , their good , be so invariably the rule of motion or of rest in their walk that the girl , suddenly check , stand silent and affright in surprise . they be still more startled when Ruth wail aloud some inarticulate word . 

 " be you not well , dear Mrs Denbigh ? " ask Elizabeth , gently , kneel down on the grass by Ruth . 

 she sit face the west . the low watery twilight be on her face as she take her hand away . so pale , so haggard , so wild and wander a look the girl have never see on human countenance before . 

 " well ! what be you do here with I ? you should not be with I , " say she , shake her head slowly . 

 they look at each other . 

 " you be sadly tired , " say Elizabeth , soothingly . " come home , and let I help you to bed . I will tell papa you be ill , and ask he to send for a doctor . " 

 Ruth look at she as if she do not understand the meaning of her word . no more she do at first . but by - and - by the dull brain begin to think most vividly and rapidly , and she speak in a sharp way which deceive the girl into a belief that nothing have be the matter . 

 " yes ! I be tired . I be tired . those sand oh ! those sand , those weary , dreadful sand ! but that be all over now . only my heart ache still . feel how it flutter and beat , " say she , take Elizabeth 's hand , and hold it to her side . " I be quite well , though , " she continue , read pity in the child 's look , as she feel the trembling , quiver beat . " we will go straight to the dressing - room , and read a chapter ; that will still my heart ; and then I will go to bed , and Mr Bradshaw will excuse I , I know , this one night . I only ask for one night . put on your right frock , dear , and do all you ought to do . but I know you will , " say she , bend down to kiss Elizabeth , and then , before she have do so , raise her head abruptly . " you be good and dear girl God keep you so ! " 

 by a strong effort at self - command , she go onwards at an even pace , neither rush nor pause to sob and think . the very regularity of motion calm she . the front and back door of the house be on two side , at right angle with each other . they all shrunk a little from the idea of go in at the front door , now that the strange gentleman be about , and , accordingly , they go through the quiet farm - yard right into the bright , ruddy kitchen , where the servant be dash about with the dinner thing . it be a contrast in more than colour to the lonely , dusky field , which even the little girl perceive ; and the noise , the warmth , the very bustle of the servant , be a positive relief to Ruth , and for the time lift off the heavy press of pen - up passion . a silent house , with moonlit room , or with a faint gloom brood over the apartment , would have be more to be dread . then , she must have give way , and cry out . as it be , she go up the old awkward back stair , and into the room they be to sit in . there be no candle . Mary volunteer to go down for one ; and when she return she be full of the wonder of preparation in the drawing - room , and ready and eager to dress , so as to take her place there before the gentleman have finish dinner . but she be strike by the strange paleness of Ruth 's face , now that the light fall upon it . 

 " stay up here , dear Mrs Denbigh ! we will tell papa you be tired , and be go to bed . " 

 another time Ruth would have dread Mr Bradshaw 's displeasure ; for it be an understand thing that no one be to be ill or tired in his household without leave ask , and cause give and assign . but she never think of that now . her great desire be to hold quiet till she be alone . quietness it be not it be rigidity ; but she succeed in be rigid in look and movement , and go through her duty to Elizabeth   who prefer remain with her upstairs   with wooden precision . but her heart feel at time like ice , at time like burn fire ; always a heavy , heavy weight within she . at last Elizabeth go to bed . still Ruth dare not think . Mary would come upstairs soon ; and with a strange , sick , shrink yearning , Ruth await she and the crumb of intelligence she might drop out about he . Ruth 's sense of hearing be quicken to miserable intensity as she stand before the chimney - piece , grasp it tight with both hand gaze into the die fire , but see not the dead grey ember , or the little spark of vivid light that run hither and thither among the wood - ash but an old farm - house , and climb , wind road , and a little golden breezy common , with a rural inn on the hill - top , far , far away . and through the thought of the past come the sharp sound of the present of three voice , one of which be almost silence , it be so hush . indifferent people would only have guess that Mr Donne be speak by the quietness in which the other listen ; but Ruth hear the voice and many of the word , though they convey no idea to her mind . she be too much stunned even to feel curious to know to what they relate . he speak . that be her one fact . 

 presently up come Mary , bounding , exultant . Papa have let she stay up one quarter of an hour long , because Mr Hickson have ask . Mr Hickson be so clever ! she do not know what to make of Mr Donne , he seem such a dawdle . but he be very handsome . have Ruth see he ? oh , no ! she could not , it be so dark on those stupid sand . well , never mind , she would see he to - morrow . she must be well to - morrow . Papa seem a good deal put out that neither she nor Elizabeth be in the drawing - room to - night ; and his last word be , " tell Mrs Denbigh I hope "   and papa 's " hope " always mean " expect "   ' she will be able to make breakfast at nine o'clock ; " and then she would see Mr Donne . 

 that be all Ruth hear about he . she go with Mary into her bedroom , help she to undress , and put the candle out . at length she be alone in her own room ! at length ! 

 but the tension do not give way immediately . she fasten her door , and throw open the window , cold and threatening as be the night . she tear off her gown ; she put her hair back from her heated face . it seem now as if she could not think as if thought and emotion have be repress so sternly that they would not come to relieve her stupified brain . till all at once , like a flash of lightning , her life , past and present , be reveal to she in its minute detail . and when she see she very present " now , " the strange confusion of agony be too great to be bear , and she cry aloud . then she be quite dead , and listen as to the sound of gallop army . 

 " if I might see he ! if I might see he ! if I might just ask he why he leave I ; if I have vex he in any way ; it be so strange so cruel ! it be not he ; it be his mother , " say she , almost fiercely , as if answer herself . " oh , God ! but he might have find I out before this , " she continue , sadly . " he do not care for I , as I do for he . he do not care for I at all , " she go on wildly and sharply . " he do I cruel harm . I can never again lift up my face in innocence . they think I have forget all , because I do not speak . oh , darling love ! be I talk against you ? " ask she , tenderly . " I be so torn and perplexed ! you , who be the father of my child ! " 

 but that very circumstance , full of such tender meaning in many case , throw a new light into her mind . it change she from the woman into the mother the stern guardian of her child . she be still for a time , think . then she begin again , but in a low , deep voice , 

 " he leave I . he might have be hurry off , but he might have inquire he might have learn , and explain . he leave I to bear the burden and the shame ; and never care to learn , as he might have do , of Leonard 's birth . he have no love for his child , and I will have no love for he . " 

 she raise her voice while utter this determination , and then , feel her own weakness , she moan out , " alas ! alas ! " 

 and then she start up , for all this time she have be rock herself backwards and forwards as she sit on the ground , and begin to pace the room with hurried step . 

 " what be I think of ? where be I ? I who have be pray these year and year to be worthy to be Leonard 's mother . my God ! what a depth of sin be in my heart ! why , the old time would be as white as snow to what it would be now , if I seek he out , and pray for the explanation , which should re - establish he in my heart . I who have strive   or make a mock of try   to learn God 's holy will , in order to bring up Leonard into the full strength of a Christian I who have teach his sweet innocent lip to pray , ' lead we not into temptation , but deliver we from evil ; ' and yet , somehow , I have   be long to give he to his father , who be who be " she almost choke , till at last she cry sharp out , " oh , my God ! I do believe Leonard 's father be a bad man , and yet , oh ! pitiful God , I love he ; I can not forget I can not ! " 

 she throw her body half out of the window into the cold night air . the wind be rise , and come in great gust . the rain beat down on she . it do she good . a still , calm night would not have soothe she as this do . the wild tattered cloud , hurry past the moon , give she a foolish kind of pleasure that almost make her smile a vacant smile . the blast - drive rain come on she again , and drench her hair through and through . the word ' stormy wind fulfil his word " come into her mind . 

 she sit down on the floor . this time her hand be clasp round her knee . the uneasy rock motion be still . 

 " I wonder if my darling be frightened with this blustering , noisy wind . I wonder if he be awake . " 

 and then her thought go back to the various time of old , when , affright by the weather sound so mysterious in the night he have creep into her bed and clung to she , and she have soothe he , and sweetly awe he into stillness and childlike faith , by tell he of the goodness and power of God . 

 of a sudden she creep to a chair , and there kneel as in the very presence of God , hide her face , at first not speak a word   for do he not know her heart , but by - and - by moan out , amid her sob and tear   and now for the first time she weep , 

 " oh , my God , help I , for I be very weak . my God ! I pray Thee be my rock and my strong fortress , for I of myself be nothing . if I ask in his name , thou wilt give it I . in the name of Jesus Christ I pray for strength to do Thy will ! " 

 she could not think , or , indeed , remember anything but that she be weak , and God be strong , and " a very present help in time of trouble ; " and the wind rise yet higher , and the house shake and vibrate as , in measured time , the great and terrible gust come from the four quarter of the heaven and blow around it , die away in the distance with loud and unearthly wail , which be not utterly still before the sound of the come blast be hear like the trumpet of the vanguard of the Prince of Air . 

 there be a knock at the bedroom door a little , gentle knock , and a soft child 's voice . 

 " Mrs Denbigh , may I come in , please ? I be so frightened ! " 

 it be Elizabeth . Ruth calm her passionate breathing by one hasty draught of water , and open the door to the timid girl . 

 " oh , Mrs Denbigh ! do you ever hear such a night ? I be so frightened ! and Mary sleep so sound . " 

 Ruth be too much shake to be able to speak all at once ; but she take Elizabeth in her arm to reassure she . Elizabeth stand back . 

 " why , how wet you be , Mrs Denbigh ! and there be the window open , I do believe ! oh , how cold it be ! " say she , shiver . 

 " get into my bed , dear ! " say Ruth . 

 " but do come too ! the candle give such a strange light with that long wick , and , somehow , your face do not look like you . please , put the candle out , and come to bed . I be so frightened , and it seem as if I should be safe if you be by I . " 

 Ruth shut the window , and go to bed . Elizabeth be all shiver and quaking . to soothe she , Ruth make a great effort ; and speak of Leonard and his fear , and , in a low hesitate voice , she speak of God 's tender mercy , but very humbly , for she fear lest Elizabeth should think she well and holy than she be . the little girl be soon asleep , her fear forget ; and Ruth , wear out by passionate emotion , and oblige to be still for fear of awake her bedfellow , go off into a short slumber , through the depth of which the echo of her wake sob quiver up . 

 when she awake the grey light of autumnal dawn be in the room . Elizabeth sleep on ; but Ruth hear the servant about , and the early farmyard sound . after she have recover from the shock of consciousness and recollection , she collect her thought with a stern calmness . he be here . in a few hour she must meet he . there be no escape , except through subterfuge and contrivance that be both false and cowardly . how it would all turn out she could not say , or even guess . but of one thing she be clear , and to one thing she would hold fast : that be , that , come what might , she would obey God 's law , and , be the end of all what it might , she would say , " Thy will be do ! " she only ask for strength enough to do this when the time come . how the time would come what speech or action would be requisite on her part , she do not know she do not even try to conjecture . she leave that in his hand . 

 she be icy cold , but very calm , when the breakfast - bell rang . she go down immediately ; because she feel that there be less chance of a recognition if she be already at her place beside the tea - urn , and busy with the cup , than if she come in after all be settle . her heart seem to stand still , but she feel almost a strange exultant sense of power over herself . she feel , rather than see , that he be not there . Mr Bradshaw and Mr Hickson be , and so busy talk election - politic that they do not interrupt their conversation even when they bow to she . her pupil sit one on each side of she . before they be quite settle , and while the other two gentleman yet hang over the fire , Mr Donne come in . Ruth feel as if that moment be like death . she have a kind of desire to make some sharp sound , to relieve a choke sensation , but it be over in an instant , and she sit on very composed and silent to all outward appearance the very model of a governess who know her place . and by - and - by she feel strangely at ease in her sense of power . she could even listen to what be be say . she have never dare as yet to look at Mr Donne , though her heart burn to see he once again . he sound change . the voice have lose its fresh and youthful eagerness of tone , though in peculiarity of modulation it be the same . it could never be mistake for the voice of another person . there be a good deal say at that breakfast , for none seem inclined to hurry , although it be Sunday morning . Ruth be compel to sit there , and it be good for she that she do . that half - hour seem to separate the present Mr Donne very effectively from her imagination of what Mr Bellingham have be . she be no analyser ; she hardly even have learn to notice character ; but she feel there be some strange difference between the people she have live with lately and the man who now leant back in his chair , listen in a careless manner to the conversation , but never join in , or express any interest in it , unless it somewhere , or somehow , touch himself . now , Mr Bradshaw always throw himself into a subject ; it might be in a pompous , dogmatic sort of way , but he do do it , whether it relate to himself or not ; and it be part of Mr Hickson 's trade to assume an interest if he feel it not . but Mr Donne do neither the one nor the other . when the other two be talk of many of the topic of the day , he put his glass in his eye , the well to examine into the exact nature of a cold game - pie at the other side of the table . suddenly Ruth feel that his attention be catch by she . until now , see his short - sightedness , she have believe herself safe ; now her face flush with a painful , miserable blush . but in an instant she be strong and quiet . she look up straight at his face ; and , as if this action take he aback , he drop his glass , and begin eat away with great diligence . she have see he . he be change , she know not how . in fact , the expression , which have be only occasional formerly , when his bad self predominate , have become permanent . he look restless and dissatisfied . but he be very handsome still ; and her quick eye have recognise , with a sort of strange pride , that the eye and mouth be like Leonard 's . although perplex by the straightforward , brave look she have send right at he , he be not entirely baffle . he think this Mrs Denbigh be certainly like poor Ruth ; but this woman be far handsomer . her face be positively greek ; and then such a proud , superb turn of her head ; quite queenly ! a governess in Mr Bradshaw 's family ! why , she might be a Percy or a Howard for the grandeur of her grace ! poor Ruth ! this woman 's hair be dark , though ; and she have less colour ; altogether a more refine - look person . poor Ruth ! and , for the first time for several year , he wonder what have become of she ; though , of course , there be but one thing that could have happen , and perhaps it be as well he do not know her end , for most likely it would have make he very uncomfortable . he leant back in his chair , and , unobserve   for he would not have think it gentlemanly to look so fixedly at she if she or any one notice he , he put up his glass again . she be speak to one of her pupil , and do not see he . 

 by Jove ! it must be she , though ! there be little dimple come out about the mouth as she speak , just like those he use to admire so much in Ruth , and which he have never see in any one else the sunshine without the positive movement of a smile . the long he look the more he be convince ; and it be with a jerk that he recover himself enough to answer Mr Bradshaw 's question , whether he wish to go to church or not . 

 " Church ? how far a mile ? no ; I think I shall perform my devotion at home to - day . " 

 he absolutely feel jealous when Mr Hickson spring up to open the door as Ruth and her pupil leave the room . he be pleased to feel jealous again . he have be really afraid he be too much " use - up " for such sensation . but Hickson must keep his place . what he be pay for be do the talking to the elector , not pay attention to the lady in their family . Mr Donne have notice that Mr Hickson have try to be gallant to Miss Bradshaw ; let he , if he like ; but let he beware how he behave to this fair creature , Ruth or no Ruth . it certainly be Ruth ; only how the devil have she play her card so well as to be the governess the respected governess , in such a family as Mr Bradshaw 's ? 

 Mr Donne 's movement be evidently to be the guide of Mr Hickson 's . Mr Bradshaw always dislike go to church , partly from principle , partly because he never could find the place in the Prayer - book . Mr Donne be in the drawing - room as Mary come down ready equip ; he be turn over the leaf of the large and handsome Bible . see Mary , he be strike with a new idea . 

 " how singular it be , " say he , " that the name of Ruth be so seldom choose by those good people who go to the Bible before they christen their child . it be a pretty name , I think . " 

 Mr Bradshaw look up . " why , Mary ! " say he , " be not that Mrs Denbigh 's name ? " 

 " yes , papa , " reply Mary , eagerly ; " and I know two other Ruths ; there be Ruth Brown here , and Ruth Macartney at Eccleston . " 

 " and I have an aunt call Ruth , Mr Donne ! I do not   think your observation hold good . besides my daughter ' governess , I know three other Ruths . " 

 " oh ! I have no doubt I be wrong . it be just a speech of which one perceive the folly the moment it be make . " 

 but , secretly , he rejoice with a fierce joy over the success of his device . 

 Elizabeth come to summon Mary . 

 Ruth be glad when she get into the open air , and away from the house . two hour be go and over . two out of a day , a day and a half for it might be late on Monday morning before the Eccleston party return . 

 she feel weak and tremble in body , but strong in power over herself . they have leave the house in good time for church , so they need not to hurry ; and they go leisurely along the road , now and then pass some country person whom they know , and with whom they exchange a kindly , placid greeting . but presently , to Ruth 's dismay , she hear a step behind , come at a rapid pace , a peculiar clank of rather high - heeled boot , which give a springy sound to the walk , that she have know well long ago . it be like a nightmare , where the evil dread be never avoid , never completely shun , but be by one 's side at the very moment of triumph in escape . there he be by her side ; and there be a quarter of a mile intervene between she and the church ; but even yet she trust that he have not recognise she . 

 " I have change my mind , you see , " say he , quietly . " I have some curiosity to see the architecture of the church ; some of these old country church have singular bit about they . Mr Bradshaw kindly direct I part of the way , but I be so much puzzle by ' turn to the right , ' and ' turn to the left , ' that I be quite glad to espy your party . " 

 that speech require no positive answer of any kind ; and no answer do it receive . he have not expect a reply . he know , if she be Ruth , she could not answer any indifferent word of his ; and her silence make he more certain of her identity with the lady by his side . 

 " the scenery here be of a kind new to I ; neither grand , wild , nor yet mark by high cultivation ; and yet it have great charm . it remind I of some part of Wales . " he breathe deeply , and then add , " you have be in Wales , I believe ? " 

 he speak low ; almost in a whisper . the little church - bell begin to call the lag people with its quick , sharp summon . Ruth writhe in body and spirit , but struggle on . the church - door would be gain at last ; and in that holy place she would find peace . 

 he repeat in a loud tone , so as to compel an answer in order to conceal her agitation from the girl : 

 " have you never be in Wales ? " he use " never " instead of " ever , " and lay the emphasis on that word , in order to mark his meaning to Ruth , and Ruth only . but he drive she to bay . 

 " I have be in Wales , sir , " she reply , in a calm , grave tone . " I be there many year ago . event take place there , which contribute to make the recollection of that time most miserable to I . I shall be oblige to you , sir , if you will make no further reference to it . " 

 the little girl wonder how Mrs Denbigh could speak in such a tone of quiet authority to Mr Donne , who be almost a member of Parliament . but they settle that her husband must have die in Wales , and , of course , that would make the recollection of the country " most miserable , " as she say . 

 Mr Donne do not dislike the answer , and he positively admire the dignity with which she speak . his leave she as he do must have make she very miserable ; and he like the pride that make she retain her indignation , until he could speak to she in private , and explain away a good deal of what she might complain of with some justice . 

 the church be reach . they all go up the middle aisle into the Eagle 's Crag pew . he follow they in , enter himself , and shut the door . Ruth 's heart sink as she see he there ; just opposite to she ; come between she and the clergyman who be to read out the Word of God . it be merciless it be cruel to haunt she there . she durst not lift her eye to the bright eastern light she could not see how peacefully the marble image of the dead lie on their tomb , for he be between she and all Light and Peace . she know that his look be on she ; that he never turn his glance away . she could not join in the prayer for the remission of sin while he be there , for his very presence seem as a sign that their stain would never be wash out of her life . but , although goad and chafe by her thought and recollection , she keep very still . no sign of emotion , no flush of colour be on her face as he look at she . Elizabeth could not find her place , and then Ruth breathe once , long and deeply , as she move up the pew , and out of the straight , burn glance of those eye of evil meaning . when they sit down for the reading of the first lesson , Ruth turn the corner of the seat so as no long to be opposite to he . she could not listen . the word seem to be utter in some world far away , from which she be exile and cast out ; their sound , and yet more their meaning , be dim and distant . but in this extreme tension of mind to hold in her bewildered agony , it so happen that one of her sens be preternaturally acute . while all the church and the people swam in misty haze , one point in a dark corner grow clear and clear till she see   what at another time she could not have discern at all   a face a gargoyle I think they call it at the end of the arch next to the narrowing of the nave into the chancel , and in the shadow of that contraction . the face be beautiful in feature   the next to it be a grinning monkey , but it be not the feature that be the most striking part . there be a half - open mouth , not in any way distort out of its exquisite beauty by the intense expression of suffer it convey . any distortion of the face by mental agony imply that a struggle with circumstance be go on . but in this face , if such struggle have be , it be over now . circumstance have conquer ; and there be no hope from mortal endeavour , or help from mortal creature to be have . but the eye look onward and upward to the " Hills from whence cometh our help . " and though the part lip seem ready to quiver with agony , yet the expression of the whole face , owe to these strange , stony , and yet spiritual eye , be high and console . if mortal gaze have never seek its meaning before , in the deep shadow where it have be place long century ago , yet Ruth 's do now . who could have imagine such a look ? who could have witness perhaps feel such infinite sorrow , and yet dare to lift it up by faith into a peace so pure ? or be it a mere conception ? if so , what a soul the unknown carver must have have ! for creator and handicraftsman must have be one ; no two mind could have be in such perfect harmony . whatever it be however it come there imaginer , carver , sufferer , all be long pass away . human art be end human life do human suffering over ; but this remain ; it still Ruth 's beat heart to look on it . she grow still enough to hear word which have come to many in their time of need , and awe they in the presence of the extreme suffering that the hushed world have ever hear of . 

 the second lesson for the morning of the 25th of September be the 26th chapter of St Matthew 's Gospel . 

 and when they pray again , Ruth 's tongue be unloosed , and she also could pray , in his name , who undergo the agony in the garden . 

 as they come out of church , there be a little pause and gathering at the door . it have begin to rain ; those who have umbrella be put they up ; those who have not be regretting , and wonder how long it would last . stand for a moment , impede by the people who be thus collect under the porch , Ruth hear a voice close to her say , very low , but very distinctly , 

 " I have much to say to you much to explain . I entreat you to give I the opportunity . " 

 Ruth do not reply . she would not acknowledge that she hear ; but she tremble nevertheless , for the well - remember voice be low and soft , and have yet its power to thrill . she earnestly desire to know why and how he have leave she . it appear to she as if that knowledge could alone give she a relief from the restless wondering that distract her mind , and that one explanation could do no harm . 

 " no ! " the high spirit make answer ; " it must not be . " 

 Ruth and the girl have each an umbrella . she turn to Mary , and say , 

 " Mary , give your umbrella to Mr Donne , and come under mine . " her way of speak be short and decide ; she be compress her meaning into as few word as possible . the little girl obey in silence . as they go first through the churchyard stile , Mr Donne speak again . 

 " you be unforgiving , " say he . " I only ask you to hear I . I have a right to be hear , Ruth ! I will not   believe you be so much change , as not to listen to I when I entreat . " 

 he speak in a tone of soft complaint . but he himself have do much to destroy the illusion which have hang about his memory for year , whenever Ruth have allow herself to think of it . besides which , during the time of her residence in the Benson family , her feeling of what people ought to be have be unconsciously raise and refine ; and Mr Donne , even while she have to struggle against the force of past recollection , repel she so much by what he be at present , that every speech of his , every minute they be together , serve to make her path more and more easy to follow . his voice retain something of its former influence . when he speak , without she see he , she could not help remember former day . 

 she do not answer this last speech any more than the first . she see clearly , that , put aside all thought as to the character of their former relationship , it have be dissolve by his will his act and deed ; and that , therefore , the power to refuse any further intercourse whatsoever remain with she . 

 it sometimes seem a little strange how , after have earnestly pray to be deliver from temptation , and have give ourselves with shut eye into God 's hand , from that time every thought , every outward influence , every acknowledge law of life , seem to lead we on from strength to strength . it seem strange sometimes , because we notice the coincidence ; but it be the natural , unavoidable consequence of all truth and goodness be one and the same , and therefore carry out in every circumstance , external and internal , of God 's creation . 

 when Mr Donne see that Ruth would not answer he , he become only the more determined that she should hear what he have to say . what that be he do not exactly know . the whole affair be most mysterious and piquant . 

 the umbrella protect Ruth from more than the rain on that walk homeward , for under its shelter she could not be speak to unheard . she have not rightly understand at what time she and the girl be to dine . from the gathering at meal - time she must not shrink . she must show no sign of weakness . but , oh ! the relief , after that walk , to sit in her own room , lock up , so that neither Mary nor Elizabeth could come by surprise , and to let her weary frame   weary with be so long brace up to rigidity and stiff quiet   fall into a chair anyhow all helpless , nerveless , motionless , as if the very bone have melt out of she ! 

 the peaceful rest which her mind take be in thinking of Leonard . she dare not look before or behind , but she could see he well at present . she brood over the thought of he , till she dread his father more and more . by the light of her child 's purity and innocence , she see evil clearly , and yet more clearly . she think that , if Leonard ever come to know the nature of his birth , she have nothing for it but to die out of his sight . he could never know human heart could never know , her ignorant innocence , and all the small circumstance which have impel she onwards . but God know . and if Leonard hear of his mother 's error , why , nothing remain but death ; for she feel , then , as if she have it in her power to die innocently out of such future agony ; but that escape be not so easy . suddenly a fresh thought come , and she pray that , through whatever suffering , she might be purify . whatever trial , woe , measureless pang , God might see fit to chastise she with , she would not shrink , if only at last she might come into his presence in Heaven . alas ! the shrink from suffer we can not help . that part of her prayer be vain . and as for the rest , be not the sure justice of his law find she out even now ? his law once break , his justice and the very nature of those law bring the immutable retribution ; but if we turn penitently to he , he enable we to bear our punishment with a meek and docile heart , " for his mercy endureth for ever . " 

 Mr Bradshaw have feel himself rather want in proper attention to his guest , inasmuch as he have be unable , all in a minute , to comprehend Mr Donne 's rapid change of purpose ; and , before it have enter into his mind that , notwithstanding the distance of the church , Mr Donne be go thither , that gentleman be out of the sight , and far out of the reach , of his burly host . but though the latter have so far neglect the duty of hospitality as to allow his visitor to sit in the Eagle 's Crag pew with no other guard of honour than the child and the governess , Mr Bradshaw determine to make up for it by extra attention during the remainder of the day . accordingly he never leave Mr Donne . whatever wish that gentleman express , it be the study of his host to gratify . do he hint at the pleasure which a walk in such beautiful scenery would give he , Mr Bradshaw be willing to accompany he , although at Eccleston it be a principle with he not to take any walk for pleasure on a Sunday . when Mr Donne turn round , and recollect letter which must be write , and which would compel he to stay at home , Mr Bradshaw instantly give up the walk , and remain at hand , ready to furnish he with any writing - material which could be want , and which be not lay out in the half - furnish house . nobody know where Mr Hickson be all this time . he have saunter out after Mr Donne , when the latter set off for church , and he have never return . Mr Donne keep wonder if he could have meet Ruth if , in fact , she have go out with her pupil , now that the afternoon have clear up . this uneasy wonder , and a few mental imprecation on his host 's polite attention , together with the letter - write pretence , pass away the afternoon the long afternoon he have ever spend ; and of weariness he have have his share . Lunch be linger in the dining - room , leave there for the truant Mr Hickson ; but of the child or Ruth there be no sign . he venture on a distant inquiry as to their whereabouts . 

 " they dine early ; they be go to church again . Mrs Denbigh be a member of the Establishment once ; and , though she attend chapel at home , she seem glad to have an opportunity of go to church . " 

 Mr Donne be on the point of ask some further question about " Mrs Denbigh , " when Mr Hickson come in , loud - speak , cheerful , hungry , and as ready to talk about his ramble , and the way in which he have lose and find himself , as he be about everything else . he know how to dress up the commonest occurrence with a little exaggeration , a few pun , and a happy quotation or two , so as to make it sound very agreeable . he could read face , and see that he have be miss ; both host and visitor look mop to death . he determine to devote himself to their amusement during the remainder of the day , for he have really lose himself , and feel that he have be away too long on a dull Sunday , when people be apt to get hyppe if not well amuse . 

 " it be really a shame to be indoor in such a place . rain ? yes , it rain some hour ago , but now it be splendid weather . I feel myself quite qualified for guide , I assure you . I can show you all the beauty of the neighbourhood , and throw in a bog and a nest of viper to boot . " 

 Mr Donne languidly assent to this proposal of go out ; and then he become restless until Mr Hickson have eat a hasty lunch , for he hop to meet Ruth on the way from church , to be near she , and watch she , though he might not be able to speak to she . to have the slow hour roll away to know he must leave the next day and yet , so close to she , not to be see she be more than he could bear . in an impetuous kind of way , he disregard all Mr Hickson 's offer of guidance to lovely view , and turn a deaf ear to Mr Bradshaw 's express wish of show he the land belong to the house   " very little for fourteen thousand pound " , and set off wilfully on the road lead to the church , from which , he aver , he have see a view which nothing else about the place could equal . 

 they meet the country people drop homeward . no Ruth be there . she and her pupil have return by the field - way , as Mr Bradshaw inform his guest at dinner - time . Mr Donne be very captious all through dinner . he think it would never be over , and curse Hickson 's interminable story , which be tell on purpose to amuse he . his heart give a fierce bind when he see she in the drawing - room with the little girl . 

 she be read to they with how sick and tremble a heart , no word can tell . but she could master and keep down outward sign of her emotion . an hour more to - night   part of which be to be spend in family prayer , and all in the safety of company , another hour in the morning   when all would be engage in the bustle of departure   if , during this short space of time , she could not avoid speak to he , she could at least keep he at such a distance as to make he feel that henceforward her world and his belong to separate system , wide as the heaven apart . 

 by degree she feel that he be draw near to where she stand . he be by the table examine the book that lie upon it . Mary and Elizabeth draw off a little space , awe - stricken by the future member for Eccleston . as he bend his head over a book , he say , " I implore you ; five minute alone . " 

 the little girl could not hear ; but Ruth , hem in so that no escape be possible , do hear . 

 she take sudden courage , and say , in a clear voice , 

 " will you read the whole passage aloud ? I do not remember it . " 

 Mr Hickson , hover at no great distance , hear these word , and draw near to second Mrs Denbigh 's request . Mr Bradshaw , who be very sleepy after his unusually late dinner , and longing for bedtime , join in the request , for it would save the necessity for make talk , and he might , perhaps , get in a nap , undisturbed and unnoticed , before the servant come in to prayer . 

 Mr Donne be catch ; he be oblige to read aloud , although he do not know what he be read . in the middle of some sentence the door open , a rush of servant come in , and Mr Bradshaw become particularly wide awake in an instant , and read they a long sermon with great emphasis and unction , wind up with a prayer almost as long . 

 Ruth sit with her head droop , more from exhaustion after a season of effort than because she shun Mr Donne 's look . he have so lose his power over her his power , which have stir she so deeply the night before that , except as one know her error and her shame , and make a cruel use of such knowledge , she have quite separate he from the idol of her youth . and yet , for the sake of that first and only love , she would gladly have know what explanation he could offer to account for leave she . it would have be something gain to her own self - respect , if she have learn that he be not then , as she feel he to be now , cold and egotistical , care for no one and nothing but what relate to himself . 

 Home , and Leonard how strangely peaceful the two seem ! oh , for the rest that a dream about Leonard would bring ! 

 Mary and Elizabeth go to bed immediately after prayer , and Ruth accompany they . it be plan that the gentleman should leave early the next morning . they be to breakfast half an hour soon , to catch the railway train ; and this by Mr Donne 's own arrangement , who have be as eager about his canvassing , the week before , as it be possible for he to be , but who now wish Eccleston and the dissenting interest therein very fervently at the devil . 

 just as the carriage come round , Mr Bradshaw turn to Ruth : " any message for Leonard beyond love , which be a matter of course ? " 

 Ruth gasp for she see Mr Donne catch at the name ; she do not guess the sudden sharp jealousy call out by the idea that Leonard be a grow - up man . 

 " who be Leonard ? " say he to the little girl stand by he ; he do not know which she be . 

 " Mrs Denbigh 's little boy , " answer Mary . 

 under some pretence or other , he draw near to Ruth ; and in that low voice , which she have learn to loathe , he say , 

 " our child ! " 

 by the white misery that turn her face to stone by the wild terror in her implore eye by the gasp breath which come out as the carriage drive away he know that he have seize the spell to make she listen at last . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 the Meeting on the Sands 
 

 " he will take he away from I ! he will take the child from I ! " 

 these word rang like a tolling bell through Ruth 's head . it seem to she that her doom be certain . Leonard would be take from she ! she have a firm conviction not the less firm because she know not on what it be base that a child , whether legitimate or not , belong of legal right to the father . and Leonard , of all child , be the prince and monarch . every man 's heart would long to call Leonard " child ! " she have be too strongly tax to have much power leave she to reason coolly and dispassionately , just then , even if she have be with any one who could furnish she with information from which to draw correct conclusion . the one think haunt her night and day " he will take my child away from I ! " in her dream she see Leonard borne away into some dim land , to which she could not follow . sometimes he sit in a swiftly - move carriage , at his father 's side , and smile on she as he pass by , as if go to promise pleasure . at another time he be struggle to return to she ; stretch out his little arm , and cry to she for the help she could not give . how she get through the day , she do not know ; her body move about and habitually act , but her spirit be with her child . she think often of writing and warn Mr Benson of Leonard 's danger ; but then she shrink from recur to circumstance , all mention of which have cease year ago ; the very recollection of which seem bury deep for ever . besides , she fear occasion discord or commotion in the quiet circle in which she live . Mr Benson 's deep anger against her betrayer have be show too clearly in the old time to allow she to think that he would keep it down without expression now . he would cease to do anything to forward his election ; he would oppose he as much as he could ; and Mr Bradshaw would be angry , and a storm would arise , from the bare thought of which Ruth shrink with the cowardliness of a person thoroughly wear out with late contest . she be bodily weary with her spiritual buffeting . 

 one morning , three or four day after their departure , she receive a letter from Miss Benson . she could not open it at first , and put it on one side , clench her hand over it all the time . at last she tear it open . Leonard be safe as yet . there be a few line in his great round hand , speak of event no large than the loss of a beautiful " alley . " there be a sheet from Miss Benson . she always write letter in the manner of a diary . " Monday we do so - and - so ; Tuesday , so - and - so ,   c. " Ruth glance rapidly down the page . yes , here it be ! sick , flutter heart , be still ! 

 " in the middle of the damson , when they be just on the fire , there be a knock at the door . my brother be out , and Sally be wash up , and I be stir the preserve with my great apron and bib on ; so I bade Leonard come in from the garden and open the door . but I would have wash his face first , if I have know who it be ! it be Mr Bradshaw and the Mr Donne that they hope to send up to the House of Commons , as member of Parliament for Eccleston , and another gentleman , whose name I never hear . they have come canvass ; and when they find my brother be out , they ask Leonard if they could see I . the child say , ' yes ! if I could leave the damson ; ' and straightway come to call I , leave they stand in the passage . I whip off my apron , and take Leonard by the hand , for I fancy I should feel less awkward if he be with I ; and then I go and ask they all into the study , for I think I should like they to see how many book Thurstan have get . then they begin talk politic at I in a very polite manner , only I could not make head or tail of what they mean ; and Mr Donne take a deal of notice of Leonard , and call he to he ; and I be sure he notice what a noble , handsome boy he be , though his face be very brown and red , and hot with digging , and his curl all tangle . Leonard talk back as if he have know he all his life , till , I think , Mr Bradshaw think he be make too much noise , and bid he remember he ought to be see , not hear . so he stand as still and stiff as a soldier , close to Mr Donne ; and as I could not help look at the two , and think how handsome they both be in their different way , I could not tell Thurstan half the message the gentleman leave for he . but there be one thing more I must tell you , though I say I would not . when Mr Donne be talk to Leonard , he take off his watch and chain and put it round the boy 's neck , who be pleased enough , you may be sure . I bid he give it back to the gentleman , when they be all go away ; and I be quite surprised , and very uncomfortable , when Mr Donne say he have give it to Leonard , and that he be to keep it for his own . I could see Mr Bradshaw be annoy , and he and the other gentleman speak to Mr Donne , and I hear they say , ' too bareface ; ' and I shall never forget Mr Donne 's proud , stubborn look back at they , nor his way of say , ' I allow no one to interfere with what I choose to do with my own . ' and he look so haughty and displeased , I durst say nothing at the time . but when I tell Thurstan , he be very grieved and angry ; and say he have hear that our party be bribe , but that he never could have think they would have try to do it at his house . Thurstan be very much out of spirit about this election altogether ; and , indeed , it do make sad work up and down the town . however , he send back the watch with a letter to Mr Bradshaw ; and Leonard be very good about it , so I give he a taste of the new damson - preserve on his bread for supper . " 

 although a stranger might have consider this letter wearisome from the multiplicity of the detail , Ruth crave greedily after more . what have Mr Donne say to Leonard ? have Leonard like his new acquaintance ? be they likely to meet again ? after wonder and wonder over these point , Ruth compose herself by the hope that in a day or two she should hear again ; and to secure this end , she answer the letter by return of post . that be on Thursday . on Friday she have another letter , in a strange hand . it be from Mr Donne . no name , no initial be give . if it have fall into another person 's hand , they could not have recognise the writer , nor guess to whom it be send . it contain simply these word : 

 " for our child 's sake , and in his name , I summon you to appoint a place where I can speak , and you can listen , undisturbed . the time must be on Sunday ; the limit of distance may be the circumference of your power of walk . my word may be command , but my fond heart entreat . More I shall not say now , but , remember ! your boy 's welfare depend on your accede to this request . Address B. D. , Post - Office , Eccleston . " 

 Ruth do not attempt to answer this letter till the last five minute before the post go out . she could not decide until force to it . either way she dread . she be very nearly leave the letter altogether unanswered . but suddenly she resolve she would know all , the good , the bad . no cowardly dread of herself , or of other , should make her neglect aught that come to she in her child 's name . she take up a pen and write : 

 " the sand below the rock , where we meet you the other night . time , afternoon church . " 

 Sunday come . 

 " I shall not go to church this afternoon . you know the way , of course ; and I can trust you to go steadily by yourself . " 

 when they come to kiss she before leave she , accord to their fond will not , they be strike by the coldness of her face and lip . 

 " be you not well , dear Mrs Denbigh ? how cold you be ! " 

 " yes , darling ! I be well ; " and tear spring into her eye as she look at their anxious little face . " go now , dear . five o'clock will soon be here , and then we will have tea . " 

 " and that will warm you ! " say they , leave the room . 

 " and then it will be over , " she murmur " over . " 

 it never come into her head to watch the girl as they disappear down the lane on their way to church . she know they too well to distrust their do what they be tell . she sit still , her head bow on her arm for a few minute , and then rise up and go to put on her walk thing . some thought impel she to sudden haste . she cross the field by the side of the house , run down the steep and rocky path , and be carry by the impetus of her descent far out on the level sand but not far enough for her intent . without look to the right hand or to the left , where comer might be see , she go forwards to the black post , which , rise above the heaving water , mark where the fisherman 's net be lay . she go straight towards this place , and hardly stint her pace even where the wet sand be glitter with the recede wave . once there , she turn round , and in a dart glance , see that as yet no one be near . she be perhaps half - a - mile or more from the grey , silvery rock , which slop away into brown moorland , intersperse with a field here and there of golden , wave corn . behind be purple hill , with sharp , clear outline , touch the sky . a little on one side from where she stand , she see the white cottage and house which form the village of Abermouth , scatter up and down , and , on a windy hill , about a mile inland , she see the little grey church , where even now many be worship in peace . 

 " pray for I ! " she sigh out , as this object catch her eye . 

 and now , close under the heathery field , where they fall softly down and touch the sand , she see a figure move in the direction of the great shadow make by the rock go towards the very point where the path from Eagle 's Crag come down to the shore . 

 " it be he ! " say she to herself . and she turn round and look seaward . the tide have turn ; the wave be slowly recede , as if loath to lose the hold they have , so lately , and with such swift bound , gain on the yellow sand . the eternal moan they have make since the world begin fill the ear , break only by the skirl of the grey sea - bird as they alight in group on the edge of the water , or as they rise up with their measured , balance motion , and the sunlight catch their white breast . there be no sign of human life to be see ; no boat , or distant sail , or near shrimper . the black post there be all that speak of man 's work or labour . beyond a stretch of the water , a few pale grey hill show like film ; their summit clear , though faint , their basis lose in a vapoury mist . 

 on the hard , echo sand , and distinct from the ceaseless murmur of the salt sea wave , come footstep near nearer . very near they be when Ruth , unwilling to show the fear that riot in her heart , turn round , and face Mr Donne . 

 he come forward , with both hand extend . 

 " this be kind ! my own Ruth , " say he . Ruth 's arm hang down motionless at her side . 

 " what ! Ruth , have you no word for I ? " 

 " I have nothing to say , " say Ruth . 

 " why , you little revengeful creature ! and so I be to explain all before you will even treat I with decent civility . " 

 " I do not want explanation , " say Ruth , in a trembling tone . " we must not speak of the past . you ask I to come in Leonard 's in my child 's name , and to hear what you have to say about he . " 

 " but what I have to say about he relate to you even more . and how can we talk about he without recur to the past ? that past , which you try to ignore I know you can not do it in your heart be full of happy recollection to I . be you not happy in Wales ? " he say , in his tender tone . 

 but there be no answer ; not even one faint sigh , though he listen intently . 

 " you dare not speak ; you dare not answer I . your heart will not allow you to prevaricate , and you know you be happy . " 

 suddenly Ruth 's beautiful eye be raise to he , full of lucid splendour , but grave and serious in their expression ; and her cheek , heretofore so faintly ting with the tender blush , flash into a ruddy glow . 

 " I be happy . I do not deny it . whatever come , I will not blench from the truth . I have answer you . " 

 " and yet , " reply he , secretly exult in her admission , and not perceive the inner strength of which she must have be conscious before she would have dare to make it " and yet , Ruth , we be not to recur to the past ! why not ? if it be happy at the time , be the recollection of it so miserable to you ? " 

 he try once more to take her hand , but she quietly step back . 

 " I come to hear what you have to say about my child , " say she , begin to feel very weary . 

 " our child , Ruth . " 

 she draw herself up , and her face go very pale . 

 " what have you to say about he ? " ask she , coldly . 

 " much , " exclaim he " much that may affect his whole life . but it all depend upon whether you will hear I or not . " 

 " I listen . " 

 " Good Heavens ! Ruth , you will drive I mad . oh ! what a changed person you be from the sweet , love creature you be ! I wish you be not so beautiful . " she do not reply , but he catch a deep , involuntary sigh . 

 " will you hear I if I speak , though I may not begin all at once to talk of this boy a boy of whom any mother any parent , might be proud ? I could see that , Ruth . I have see he ; he look like a prince in that cramp , miserable house , and with no earthly advantage . it be a shame he should not have every kind of opportunity lay open before he . " 

 there be no sign of maternal ambition on the motionless face , though there might be some little spring in her heart , as it beat quick and strong at the idea of the proposal she imagine he be go to make of take her boy away to give he the careful education she have often crave for he . she should refuse it , as she would everything else which seem to imply that she acknowledge a claim over Leonard ; but yet sometimes , for her boy 's sake , she have long for a large opening a more extended sphere . 

 " Ruth ! you acknowledge we be happy once ; there be circumstance which , if I could tell you they all in detail , would show you how in my weak , convalescent state I be almost passive in the hand of other . ah , Ruth ! I have not forget the tender nurse who soothe I in my delirium . when I be feverish , I dream that I be again at Llan - dhu , in the little old bed - chamber , and you , in white which you always wear then , you know flit about I . " 

 the tear drop , large and round , from Ruth 's eye she could not help it how could she ? 

 " we be happy then , " continue he , gain confidence from the sight of her melted mood , and recur once more to the admission which he consider so much in his favour . " can such happiness never return ? " thus he go on , quickly , anxious to lay before she all he have to offer , before she should fully understand his meaning . 

 " if you would consent , Leonard should be always with you educate where and how you like money to any amount you might choose to name should be secure to you and he if only , Ruth if only those happy day might return . " 

 Ruth speak . 

 " I say that I be happy , because I have ask God to protect and help I and I dare not tell a lie . I be happy . oh ! what be happiness or misery that we should talk about they now ? " 

 Mr Donne look at she , as she utter these word , to see if she be wander in her mind , they seem to he so utterly strange and incoherent . 

 " I dare not think of happiness I must not look forward to sorrow . God do not put I here to consider either of these thing . " 

 " my dear Ruth , compose yourself ! there be no hurry in answer the question I ask . " 

 " what be it ? " say Ruth . 

 " I love you so , I can not live without you . I offer you my heart , my life I offer to place Leonard wherever you would have he place . I have the power and the mean to advance he in any path of life you choose . all who have show kindness to you shall be reward by I , with a gratitude even surpass your own . if there be anything else I can do that you can suggest , I will do it . " 

 " listen to I ! " say Ruth , now that the idea of what he propose have enter her mind . " when I say that I be happy with you long ago , I be choke with shame as I say it . and yet it may be a vain , false excuse that I make for myself . I be very young ; I do not know how such a life be against God 's pure and holy will at least , not as I know it now ; and I tell you truth all the day of my year since I have go about with a stain on my hidden soul a stain which make I loathe myself , and envy those who stand spotless and undefile ; which make I shrink from my child from Mr Benson , from his sister , from the innocent girl whom I teach nay , even I have cower away from God himself ; and what I do wrong then , I do blindly to what I should do now if I listen to you . " 

 she be so strongly agitated that she put her hand over her face , and sob without restraint . then , take they away , she look at he with a glowing face , and beautiful , honest , wet eye , and try to speak calmly , as she ask if she need to stay long   she would have go away at once but that she think of Leonard , and wish to hear all that his father might have to say . he be so strike anew by her beauty , and understand she so little , that he believe that she only require a little more urge to consent to what he wish ; for in all she have say there be no trace of the anger and resentment for his desertion of she , which he have expect would be a prominent feature the great obstacle he have to encounter . the deep sense of penitence she express , he mistake for earthly shame ; which he imagine he could soon soothe away . 

 " yes , I have much more to say . I have not say half . I can not tell you how fondly I will how fondly I do love you how my life shall be spend in minister to your wish . money , I see I know , you despise " 

 " Mr Bellingham ! I will not stay to hear you speak to I so again . I have be sinful , but it be not you who should " she could not speak , she be so choke with passionate sorrow . 

 he want to calm she , as he see she shake with repressed sob . he put his hand on her arm . she shake it off impatiently , and move away in an instant . 

 " Ruth ! " say he , nettle by her action of repugnance , " I begin to think you never love I . " 

 " I ! I never love you ! do you dare to say so ? " 

 her eye flame on he as she speak . her red , round lip curl into beautiful contempt . 

 " why do you shrink so from I ? " say he , in his turn get impatient . 

 " I do not come here to be speak to in this way , " say she . " I come , if by any chance I could do Leonard good . I would submit to many humiliation for his sake but to no more from you . " 

 " be not you afraid to brave I so ? " say he . " do not   you know how much you be in my power ? " 

 she be silent . she long to go away , but dread lest he should follow she , where she might be less subject to interruption than she be here near the fisherman 's net , which the recede tide be leave every moment barer and more bare , and the post they be fasten to more blackly uprising above the water . 

 Mr Donne put his hand on her arm as they hang down before she her hand tightly clasped together . 

 " ask I to let you go , " say he . " I will , if you will ask I . " he look very fierce and passionate and determine . the vehemence of his action take Ruth by surprise , and the painful tightness of the grasp almost make her exclaim . but she be quite still and mute . 

 " ask I , " say he , give she a little shake . she do not speak . her eye , fix on the distant shore , be slowly fill with tear . suddenly a light come through the mist that obscure they , and the shut lip part . she see some distant object that give her hope . 

 " it be Stephen Bromley , " say she . " he be come to his net . they say he be a very desperate , violent man , but he will protect I . " 

 " you obstinate , wilful creature ! " say Mr Donne , release his grasp . " you forget that one word of mine could undeceive all these good people at Eccleston ; and that if I speak out ever so little , they would throw you off in an instant . now ! " he continue , " do you understand how much you be in my power ? " 

 " Mr and Miss Benson know all they have not throw I off , " Ruth gasp out . " oh ! for Leonard 's sake ! you would not be so cruel . " 

 " then do not you be cruel to he to I . think once more ! " 

 " I think once more ; " she speak solemnly . " to save Leonard from the shame and agony of know my disgrace , I would lie down and die . oh ! perhaps it would be good for he for I , if I might ; my death would be a stingless grief but to go back into sin would be the real cruelty to he . the error of my youth may be wash away by my tear it be so once when the gentle , bless Christ be upon earth ; but now , if I go into wilful guilt , as you would have I , how could I teach Leonard God 's holy will ? I should not mind his know my past sin , compare to the awful corruption it would be if he know I live now , as you would have I , lose to all fear of God " her speech be break by sob . " whatever may be my doom God be just I leave myself in his hand . I will save Leonard from evil . evil would it be for he if I live with you . I will let he die first ! " she lift her eye to heaven , and clasp and wreathe her hand together tight . then she say : " you have humble I enough , sir . I shall leave you now . " 

 she turn away resolutely . the dark , grey fisherman be at hand . Mr Donne fold his arm , and set his tooth , and look after she . 

 " what a stately step she have ! how majestic and graceful all her attitude be ! she think she have baffle I now . we will try something more , and bid a high price . " he unfold his arm , and begin to follow she . he gain upon she , for her beautiful walk be now waver and unsteady . the work which have keep she in motion be run down fast . 

 " Ruth ! " say he , overtake she . " you shall hear I once more . aye , look round ! your fisherman be near . he may hear I , if he choose hear your triumph . I be come to offer to marry you , Ruth ; come what may , I will have you . Nay I will make you hear I . I will hold this hand till you have hear I . to - morrow I will speak to any one in Eccleston you like to Mr Bradshaw ; Mr , the little minister , I mean . we can make it worth while for he to keep our secret , and no one else need know but what you be really Mrs Denbigh . Leonard shall still bear this name , but in all thing else he shall be treat as my son . he and you would grace any situation . I will take care the high path be open to he ! " 

 he look to see the lovely face brighten into sudden joy ; on the contrary , the head be still hang down with a heavy droop . 

 " I can not , " say she ; her voice be very faint and low . 

 " it be sudden for you , my dearest . but be calm . it will all be easily manage . leave it to I . " 

 " I can not , " repeat she , more distinct and clear , though still very low . 

 " why ! what on earth make you say that ? " ask he , in a mood to be irritate by any repetition of such word . 

 " I do not love you . I do once . do not   say I do not love you then ; but I do not now . I could never love you again . all you have say and do since you come with Mr Bradshaw to Abermouth first , have only make I wonder how I ever could have love you . we be very far apart . the time that have press down my life like brand of hot iron , and scar I for ever , have be nothing to you . you have talk of it with no sound of moaning in your voice no shadow over the brightness of your face ; it have leave no sense of sin on your conscience , while I it haunt and haunt ; and yet I might plead that I be an ignorant child only I will not plead anything , for God know all but this be only one piece of our great difference " 

 " you mean that I be no saint , " he say , impatient at her speech . " grant . but people who be no saint have make very good husband before now . come , do not   let any morbid , overstrained conscientiousness interfere with substantial happiness happiness both to you and to I for I be sure I can make you happy aye ! and make you love I , too , in spite of your pretty defiance . I love you so dearly I must win love back . and here be advantage for Leonard , to be gain by you quite in a holy and legitimate way . " 

 she stand very erect . 

 " if there be one thing need to confirm I , you have name it . you shall have nothing to do with my boy , by my consent , much less by my agency . I would rather see he work on the roadside than lead such a life be such a one as you be . you have hear my mind now , Mr Bellingham . you have humble I you have bait I ; and if at last I have speak out too harshly , and too much in a spirit of judgment , the fault be yours . if there be no other reason to prevent our marriage but the one fact that it would bring Leonard into contact with you , that would be enough . " 

 " it be enough ! " say he , make she a low bow . " neither you nor your child shall ever more be annoy by I . I wish you a good evening . " 

 they walk apart he back to the inn , to set off instantly , while the blood be hot within he , from the place where he have be so mortified she to steady herself along till she reach the little path , more like a rude staircase than anything else , by which she have to climb to the house . 

 she do not turn round for some time after she be fairly lose to the sight of any one on the shore ; she clamber on , almost stunned by the rapid beating of her heart . her eye be hot and dry ; and at last become as if she be suddenly blind . unable to go on , she totter into the tangled underwood which grow among the stone , fill every niche and crevice , and little shelving space , with green and delicate tracery . she sink down behind a great overhanging rock , which hide she from any one come up the path . an ash - tree be root in this rock , slant away from the sea - breeze that be prevalent in most weather ; but this be a still , autumnal Sabbath evening . as Ruth 's limb fall , so they lay . she have no strength , no power of volition to move a finger . she could not think or remember . she be literally stun . the first sharp sensation which rouse she from her torpor be a quick desire to see he once more ; up she spring , and climb to an out - jut dizzy point of rock , but a little above her shelter nook , yet command a wide view over the bare , naked sand ; far away below , touch the ripple water - line , be Stephen Bromley , busily gather in his net ; besides he there be no living creature visible . Ruth shade her eye , as if she think they might have deceive she ; but no , there be no one there . she go slowly down to her old place , cry sadly as she go . 

 " oh ! if I have not speak so angrily to he the last thing I say be so bitter so reproachful ! and I shall never , never see he again ! " 

 she could not take in the general view and scope of their conversation the event be too near she for that ; but her heart feel sore at the echo of her last word , just and true as their severity be . her struggle , her constant flow tear , which fall from very weakness , make her experience a sensation of intense bodily fatigue ; and her soul have lose the power of throw itself forward , or contemplate anything beyond the dreary present , when the expanse of grey , wild , bleak moor , stretch wide away below a sunless sky , seem only an outward sign of the waste world within her heart , for which she could claim no sympathy ; for she could not even define what its woe be ; and if she could , no one would understand how the present time be haunt by the terrible ghost of the former love . 

 " I be so weary ! I be so weary ! " she moan aloud at last . " I wonder if I might stop here , and just die away . " 

 she shut her eye , until through the closed lid come a ruddy blaze of light . the cloud have part away , and the sun be go down in a crimson glory behind the distant purple hill . the whole western sky be one flame of fire . Ruth forget herself in look at the gorgeous sight . she sit up gaze , and , as she gaze , the tear dry on her cheek ; and , somehow , all human care and sorrow be swallow up in the unconscious sense of God 's infinity . the sunset calm she more than any word , however wise and tender , could have do . it even seem to give her strength and courage ; she do not know how or why , but so it be . 

 she rise , and go slowly towards home . her limb be very stiff , and every now and then she have to choke down an unbidden sob . her pupil have be long return from church , and have busy themselves in prepare tea an occupation which have probably make they feel the time less long . 

 if they have ever see a sleep - walker , they might have liken Ruth to one for the next few day , so slow and measure do her movement seem so far away be her intelligence from all that be pass around she so hushed and strange be the tone of her voice . they have letter from home announce the triumphant return of Mr Donne as M.P. for Eccleston . Mrs Denbigh hear the news without a word , and be too languid to join in the search after purple and yellow flower with which to deck the sitting - room at Eagle 's Crag . 

 a letter from Jemima come the next day , summon they home . Mr Donne and his friend have leave the place , and quiet be restore in the Bradshaw household ; so it be time that Mary 's and Elizabeth 's holiday should cease . Mrs Denbigh have also a letter a letter from Miss Benson , say that Leonard be not quite well . there be so much pain take to disguise anxiety , that it be very evident much anxiety be feel ; and the girl be almost alarm by Ruth 's sudden change from taciturn langour to eager , vehement energy . body and mind seem strained to exertion . every plan that could facilitate packing and winding - up affair at Abermouth , every errand and arrangement that could expedite their departure by one minute , be do by Ruth with stern promptitude . she spar herself in nothing . she make they rest , make they lie down , while she herself lift weight and transact business with feverish power , never rest , and try never to have time to think . 

 for in remembrance of the past there be remorse , how have she forget Leonard these last few day ! how have she repine and be dull of heart to her blessing ! and in anticipation of the future there be one sharp point of red light in the darkness which pierce her brain with agony , and which she would not see or recognise and see and recognise all the more for such mad determination which be not the true shield against the bitterness of the arrow of death . 

 when the seaside party arrive in Eccleston , they be meet by Mrs and Miss Bradshaw and Mr Benson . by a firm resolution , Ruth keep from shape the question , " be he alive ? " as if by give shape to her fear she make their realisation more imminent . she say merely , " how be he ? " but she say it with drawn , tight , bloodless lip , and in her eye Mr Benson read her anguish of anxiety . 

 " he be very ill , but we hope he will soon be well . it be what every child have to go through . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 Jemima make a Discovery 
 

 Mr Bradshaw have be successful in carry his point . his member have be return ; his proud opponent mortify . so the public think he ought to be well pleased ; but the public be disappoint to see that he do not show any of the gratification they suppose he to feel . 

 the truth be , that he have meet with so many small mortification during the progress of the election , that the pleasure which he would otherwise have feel in the final success of his scheme be much diminish . 

 he have more than tacitly sanction bribery ; and now that the excitement be over , he regret it ; not entirely from conscientious motif , though he be uneasy from a slight sense of wrong - doing ; but he be more pained , after all , to think that , in the eye of some of his townsman , his hitherto spotless character have receive a blemish . he , who have be so stern and severe a censor on the undue influence exercise by the opposite party in all precede election , could not expect to be spar by their adherent now , when there be rumour that the hand of the scrupulous Dissenters be not clean . before , it have be his boast that neither friend nor enemy could say one word against he ; now , he be constantly afraid of an indictment for bribery , and of be compel to appear before a Committee to swear to his own share in the business . 

 his uneasy , fearful consciousness make he strict and sterner than ever ; as if he would quench all wonder , slanderous talk about he in the town by a renew austerity of uprightness ; that the slack - principle Mr Bradshaw of one month of ferment and excitement might not be confound with the highly - conscientious and deeply - religious Mr Bradshaw , who go to chapel twice a day , and give a hundred pound a - piece to every charity in the town , as a sort of thank - offering that his end be gain . 

 but he be secretly dissatisfied with Mr Donne . in general , that gentleman have be rather too willing to act in accordance with any one 's advice , no matter whose ; as if he have think it too much trouble to weigh the wisdom of his friend , in which case Mr Bradshaw 's would have , doubtless , prove the most valuable . but now and then he unexpectedly , and utterly without reason , take the conduct of affair into his own hand , as when he have be absent without leave only just before the day of nomination . no one guess whither he have go ; but the fact of his be go be enough to chagrin Mr Bradshaw , who be quite ready to pick a quarrel on this very head , if the election have not terminate favourably . as it be , he have a feeling of proprietorship in Mr Donne which be not disagreeable . he have give the new M.P. his seat ; his resolution , his promptitude , his energy , have make Mr Donne " our member ; " and Mr Bradshaw begin to feel proud of he accordingly . but there have be no one circumstance during this period to bind Jemima and Mr Farquhar together . they be still misunderstand each other with all their power . the difference in the result be this : Jemima love he all the more , in spite of quarrel and coolness . he be grow utterly weary of the petulant temper of which he be never certain ; of the reception which vary day after day , accord to the mood she be in and the thought that be uppermost ; and he be almost startled to find how very glad he be that the little girl and Mrs Denbigh be come home . his be a character to bask in peace ; and lovely , quiet Ruth , with her low tone and quiet reply , her delicate wave movement , appear to he the very type of what a woman should be a calm , serene soul , fashion the body to angelic grace . 

 it be , therefore , with no slight interest that Mr Farquhar inquire daily after the health of little Leonard . he ask at the Bensons ' house ; and Sally answer he , with swollen and tearful eye , that the child be very bad very bad indeed . he ask at the doctor 's ; and the doctor tell he , in a few short word , that " it be only a bad kind of measle , and that the lad might have a struggle for it , but he think he would get through . vigorous child carry their force into everything ; never do thing by half ; if they be ill , they be sure to be in a high fever directly ; if they be well , there be no peace in the house for their rioting . for his part , " continue the doctor , " he think he be glad he have have no child ; as far as he could judge , they be pretty much all plague and no profit . " but as he end his speech he sigh ; and Mr Farquhar be none the less convinced that common report be true , which represent the clever , prosperous surgeon of Eccleston as bitterly disappointed at his failure of offspring . 

 while these various interest and feeling have their course outside the Chapel - house , within there be but one thought which possess all the inmate . when Sally be not cook for the little invalid , she be cry ; for she have have a dream about green rush , not three month ago , which , by some queer process of oneiromancy she interpret to mean the death of a child ; and all Miss Benson 's endeavour be direct to make she keep silence to Ruth about this dream . Sally think that the mother ought to be tell ; what be dream send for but for warning ? but it be just like a pack of dissenter , who would not believe anything like other folk . Miss Benson be too much accustomed to Sally 's contempt for dissenter , as view from the pinnacle of the Establishment , to pay much attention to all this grumbling ; especially as Sally be willing to take as much trouble about Leonard as if she believe he be go to live , and that his recovery depend upon her care . Miss Benson 's great object be to keep she from have any confidential talk with Ruth ; as if any repetition of the dream could have deepen the conviction in Ruth 's mind that the child would die . 

 it seem to she that his death would only be the fitting punishment for the state of indifference towards he towards life and death towards all thing earthly or divine , into which she have suffer herself to fall since her last interview with Mr Donne . she do not understand that such exhaustion be but the natural consequence of violent agitation and severe tension of feeling . the only relief she experience be in constantly serve Leonard ; she have almost an animal 's jealousy lest any one should come between she and her young . Mr Benson see this jealous suspicion , although he could hardly understand it ; but he calm his sister 's wonder and officious kindness , so that the two patiently and quietly provide all that Ruth might want , but do not interfere with her right to nurse Leonard . but when he be recover , Mr Benson , with the slight tone of authority he know how to assume when need be , bade Ruth lie down and take some rest , while his sister watch . Ruth do not answer , but obey in a dull , weary kind of surprise at be so commanded . she lie down by her child , gaze her fill at his calm slumber ; and as she gaze , her large white eyelid be softly press down as with a gentle irresistible weight , and she fall asleep . 

 she dream that she be once more on the lonely shore , strive to carry Leonard away from some pursuer some human pursuer she know he be human , and she know who he be , although she dare not say his name even to herself , he seem so close and present , gain on her fly footstep , rush after she as with the sound of the roar tide . her foot seem heavy weight fix to the ground ; they would not move . all at once , just near the shore , a great black whirlwind of wave clutch she back to her pursuer ; she throw Leonard on to land , which be safety ; but whether he reach it or no , or be sweep back like she into a mysterious something too dreadful to be bear , she do not know , for the terror awaken she . at first the dream seem yet a reality , and she think that the pursuer be couch even there , in that very room , and the great boom of the sea be still in her ear . but as full consciousness return , she see herself safe in the dear old room the haven of rest the shelter from storm . a bright fire be glow in the little old - fashioned , cup - shape grate , niche into a corner of the wall , and guard on either side by whitewashed brick , which rest on hob . on one of these the kettle hum and buzz , within two point of boiling whenever she or Leonard require tea . in her dream that home - like sound have be the roaring of the relentless sea , creep swiftly on to seize its prey . Miss Benson sit by the fire , motionless and still ; it be too dark to read any long without a candle ; but yet on the ceiling and upper part of the wall the golden light of the set sun be slowly move so slow , and yet a motion give the feeling of rest to the weary yet more than perfect stillness . the old clock on the staircase tell its monotonous click - clack , in that soothing way which more mark the quiet of the house than disturb with any sense of sound . Leonard still sleep that renovate slumber , almost in her arm , far from that fatal pursuing sea , with its human form of cruelty . the dream be a vision ; the reality which prompt the dream be over and past Leonard be safe she be safe ; all this loosen the frozen spring , and they gush forth in her heart , and her lip move in accordance with her thought . 

 " what be you say , my darling ? " say Miss Benson , who catch sight of the motion , and fancy she be ask for something . Miss Benson bend over the side of the bed on which Ruth lay , to catch the low tone of her voice . 

 " I only say , " reply Ruth , timidly , " thank God ! I have so much to thank he for , you do not   know . " 

 " my dear , I be sure we have all of we cause to be thankful that our boy be spar . see ! he be waken up ; and we will have a cup of tea together . " 

 Leonard stride on to perfect health ; but he be make old in character and look by his severe illness . he grow tall and thin , and the lovely child be lose in the handsome boy . he begin to wonder , and to question . Ruth mourn a little over the vanish babyhood , when she be all in all , and over the childhood , whose petal have fall away ; it seem as though two of her child be go the one an infant , the other a bright , thoughtless darling ; and she wish that they could have remain quick in her memory for ever , instead of be absorb in love pride for the present boy . but these be only fanciful regret , flit like shadow across a mirror . peace and thankfulness be once more the atmosphere of her mind ; nor be her unconsciousness disturb by any suspicion of Mr Farquhar 's increase approbation and admiration , which he be diligently nurse up into love for she . she know that he have send she do not know how often he have bring fruit for the convalescent Leonard . she hear , on her return from her daily employment , that Mr Farquhar have bring a little gentle pony on which Leonard , weak as he be , might ride . to confess the truth , her maternal pride be such that she think that all kindness show to such a boy as Leonard be but natural ; she believe he to be 
 

 a child whom all that look on , love . 
 

 as in truth he be ; and the proof of this be daily show in many kind inquiry , and many thoughtful little offering , besides Mr Farquhar 's . the poor   warm and kind of heart to all sorrow common to humanity   be touch with pity for the young widow , whose only child lie ill , and nigh unto death . they bring what they could a fresh egg , when egg be scarce a few ripe pear that grow on the sunny side of the humblest cottage , where the fruit be regard as a source of income a call of inquiry , and a prayer that God would spare the child , from an old crippled woman , who could scarcely drag herself so far as the Chapel - house , yet feel she worn and weary heart stir with a sharp pang of sympathy , and a very present remembrance of the time when she too be young , and see the life - breath quiver out of her child , now an angel in that heaven which feel more like home to the desolate old creature than this empty earth . to all such , when Leonard be well , Ruth go , and thank they from her heart . she and the old cripple sit hand in hand over the scanty fire on the hearth of the latter , while she tell in solemn , break , homely word , how her child sicken and die . tear fall like rain down Ruth 's cheek ; but those of the old woman be dry . all tear have be weep out of she long ago , and now she sit patient and quiet , wait for death . but after this , Ruth " clave unto she , " and the two be henceforward a pair of friend . Mr Farquhar be only include in the general gratitude which she feel towards all who have be kind to her boy . 

 the winter pass away in deep peace after the storm of the autumn , yet every now and then a feeling of insecurity make Ruth shake for an instant . those wild autumnal storm have tear aside the quiet flower and herbage that have gather over the wreck of her early life , and show she that all deed , however hidden and long pass by , have their eternal consequence . she turn sick and faint whenever Mr Donne 's name be casually mention . no one see it ; but she feel the miserable stop in her heart 's beating , and wish that she could prevent it by any exercise of self - command . she have never name his identity with Mr Bellingham , nor have she speak about the seaside interview . deep shame make her silent and reserve on all her life before Leonard 's birth ; from that time she rise again in her self - respect , and speak as openly as a child   when need be   of all occurrence which have take place since then ; except that she could not , and would not , tell of this mocking echo , this haunt phantom , this past , that would not rest in its grave . the very circumstance that it be stalk abroad in the world , and might reappear at any moment , make she a coward : she tremble away from contemplate what the reality have be ; only she cling more faithfully than before to the thought of the great God , who be a rock in the dreary land , where no shadow be . 

 Autumn and winter , with their lower sky , be less dreary than the woeful , desolate feeling that shed a gloom on Jemima . she find too late that she have consider Mr Farquhar so securely her own for so long a time , that her heart refuse to recognise he as lose to she , unless her reason go through the same weary , convincing , miserable evidence day after day , and hour after hour . he never speak to she now , except from common civility . he never care for her contradiction ; he never try , with patient perseverance , to bring she over to his opinion ; he never use the wonte wile   so tenderly remember now they have no existence but in memory   to bring she round out of some wilful mood and such mood be common enough now ! frequently she be sullenly indifferent to the feeling of other not from any unkindness , but because her heart seem numb and stony , and incapable of sympathy . then afterwards her self - reproach be terrible in the dead of night , when no one see it . with a strange perversity , the only intelligence she care to hear , the only sight she care to see , be the circumstance which give confirmation to the idea that Mr Farquhar be think of Ruth for a wife . she crave with stinging curiosity to hear something of their affair every day ; partly because the torture which such intelligence give be almost a relief from the deadness of her heart to all other interest . 

 and so spring   gioventu dell'anno   come back to she , bring all the contrast which spring alone can bring to add to the heaviness of the soul . the little wing creature fill the air with burst of joy ; the vegetation come bright and hopefully onwards , without any check of nipping frost . the ash - tree in the Bradshaws ' garden be out in leaf by the middle of May , which that year wear more the aspect of summer than most june do . the sunny weather mock Jemima , and the unusual warmth oppress her physical power . she feel very weak and languid ; she be acutely sensible that no one else notice her want of strength ; father , mother , all seem too full of other thing to care if , as she believe , her life be wan . she herself feel glad that it be so . but her delicacy be not unnoticed by all . her mother often anxiously ask her husband if he do not think Jemima be look ill ; nor do his affirmation to the contrary satisfy she , as most of his affirmation do . she think every morning , before she get up , how she could tempt Jemima to eat , by order some favourite dainty for dinner ; in many other little way she try to minister to her child ; but the poor girl 's own abrupt irritability of temper have make her mother afraid of openly speak to she about her health . 

 Ruth , too , see that Jemima be not look well . how she have become an object of dislike to her former friend she do not know ; but she be sensible that Miss Bradshaw dislike she now . she be not aware that this feeling be grow and strengthen almost into repugnance , for she seldom see Jemima out of school - hour , and then only for a minute or two . but the evil element of a fellow - creature 's dislike oppress the atmosphere of her life . that fellow - creature be one who have once love she so fondly , and whom she still love , although she have learn to fear she , as we fear those whose face cloud over when we come in sight who cast unloving glance at we , of which we , though not see , be conscious , as of some occult influence ; and the cause of whose dislike be unknown to we , though every word and action seem to increase it . I believe that this sort of dislike be only show by the jealous , and that it render the disliker even more miserable , because more continually conscious than the object ; but the grow evidence of Jemima 's feeling make Ruth very unhappy at time . this very May , too , an idea have come into her mind , which she have try to repress namely , that Mr Farquhar be in love with she . it annoy she extremely ; it make she reproach herself that she ever should think such a thing possible . she try to strangle the notion , to drown it , to starve it out by neglect its existence cause she such pain and distress . 

 the bad be , he have win Leonard 's heart , who be constantly seek he out ; or , when absent , talk about he . the good be some journey connect with business , which would take he to the Continent for several week ; and , during that time , surely this disagreeable fancy of his would die away , if untrue ; and if true , some way would be open by which she might put a stop to all increase of predilection on his part , and yet retain he as a friend for Leonard that darling for whom she be far - seeing and covetous , and miserly of every scrap of love and kindly regard . 

 Mr Farquhar would not have be flatter if he have know how much his departure contribute to Ruth 's rest of mind on the Saturday afternoon on which he set out on his journey . it be a beautiful day ; the sky of that intense quivering blue which seem as though you could look through it for ever , yet not reach the black , infinite space which be suggest as lie beyond . now and then a thin , torn , vaporous cloud float slowly within the vaulted depth ; but the soft air that gently waft it be not perceptible among the leaf on the tree , which do not even tremble . Ruth sit at her work in the shadow form by the old grey garden wall ; Miss Benson and Sally the one in the parlour window - seat mending stocking , the other hard at work in her kitchen be both within talking distance , for it be weather for open door and window ; but none of the three keep up any continued conversation ; and in the interval Ruth sing low a brooding song , such as she remember her mother sing long ago . now and then she stop to look at Leonard , who be labour away with vehement energy at dig over a small plot of ground , where he mean to prick out some celery plant that have be give to he . Ruth 's heart warm at the earnest , spirited way in which he thrust his large spade deep down into the brown soil , his ruddy face glow , his curly hair wet with the exertion ; and yet she sigh to think that the day be over when her deed of skill could give he pleasure . now , his delight be in act himself ; last year , not fourteen month ago , he have watch she make a daisy - chain for he , as if he could not admire her cleverness enough ; this year this week , when she have be devote every spare hour to the simple tailoring which she perform for her boy   she have always make every article he wear , and feel almost jealous of the employment , he have come to she with a wistful look , and ask when he might begin to have clothe make by a man ? 

 ever since the Wednesday when she have accompany Mary and Elizabeth , at Mrs Bradshaw 's desire , to be measure for spring clothe by the new Eccleston dressmaker , she have be look forward to this Saturday afternoon 's pleasure of make summer trouser for Leonard ; but the satisfaction of the employment be a little take away by Leonard 's speech . it be a sign , however , that her life be very quiet and peaceful , that she have leisure to think upon the thing at all ; and often she forget it entirely in her low , chant song , or in listen to the thrush warble out his afternoon ditty to his patient mate in the holly - bush below . 

 the distant rumble of cart through the busy street   it be market - day   not only form a low rolling bass to the nearer and pleasanter sound , but enhance the sense of peace by the suggestion of the contrast afford to the repose of the garden by the bustle not far off . 

 but besides physical din and bustle , there be mental strife and turmoil . 

 that afternoon , as Jemima be restlessly wander about the house , her mother desire she to go on an errand to Mrs Pearson 's , the new dressmaker , in order to give some direction about her sister ' new frock . Jemima go , rather than have the trouble of resist ; or else she would have prefer stay at home , move or be outwardly quiet accord to her own fitful will . Mrs Bradshaw , who , as I have say , have be aware for some time that something be wrong with her daughter , and be very anxious to set it to right if she only know how , have rather plan this errand with a view to dispel Jemima 's melancholy . 

 " and , Mimie , dear , " say her mother , " when you be there , look out for a new bonnet for yourself ; she have get some very pretty one , and your old one be so shabby . " 

 " it do for I , mother , " say Jemima , heavily . " I do not   want a new bonnet . " 

 " but I want you to have one , my lassie . I want my girl to look well and nice . " 

 there be something of homely tenderness in Mrs Bradshaw 's tone that touch Jemima 's heart . she go to her mother , and kiss she with more of affection than she have show to any one for week before ; and the kiss be return with warm fondness . 

 " I think you love I , mother , " say Jemima . 

 " we all love you , dear , if you would but think so . and if you want anything , or wish for anything , only tell I , and with a little patience I can get your father to give it you , I know . only be happy , there be a good girl . " 

 " be happy ! as if one could by an effort of will ! " think Jemima , as she go along the street , too absorb in herself to notice the bow of acquaintance and friend , but instinctively guide herself right among the throng and press of cart , and gig , and market people in High Street . 

 but her mother 's tone and look , with their comfort power , remain long in her recollection than the inconsistency of any word speak . when she have complete her errand about the frock , she ask to look at some bonnet , in order to show her recognition of her mother 's kind think . 

 Mrs Pearson be a smart , clever - look woman of five or six and thirty . she have all the variety of small - talk at her finger - end that be formerly need by barber to amuse the people who come to be shave . she have admire the town till Jemima be weary of its praise , sick and oppress by its sameness , as she have be these many week . 

 " here be some bonnet , ma'am , that will be just the thing for you elegant and tasty , yet quite of the simple style , suitable to young lady . oblige I by try on this white silk ! " 

 Jemima look at herself in the glass ; she be oblige to own it be very become , and perhaps not the less so for the flush of modest shame which come into her cheek as she hear Mrs Pearson 's open praise of the " rich , beautiful hair , " and the " oriental eye " of the wearer . 

 " I induce the young lady who accompany your sister the other day the governess , be she , ma'am ? " 

 " yes Mrs Denbigh be her name , " say Jemima , cloud over . 

 " thank you , ma'am . well , I persuade Mrs Denbigh to try on that bonnet , and you can not   think how charming she look in it ; and yet I do not   think it become she as much as it do you . " 

 " Mrs Denbigh be very beautiful , " say Jemima , take off the bonnet , and not much inclined to try on any other . 

 " very , ma'am . quite a peculiar style of beauty . if I might be allow , I should say that her be a grecian style of loveliness , while yours be oriental . she remind I of a young person I once know in Fordham . " Mrs Pearson sigh an audible sigh . 

 " in Fordham ! " say Jemima , remember that Ruth have once speak of the place as one in which she have spend some time , while the county in which it be situate be the same in which Ruth be bear . " in Fordham ! why , I think Mrs Denbigh come from that neighbourhood . " 

 " oh , ma'am ! she can not be the young person I mean I be sure , ma'am hold the position she do in your establishment . I should hardly say I know she myself ; for I only see she two or three time at my sister 's house ; but she be so remark for her beauty , that I remember her face quite well the more so , on account of her vicious conduct afterwards . " 

 " her vicious conduct ! " repeat Jemima , convince by these word that there could be no identity between Ruth and the " young person " allude to . " then it could not have be our Mrs Denbigh . " 

 " oh , no , ma'am ! I be sure I should be sorry to be understand to have suggest anything of the kind . I beg your pardon if I do so . all I mean to say and perhaps that be a liberty I ought not to have take , consider what Ruth Hilton be " 

 " Ruth Hilton ! " say Jemima , turn suddenly round , and face Mrs Pearson . 

 " yes , ma'am , that be the name of the young person I allude to . " 

 " tell I about she what do she do ? " ask Jemima , subdue her eagerness of tone and look as good she might , but tremble as on the verge of some strange discovery . 

 " I do not   know whether I ought to tell you , ma'am it be hardly a fit story for a young lady ; but this Ruth Hilton be an apprentice to my sister - in - law , who have a first - rate business in Fordham , which bring she a good deal of patronage from the county family ; and this young creature be very artful and bold , and think sadly too much of her beauty ; and , somehow , she beguile a young gentleman , who take she into keeping   I be sure , ma'am , I ought to apologise for pollute your ear   " 

 " go on , " say Jemima , breathlessly . 

 " I do not   know much more . his mother follow he into Wales . she be a lady of a great deal of religion , and of a very old family , and be much shocked at her son 's misfortune in be captivate by such a person ; but she lead he to repentance , and take he to Paris , where , I think , she die ; but I be not sure , for , owe to family difference , I have not be on term for some year with my sister - in - law , who be my informant . " 

 " who die ? " interrupt Jemima " the young man 's mother , or or Ruth Hilton ? " 

 " oh dear , ma'am ! pray do not   confuse the two . it be the mother , Mrs I forget the name something like Billington . it be the lady who die . " 

 " and what become of the other ? " ask Jemima , unable , as her dark suspicion seem thickening , to speak the name . 

 " the girl ? why , ma'am , what could become of she ? not that I know exactly only one know they can but go from bad to bad , poor creature ! God forgive I , if I be speak too transiently of such degraded woman , who , after all , be a disgrace to our sex . " 

 " then you know nothing more about she ? " ask Jemima . 

 " I do hear that she have go off with another gentleman that she meet with in Wales , but I be sure I can not   tell who tell I . " 

 there be a little pause . Jemima be ponder on all she have hear . suddenly she feel that Mrs Pearson 's eye be upon she , watch she ; not with curiosity , but with a newly - awakened intelligence ; and yet she must ask one more question ; but she try to ask it in an indifferent , careless tone , handle the bonnet while she speak . 

 " how long be it since all this all you have be tell I about happen ? "   Leonard be eight year old . 

 " why let I see . it be before I be marry , and I be marry three year , and poor dear Pearson have be decease five I should say go on for nine year this summer . blush rose would become your complexion , perhaps , well than these lilac , " say she , as with superficial observation she watch Jemima turn the bonnet round and round on her hand the bonnet that her dizzy eye do not see . 

 " thank you . it be very pretty . but I do not   want a bonnet . I beg your pardon for take up your time . " and with an abrupt bow to the discomfited Mrs Pearson , she be out and away in the open air , thread her way with instinctive energy along the crowded street . suddenly she turn round , and go back to Mrs Pearson 's with even more rapidity than she have be walk away from the house . 

 " I have change my mind , " say she , as she come , breathless , up into the show - room . " I will take the bonnet . how much be it ? " 

 " allow I to change the flower ; it can be do in an instant , and then you can see if you would not prefer the rose ; but with either foliage it be a lovely little bonnet , " say Mrs Pearson , hold it up admiringly on her hand . 

 " oh ! never mind the flower yes ! change they to rose . " and she stand by , agitated   Mrs Pearson think with impatience , all the time the milliner be make the alteration with skilful , busy haste . 

 " by the way , " say Jemima , when she see the last touch be be give , and that she must not delay execute the purpose which be the real cause of her return " Papa , I be sure , would not like your connect Mrs Denbigh 's name with such a story as you have be tell I . " 

 " oh dear ! ma'am , I have too much respect for you all to think of do such a thing ! of course I know , ma'am , that it be not to be cast up to any lady that she be like anybody disreputable . " 

 " but I would rather you do not name the likeness to any one , " say Jemima ; " not to any one . do not   tell any one the story you have tell I this morning . " 

 " indeed , ma'am , I should never think of such a thing ! my poor husband could have bear witness that I be as close as the grave where there be anything to conceal . " 

 " oh dear ! " say Jemima , " Mrs Pearson , there be nothing to conceal ; only you must not speak about it . " 

 " I certainly shall not do it , ma'am ; you may rest assure of I . " 

 this time Jemima do not go towards home , but in the direction of the outskirt of the town , on the hilly side . she have some dim recollection of hear her sister ask if they might not go and invite Leonard and his mother to tea ; and how could she face Ruth , after the conviction have take possession of her heart that she , and the sinful creature she have just hear of , be one and the same ? 

 it be yet only the middle of the afternoon ; the hour be early in the old - fashioned town of Eccleston . soft white cloud have come slowly sail up out of the west ; the plain be fleck with thin float shadow , gently bear along by the westerly wind that be wave the long grass in the hay - field into alternate light and shade . Jemima go into one of these field , lie by the side of the upland road . she be stun by the shock she have receive . the diver , leave the green sward , smooth and know , where his friend stand with their familiar smile face , admire his glad bravery the diver , down in an instant in the horrid depth of the sea , close to some strange , ghastly , lidless - eyed monster , can hardly more feel his blood curdle at the near terror than do Jemima now . two hour ago but a point of time on her mind 's dial she have never imagine that she should ever come in contact with any one who have commit open sin ; she have never shape her conviction into word and sentence , but still it be there , that all the respectable , all the family and religious circumstance of her life , would hedge she in , and guard she from ever encounter the great shock of come face to face with vice . without be pharisaical in her estimation of herself , she have all a Pharisee 's dread of publican and sinner , and all a child 's cowardliness that cowardliness which prompt it to shut its eye against the object of terror , rather than acknowledge its existence with brave faith . her father 's often reiterate speech have not be without their effect . he draw a clear line of partition , which separate mankind into two great group , to one of which , by the grace of God , he and his belong ; while the other be compose of those whom it be his duty to try and reform , and bring the whole force of his morality to bear upon , with lecture , admonition , and exhortation a duty to be perform , because it be a duty but with very little of that Hope and Faith which be the Spirit that maketh alive . Jemima have rebel against these hard doctrine of her father 's , but their frequent repetition have have its effect , and lead she to look upon those who have go astray with shrinking , shudder recoil , instead of with a pity so Christ - like as to have both wisdom and tenderness in it . 

 and now she see among her own familiar associate one , almost her housefellow , who have be stain with that evil most repugnant to her womanly modesty , that would fain have ignore its existence altogether . she loathe the thought of meet Ruth again . she wish that she could take she up , and put she down at a distance somewhere anywhere where she might never see or hear of she more ; never be remind , as she must be whenever she see she , that such thing be in this sunny , bright , lark - sing earth , over which the blue dome of heaven bend softly down as Jemima sit in the hayfield that June afternoon ; her cheek flush and red , but her lip pale and compress , and her eye full of a heavy , angry sorrow . it be Saturday , and the people in that part of the country leave their work an hour early on that day . by this , Jemima know it must be grow time for she to be at home . she have have so much of conflict in her own mind of late , that she have grow to dislike struggle , or speech , or explanation ; and so strove to conform to time and hour much more than she have do in happy day . but oh ! how full of hate her heart be grow against the world ! and oh ! how she sicken at the thought of see Ruth ! who be to be trust more , if Ruth calm , modest , delicate , dignified Ruth have a memory blacken by sin ? 

 as she go heavily along , the thought of Mr Farquhar come into her mind . it show how terrible have be the stun , that he have be forget until now . with the thought of he come in her first merciful feeling towards Ruth . this would never have be , have there be the least latent suspicion in Jemima 's jealous mind that Ruth have purposely do aught look a look utter a word modulate a tone for the sake of attract . as Jemima recall all the passage of their intercourse , she slowly confess to herself how pure and simple have be all Ruth 's way in relation to Mr Farquhar . it be not merely that there have be no coquetting , but there have be simple unconsciousness on Ruth 's part , for so long a time after Jemima have discover Mr Farquhar 's inclination for she ; and when at length she have slowly awaken to some perception of the state of his feeling , there have be a modest , shrink dignity of manner , not startle , or emotional , or even timid , but pure , grave , and quiet ; and this conduct of Ruth 's , Jemima instinctively acknowledge to be of necessity transparent and sincere . now , and here , there be no hypocrisy ; but some time , somewhere , on the part of somebody , what hypocrisy , what lie must have be act , if not absolutely speak , before Ruth could have be receive by they all as the sweet , gentle , girlish widow , which she remember they have all believe Mrs Denbigh to be when first she come among they ! could Mr and Miss Benson know ? could they be a party to the deceit ? not sufficiently acquaint with the world to understand how strong have be the temptation to play the part they do , if they wish to give Ruth a chance , Jemima could not believe they guilty of such deceit as the knowledge of Mrs Denbigh 's previous conduct would imply ; and yet how it darken the latter into a treacherous hypocrite , with a black secret shut up in her soul for year live in apparent confidence , and daily household familiarity with the Bensons for year , yet never tell the remorse that ought to be corrode her heart ! who be true ? who be not ? who be good and pure ? who be not ? the very foundation of Jemima 's belief in her mind be shake . 

 could it be false ? could there be two Ruth Hiltons ? she go over every morsel of evidence . it could not be . she know that Mrs Denbigh 's former name have be Hilton . she have hear she speak casually , but charily , of have live in Fordham . she know she have be in Wales but a short time before she make her appearance in Eccleston . there be no doubt of the identity . into the middle of Jemima 's pain and horror at the afternoon 's discovery , there come a sense of the power which the knowledge of this secret give she over Ruth ; but this be no relief , only an aggravation of the regret with which Jemima look back on her state of ignorance . it be no wonder that when she arrive at home , she be so oppress with headache that she have to go to bed directly . 

 " quiet , mother ! quiet , dear , dear mother "   for she clung to the known and try goodness of her mother more than ever now , " that be all I want . " and she be leave to the stillness of her darken room , the blind idly flap to and fro in the soft evening breeze , and let in the rustle sound of the branch which wave close to her window , and the thrush 's gurgling warble , and the distant hum of the busy town . 

 her jealousy be go she know not how or where . she might shun and recoil from Ruth , but she now think that she could never more be jealous of she . in her pride of innocence , she feel almost ashamed that such a feeling could have have existence . could Mr Farquhar hesitate between her own self and one who no ! she could not name what Ruth have be , even in thought . and yet he might never know , so fair a seeming do her rival wear . oh ! for one ray of God 's holy light to know what be seem , and what be truth , in this traitorous hollow earth ! it might be she use to think such thing possible , before sorrow have embitter she that Ruth have work her way through the deep purgatory of repentance up to something like purity again ; God only know ! if her present goodness be real if , after have strive back thus far on the height , a fellow - woman be to throw she down into some terrible depth with her unkind , incontinent tongue , that would be too cruel ! and yet , if there be such woeful uncertainty and deceit somewhere if Ruth no ! that Jemima , with noble candour , admit be impossible . whatever Ruth have be , she be good , and to be respect as such , now . it do not follow that Jemima be to preserve the secret always ; she doubt her own power to do so , if Mr Farquhar come home again , and be still constant in his admiration of Mrs Denbigh , and if Mrs Denbigh give he any the least encouragement . but this last she think , from what she know of Ruth 's character , be impossible . only , what be impossible after this afternoon 's discovery ? at any rate , she would watch and wait . come what might , Ruth be in her power . and , strange to say , this last certainty give Jemima a kind of protect , almost pity , feel for Ruth . her horror at the wrong be not diminish ; but the more she think of the struggle that the wrong - doer must have make to extricate herself , the more she feel how cruel it would be to baffle all by reveal what have be . but for her sister ' sake she have a duty to perform ; she must watch Ruth . for her love 's sake she could not have help watch ; but she be too much stunned to recognise the force of her love , while duty seem the only stable thing to cling to . for the present she would neither meddle nor mar in Ruth 's course of life . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 Mr Bradshaw 's Virtuous Indignation 
 

 so it be that Jemima no long avoid Ruth , nor manifest by word or look the dislike which for a long time she have be scarce conceal . Ruth could not help notice that Jemima always seek to be in her presence while she be at Mr Bradshaw 's house ; either when daily teach Mary and Elizabeth , or when she come as an occasional visitor with Mr and Miss Benson , or by herself . up to this time Jemima have use no gentle skill to conceal the abruptness with which she would leave the room rather than that Ruth and she should be bring into contact rather than that it should fall to her lot to entertain Ruth during any part of the evening . it be month since Jemima have leave off sit in the schoolroom , as have be she will not during the first few year of Ruth 's governess - ship . now , each morning Miss Bradshaw seat herself at a little round table in the window , at her work , or at her writing ; but whether she sew , or write , or read , Ruth feel that she be always watch watch . at first Ruth have welcome all these change in habit and behaviour , as give she a chance , she think , by some patient waiting or some opportune show of endure , constant love , to regain her lose friend 's regard ; but by - and - by the icy chillness , immovable and grey , strike more to her heart than many sudden word of unkindness could have do . they might be attribute to the hot impulse of a hasty temper to the vehement anger of an accuser ; but this measure manner be the conscious result of some deep - seat feeling ; this cold sternness befit the calm implacability of some severe judge . the watching , which Ruth feel be ever upon she , make she unconsciously shiver , as you would if you see that the passionless eye of the dead be visibly gaze upon you . her very be shrivel and parch up in Jemima 's presence , as if blow upon by a bitter , keen , east wind . 

 Jemima bend every power she possess upon the one object of ascertain what Ruth really be . sometimes the strain be very painful ; the constant tension make her soul weary ; and she moan aloud , and upbraided circumstance   she dare not go higher to the Maker of circumstance   for have deprive she of her unsuspicious happy ignorance . 

 thing be in this state when Mr Richard Bradshaw come on his annual home visit . he be to remain another year in London , and then to return and be admit into the firm . after he have be a week at home , he grow tired of the monotonous regularity of his father 's household , and begin to complain of it to Jemima . 

 " I wish Farquhar be at home . though he be such a stiff , quiet old fellow , his come in in the evening make a change . what have become of the Millses ? they use to drink tea with we sometimes , formerly . " 

 " oh ! papa and Mr Mills take opposite side at the election , and we have never visit since . I do not   think they be any great loss . " 

 " anybody be a loss the stupid bore that ever be would be a blessing , if he only would come in sometimes . " 

 " Mr and Miss Benson have drink tea here twice since you come . " 

 " come , that be capital ! apropos of stupid bore , you talk of the Bensons . I do not think you have so much discrimination , my little sister . " 

 Jemima look up in surprise ; and then reddened angrily . 

 " I never mean to say a word against Mr or Miss Benson , and that you know quite well , Dick . " 

 " never mind ! I will not   tell tale . they be stupid old fogey , but they be well than nobody , especially as that handsome governess of the girl always come with they to be look at . " 

 there be a little pause ; Richard break it by say : 

 " do you know , Mimie , I have   a notion , if she play her card well , she may hook Farquhar ! " 

 " who ? " ask Jemima , shortly , though she know quite well . 

 " Mrs Denbigh , to be sure . we be talk of she , you know . Farquhar ask I to dine with he at his hotel as he pass through town , and I have my own reason for go and try to creep up his sleeve I want he to tip I , as he use to do . " 

 " for shame ! Dick , " burst in Jemima . 

 " well ! well ! not tip I exactly , but lend I some money . the governor keep I so deucedly short . " 

 " why ! it be only yesterday , when my father be speak about your expense , and your allowance , I hear you say that you would more than you know how to spend . " 

 " do not   you see that be the perfection of art ? if my father have think I extravagant , he would have keep I in with a tight rein ; as it be , I be in great hope of a handsome addition , and I can tell you it be need . if my father have give I what I ought to have have at first , I should not have be drive to the speculation and mess I have   get into . " 

 " what speculation ? what mess ? " ask Jemima , with anxious eagerness . 

 " oh ! mess be not the right word . speculation hardly be ; for they be sure to turn out well , and then I shall surprise my father with my rich . " he see that he have go a little too far in his confidence , and be try to draw in . 

 " but , what do you mean ? do explain it to I . " 

 " never you trouble your head about my business , my dear . woman can not   understand the share - market , and such thing . do not   think I have   forget the awful blunder you make when you try to read the state of the money - market aloud to my father , that night when he have lose his spectacle . what be we talk of ? oh ! of Farquhar and pretty Mrs Denbigh . yes ! I soon find out that be the subject my gentleman like I to dwell on . he do not talk about her much himself , but his eye sparkle when I tell he what enthusiastic letter Polly and Elizabeth write about she . how old d'ye think she be ? " 

 " I know ! " say Jemima . " at least , I hear her age speak about , amongst other thing , when first she come . she will be five - and - twenty this autumn . " 

 " and Farquhar be forty , if he be a day . she be young , too , to have such a boy as Leonard ; younger - look , or full as young - look as she be ! I tell you what , Mimie , she look young than you . how old be you ? three - and - twenty , be not   it ? " 

 " last March , " reply Jemima . 

 " you will have to make haste and pick up somebody , if you be lose your good look at this rate . why , Jemima , I think you have a good chance of Farquhar a year or two ago . how come you to have lose he ? I would far rather you would have he than that proud , haughty Mrs Denbigh , who flash her great grey eye upon I if ever I dare to pay she a compliment . she ought to think it an honour that I take that much notice of she . besides , Farquhar be rich , and it be keep the business of the firm in one 's own family ; and if he marry Mrs Denbigh she will be sure to be want Leonard in when he be of age , and I will not   have that . have a try for Farquhar , Mimie ! ten to one it be not too late . I wish I would bring you a pink bonnet down . you go about so dowdy so careless of how you look . " 

 " if Mr Farquhar have not like I as I be , " say Jemima , choke , " I do not   want to owe he to a pink bonnet . " 

 " Nonsense ! I do not   like to have my sister ' governess steal a march on my sister . I tell you Farquhar be worth try for . if you will wear the pink bonnet I will give it you , and I will back you against Mrs Denbigh . I think you might have do something with ' our member , ' as my father call he , when you have he so long in the house . but , altogether , I should like Farquhar well for a brother - in - law . by the way , have you hear down here that Donne be go to be marry ? I hear of it in town , just before I leave , from a man that be good authority . some Sir Thomas Campbell 's seventh daughter : a girl without a penny ; father ruin himself by gambling , and oblige to live abroad . but Donne be not a man to care for any obstacle , from all account , when once he have take a fancy . it be love at first sight , they say . I believe he do not know of her existence a month ago . " 

 " no ! we have not hear of it , " reply Jemima . " my father will like to know ; tell it he ; " continue she , as she be leave the room , to be alone , in order to still her habitual agitation whenever she hear Mr Farquhar and Ruth couple together . 

 Mr Farquhar come home the day before Richard Bradshaw leave for town . he drop in after tea at the Bradshaws ' ; he be evidently disappointed to see none but the family there , and look round whenever the door open . 

 " look ! look ! " say Dick to his sister . " I want to make sure of his come in to - night , to save I my father 's parting exhortation against the temptation of the world   as if I do not know much more of the world than he do ! , so I use a spell I think would prove efficacious ; I tell he that we should be by ourselves , with the exception of Mrs Denbigh , and look how he be expect she to come in ! " 

 Jemima do see ; do understand . she understand , too , why certain packet be put carefully on one side , apart from the rest of the purchase of swiss toy and jewellery , by which Mr Farquhar prove that none of Mr Bradshaw 's family have be forget by he during his absence . before the end of the evening , she be very conscious that her sore heart have not forget how to be jealous . her brother do not allow a word , a look , or an incident , which might be suppose on Mr Farquhar 's side to refer to Ruth , to pass unnoticed ; he point out all to his sister , never dream of the torture he be inflict , only anxious to prove his own extreme penetration . at length Jemima could stand it no long , and leave the room . she go into the schoolroom , where the shutter be not closed , as it only look into the garden . she open the window , to let the cool night air blow in on her hot cheek . the cloud be hurry over the moon 's face in a tempestuous and unstable manner , make all thing seem unreal ; now clear out in its bright light , now tremble and quiver in shadow . the pain at her heart seem to make Jemima 's brain grow dull ; she lay her head on her arm , which rest on the window - sill , and grow dizzy with the sick weary notion that the earth be wander lawless and aimless through the heaven , where all seem one tossed and whirl wrack of cloud . it be a wake nightmare , from the uneasy heaviness of which she be thankful to be rouse by Dick 's entrance . 

 " what , you be here , be you ? I have be look everywhere for you . I want to ask you if you have any spare money you could lend I for a few week ? " 

 " how much do you want ? " ask Jemima , in a dull , hopeless voice . 

 " oh ! the more the well . but I should be glad of any trifle , I be keep so confoundedly short . " 

 when Jemima return with her little store , even her careless , selfish brother be strike by the wanness of her face , light by the bed - candle she carry . 

 " come , Mimie , do not   give it up . if I be you , I would have a good try against Mrs Denbigh . I will send you the bonnet as soon as ever I get back to town , and you pluck up a spirit , and I will back you against she even yet . " 

 it seem to Jemima strange and yet only a fitting part of this strange , chaotic world to find that her brother , who be the last person to whom she could have give her confidence in her own family , and almost the last person of her acquaintance to whom she could look for real help and sympathy , should have be the only one to hit upon the secret of her love . and the idea pass away from his mind as quickly as all idea not bear upon his own self - interest do . 

 the night , the sleepless night , be so crowded and haunt by miserable image , that she long for day ; and when day come , with its stinging reality , she weary and grow sick for the solitude of night . for the next week , she seem to see and hear nothing but what confirm the idea of Mr Farquhar 's decide attachment to Ruth . even her mother speak of it as a thing which be impending , and which she wonder how Mr Bradshaw would like ; for his approval or disapproval be the standard by which she measure all thing . 

 " oh ! merciful God , " pray Jemima , in the dead silence of the night , " the strain be too great I can not bear it long my life my love the very essence of I , which be myself through time and eternity ; and on the other side there be all - pity Charity . if she have not be what she be if she have show any sign of triumph any knowledge of her prize if she have make any effort to gain his dear heart , I must have give way long ago , and taunt she , even if I do not tell other taunt she , even though I sink down to the pit the next moment . 

 " the temptation be too strong for I . oh Lord ! where be Thy peace that I believe in , in my childhood ? that I hear people speak of now , as if it hush up the trouble of life , and have not to be seek for seek for , as with tear of blood ! " 

 there be no sound nor sight in answer to this wild implore cry , which Jemima half thought must force out a sign from Heaven . but there be a dawn steal on through the darkness of her night . 

 it be glorious weather for the end of August . the night be as full of light as the day everywhere , save in the low dusky meadow by the river - side , where the mist rise and blend the pale sky with the land below . unknowing of the care and trouble around they , Mary and Elizabeth exult in the weather , and see some new glory in every touch of the year 's decay . they be clamorous for an expedition to the hill , before the calm stillness of the autumn should be disturb by storm . they gain permission to go on the next Wednesday the next half - holiday . they have win their mother over to consent to a full holiday , but their father would not hear of it . Mrs Bradshaw have propose an early dinner , but the idea be scout at by the girl . what would the expedition be worth if they do not carry their dinner with they in basket ? anything out of a basket , and eat in the open air , be worth twenty time as much as the most sumptuous meal in the house . so the basket be pack up , while Mrs Bradshaw wail over probable cold to be catch from sit on the damp ground . Ruth and Leonard be to go ; they four . Jemima have refuse all invitation to make one of the party ; and yet she have a half - sympathy with her sister ' joy a sort of longing , linger look back to the time when she too would have revel in the prospect that lie before they . they , too , would grow up , and suffer ; though now they play , regardless of their doom . 

 the morning be bright and glorious ; just cloud enough , as some one say , to make the distant plain look beautiful from the hill , with its float shadow pass over the golden corn - field . Leonard be to join they at twelve , when his lesson with Mr Benson , and the girl ' with their master , should be over . Ruth take off her bonnet , and fold her shawl with her usual dainty , careful neatness , and lay they aside in a corner of the room to be in readiness . she try to forget the pleasure she always anticipate from a long walk towards the hill , while the morning 's work go on ; but she show enough of sympathy to make the girl cle round she with many a caress of joyous love . everything be beautiful in their eye ; from the shadow of the quivering leaf on the wall to the glitter bead of dew , not yet absorb by the sun , which deck the gossamer web in the vine outside the window . eleven o'clock strike . the Latin master go away , wonder much at the radiant face of his pupil , and think that it be only very young people who could take such pleasure in the " Delectus . " Ruth say , " now , do let we try to be very steady this next hour , " and Mary pull back Ruth 's head , and give the pretty bud mouth a kiss . they sit down to work , while Mrs Denbigh read aloud . a fresh sun - gleam burst into the room , and they look at each other with glad , anticipate eye . 

 Jemima come in , ostensibly to seek for a book , but really from that sort of restless weariness of any one place or employment , which have take possession of she since Mr Farquhar 's return . she stand before the bookcase in the recess , languidly pass over the title in search of the one she want . Ruth 's voice lose a tone or two of its peacefulness , and her eye look more dim and anxious at Jemima 's presence . she wonder in her heart if she dare to ask Miss Bradshaw to accompany they in their expedition . eighteen month ago she would have urge it on her friend with soft , love entreaty ; now she be afraid even to propose it as a hard possibility ; everything she do or say be take so wrongly seem to add to the old dislike , or the later stony contempt with which Miss Bradshaw have regard she . while they be in this way Mr Bradshaw come into the room . his entrance his be at home at all at this time be so unusual a thing , that the reading be instantly stop ; and all four involuntarily look at he , as if expect some explanation of his unusual proceeding . 

 his face be almost purple with suppress agitation . 

 " Mary and Elizabeth , leave the room . do not   stay to pack up your book . leave the room , I say ! " he speak with trembling anger , and the frightened girl obey without a word . a cloud pass over the sun cast a cold gloom into the room which be late so bright and beaming ; but , by equalise the light , it take away the dark shadow from the place where Jemima have be stand , and her figure catch her father 's eye . 

 " leave the room , Jemima , " say he . 

 " why , father ? " reply she , in an opposition that be strange even to herself , but which be prompt by the sullen passion which seethe below the stagnant surface of her life , and which seek a vent in defiance . she maintain her ground , face round upon her father , and Ruth Ruth , who have rise , and stand tremble , shake , a lightning - fear have show she the precipice on which she stand . it be of no use ; no quiet , innocent life no profound silence , even to her own heart , as to the Past ; the old offence could never be drown in the Deep ; but thus , when all be calm on the great , broad , sunny sea , it rise to the surface , and face she with its unclosed eye and its ghastly countenance . the blood bubble up to her brain , and make such a sound there , as of boiling water , that she do not hear the word which Mr Bradshaw first speak ; indeed , his speech be break and disjoint by intense passion . but she need not to hear ; she know . as she rise up at first , so she stand now numb and helpless . when her ear hear again   as if the sound be draw near , and become more distinct , from some faint , vague distance of space , Mr Bradshaw be say , " if there be one sin I hate I utterly loathe more than all other , it be wantonness . it include all other sin . it be but of a piece that you should have come with your sickly , hypocritical face , impose upon we all . I trust Benson do not know of it for his own sake , I trust not . before God , if he get you into my house on false pretence , he shall find his charity at other man 's expense shall cost he dear you the common talk of Eccleston for your profligacy " he be absolutely choke by his boiling indignation . Ruth stand speechless , motionless . her head droop a little forward , her eye be more than half veil by the large quivering lid , her arm hang down straight and heavy . at last she heave the weight off her heart enough to say , in a faint , moan voice , speak with infinite difficulty : 

 " I be so young . " 

 " the more depraved , the more disgusting you , " Mr Bradshaw exclaim , almost glad that the woman , unresiste so long , should now begin to resist . but to his surprise   for in his anger he have forget her presence   Jemima move forwards , and say , " Father ! " 

 " you hold your tongue , Jemima . you have grow more and more insolent more and more disobedient every day . I now know who to thank for it . when such a woman come into my family there be no wonder at any corruption any evil any defilement " 

 " Father ! " 

 " not a word ! if , in your disobedience , you choose to stay and hear what no modest young woman would put herself in the way of hearing , you shall be silent when I bid you . the only good you can gain be in the way of warning . look at that woman "   indicate Ruth , who move her droop head a little on one side , as if by such motion she could avert the pitiless point her face grow whiter and whiter still every instant   " look at that woman , I say corrupt long before she be your age hypocrite for year ! if ever you , or any child of mine , care for she , shake she off from you , as St Paul shake off the viper even into the fire . " he stop for very want of breath . Jemima , all flushed and panting , go up and stand side by side with wan Ruth . she take the cold , dead hand which hang next to she in her warm convulsive grasp , and hold it so tight that it be blue and discolour for day , she speak out beyond all power of restraint from her father . 

 " Father , I will speak . I will not keep silence . I will bear witness to Ruth . I have hat she so keenly , may God forgive I ! but you may know , from that , that my witness be true . I have hat she , and my hatred be only quench into contempt not contempt now , dear Ruth dear Ruth "   this be speak with infinite softness and tenderness , and in spite of her father 's fierce eye and passionate gesture   " I hear what you have learn now , father , week and week ago a year it may be , all time of late have be so long ; and I shudder up from she and from her sin ; and I might have speak of it , and tell it there and then , if I have not be afraid that it be from no good motive I should act in so do , but to gain a way to the desire of my own jealous heart . yes , father , to show you what a witness I be for Ruth , I will own that I be stab to the heart with jealousy ; some one some one care for Ruth that oh , father ! spare I say all . " her face be double - dye with crimson blush , and she pause for one moment no more . 

 " I watch she , and I watch she with my wild - beast eye . if I have see one palter with duty if I have witness one flickering shadow of untruth in word or action if , more than all thing , my woman 's instinct have ever be conscious of the faint speck of impurity in thought , or word , or look , my old hate would have flame out with the flame of hell ! my contempt would have turn to loathe disgust , instead of my be full of pity , and the stirring of new - awakened love , and most true respect . Father , I have bear my witness ! " 

 " and I will tell you how much your witness be worth , " say her father , begin low , that his pen - up wrath might have room to swell out . " it only convince I more and more how deep be the corruption this wanton have spread in my family . she have come amongst we with her innocent seeming , and spread her net well and skilfully . she have turn right into wrong , and wrong into right , and teach you all to be uncertain whether there be any such thing as Vice in the world , or whether it ought not to be look upon as Virtue . she have lead you to the brink of the deep pit , ready for the first chance circumstance to push you in . and I trust she I trust she I welcome she . " 

 " I have do very wrong , " murmur Ruth , but so low , that perhaps he do not hear she , for he go on , lash himself up . 

 " I welcome she . I be dupe into allow her bastard   I sicken at the thought of it   " 

 at the mention of Leonard , Ruth lift up her eye for the first time since the conversation begin , the pupil dilate , as if she be just become aware of some new agony in store for she . I have see such a look of terror on a poor dumb animal 's countenance , and once or twice on human face . I pray I may never see it again on either ! Jemima feel the hand she hold in her strong grasp writhe itself free . Ruth spread her arm before she , clasping and lace her finger together , her head throw a little back , as if in intensest suffering . 

 Mr Bradshaw go on : 

 " that very child and heir of shame to associate with my own innocent child ! I trust they be not contaminate . " 

 " I can not bear it I can not bear it ! " be the word wring out of Ruth . 

 " can not bear it ! can not bear it ! " he repeat . " you must bear it , madam . do you suppose your child be to be exempt from the penalty of his birth ? do you suppose that he alone be to be save from the upbraid scoff ? do you suppose that he be ever to rank with other boy , who be not stain and mark with sin from their birth ? every creature in Eccleston may know what he be ; do you think they will spare he their scorn ? ' can not bear it , ' indeed ! before you go into your sin , you should have think whether you could bear the consequence or not have have some idea how far your offspring would be degrade and scout , till the good thing that could happen to he would be for he to be lose to all sense of shame , dead to all knowledge of guilt , for his mother 's sake . " 

 Ruth speak out . she stand like a wild creature at bay , past fear now . " I appeal to God against such a doom for my child . I appeal to God to help I . I be a mother , and as such I cry to God for help for help to keep my boy in his pitying sight , and to bring he up in his holy fear . let the shame fall on I ! I have deserve it , but he he be so innocent and good . " 

 Ruth have catch up her shawl , and be tie on her bonnet with her trembling hand . what if Leonard be hear of her shame from common report ? what would be the mysterious shock of the intelligence ? she must face he , and see the look in his eye , before she know whether he recoil from she ; he might have his heart turn to hate she , by their cruel jeer . 

 Jemima stand by , dumb and pity . her sorrow be past her power . she help in arrange the dress , with one or two gentle touch , which be hardly feel by Ruth , but which call out all Mr Bradshaw 's ire afresh ; he absolutely take she by the shoulder and turn she by force out of the room . in the hall , and along the stair , her passionate woeful crying be hear . the sound only concentrate Mr Bradshaw 's anger on Ruth . he hold the street - door open wide , and say , between his tooth , " if ever you , or your bastard , darken this door again , I will have you both turn out by the police ! " 

 he need not have add this , if he have see Ruth 's face . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 prepare to stand on the Truth 
 

 as Ruth go along the accustomed street , every sight and every sound seem to bear a new meaning , and each and all to have some reference to her boy 's disgrace . she hold her head down , and scud along dizzy with fear , lest some word should have tell he what she have be , and what he be , before she could reach he . it be a wild , unreasoning fear , but it take hold of she as strongly as if it have be well found . and , indeed , the secret whisper by Mrs Pearson , whose curiosity and suspicion have be excite by Jemima 's manner , and confirm since by many a little corroborating circumstance , have spread abroad , and be know to most of the gossip in Eccleston before it reach Mr Bradshaw 's ear . 

 as Ruth come up to the door of the Chapel - house , it be open , and Leonard come out , bright and hopeful as the morning , his face radiant at the prospect of the happy day before he . he be dress in the clothe it have be such a pleasant pride to she to make for he . he have the dark blue ribbon tie round his neck that she have leave out for he that very morning , with a smile thought of how it would set off his brown , handsome face . she catch he by the hand as they meet , and turn he , with his face homeward , without a word . her look , her rush movement , her silence , awe he ; and although he wonder , he do not stay to ask why she do so . the door be on the latch ; she open it , and only say , " Upstairs , " in a hoarse whisper . up they go into her own room . she draw he in , and bolt the door ; and then , sit down , she place he   she have never let go of he   before she , hold he with her hand on each of his shoulder , and gaze into his face with a woeful look of the agony that could not find vent in word . at last she try to speak ; she try with strong bodily effort , almost amount to convulsion . but the word would not come ; it be not till she see the absolute terror depict on his face that she find utterance ; and then the sight of that terror change the word from what she mean they to have be . she draw he to she , and lay her head upon his shoulder ; hide her face even there . 

 " my poor , poor boy ! my poor , poor darling ! oh ! would that I have die I have die , in my innocent girlhood ! " 

 " Mother ! mother ! " sob Leonard . " what be the matter ? why do you look so wild and ill ? why do you call I your ' poor boy ' ? be we not go to Scaurside - hill ? I do not   much mind it , mother ; only please do not   gasp and quiver so . dearest mother , be you ill ? let I call Aunt Faith ! " 

 Ruth lift herself up , and put away the hair that have fall over and be blind her eye . she look at he with intense wistfulness . 

 " kiss I , Leonard ! " say she " kiss I , my darling , once more in the old way ! " Leonard throw himself into her arm and hug she with all his force , and their lip clung together as in the kiss give to the dying . 

 " Leonard ! " say she at length , hold he away from she , and nerve herself up to tell he all by one spasmodic effort " listen to I . " the boy stand breathless and still , gaze at she . on her impetuous transit from Mr Bradshaw 's to the Chapel - house , her wild , desperate thought have be that she would call herself by every violent , coarse name which the world might give she that Leonard should hear those word apply to his mother first from her own lip ; but the influence of his presence for he be a holy and sacred creature in her eye , and this point remain steadfast , though all the rest be upheave subdue she ; and now it seem as if she could not find word fine enough , and pure enough , to convey the truth that he must learn , and should learn from no tongue but her . 

 " Leonard when I be very young I do very wrong . I think God , who know all , will judge I more tenderly than man but I do wrong in a way which you can not understand yet "   she see the red flush come into his cheek , and it sting she as the first token of that shame which be to be his portion through life   " in a way people never forget , never forgive . you will hear I call the hard name that ever can be throw at woman I have be , to - day ; and , my child , you must bear it patiently , because they will be partly true . never get confuse , by your love for I , into think that what I do be right . where be I ? " say she , suddenly falter , and forget all she have say and all she have get to say ; and then , see Leonard 's face of wonder , and burn shame and indignation , she go on more rapidly , as fear lest her strength should fail before she have end . 

 " and , Leonard , " continue she , in a trembling , sad voice , " this be not all . the punishment of punishment lie await I still . it be to see you suffer for my wrongdoing . yes , darling ! they will speak shameful thing of you , poor innocent child ! as well as of I , who be guilty . they will throw it in your tooth through life , that your mother be never married be not married when you be bear " 

 " be not you married ? be not you a widow ? " ask he abruptly , for the first time get anything like a clear idea of the real state of the case . 

 " no ! may God forgive I , and help I ! " exclaim she , as she see a strange look of repugnance cloud over the boy 's face , and feel a slight motion on his part to extricate himself from her hold . it be as slight , as transient as it could be over in an instant . but she have take her hand away , and cover up her face with they as quickly cover up her face in shame before her child ; and in the bitterness of her heart she be wail out , " oh , would to God I have die that I have die as a baby that I have die as a little baby hang at my mother 's breast ! " 

 " Mother , " say Leonard , timidly put his hand on her arm ; but she shrink from he , and continue her low , passionate wail . " Mother , " say he , after a pause , come nearer , though she see it not " mammy darling , " say he , use the caress name , which he have be try to drop as not sufficiently manly , " mammy , my own , own dear , dear , darling mother , I do not   believe they I do not , I do not , I do not , I do not ! " he break out into a wild burst of cry as he say this . in a moment her arm be round the poor boy , and she be hush he up like a baby on her bosom . " Hush , Leonard ! Leonard , be still , my child ! I have be too sudden with you ! I have do you harm oh ! I have do you nothing but harm , " cry she , in a tone of bitter self - reproach . 

 " no , mother , " say he , stop his tear , and his eye blaze out with earnestness ; " there never be such a mother as you have be to I , and I will not   believe any one who say it . I will not ; and I will knock they down if they say it again , I will ! " he clench his fist , with a fierce , defiant look on his face . 

 " you forget , my child , " say Ruth , in the sweetest , sad tone that ever be hear , " I say it of myself ; I say it because it be true . " Leonard throw his arm tight round she , and hide his face against her bosom . she feel he pant there like some hunt creature . she have no soothe comfort to give he . " oh , that she and he lie dead ! " 

 at last , exhausted , he lie so still and motionless , that she fear to look . she want he to speak , yet dread his first word . she kiss his hair , his head , his very clothe , murmur low , inarticulate , moaning sound . 

 " Leonard , " say she , " Leonard , look up at I ! Leonard , look up ! " but he only cling the close , and hide his face the more . 

 " my boy ! " say she , " what can I do or say ? if I tell you never to mind it that it be nothing I tell you false . it be a bitter shame and a sorrow that I have draw down upon you . a shame , Leonard , because of I , your mother ; but , Leonard , it be no disgrace or lower of you in the eye of God . " she speak now as if she have find the clue which might lead he to rest and strength at last . " remember that , always . remember that , when the time of trial come and it seem a hard and cruel thing that you should be call reproachful name by man , and all for what be no fault of yours remember God 's pity and God 's justice ; and though my sin shall have make you an outcast in the world oh , my child , my child ! "   she feel he kiss she , as if mutely try to comfort she it give her strength to go on   " remember , darling of my heart , it be only your own sin that can make you an outcast from God . " 

 she grow so faint that her hold of he relaxed . he look up affrighted . he bring her water he throw it over she ; in his terror at the notion that she be go to die and leave he , he call she by every fond name , implore she to open her eye . 

 when she partially recover , he help she to the bed , on which she lie still , wan and death - like . she almost hop the swoon that hang around her might be death , and in that imagination she open her eye to take a last look at her boy . she see he pale and terror - stricken ; and pity for his affright rouse she , and make she forget herself in the wish that he should not see her death , if she be indeed die . 

 " go to Aunt Faith ! " whisper she ; " I be weary , and want sleep . " 

 Leonard arise slowly and reluctantly . she try to smile upon he , that what she think would be her last look might dwell in his remembrance as tender and strong ; she watch he to the door ; she see he hesitate , and return to she . he come back to she , and say in a timid , apprehensive tone : 

 " mother will they speak to I about it ? " 

 Ruth close her eye , that they might not express the agony she feel , like a sharp knife , at this question . Leonard have ask it with a child 's desire of avoid painful and mysterious topic , from no personal sense of shame as she understand it , shame begin thus early , thus instantaneously . 

 " no , " she reply . " you may be sure they will not . " 

 so he go . but now she would have be thankful for the unconsciousness of fainting ; that one little speech bear so much meaning to her hot , irritable brain . Mr and Miss Benson , all in their house , would never speak to the boy but in his home alone would he be safe from what he have already learn to dread . every form in which shame and opprobrium could overwhelm she darling , haunt she . she have be exercise strong self - control for his sake ever since she have meet he at the house - door ; there be now a reaction . his presence have keep her mind on its perfect balance . when that be withdraw , the effect of the strain of power be feel . and athwart the fever - mist that arise to obscure her judgment , all sort of will - o'-the - wisp plan flitter before she ; tempt she to this and that course of action to anything rather than patient endurance to relieve her present state of misery by some sudden spasmodic effort , that take the semblance of be wise and right . gradually all her desire , all her longing , settle themselves on one point . what have she do what could she do , to Leonard , but evil ? if she be away , and go no one know where lose in mystery , as if she be dead perhaps the cruel heart might relent , and show pity on Leonard ; while her perpetual presence would but call up the remembrance of his birth . thus she reason in her hot , dull brain ; and shape her plan in accordance . 

 Leonard steal downstairs noiselessly . he listen to find some quiet place where he could hide himself . the house be very still . Miss Benson think the purposed expedition have take place , and never dream but that Ruth and Leonard be on distant , sunny Scaurside - hill ; and after a very early dinner , she have set out to drink tea with a farmer 's wife who live in the country two or three mile off . Mr Benson mean to have go with she ; but while they be at dinner , he have receive an unusually authoritative note from Mr Bradshaw desiring to speak with he , so he go to that gentleman 's house instead . Sally be busy in her kitchen , make a great noise   not unlike a groom rub down a horse   over her cleaning . Leonard steal into the sitting - room , and crouch behind the large old - fashioned sofa to ease his sore , ache heart , by cry with all the prodigal waste and abandonment of childhood . 

 Mr Benson be show into Mr Bradshaw 's own particular room . the latter gentleman be walk up and down , and it be easy to perceive that something have occur to chafe he to great anger . 

 " sit down , sir ! " say he to Mr Benson , nod to a chair . 

 Mr Benson sit down . but Mr Bradshaw continue his walk for a few minute long without speak . then he stop abruptly , right in front of Mr Benson ; and in a voice which he try to render calm , but which tremble with passion with a face glow purple as he think of his wrong   and real wrong they be , he begin : 

 " Mr Benson , I have send for you to ask I be almost too indignant at the bare suspicion to speak as become I but do you I really shall be oblige to beg your pardon , if you be as much in the dark as I be yesterday as to the character of that woman who live under your roof ? " 

 there be no answer from Mr Benson . Mr Bradshaw look at he very earnestly . his eye be fix on the ground he make no inquiry he utter no expression of wonder or dismay . Mr Bradshaw grind his foot on the floor with gathering rage ; but just as he be about to speak , Mr Benson rise up a poor deform old man before the stern and portly figure that be swell and pant with passion . 

 " hear I , sir ! "   stretch out his hand as if to avert the word which be impend . " nothing you can say , can upbraid I like my own conscience ; no degradation you can inflict , by word or deed , can come up to the degradation I have suffer for year , at be a party to a deceit , even for a good end " 

 " for a good end ! Nay ! what next ? " 

 the taunt contempt with which Mr Bradshaw speak these word almost surprise himself by what he imagine must be its successful power of withering ; but in spite of it , Mr Benson lift his grave eye to Mr Bradshaw 's countenance , and repeat : 

 " for a good end . the end be not , as perhaps you consider it to have be , to obtain her admission into your family nor yet to put she in the way of gain her livelihood ; my sister and I would willingly have share what we have with she ; it be our intention to do so at first , if not for any length of time , at least as long as her health might require it . why I advise   perhaps I only yield to advice   a change of name an assumption of a false state of widowhood be because I earnestly desire to place she in circumstance in which she might work out her self - redemption ; and you , sir , know how terribly the world go against all such as have sin as Ruth do . she be so young , too . " 

 " you mistake , sir ; my acquaintance have not lain so much among that class of sinner as to give I much experience of the way in which they be treat . but , judge from what I have see , I should say they meet with full as much leniency as they deserve ; and suppose they do not I know there be plenty of sickly sentimentalist just now who reserve all their interest and regard for criminal why not pick out one of these to help you in your task of wash the blackamoor white ? why choose I to be impose upon my household into which to intrude your protťgťe ? why be my innocent child to be expose to corruption ? I say , " say Mr Bradshaw , stamp his foot , " how dare you come into this house , where you be look upon as a minister of religion , with a lie in your mouth ? how dare you single I out , of all people , to be gull and deceive , and point at through the town as the person who have take an abandon woman into his house to teach his daughter ? " 

 " I own my deceit be wrong and faithless . " 

 " yes ! you can own it , now it be find out ! there be small merit in that , I think ! " 

 " Sir ! I claim no merit . I take shame to myself . I do not single you out . you apply to I with your proposal that Ruth should be your child 's governess . " 

 " pah ! " 

 " and the temptation be too great no ! I will not say that but the temptation be great than I could stand it seem to open out a path of usefulness . " 

 " now , do not   let I hear you speak so , " say Mr Bradshaw , blaze up . " I can not   stand it . it be too much to talk in that way when the usefulness be to consist in contaminate my innocent girl . " 

 " God know that if I have believe there have be any danger of such contamination God know how I would have die soon than have allow she to enter your family . Mr Bradshaw , you believe I , do not   you ? " ask Mr Benson , earnestly . 

 " I really must be allow the privilege of doubt what you say in future , " say Mr Bradshaw , in a cold , contemptuous manner . 

 " I have deserve this , " Mr Benson reply . " but , " continue he , after a moment 's pause , " I will not speak of myself , but of Ruth . surely , sir , the end I aim at   the mean I take to obtain it be wrong ; you can not feel that more than I do   be a right one ; and you will not you can not say , that your child have suffer from associate with she . I have she in my family , under the watchful eye of three anxious person for a year or more ; we see fault no human being be without they and poor Ruth 's be but slight venial error ; but we see no sign of a corrupt mind no glimpse of boldness or forwardness no token of want of conscientiousness ; she seem , and be , a young and gentle girl , who have be lead astray before she fairly know what life be . " 

 " I suppose most depraved woman have be innocent in their time , " say Mr Bradshaw , with bitter contempt . 

 " oh , Mr Bradshaw ! Ruth be not deprave , and you know it . you can not have see she have know she daily , all these year , without acknowledge that ! " Mr Benson be almost breathless , await Mr Bradshaw 's answer . the quiet self - control which he have maintain so long , be go now . 

 " I see she daily I do not know she . if I have know she , I should have know she be fall and deprave , and consequently not fit to come into my house , nor to associate with my pure child . " 

 " now I wish God would give I power to speak out convincingly what I believe to be his truth , that not every woman who have fall be deprave ; that many how many the Great Judgment Day will reveal to those who have shake off the poor , sore , penitent heart on earth many , many crave and hunger after a chance for virtue the help which no man give to they help that gentle , tender help which Jesus give once to Mary Magdalen . " Mr Benson be almost choke by his own feeling . 

 " come , come , Mr Benson , let we have no more of this morbid way of talk . the world have decide how such woman be to be treat ; and , you may depend upon it , there be so much practical wisdom in the world that its way of acting be right in the long run , and that no one can fly in its face with impunity , unless , indeed , they stoop to deceit and imposition . " 

 " I take my stand with Christ against the world , " say Mr Benson , solemnly , disregard the covert allusion to himself . " what have the world 's way end in ? can we be much bad than we be ? " 

 " speak for yourself , if you please . " 

 " be it not time to change some of our way of thinking and acting ? I declare before God , that if I believe in any one human truth , it be this that to every woman who , like Ruth , have sin , should be give a chance of self - redemption and that such a chance should be give in no supercilious or contemptuous manner , but in the spirit of the holy Christ . " 

 " such as get she into a friend 's house under false colour . " 

 " I do not argue on Ruth 's case . in that I have acknowledge my error . I do not argue on any case . I state my firm belief , that it be God 's will that we should not dare to trample any of his creature down to the hopeless dust ; that it be God 's will that the woman who have fall should be number among those who have break heart to be bind up , not cast aside as lose beyond recall . if this be God 's will , as a thing of God it will stand ; and he will open a way . " 

 " I should have attach much more importance to all your exhortation on this point if I could have respect your conduct in other matter . as it be , when I see a man who have delude himself into consider falsehood right , I be disinclined to take his opinion on subject connect with morality ; and I can no long regard he as a fitting exponent of the will of God . you perhaps understand what I mean , Mr Benson . I can no long attend your chapel . " 

 if Mr Benson have feel any hope of make Mr Bradshaw 's obstinate mind receive the truth , that he acknowledge and repent of his connivance at the falsehood by mean of which Ruth have be receive into the Bradshaw family , this last sentence prevent his make the attempt . he simply bow and take his leave Mr Bradshaw attend he to the door with formal ceremony . 

 he feel acutely the severance of the tie which Mr Bradshaw have just announce to he . he have experience many mortification in his intercourse with that gentleman , but they have fall off from his meek spirit like drop of water from a bird 's plumage ; and now he only remember the act of substantial kindness render   the ostentation all forget   many happy hour and pleasant evening the child whom he have love dearer than he think till now the young people about whom he have care , and whom he have strive to lead aright . he be but a young man when Mr Bradshaw first come to his chapel ; they have grow old together ; he have never recognise Mr Bradshaw as an old familiar friend so completely as now when they be sever . 

 it be with a heavy heart that he open his own door . he go to his study immediately ; he sit down to steady himself into his position . 

 how long he be there silent and alone review his life confess his sin he do not know ; but he hear some unusual sound in the house that disturb he rouse he to present life . a slow , languid step come along the passage to the front door the breathing be break by many sigh . 

 Ruth 's hand be on the latch when Mr Benson come out . her face be very white , except two red spot on each cheek her eye be deep - sunk and hollow , but glitter with feverish lustre . " Ruth ! " exclaim he . she move her lip , but her throat and mouth be too dry for she to speak . 

 " where be you go ? " ask he ; for she have all her walk thing on , yet tremble so , even as she stand , that it be evident she could not walk far without fall . 

 she hesitate she look up at he , still with the same dry glitter eye . at last she whisper   for she could only speak in a whisper , " to Helmsby I be go to Helmsby . " 

 " Helmsby ! my poor girl may God have mercy upon you ! " for he see she hardly know what she be say . " where be Helmsby ? " 

 " I do not   know . in Lincolnshire , I think . " 

 " but why be you go there ? " 

 " Hush ! he be asleep , " say she , as Mr Benson have unconsciously raise his voice . 

 " who be asleep ? " ask Mr Benson . 

 " that poor little boy , " say she , begin to quiver and cry . 

 " come here ! " say he , authoritatively , draw she into the study . 

 " sit down in that chair . I will come back directly . " 

 he go in search of his sister , but she have not return . then he have recourse to Sally , who be as busy as ever about her cleaning . 

 " how long have Ruth be at home ? " ask he . 

 " Ruth ! she have never be at home sin ' morning . she and Leonard be to be off for the day somewhere or other with they Bradshaw girl . " 

 " then she have have no dinner ? " 

 " not here , at any rate . I can not   answer for what she may have do at other place . " 

 " and Leonard where be he ? " 

 " how should I know ? with his mother , I suppose . leastway , that be what be fix on . I have   enough to do of my own , without rout after other folk . " 

 she go on scour in no very good temper . Mr Benson stand silent for a moment . 

 " Sally , " he say , " I want a cup of tea . will you make it as soon as you can ; and some dry toast too ? I will come for it in ten minute . " 

 strike by something in his voice , she look up at he for the first time . 

 " what ha ' ye be do to yourself , to look so grim and grey ? tire yourself all to tatter , look after some naught , I will be bind ! well ! well ! I mun make ye your tea , I reckon ; but I do hope as you grow old you would ha ' grow wiser ! " 

 Mr Benson make no reply , but go to look for Leonard , hop that the child 's presence might bring back to his mother the power of self - control . he open the parlour - door , and look in , but see no one . just as he be shut it , however , he hear a deep , break , sob sigh ; and , guide by the sound , he find the boy lie on the floor , fast asleep , but with his feature all swell and disfigure by passionate crying . 

 " poor child ! this be what she mean , then , " think Mr Benson . " he have begin his share of the sorrow too , " he continue , pitifully . " no ! I will not waken he back to consciousness . " so he return alone into the study . Ruth sit where he have place she , her head bend back , and her eye shut . but when he come in she start up . 

 " I must be go , " she say , in a hurried way . 

 " Nay , Ruth , you must not go . you must not leave we . we can not do without you . we love you too much . " 

 " love I ! " say she , look at he wistfully . as she look , her eye fill slowly with tear . it be a good sign , and Mr Benson take heart to go on . 

 " yes ! Ruth . you know we do . you may have other thing to fill up your mind just now , but you know we love you ; and nothing can alter our love for you . you ought not to have think of leave we . you would not , if you have be quite well . " 

 " do you know what have happen ? " she ask , in a low , hoarse voice . 

 " yes . I know all , " he answer . " it make no difference to we . why should it ? " 

 " oh ! Mr Benson , do not   you know that my shame be discover ? " she reply , burst into tear " and I must leave you , and leave Leonard , that you may not share in my disgrace . " 

 " you must do no such thing . leave Leonard ! you have no right to leave Leonard . where could you go to ? " 

 " to Helmsby , " she say , humbly . " it would break my heart to go , but I think I ought , for Leonard 's sake . I know I ought . " she be cry sadly by this time , but Mr Benson know the flow of tear would ease her brain . " it will break my heart to go , but I know I must . " 

 " sit still here at present , " say he , in a decide tone of command . he go for the cup of tea . he bring it to she without Sally 's be aware for whom it be intend . 

 " drink this ! " he speak as you would do to a child , if desire it to take medicine . " eat some toast . " she take the tea , and drink it feverishly ; but when she try to eat , the food seem to choke she . still she be docile , and she try . 

 " I can not , " say she at last , put down the piece of toast . there be a return to something of her usual tone in the word . she speak gently and softly ; no long in the shrill , hoarse voice she have use at first . Mr Benson sit down by she . 

 " now , Ruth , we must talk a little together . I want to understand what your plan be . where be Helmsby ? why do you fix to go there ? " 

 " it be where my mother live , " she answer . " before she be marry she live there ; and wherever she live , the people all love she dearly ; and I think I think , that for her sake some one would give I work . I mean to tell they the truth , " say she , drop her eye ; " but still they would , perhaps , give I some employment I do not   care what for her sake . I could do many thing , " say she , suddenly look up . " I be sure I could weed I could in garden if they do not like to have I in their house . but perhaps some one , for my mother 's sake oh ! my dear , dear mother ! do you know where and what I be ? " she cry out , sob afresh . 

 Mr Benson 's heart be very sore , though he speak authoritatively , and almost sternly . 

 " Ruth ! you must be still and quiet . I can not have this . I want you to listen to I . your thought of Helmsby would be a good one , if it be right for you to leave Eccleston ; but I do not think it be . I be certain of this , that it would be a great sin in you to separate yourself from Leonard . you have no right to sever the tie by which God have bind you together . " 

 " but if I be here they will all know and remember the shame of his birth ; and if I go away they may forget " 

 " and they may not . and if you go away , he may be unhappy or ill ; and you , who above all other have and have from God remember that , Ruth ! the power to comfort he , the tender patience to nurse he , have leave he to the care of stranger . yes ; I know ! but we ourselves be as stranger , dearly as we love he , compare to a mother . he may turn to sin , and want the long forbearance , the serene authority of a parent ; and where be you ? no dread of shame , either for yourself , or even for he , can ever make it right for you to shake off your responsibility . " all this time he be watch she narrowly , and see she slowly yield herself up to the force of what he be say . 

 " besides , Ruth , " he continue , " we have go on falsely hitherto . it have be my doing , my mistake , my sin . I ought to have know well . now , let we stand firm on the truth . you have no new fault to repent of . be brave and faithful . it be to God you answer , not to man . the shame of have your sin know to the world , should be as nothing to the shame you feel at have sin . we have dread man too much , and God too little , in the course we have take . but now be of good cheer . perhaps you will have to find your work in the world very low not quite work in the field , " say he , with a gentle smile , to which she , downcast and miserable , could give no response . " Nay , perhaps , Ruth , " he go on , " you may have to stand and wait for some time ; no one may be willing to use the service you would gladly render ; all may turn aside from you , and may speak very harshly of you . can you accept all this treatment meekly , as but the reasonable and just penance God have lay upon you feel no anger against those who slight you , no impatience for the time to come   and come it surely will I speak as have the word of God for what I say   when he , have purify you , even as by fire , will make a straight path for your foot ? my child , it be Christ the Lord who have tell we of this infinite mercy of God . have you faith enough in it to be brave , and bear on , and do rightly in patience and in tribulation ? " 

 Ruth have be hush and very still until now , when the pleading earnestness of his question urge she to answer : 

 " yes ! " say she . " I hope I believe I can be faithful for myself , for I have sin and do wrong . but Leonard " she look up at he . 

 " but Leonard , " he echo . " ah ! there it be hard , Ruth . I own the world be hard and persecute to such as he . " he pause to think of the true comfort for this sting . he go on . " the world be not everything , Ruth ; nor be the want of man 's good opinion and esteem the high need which man have . teach Leonard this . you would not wish his life to be one summer 's day . you dare not make it so , if you have the power . teach he to bid a noble , christian welcome to the trial which God send and this be one of they . teach he not to look on a life of struggle , and perhaps of disappointment and incompleteness , as a sad and mournful end , but as the mean permit to the hero and warrior in the army of Christ , by which to show their faithful following . tell he of the hard and thorny path which be tread once by the bleed foot of one . Ruth ! think of the Saviour 's life and cruel death , and of his divine faithfulness . oh , Ruth ! " exclaim he , " when I look and see what you may be what you must be to that boy , I can not think how you could be coward enough , for a moment , to shrink from your work ! but we have all be coward hitherto , " he add , in bitter self - accusation . " God help we to be so no long ! " 

 Ruth sit very quiet . her eye be fix on the ground , and she seem lose in thought . at length she rise up . 

 " Mr Benson ! " say she , stand before he , and prop herself by the table , as she be tremble sadly from weakness , " I mean to try very , very hard , to do my duty to Leonard and to God , " she add , reverently . " I be only afraid my faith may sometimes fail about Leonard " 

 " Ask , and it shall be give unto you . that be no vain or untried promise , Ruth ! " 

 she sit down again , unable long to stand . there be another long silence . 

 " I must never go to Mr Bradshaw 's again , " she say at last , as if think aloud . 

 " no , Ruth , you shall not , " he answer . 

 " but I shall earn no money ! " add she , quickly , for she think that he do not perceive the difficulty that be trouble she . 

 " you surely know , Ruth , that while Faith and I have a roof to shelter we , or bread to eat , you and Leonard share it with we . " 

 " I know I know your most tender goodness , " say she , " but it ought not to be . " 

 " it must be at present , " he say , in a decide manner . " perhaps before long you may have some employment ; perhaps it may be some time before an opportunity occur . " 

 " hush , " say Ruth ; " Leonard be move about in the parlour . I must go to he . " 

 but when she stand up , she turn so dizzy , and totter so much , that she be glad to sit down again immediately . 

 " you must rest here . I will go to he , " say Mr Benson . he leave she ; and when he be go , she lean her head on the back of the chair , and cry quietly and incessantly ; but there be a more patient , hopeful , resolve feeling in her heart , which all along , through all the tear she shed , bear she onwards to high thought , until at last she rise to prayer . 

 Mr Benson catch the new look of shrink shame in Leonard 's eye , as it first seek , then shun , meet his . he be pain , too , by the sight of the little sorrowful , anxious face , on which , until now , hope and joy have be predominant . the constrained voice , the few word the boy speak , when formerly there would have be a glad and free utterance all this grieve Mr Benson inexpressibly , as but the beginning of an unwonted mortification , which must last for year . he himself make no allusion to any unusual occurrence ; he speak of Ruth as sit , overcome by headache , in the study for quietness : he hurry on the preparation for tea , while Leonard sit by in the great arm - chair , and look on with sad , dreamy eye . he strove to lessen the shock which he know Leonard have receive , by every mixture of tenderness and cheerfulness that Mr Benson 's gentle heart prompt ; and now and then a languid smile steal over the boy 's face . when his bedtime come , Mr Benson tell he of the hour , although he fear that Leonard would have but another sorrowful cry of himself to sleep ; but he be anxious to accustom the boy to cheerful movement within the limit of domestic law , and by no disobedience to it to weaken the power of glad submission to the Supreme ; to begin the new life that lie before he , where strength to look up to God as the Law - giver and Ruler of event would be pre - eminently require . when Leonard have go upstairs , Mr Benson go immediately to Ruth , and say , 

 " Ruth ! Leonard be just go up to bed , " secure in the instinct which make she silently rise , and go up to the boy certain , too , that they would each be the other 's good comforter , and that God would strengthen each through the other . 

 now , for the first time , he have leisure to think of himself ; and to go over all the event of the day . the half - hour of solitude in his study , that he have before his sister 's return , be of inestimable value ; he have leisure to put event in their true place , as to importance and eternal significance . 

 Miss Faith come in laden with farm produce . her kind entertainer have bring she in their shandry to the opening of the court in which the Chapel - house stand ; but she be so heavily burden with egg , mushroom , and plum , that when her brother open the door she be almost breathless . 

 " oh , Thurstan ! take this basket it be such a weight ! oh , Sally , be that you ? here be some magnum - bonum which we must preserve to - morrow . there be guinea - fowl egg in that basket . " 

 Mr Benson let she unburden her body , and her mind too , by give charge to Sally respect her housekeeping treasure , before he say a word ; but when she return into the study , to tell he the small piece of intelligence respect her day at the farm , she stand aghast . 

 " why , Thurstan , dear ! what be the matter ? be your back hurt you ? " 

 he smile to reassure she ; but it be a sickly and force smile . 

 " no , Faith ! I be quite well , only rather out of spirit , and want to talk to you to cheer I . " 

 Miss Faith sit down , straight , sit bolt - upright to listen the well . 

 " I do not   know how , but the real story about Ruth be find out . " 

 " oh , Thurstan ! " exclaim Miss Benson , turn quite white . 

 for a moment , neither of they say another word . then she go on . 

 " do Mr Bradshaw know ? " 

 " yes ! he send for I , and tell I . " 

 " do Ruth know that it have all come out ? " 

 " yes . and Leonard know . " 

 " how ? who tell he ? " 

 " I do not know . I have ask no question . but of course it be his mother . " 

 " she be very foolish and cruel , then , " say Miss Benson , her eye blaze , and her lip tremble , at the thought of the suffer her darling boy must have go through . 

 " I think she be wise . I be sure it be not cruel . he must have soon know that there be some mystery , and it be well that it should be tell he openly and quietly by his mother than by a stranger . " 

 " how could she tell he quietly ? " ask Miss Benson , still indignant . 

 " well ! perhaps I use the wrong word of course no one be by and I do not   suppose even they themselves could now tell how it be tell , or in what spirit it be bear . " 

 Miss Benson be silent again . 

 " be Mr Bradshaw very angry ? " 

 " yes , very ; and justly so . I do very wrong in make that false statement at first . " 

 " no ! I be sure you do not , " say Miss Faith . " Ruth have have some year of peace , in which to grow strong and wise , so that she can bear her shame now in a way she never could have do at first . " 

 " all the same it be wrong in I to do what I do . " 

 " I do it too , as much or more than you . and I do not   think it wrong . I be certain it be quite right , and I would do just the same again . " 

 " perhaps it have not do you the harm it have do I . " 

 " Nonsense ! Thurstan . do not   be morbid . I be sure you be as good and well than ever you be . " 

 " no , I be not . I have get what you call morbid just in consequence of the sophistry by which I persuade myself that wrong could be right . I torment myself . I have lose my clear instinct of conscience . formerly , if I believe that such or such an action be accord to the will of God , I go and do it , or at least I try to do it , without thinking of consequence . now , I reason and weigh what will happen if I do so and so I grope where formerly I see . oh , Faith ! it be such a relief to I to have the truth know , that I be afraid I have not be sufficiently sympathise with Ruth . " 

 " Poor Ruth ! " say Miss Benson . " but at any rate our tell a lie have be the saving of she . there be no fear of she go wrong now . " 

 " God 's omnipotence do not need our sin . " 

 they do not speak for some time . 

 " you have not tell I what Mr Bradshaw say . " 

 " one can not   remember the exact word that be speak on either side in moment of such strong excitement . he be very angry , and say some thing about I that be very just , and some about Ruth that be very hard . his last word be that he should give up come to chapel . " 

 " oh , Thurstan ! do it come to that ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " do Ruth know all he say ? " 

 " no ! why should she ? I do not   know if she know he have speak to I at all . poor creature ! she have enough to craze she almost without that ! she be for go away and leave we , that we might not share in her disgrace . I be afraid of she be quite delirious . I do so want you , Faith ! however , I do the good I could ; I speak to she very coldly , and almost sternly , all the while my heart be bleed for she . I dare not give her sympathy ; I try to give her strength . but I do so want you , Faith . " 

 " and I be so full of enjoyment , I be ashamed to think of it . but the dawson be so kind and the day be so fine where be Ruth now ? " 

 " with Leonard . he be her great earthly motive I think that be with he would be good . but he must be in bed and asleep now . " 

 " I will go up to she , " say Miss Faith . 

 she find Ruth keep watch by Leonard 's troubled sleep ; but when she see Miss Faith she rise up , and throw herself on her neck and clung to she , without speak . after a while Miss Benson say : 

 " you must go to bed , Ruth ! " so , after she have kiss the sleeping boy , Miss Benson lead she away , and help to undress she , and bring she up a cup of soothe violet tea not so soothing as tender action and soft love tone . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 an understanding between Lovers 
 

 it be well they have so early and so truly strengthen the spirit to bear , for the event which have to be endure soon come thick and threefold . 

 every evening Mr and Miss Benson think the bad must be over ; and every day bring some fresh occurrence to touch upon the raw place . they could not be certain , until they have see all their acquaintance , what difference it would make in the cordiality of their reception : in some case it make much ; and Miss Benson be proportionably indignant . she feel this change in behaviour more than her brother . his great pain arise from the coolness of the Bradshaws . with all the fault which have at time grate on his sensitive nature   but which he now forget , and remember only their kindness , they be his old familiar friend his kind , if ostentatious , patron his great personal interest , out of his own family ; and he could not get over the suffering he experience from see their large square pew empty on sunday from perceive how Mr Bradshaw , though he bow in a distant manner when he and Mr Benson meet face to face , shun he as often as he possibly could . all that happen in the household , which once be as patent to he as his own , be now a seal book ; he hear of its doing by chance , if he hear at all . just at the time when he be feel the most depressed from this cause , he meet Jemima at a sudden turn of the street . he be uncertain for a moment how to accost she , but she save he all doubt ; in an instant she have his hand in both of her , her face flush with honest delight . 

 " oh , Mr Benson , I be so glad to see you ! I have so want to know all about you ! how be poor Ruth ? dear Ruth ! I wonder if she have forgive I my cruelty to she ? and I may not go to she now , when I should be so glad and thankful to make up for it . " 

 " I never hear you have be cruel to she . I be sure she do not think so . " 

 " she ought ; she must . what be she do ? oh ! I have so much to ask , I can never hear enough ; and papa say " she hesitate a moment , afraid of give pain , and then , believe that they would understand the state of affair , and the reason for her behaviour well if she tell the truth , she go on : " Papa say I must not go to your house I suppose it be right to obey he ? " 

 " certainly , my dear . it be your clear duty . we know how you feel towards we . " 

 " oh ! but if I could do any good if I could be of any use or comfort to any of you especially to Ruth , I should come , duty or not . I believe it would be my duty , " say she , hurry on to try and stop any decide prohibition from Mr Benson . " no ! do not   be afraid ; I will not   come till I know I can do some good . I hear bit about you through Sally every now and then , or I could not have wait so long . Mr Benson , " continue she , redden very much , " I think you do quite right about poor Ruth . " 

 " not in the falsehood , my dear . " 

 " no ! not perhaps in that . I be not think of that . but I have be think a great deal about poor Ruth 's you know I could not help it when everybody be talk about it and it make I think of myself , and what I be . with a father and mother , and home and careful friend , I be not likely to be tempt like Ruth ; but oh ! Mr Benson , " say she , lift her eye , which be full of tear , to his face , for the first time since she begin to speak , " if you know all I have be think and feel this last year , you would see how I have yield to every temptation that be able to come to I ; and , see how I have no goodness or strength in I , and how I might just have be like Ruth , or rather , bad than she ever be , because I be more headstrong and passionate by nature , I do so thank you and love you for what you do for she ! and will you tell I really and truly now if I can ever do anything for Ruth ? if you will promise I that , I will not   rebel unnecessarily against papa ; but if you do not , I will , and come and see you all this very afternoon . remember ! I trust you ! " say she , break away . then turn back , she come to ask after Leonard . 

 " he must know something of it , " say she . " do he feel it much ? " 

 " very much , " say Mr Benson . Jemima shake her head sadly . 

 " it be hard upon he , " say she . 

 " it be , " Mr Benson reply . 

 for in truth , Leonard be their great anxiety indoor . his health seem shake , he speak half sentence in his sleep , which show that in his dream he be battle on his mother 's behalf against an unkind and angry world . and then he would wail to himself , and utter sad word of shame , which they never think have reach his ear . by day , he be in general grave and quiet ; but his appetite vary , and he be evidently afraid of go into the street , dread to be point at as an object of remark . each separately in their heart long to give he change of scene , but they be all silent , for where be the requisite money to come from ? 

 his temper become fitful and variable . at time he would be most sullen against his mother ; and then give way to a passionate remorse . when Mr Benson catch Ruth 's look of agony at her child 's rebuff , his patience fail ; or rather , I should say , he believe that a strong , severer hand than hers be require for the management of the lad . but , when she hear Mr Benson say so , she plead with he . 

 " have patience with Leonard , " she say . " I have deserve the anger that be fret in his heart . it be only I who can reinstate myself in his love and respect . I have no fear . when he see I really strive hard and long to do what be right , he must love I . I be not afraid . " 

 even while she speak , her lip quiver , and her colour go and come with eager anxiety . so Mr Benson hold his peace , and let she take she course . it be beautiful to see the intuition by which she divine what be pass in every fold of her child 's heart , so as to be always ready with the right word to soothe or to strengthen he . her watchfulness be unwearied , and with no thought of self - taint in it , or else she might have often pause to turn aside and weep at the cloud of shame which come over Leonard 's love for she , and hide it from all but her faithful heart ; she believe and know that he be yet her own affectionate boy , although he might be gloomily silent , or apparently hard and cold . and in all this , Mr Benson could not choose but admire the way in which she be insensibly teach Leonard to conform to the law of right , to recognise Duty in the mode in which every action be perform . when Mr Benson see this , he know that all goodness would follow , and that the claim which his mother 's infinite love have on the boy 's heart would be acknowledge at last , and all the more fully because she herself never urge they , but silently admit the force of the reason that cause they to be for a time forget . by - and - by Leonard 's remorse at his ungracious and sullen way to his mother way that alternate with passionate , fitful burst of cling love assume more the character of repentance ; he try to do so no more . but still his health be delicate ; he be averse to go out - of - door ; he be much graver and sad than become his age . it be what must be , an inevitable consequence of what have be ; and Ruth have to be patient , and pray in secret , and with many tear , for the strength she need . 

 she know what it be to dread the go out into the street after her story have become know . for day and day she have silently shrink from this effort . but one evening towards dusk , Miss Benson be busy , and ask she to go an errand for she ; and Ruth get up and silently obey she . that silence as to inward suffering be only one part of her peculiar and exquisite sweetness of nature ; part of the patience with which she " accept her penance . " her true instinct tell she that it be not right to disturb other with many expression of her remorse ; that the holy repentance consist in a quiet and daily sacrifice . still there be time when she weary pitifully of her inaction . she be so willing to serve and work , and every one despise her service . her mind , as I have say before , have be well cultivate during these last few year ; so now she use all the knowledge she have gain in teach Leonard , which be an employment that Mr Benson relinquish willingly , because he feel that it would give she some of the occupation that she need . she endeavour to make herself useful in the house in every way she could ; but the water of housekeeping have close over her place during the time of her absence at Mr Bradshaw 's and , besides , now that they be try to restrict every unnecessary expense , it be sometimes difficult to find work for three woman . many and many a time Ruth turn over in her mind every possible chance of obtain employment for her leisure hour , and nowhere could she find it . now and then Sally , who be her confidante in this wish , procure she some needlework , but it be of a coarse and common kind , soon do , lightly pay for . but whatever it be , Ruth take it , and be thankful , although it add but a few penny to the household purse . I do not mean that there be any great need of money ; but a new adjustment of expenditure be require a reduction of want which have never be very extravagant . 

 Ruth 's salary of forty pound be go , while more of her " keep , " as Sally call it , be throw upon the Bensons . Mr Benson receive about eighty pound a year for his salary as minister . of this , he know that twenty pound come from Mr Bradshaw ; and when the old man appoint to collect the pew - rent bring he the quarterly amount , and he find no diminution in they , he inquire how it be , and learn that , although Mr Bradshaw have express to the collector his determination never to come to chapel again , he have add , that of course his pew - rent should be pay all the same . but this Mr Benson could not suffer ; and the old man be commission to return the money to Mr Bradshaw , as be what his deserted minister could not receive . 

 Mr and Miss Benson have about thirty or forty pound come in annually from a sum which , in happy day , Mr Bradshaw have invest in Canal share for they . altogether their income do not fall much short of a hundred a year , and they live in the Chapel - house free of rent . so Ruth 's small earning be but very little in actual hard commercial account , though in another sense they be much ; and Miss Benson always receive they with quiet simplicity . by degree , Mr Benson absorb some of Ruth 's time in a gracious and natural way . he employ her mind in all the kind office he be accustomed to render to the poor around he . and as much of the peace and ornament of life as they gain now , be gain on a firm basis of truth . if Ruth begin low down to find her place in the world , at any rate there be no flaw in the foundation . 

 Leonard be still their great anxiety . at time the question seem to be , could he live through all this trial of the elasticity of childhood ? and then they know how precious a blessing how true a pillar of fire , he be to his mother ; and how black the night , and how dreary the wilderness would be , when he be not . the child and the mother be each messenger of God angel to each other . 

 they have long gap between the piece of intelligence respect the Bradshaws . Mr Bradshaw have at length purchase the house at Abermouth , and they be much there . the way in which the Bensons hear most frequently of the family of their former friend , be through Mr Farquhar . he call on Mr Benson about a month after the latter have meet Jemima in the street . Mr Farquhar be not in the habit of pay call on any one ; and though he have always entertain and evince the most kind and friendly feeling towards Mr Benson , he have rarely be in the Chapel - house . Mr Benson receive he courteously , but he rather expect that there would be some especial reason allege , before the conclusion of the visit , for its occurrence ; more particularly as Mr Farquhar sit talk on the topic of the day in a somewhat absent manner , as if they be not the subject most present to his mind . the truth be , he could not help recur to the last time when he be in that room , wait to take Leonard a ride , and his heart beat rather more quickly than usual at the idea that Ruth might bring the boy in when he be equip . he be very full now of the remembrance of Ruth ; and yet he be also most thankful , most self - gratulatory , that he have go no far in his admiration of she that he have never express his regard in word that no one , as he believe , be cognisant of the incipient love which have grow partly out of his admiration , and partly out of his reason . he be thankful to be spar any implication in the nine - day ' wonder which her story have make in Eccleston . and yet his feeling for she have be of so strong a character , that he wince , as with extreme pain , at every application of censure to her name . these censure be often exaggerated , it be true ; but when they be just in their judgment of the outward circumstance of the case , they be not the less painful and distressing to he . his first rebound to Jemima be occasion by Mrs Bradshaw 's account of how severely her husband be displeased at her daughter 's have take part with Ruth ; and he could have thank and almost bless Jemima when she drop in   she dare do no more   her plead excuse and charitable explanation on Ruth 's behalf . Jemima have learn some humility from the discovery which have be to she so great a shock ; standing , she have learn to take heed lest she fall ; and when she have once be arouse to a perception of the violence of the hatred which she have indulge against Ruth , she be more reticent and measure in the expression of all her opinion . it show how much her character have be purify from pride , that now she feel aware that what in she be again attract Mr Farquhar be her faithful advocacy of her rival , wherever such advocacy be wise or practicable . he be quite unaware that Jemima have be conscious of his great admiration for Ruth ; he do not know that she have ever care enough for he to be jealous . but the unacknowledged bond between they now be their grief , and sympathy , and pity for Ruth ; only in Jemima these feeling be ardent , and would fain have become active ; while in Mr Farquhar they be strongly mingle with thankfulness that he have escape a disagreeable position , and a painful notoriety . his natural caution induce he to make a resolution never to think of any woman as a wife until he have ascertain all her antecedent , from her birth upwards ; and the same spirit of caution , direct inwardly , make he afraid of give too much pity to Ruth , for fear of the conclusion to which such a feeling might lead he . but still his old regard for she , for Leonard , and his esteem and respect for the Bensons , induce he to lend a willing ear to Jemima 's earnest entreaty that he would go and call on Mr Benson , in order that she might learn something about the family in general , and Ruth in particular . it be thus that he come to sit by Mr Benson 's study fire , and to talk , in an absent way , to that gentleman . how they get on the subject he do not know , more than one - half of his attention be distract ; but they be speak about politic , when Mr Farquhar learn that Mr Benson take in no newspaper . 

 " will you allow I to send you over my Times ? I have generally do with it before twelve o'clock , and after that it be really waste - paper in my house . you will oblige I by make use of it . " 

 " I be sure I be very much oblige to you for thinking of it . but do not trouble yourself to send it ; Leonard can fetch it . " 

 " how be Leonard now ? " ask Mr Farquhar , and he try to speak indifferently ; but a grave look of intelligence cloud his eye as he look for Mr Benson 's answer . " I have not meet he lately . " 

 " no ! " say Mr Benson , with an expression of pain in his countenance , though he , too , strove to speak in his usual tone . 

 " Leonard be not strong , and we find it difficult to induce he to go much out - of - door . " 

 there be a little silence for a minute or two , during which Mr Farquhar have to check an unbidden sigh . but , suddenly rouse himself into a determination to change the subject , he say : 

 " you will find rather a lengthened account of the exposure of Sir Thomas Campbell 's conduct at Baden . he seem to be a complete blackleg , in spite of his baronetcy . I fancy the paper be glad to get hold of anything just now . " 

 " who be Sir Thomas Campbell ? " ask Mr Benson . 

 " oh , I think you might have hear the report a true one , I believe of Mr Donne 's engagement to his daughter . he must be glad she jilt he now , I fancy , after this public exposure of her father 's conduct . "   that be an awkward speech , as Mr Farquhar feel ; and he hasten to cover it , by go on without much connexion : 

 " Dick Bradshaw be my informant about all these project marriage in high life they be not much in my way ; but since he have come down from London to take his share in the business , I think I have hear more of the news and the scandal of what , I suppose , would be consider high life , than ever I do before ; and Mr Donne 's proceeding seem to be an especial object of interest to he . " 

 " and Mr Donne be engage to a Miss Campbell , be he ? " 

 " be engage ; if I understand right , she break off the engagement to marry some russian prince or other a well match , Dick Bradshaw tell I . I assure you , " continue Mr Farquhar , smile , " I be a very passive recipient of all such intelligence , and might very probably have forget all about it , if the Times of this morning have not be so full of the disgrace of the young lady 's father . " 

 " Richard Bradshaw have quite leave London , have he ? " ask Mr Benson , who feel far more interest in his old patron 's family than in all the Campbells that ever be or ever would be . 

 " yes . he have come to settle down here . I hope he may do well , and not disappoint his father , who have form very high expectation from he ; I be not sure if they be not too high for any young man to realise . " Mr Farquhar could have say more , but Dick Bradshaw be Jemima 's brother , and an object of anxiety to she . 

 " I be sure , I trust such a mortification such a grief as any disappointment in Richard , may not befall his father , " reply Mr Benson . 

 " Jemima Miss Bradshaw , " say Mr Farquhar , hesitating , " be most anxious to hear of you all . I hope I may tell she you be all well "   with an emphasis on all ; " that " 

 " thank you . thank she for we . we be all well ; all except Leonard , who be not strong , as I say before . but we must be patient . time , and such devoted , tender love as he have from his mother , must do much . " 

 Mr Farquhar be silent . 

 " send he to my house for the paper . it will be a little necessity for he to have some regular exercise , and to face the world . he must do it , soon or later . " 

 the two gentleman shake hand with each other on parting ; but no further allusion be make to either Ruth or Leonard . 

 so Leonard go for the paper . steal along by back street run with his head bend down his little heart pant with dread of be point out as his mother 's child so he use to come back , and run tremble to Sally , who would hush he up to her breast with many a rough - spoken word of pity and sympathy . 

 Mr Farquhar try to catch he to speak to he , and tame he as it be ; and , by - and - by , he contrive to interest he sufficiently to induce the boy to stay a little while in the house , or stable , or garden . but the race through the street be always to be dread as the end of ever so pleasant a visit . 

 Mr Farquhar keep up the intercourse with the Bensons which he have thus begin . he persevere in pay call quiet visit , where not much be say , political or local news talk about , and the same inquiry always make and answer as to the welfare of the two family , who be estranged from each other . Mr Farquhar 's report be so little varied that Jemima grow anxious to know more particular . 

 " oh , Mr Farquhar ! " say she ; " do you think they tell you the truth ? I wonder what Ruth can be do to support herself and Leonard ? nothing that you can hear of , you say ; and , of course , one must not ask the downright question . and yet I be sure they must be pinch in some way . do you think Leonard be strong ? " 

 " I be not sure . he be grow fast ; and such a blow as he have have will be certain to make he more thoughtful and full of care than most boy of his age ; both these circumstance may make he thin and pale , which he certainly be . " 

 " oh ! how I wish I might go and see they all ! I could tell in a twinkling the real state of thing . " she speak with a tinge of her old impatience . 

 " I will go again , and pay particular attention to anything you wish I to observe . you see , of course , I feel a delicacy about ask any direct question , or even allude in any way to these late occurrence . " 

 " and you never see Ruth by any chance ? " 

 " never ! " 

 they do not look at each other while this last question be ask and answer . 

 " I will take the paper to - morrow myself ; it will be an excuse for call again , and I will try to be very penetrate ; but I have not much hope of success . " 

 " oh , thank you . it be give you a great deal of trouble ; but you be very kind . " 

 " kind , Jemima ! " he repeat , in a tone which make she go very red and hot ; " must I tell you how you can reward I ? will you call I Walter ? say , thank you , Walter just for once . " 

 Jemima feel herself yield to the voice and tone in which this be speak ; but her very consciousness of the depth of her love make she afraid of give way , and anxious to be woo , that she might be reinstate in her self - esteem . 

 " no ! " say she , " I do not   think I can call you so . you be too old . it would not be respectful . " she mean it half in joke , and have no idea he would take the allusion to his age so seriously as he do . he rise up , and coldly , as a matter of form , in a change voice , wish her " good - bye . " her heart sink ; yet the old pride be there . but as he be at the very door , some sudden impulse make she speak : 

 " I have not vex you , have I , Walter ? " 

 he turn round , glow with a thrill of delight . she be as red as any rose ; her look drop down to the ground . 

 they be not raise when , half an hour afterwards , she say , " you will not   forbid my go to see Ruth , will you ? because if you do , I give you notice I shall disobey you . " the arm around her waist clasp she yet more fondly at the idea , suggest by this speech , of the control which he should have a right to exercise over her action at some future day . 

 " tell I , " say he , " how much of your goodness to I , this last happy hour , have be owe to the desire of have more freedom as a wife than as a daughter ? " 

 she be almost glad that he should think she need any additional motive to her love for he before she could have accept he . she be afraid that she have betray the deep , passionate regard with which she have long look upon he . she be lose in delight at her own happiness . she be silent for a time . at length she say : 

 " I do not   think you know how faithful I have be to you ever since the day when you first bring I pistachio - candy from London when I be quite a little girl . " 

 " not more faithful than I have be to you , " for in truth , the recollection of his love for Ruth have utterly fade away , and he think himself a model of constancy ; " and you have try I pretty well . what a vixen you have be ! " 

 Jemima sigh ; smitten with the consciousness of how little she have deserve her present happiness ; humble with the recollection of the evil thought that have rag in her heart during the time   which she remember well , though he might have forget it   when Ruth have have the affection which her jealous rival covet . 

 " I may speak to your father , may not I , Jemima ? " 

 no ! for some reason or fancy which she could not define , and could not be persuade out of , she wish to keep their mutual understanding a secret . she have a natural desire to avoid the congratulation she expect from her family . she dread her father 's consideration of the whole affair as a satisfactory disposal of his daughter to a worthy man , who , be his partner , would not require any abstraction of capital from the concern , and Richard 's more noisy delight at his sister 's have " hooked " so good a match . it be only her simple - hearted mother that she long to tell . she know that her mother 's congratulation would not jar upon she , though they might not sound the full organ - peal of her love . but all that her mother know pass onwards to her father ; so for the present , at any rate , she determine to realise her secret position alone . somehow , the sympathy of all other that she most long for be Ruth 's ; but the first communication of such an event be due to her parent . she impose very strict regulation on Mr Farquhar 's behaviour ; and quarrelled and differ from he more than ever , but with a secret joyful understanding with he in her heart , even while they disagree with each other for similarity of opinion be not always I think not often need for fulness and perfection of love . 

 after Ruth 's " detection , " as Mr Bradshaw use to call it , he say he could never trust another governess again ; so Mary and Elizabeth have be send to school the follow Christmas , and their place in the family be but poorly supply by the return of Mr Richard Bradshaw , who have leave London , and be receive as a partner . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIX 

 Sally take her money out of the Bank 
 

 the conversation narrate in the last chapter as take place between Mr Farquhar and Jemima , occur about a year after Ruth 's dismissal from her situation . that year , full of small event , and change of place to the Bradshaws , have be monotonous and long in its course to the other household . there have be no want of peace and tranquillity ; there have , perhaps , be more of they than in the precede year , when , though unacknowledge by any , all must have occasionally feel the oppression of the falsehood and a slight glance dread must have flash across their most prosperous state , lest , somehow or another , the mystery should be disclose . but now , as the shepherd - boy in John Bunyan sweetly sing , " he that be low need fear no fall . " 

 still , their peace be as the stillness of a grey autumnal day , when no sun be to be see above , and when a quiet film seem draw before both sky and earth , as if to rest the wearied eye after the summer 's glare . few event break the monotony of their life , and those event be of a depressing kind . they consist in Ruth 's futile endeavour to obtain some employment , however humble ; in Leonard 's fluctuation of spirit and health ; in Sally 's increase deafness ; in the final and unmendable wearing - out of the parlour carpet , which there be no spare money to replace , and so they cheerfully supply its want by a large hearth - rug that Ruth make out of end of list ; and , what be more a subject of uncease regret to Mr Benson than all , the defection of some of the member of his congregation , who follow Mr Bradshaw 's lead . their place , to be sure , be more than fill up by the poor , who throng to his chapel ; but still it be a disappointment to find that people about whom he have be earnestly think to whom he have labour to do good should dissolve the connexion without a word of farewell or explanation . Mr Benson do not wonder that they should go ; nay , he even feel it right that they should seek that spiritual help from another , which he , by his error , have forfeit his power to offer ; he only wish they have speak of their intention to he in an open and manly way . but not the less do he labour on among those to whom God permit he to be of use . he feel age steal upon he apace , although he say nothing about it , and no one seem to be aware of it ; and he work the more diligently while " it be yet day . " it be not the number of his year that make he feel old , for he be only sixty , and many man be hale and strong at that time of life ; in all probability , it be that early injury to his spine which affect the constitution of his mind as well as his body , and predispose he , in the opinion of some at least , to a feminine morbidness of conscience . he have shake off somewhat of this since the affair with Mr Bradshaw ; he be simple and more dignified than he have be for several year before , during which time he have be anxious and uncertain in his manner , and more give to thought than to action . 

 the one happy bright spot in this grey year be owe to Sally . as she say of herself , she believe she grow more " nattered " as she grow old ; but that she be conscious of her " natteredness " be a new thing , and a great gain to the comfort of the house , for it make she very grateful for forbearance , and more aware of kindness than she have ever be before . she have become very deaf ; yet she be uneasy and jealous if she be not inform of all the family thought , plan , and proceeding , which often have   however private in their detail   to be shout to she at the full pitch of the voice . but she always hear Leonard perfectly . his clear and bell - like voice , which be similar to his mother 's , till sorrow have take the ring out of it , be sure to be hear by the old servant , though every one else have fail . sometimes , however , she " get she hearing sudden , " as she phrase it , and be alive to every word and noise , more particularly when they do not want she to hear ; and at such time she resent their continuance of the habit of speak loud as a mortal offence . one day , her indignation at be think deaf call out one of the rare smile on Leonard 's face ; she see it , and say , " bless thee , lad ! if it but amuse thee , they may shout through a ram 's horn to I , and I will never let on I be not deaf . it be as good a use as I can be of , " she continue to herself , " if I can make that poor lad smile a bit . " 

 if she expect to be everybody 's confidante , she make Leonard her . " there ! " say she , when she come home from her marketing one Saturday night , " look here , lad ! here be forty - two pound , seven shilling , and twopence ! it be a mint of money , be not   it ? I take it all in sovereign for fear of fire . " 

 " what be it all for , Sally ? " say he . 

 " aye , lad ! that be ask . it be Mr Benson 's money , " say she , mysteriously , " that I have   be keep for he . be he in the study , think ye ? " 

 " yes ! I think so . where have you be keep it ? " 

 " never you mind ! " she go towards the study , but think she might have be hard on her darling in refuse to gratify his curiosity , she turn back , and say : 

 " I say if thou wilt , thou mayst do I a job of work some day . I be want a frame make for a piece of writing . " 

 and then she return to go into the study , carry her sovereign in her apron . 

 " here , Master Thurstan , " say she , pour they out on the table before her astonished master . " take it , it be all your . " 

 " all mine ! what can you mean ? " ask he , bewilder . 

 she do not hear he , and go on : 

 " lock it up safe , out o ' the way . dunnot go and leave it about to tempt folk . I will not answer for myself if money 's leave about . I may be crib a sovereign . " 

 " but where do it come from ? " say he . 

 " come from ! " she reply . " where do all money come from , but the bank , to be sure ? I think any one could tell that . " 

 " I have no money in the bank ! " say he , more and more perplexed . 

 " no ! I know that ; but I have . dunnot ye remember how you would raise my wage , last Martinmas eighteen year ? you and Faith be very headstrong , but I be too deep for you . see thee ! I go and put it I ' th ' bank . I be never go to touch it ; and if I have die it would have be all right , for I have a will make , all regular and tight make by a lawyer   leastway he would have be a lawyer , if he have not   get transport first . and now , think I , I think I will just go and get it out and give it them . bank be not always safe . " 

 " I will take care of it for you with the great pleasure . still , you know , bank allow interest . " 

 " d'ye suppose I do not   know all about interest , and compound interest too , by this time ? I tell ye I want ye to spend it . it be your own . it be not mine . it always be yours . now you be not go to fret I by say you think it mine . " 

 Mr Benson hold out his hand to she , for he could not speak . she bent forward to he as he sit there , and kiss he . 

 " eh , bless ye , lad ! it be the first kiss I have   have of ye sin ' ye be a little lad , and it be a great refreshment . now do not   you and faith go and bother I with talk about it . it be just your , and make no more ado . " 

 she go back into the kitchen , and bring out her will , and give Leonard direction how to make a frame for it ; for the boy be a very tolerable joiner , and have a box of tool which Mr Bradshaw have give he some year ago . 

 " it be a pity to lose such fine writing , " say she ; " though I can not   say as I can read it . perhaps you would just read it for I , Leonard . " she sit open - mouthed with admiration at all the long word . 

 the frame be make , and the will hang up opposite to her bed , unknown to any one but Leonard ; and , by dint of his repeat read it over to she , she learn all the word , except " testatrix , " which she would always call " testy trick . " Mr Benson have be too much gratified and touch , by her unconditional gift of all she have in the world , to reject it ; but he only hold it in his hand as a deposit until he could find a safe investment befit so small a sum . the little rearrangement of the household expenditure have not touch he as they have do the woman . he be aware that meat dinner be not now every - day occurrence ; but he prefer pudding and vegetable , and be glad of the exchange . he observe , too , that they all sit together in the kitchen in the evening ; but the kitchen , with the well - scour dresser , the shin saucepan , the well - black grate and whitened hearth , and the warmth which seem to rise up from the very flag , and ruddily cheer the most distant corner , appear a very cozy and charming sitting - room ; and , besides , it appear but right that Sally , in her old age , should have the companionship of those with whom she have live in love and faithfulness for so many year . he only wish he could more frequently leave the solitary comfort of his study , and join the kitchen party , where Sally sit as mistress in the chimney - corner , knit by fire - light , and Miss Benson and Ruth , with the candle between they , stitch away at their work ; while Leonard strew the ample dresser with his slate and book . he do not mope and pine over his lesson ; they be the one thing that take he out of himself . as yet his mother could teach he , though in some respect it be become a strain upon her acquirement and power . Mr Benson see this , but reserve his offer of help as long as he could , hop that before his assistance become absolutely necessary , some mode of employment beyond that of occasional plain - work might be lay open to Ruth . 

 in spite of the communication they occasionally have with Mr Farquhar , when he give they the intelligence of his engagement to Jemima , it seem like a glimpse into a world from which they be shut out . they wonder Miss Benson and Ruth do at least much about the detail . Ruth sit over her sewing , fancy how all have take place ; and as soon as she have arrange the event which be go on among people and place once so familiar to she , she find some discrepancy , and set - to afresh to picture the declaration of love , and the yielding , blush acceptance ; for Mr Farquhar have tell little beyond the mere fact that there be an engagement between himself and Jemima which have exist for some time , but which have be keep secret until now , when it be acknowledge , sanction , and to be fulfil as soon as he return from an arrangement of family affair in Scotland . this intelligence have be enough for Mr Benson , who be the only person Mr Farquhar see ; as Ruth always shrink from the post of open the door , and Mr Benson be apt at recognise individual knock , and always prompt to welcome Mr Farquhar . 

 Miss Benson occasionally think and what she think she be in the habit of say that Jemima might have come herself to announce such an event to old friend ; but Mr Benson decidedly vindicate she from any charge of neglect , by express his strong conviction that to she they owe Mr Farquhar 's call his all but outspoken offer of service his quiet , steady interest in Leonard ; and , moreover   repeat the conversation he have have with she in the street , the first time they meet after the disclosure , Mr Benson tell his sister how glad he be to find that , with all the warmth of her impetuous disposition hurry she on to rebellion against her father , she be now attain to that just self - control which can distinguish between mere wish and true reason that she could abstain from come to see Ruth while she could do but little good , reserve herself for some great occasion or strong emergency . 

 Ruth say nothing , but she yearn all the more in silence to see Jemima . in her recollection of that fearful interview with Mr Bradshaw , which haunt she yet , sleep or wake , she be painfully conscious that she have not thank Jemima for her generous , love advocacy ; it have pass unregarde at the time in intensity of agony but now she recollect that by no word , or tone , or touch , have she give any sign of gratitude . Mr Benson have never tell she of his meeting with Jemima ; so it seem as if there be no hope of any future opportunity : for it be strange how two household , rent apart by some dissension , can go through life , their parallel existence run side by side , yet never touch each other , near neighbour as they be , habitual and familiar guest as they may have be . 

 Ruth 's only point of hope be Leonard . she be weary of look for work and employment , which everywhere seem hold above her reach . she be not impatient of this , but she be very , very sorry . she feel within her such capability , and all ignore she , and pass she by on the other side . but she see some progress in Leonard . not that he could continue to have the happy development , and genial ripening , which other boy have ; leap from childhood to boyhood , and thence to youth , with glad bound , and unconsciously enjoy every age . at present there be no harmony in Leonard 's character ; he be as full of thought and self - consciousness as many man , plan his action long beforehand , so as to avoid what he dread , and what she could not yet give he strength to face , coward as she be herself , and shrink from hard remark . yet Leonard be regain some of his lose tenderness towards his mother ; when they be alone he would throw himself on her neck and smother she with kiss , without any apparent cause for such a passionate impulse . if any one be by , his manner be cold and reserved . the hopeful part of his character be the determination evident in he to be a " law unto himself , " and the serious thought which he give to the formation of this law . there be an inclination in he to reason , especially and principally with Mr Benson , on the great question of ethic which the majority of the world have settle long ago . but I do not think he ever so argue with his mother . her lovely patience , and her humility , be earn its reward ; and from her quiet piety , bear sweetly the denial of her wish the refusal of she beg the disgrace in which she lay , while other , less worthy , be employ this , which perplex he , and almost anger he at first , call out his reverence at last , and what she say he take for his law with proud humility ; and thus softly , she be lead he up to God . his health be not strong ; it be not likely to be . he moan and talk in his sleep , and his appetite be still variable , part of which might be owe to his preference of the hard lesson to any outdoor exercise . but this last unnatural symptom be vanish before the assiduous kindness of Mr Farquhar , and the quiet but firm desire of his mother . next to Ruth , Sally have perhaps the most influence over he ; but he dearly love both Mr and Miss Benson ; although he be reserve on this , as on every point not purely intellectual . his be a hard childhood , and his mother feel that it be so . child bear any moderate degree of poverty and privation cheerfully ; but , in addition to a good deal of this , Leonard have to bear a sense of disgrace attach to he and to the creature he love well ; this it be that take out of he the buoyancy and natural gladness of youth , in a way which no scantiness of food or clothing , or want of any outward comfort , could ever have do . 

 two year have pass away two long , eventless year . something be now go to happen , which touch their heart very nearly , though out of their sight and hearing . Jemima be go to be marry this August , and by - and - by the very day be fix . it be to be on the 14th . on the evening of the 13th , Ruth be sit alone in the parlour , idly gaze out on the darken shadow in the little garden ; her eye keep fill with quiet tear , that rise , not for her own isolation from all that be go on of bustle and preparation for the morrow 's event , but because she have see how Miss Benson have feel that she and her brother be leave out from the gathering of old friend in the Bradshaw family . as Ruth sit , suddenly she be aware of a figure by she ; she start up , and in the gloom of the apartment she recognise Jemima . in an instant they be in each other 's arm a long , fast embrace . 

 " can you forgive I ? " whisper Jemima in Ruth 's ear . 

 " forgive you ! what do you mean ? what have I to forgive ? the question be , can I ever thank you as I long to do , if I could find word ? " 

 " oh , Ruth , how I hat you once ! " 

 " it be all the more noble in you to stand by I as you do . you must have hat I when you know how I be deceive you all ! " 

 " no , that be not it that make I hate you . it be before that . oh , Ruth , I do hate you ! " 

 they be silent for some time , still hold each other 's hand . Ruth speak first . 

 " and you be go to be married to - morrow ! " 

 " yes , " say Jemima . " to - morrow , at nine o'clock . but I do not   think I could have be marry without come to wish Mr Benson and Miss Faith good - bye . " 

 " I will go for they , " say Ruth . 

 " no , not just yet . I want to ask you one or two question first . nothing very particular ; only it seem as if there have be such a strange , long separation between we . Ruth , " say she , drop her voice , " be Leonard strong than he be ? I be so sorry to hear about he from Walter . but he be well ? " ask she , anxiously . 

 " yes , he be well . not what a boy of his age should be , " reply his mother , in a tone of quiet but deep mournfulness . " oh , Jemima ! " continue she , " my sharp punishment come through he . to think what he might have be , and what he be ! " 

 " but Walter say he be both strong in health , and not so nervous and shy . " Jemima add the last word in a hesitating and doubtful manner , as if she do not know how to express her full meaning without hurt Ruth . 

 " he do not show that he feel his disgrace so much . I can not talk about it , Jemima , my heart ache so about he . but he be well , " she continue , feel that Jemima 's kind anxiety require an answer at any cost of pain to herself . " he be only study too closely now ; he take to his lesson evidently as a relief from thought . he be very clever , and I hope and trust , yet I tremble to say it , I believe he be very good . " 

 " you must let he come and see we very often when we come back . we shall be two month away . we be go to Germany , partly on Walter 's business . Ruth , I have be talk to papa to - night , very seriously and quietly , and it have make I love he so much more , and understand he so much well . " 

 " do he know of your come here ? I hope he do , " say Ruth . 

 " yes . not that he like my do it at all . but , somehow , I can always do thing against a person 's wish more easily when I be on good term with they that be not exactly what I mean ; but now to - night , after papa have be show I that he really love I more than I ever think he have do   for I always fancy he be so absorb in Dick , he do not care much for us girl , I feel brave enough to say that I intend to come here and bid you all good - bye . he be silent for a minute , and then say I might do it , but I must remember he do not approve of it , and be not to be compromise by my coming ; still I can tell that , at the bottom of his heart , there be some of the old kindly feeling to Mr and Miss Benson , and I do not   despair of its all be make up , though , perhaps , I ought to say that mamma do . " 

 " Mr and Miss Benson will not   hear of my go away , " say Ruth , sadly . 

 " they be quite right . " 

 " but I be earn nothing . I can not get any employment . I be only a burden and an expense . " 

 " be you not also a pleasure ? and Leonard , be he not a dear object of love ? it be easy for I to talk , I know , who be so impatient . oh , I never deserve to be so happy as I be ! you do not   know how good Walter be . I use to think he so cold and cautious . but now , Ruth , will you tell Mr and Miss Benson that I be here ? there be sign of paper , and I do not   know what to be do at home . and when I come back , I hope to see you often , if you will let I . " 

 Mr and Miss Benson give she a warm greeting . Sally be call in , and would bring a candle with she , to have a close inspection of she , in order to see if she be change she have not see she for so long a time , she say ; and Jemima stand laugh and blush in the middle of the room , while Sally study she all over , and would not be convince that the old gown which she be wear for the last time be not one of the new wedding one . the consequence of which misunderstanding be , that Sally , in her short petticoat and bedgown , turn up her nose at the old - fashioned way in which Miss Bradshaw 's gown be make . but Jemima know the old woman , and rather enjoy the contempt for her dress . at last she kiss they all , and run away to her impatient Mr Farquhar , who be await she . 

 not many week after this , the poor old woman whom I have name as have become a friend of Ruth 's , during Leonard 's illness three year ago , fall down and break her hip - bone . it be a serious probably a fatal injury , for one so old ; and as soon as Ruth hear of it she devote all her leisure time to old Ann Fleming . Leonard have now outstript his mother 's power of teaching , and Mr Benson give he his lesson ; so Ruth be a great deal at the cottage both night and day . 

 there Jemima find she one November evening , the second after their return from their prolong stay on the continent . she and Mr Farquhar have be to the Bensons , and have sit there some time ; and now Jemima have come on just to see Ruth for five minute , before the evening be too dark for she to return alone . she find Ruth sit on a stool before the fire , which be compose of a few stick on the hearth . the blaze they give be , however , enough to enable she to read ; and she be deep in study of the Bible , in which she have read aloud to the poor old woman , until the latter have fall asleep . Jemima beckon her out , and they stand on the green just before the open door , so that Ruth could see if Ann awake . 

 " I have not many minute to stay , only I feel as if I must see you . and we want Leonard to come to we to see all our german purchase , and hear all our german adventure . may he come to - morrow ? " 

 " yes ; thank you . oh ! Jemima , I have hear something I have get a plan that make I so happy ! I have not tell any one yet . but Mr Wynne   the parish doctor , you know   have ask I if I would go out as a sick nurse he think he could find I employment . " 

 " you , a sick nurse ! " say Jemima , involuntarily glance over the beautiful lithe figure , and the lovely refinement of Ruth 's face as the light of the rise moon fall upon it . " my dear Ruth , I do not   think you be fit for it ! " 

 " do not   you ? " say Ruth , a little disappointed . " I think I be ; at least , that I should be very soon . I like be about sick and helpless people ; I always feel so sorry for they ; and then I think I have the gift of a very delicate touch , which be such a comfort in many case . and I should try to be very watchful and patient . Mr Wynne propose it himself . " 

 " it be not in that way I mean you be not fit for it . I mean that you be fit for something well . why , Ruth , you be well educate than I be ! " 

 " but if nobody will allow I to teach ? for that be what I suppose you mean . besides , I feel as if all my education would be need to make I a good sick nurse . " 

 " your knowledge of Latin , for instance , " say Jemima , hit , in her vexation at the plan , on the first acquirement of Ruth she could think of . 

 " well ! " say Ruth , " that will not   come amiss ; I can read the prescription . " 

 " which the doctor would rather you do not do . " 

 " still , you can not   say that any knowledge of any kind will be in my way , or will unfit I for my work . " 

 " perhaps not . but all your taste and refinement will be in your way , and will unfit you . " 

 " you have not think about this so much as I have , or you would not say so . any fastidiousness I shall have to get rid of , and I shall be well without ; but any true refinement I be sure I shall find of use ; for do not   you think that every power we have may be make to help we in any right work , whatever that be ? would you not rather be nurse by a person who speak gently and move quietly about than by a loud bustling woman ? " 

 " yes , to be sure ; but a person unfit for anything else may move quietly , and speak gently , and give medicine when the doctor order it , and keep awake at night ; and those be the good quality I ever hear of in a sick nurse . " 

 Ruth be quite silent for some time . at last she say : " at any rate it be work , and as such I be thankful for it . you can not discourage I and perhaps you know too little of what my life have be how set apart in idleness I have be to sympathise with I fully . " 

 " and I want you to come to see we I in my new home . Walter and I have plan that we would persuade you to come to we very often "   she have plan , and Mr Farquhar have consent ; " and now you will have to be fasten up in a sick - room . " 

 " I could not have come , " say Ruth quickly . " Dear Jemima ! it be like you to have think of it but I could not come to your house . it be not a thing to reason about . it be just feel . but I do feel as if I could not go . dear Jemima ! if you be ill or sorrowful , and want I , I will come " 

 " so you would and must to any one , if you take up that call . " 

 " but I should come to you , love , in quite a different way ; I should go to you with my heart full of love so full that I be afraid I should be too anxious . " 

 " I almost wish I be ill , that I might make you come at once . " 

 " and I be almost ashamed to think how I should like you to be in some position in which I could show you how well I remember that day that terrible day in the school - room . God bless you for it , Jemima ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 the Forged Deed 
 

 Mr Wynne , the parish surgeon , be right . he could and do obtain employment for Ruth as a sick nurse . her home be with the Bensons ; every spare moment be give to Leonard and to they ; but she be at the call of all the invalid in the town . at first her work lie exclusively among the pauper . at first , too , there be a recoil from many circumstance , which impress upon she the most fully the physical suffering of those whom she tend . but she try to lose the sense of these or rather to lessen they , and make they take their appoint place in thinking of the individual themselves , as separate from their decaying frame ; and all along she have enough self - command to control herself from express any sign of repugnance . she allow herself no nervous haste of movement or touch that should hurt the feeling of the poor , most friendless creature , who ever lie a victim to disease . there be no rough get over of all the disagreeable and painful work of her employment . when it be a lessening of pain to have the touch careful and delicate , and the ministration perform with gradual skill , Ruth think of her charge , and not of herself . as she have foretell , she find a use for all her power . the poor patient themselves be unconsciously gratify and soothe by her harmony and refinement of manner , voice , and gesture . if this harmony and refinement have be merely superficial , it would not have have this balmy effect . that arise from its be the true expression of a kind , modest , and humble spirit . by degree her reputation as a nurse spread upwards , and many seek her good office who could well afford to pay for they . whatever remuneration be offer to she , she take it simply and without comment ; for she feel that it be not her to refuse ; that it be , in fact , owe to the Bensons for she and her child 's subsistence . she go wherever her service be first call for . if the poor bricklayer , who break both his leg in a fall from the scaffolding , send for she when she be disengage , she go and remain with he until he could spare she , let who would be the next claimant . from the happy and prosperous in all but health , she would occasionally beg off , when some one less happy and more friendless wish for she ; and sometimes she would ask for a little money from Mr Benson to give to such in their time of need . but it be astonish how much she be able to do without money . 

 her way be very quiet ; she never speak much . any one who have be oppress with the weight of a vital secret for year , and much more any one the character of whose life have be stamp by one event , and that produce sorrow and shame , be naturally reserve . and yet Ruth 's silence be not like reserve ; it be too gentle and tender for that . it have more the effect of a hush of all loud or disturbing emotion , and out of the deep calm the word that come forth have a beautiful power . she do not talk much about religion ; but those who notice she know that it be the unseen banner which she be follow . the low - breathe sentence which she speak into the ear of the sufferer and the dying carry they upwards to God . 

 she gradually become know and respect among the roughest boy of the rough populace of the town . they would make way for she when she pass along the street with more deference than they use to most ; for all know something of the tender care with which she have attend this or that sick person , and , besides , she be so often in connexion with death that something of the superstitious awe with which the dead be regard by those rough boy in the midst of their strong life , surround she . 

 she herself do not feel change . she feel just as faulty as far from be what she want to be , as ever . she well know how many of her good action be incomplete , and mar with evil . she do not feel much change from the early Ruth she could remember . everything seem to change but herself . Mr and Miss Benson grow old , and Sally grow deaf , and Leonard be shoot up , and Jemima be a mother . she and the distant hill that she see from her chamber window , seem the only thing which be the same as when she first come to Eccleston . as she sit look out , and take her fill of solitude , which sometimes be her most thorough rest as she sit at the attic window look abroad she see their next - door neighbour carry out to sun himself in his garden . when she first come to Eccleston , this neighbour and his daughter be often see take long and regular walk ; by - and - by his walk become short , and the attentive daughter would convoy he home , and set out afresh to finish her own . of late year he have only go out in the garden behind his house ; but at first he have walk pretty briskly there by his daughter 's help now he be carry , and place in a large , cushioned easy - chair , his head remain where it be place against the pillow , and hardly move when his kind daughter , who be now middle - aged , bring he the first rose of the summer . this tell Ruth of the lapse of life and time . 

 Mr and Mrs Farquhar be constant in their attention ; but there be no sign of Mr Bradshaw ever forgive the imposition which have be practise upon he , and Mr Benson cease to hope for any renewal of their intercourse . still , he think that he must know of all the kind attention which Jemima pay to they , and of the fond regard which both she and her husband bestow on Leonard . this latter feeling even go so far that Mr Farquhar call one day , and with much diffidence beg Mr Benson to urge Ruth to let he be send to school at his   Mr Farquhar 's   expense . 

 Mr Benson be take by surprise , and hesitate . " I do not know . it would be a great advantage in some respect ; and yet I doubt whether it would in other . his mother 's influence over he be thoroughly good , and I should fear that any thoughtless allusion to his peculiar position might touch the raw spot in his mind . " 

 " but he be so unusually clever , it seem a shame not to give he all the advantage he can have . besides , do he see much of his mother now ? " 

 " hardly a day pass without she come home to be an hour or so with he , even at her busy time ; she say it be her good refreshment . and often , you know , she be disengage for a week or two , except the occasional service which she be always render to those who need she . your offer be very tempting , but there be so decidedly another view of the question to be consider , that I believe we must refer it to she . " 

 " with all my heart . do not   hurry she to a decision . let she weigh it well . I think she will find the advantage preponderate . " 

 " I wonder if I might trouble you with a little business , Mr Farquhar , as you be here ? " 

 " certainly ; I be only too glad to be of any use to you . " 

 " why , I see from the report of the Star Life Assurance Company in the Times , which you be so good as to send I , that they have declare a bonus on the share ; now it seem strange that I have receive no notification of it , and I think that perhaps it might be lie at your office , as Mr Bradshaw be the purchaser of the share , and I have always receive the dividend through your firm . " 

 Mr Farquhar take the newspaper , and run his eye over the report . 

 " I have   no doubt that be the way of it , " say he . " some of our clerk have be careless about it ; or it may be Richard himself . he be not always the most punctual and exact of mortal ; but I will see about it . perhaps after all it may not   come for a day or two ; they have always such number of these circular to send out . " 

 " oh ! I be in no hurry about it . I only want to receive it some time before I incur any expense , which the promise of this bonus may tempt I to indulge in . " 

 Mr Farquhar take his leave . that evening there be a long conference , for , as it happen , Ruth be at home . she be strenuously against the school plan . she could see no advantage that would counterbalance the evil which she dread from any school for Leonard ; namely , that the good opinion and regard of the world would assume too high an importance in his eye . the very idea seem to produce in she so much shrink affright , that by mutual consent the subject be drop ; to be take up again , or not , accord to circumstance . 

 Mr Farquhar write the next morning , on Mr Benson 's behalf , to the Insurance Company , to inquire about the bonus . although he write in the usual formal way , he do not think it necessary to tell Mr Bradshaw what he have do ; for Mr Benson 's name be rarely mention between the partner ; each have be make fully aware of the view which the other entertain on the subject that have cause the estrangement ; and Mr Farquhar feel that no external argument could affect Mr Bradshaw 's resolve disapproval and avoidance of his former minister . 

 as it happen , the answer from the Insurance Company   direct to the firm   be give to Mr Bradshaw along with the other business letter . it be to the effect that Mr Benson 's share have be sell and transfer above a twelvemonth ago , which sufficiently account for the circumstance that no notification of the bonus have be send to he . 

 Mr Bradshaw toss the letter on one side , not displeased to have a good reason for feel a little contempt at the unbusiness - like forgetfulness of Mr Benson , at whose instance some one have evidently be write to the Insurance Company . on Mr Farquhar 's entrance he express this feeling to he . 

 " really , " he say , " these dissent minister have no more notion of exactitude in their affair than a child ! the idea of forget that he have sell his share , and apply for the bonus , when it seem he have transfer they only a year ago ! " 

 Mr Farquhar be read the letter while Mr Bradshaw speak . 

 " I do not   quite understand it , " say he . " Mr Benson be quite clear about it . he could not have receive his half - yearly dividend unless he have be possess of these share ; and I do not   suppose dissent minister , with all their ignorance of business , be unlike other man in know whether or not they receive the money that they believe to be owe to they . " 

 " I should not wonder if they be if Benson be , at any rate . why , I never know his watch to be right in all my life it be always too fast or too slow ; it must have be a daily discomfort to he . it ought to have be . depend upon it , his money matter be just in the same irregular state ; no account keep , I will be bind . " 

 " I do not   see that that follow , " say Mr Farquhar , half amuse . " that watch of his be a very curious one belong to his father and grandfather , I do not   know how far back . " 

 " and the sentimental feeling which he be guide by prompt he to keep it , to the inconvenience of himself and every one else . " 

 Mr Farquhar give up the subject of the watch as hopeless . 

 " but about this letter . I write , at Mr Benson 's desire , to the Insurance Office , and I be not satisfied with this answer . all the transaction have pass through our hand . I do not think it be likely Mr Benson would write and sell the share without , at any rate , inform we at the time , even though he forget all about it afterwards . " 

 " probably he tell Richard , or Mr Watson . " 

 " we can ask Mr Watson at once . I be afraid we must wait till Richard come home , for I do not   know where a letter would catch he . " 

 Mr Bradshaw pull the bell that ring into the head - clerk 's room , say as he do so , 

 " you may depend upon it , Farquhar , the blunder lie with Benson himself . he be just the man to muddle away his money in indiscriminate charity , and then to wonder what have become of it . " 

 Mr Farquhar be discreet enough to hold his tongue . 

 " Mr Watson , " say Mr Bradshaw , as the old clerk make his appearance , " here be some mistake about those insurance share we purchase for Benson ten or a dozen year ago . he speak to Mr Farquhar about some bonus they be pay to the shareholder , it seem ; and , in reply to Mr Farquhar 's letter , the Insurance Company say the share be sell twelve month since . have you any knowledge of the transaction ? have the transfer pass through your hand ? by the way "   turn to Mr Farquhar , " who keep the certificate ? do Benson or we ? " 

 " I really do not   know , " say Mr Farquhar . " perhaps Mr Watson can tell we . " 

 Mr Watson meanwhile be study the letter . when he have end it , he take off his spectacle , wipe they , and replace they , he read it again . 

 " it seem very strange , sir , " he say at length , with his trembling , aged voice , " for I pay Mr Benson the account of the dividend myself last June , and get a receipt in form , and that be since the date of the allege transfer . " 

 " pretty nearly twelve month after it take place , " say Mr Farquhar . 

 " how do you receive the dividend ? an order on the Bank , along with old Mrs Cranmer 's ? " ask Mr Bradshaw , sharply . 

 " I do not   know how they come . Mr Richard give I the money , and desire I to get the receipt . " 

 " it be unlucky Richard be from home , " say Mr Bradshaw . " he could have clear up this mystery for we . " 

 Mr Farquhar be silent . 

 " do you know where the certificate be keep , Mr Watson ? " say he . 

 " I will not be sure , but I think they be with Mrs Cranmer 's paper and deed in box A , 24 . " 

 " I wish old Cranmer would have make any other man his executor . she , too , be always come with some unreasonable request or other . " 

 " Mr Benson 's inquiry about his bonus be perfectly reasonable , at any rate . " 

 Mr Watson , who be dwell in the slow fashion of age on what have be say before , now speak : 

 " I will not be sure , but I be almost certain , Mr Benson say , when I pay he last June , that he think he ought to give the receipt on a stamp , and have speak about it to Mr Richard the time before , but that Mr Richard say it be of no consequence . yes , " continue he , gather up his memory as he go on , " he do I remember now and I think to myself that Mr Richard be but a young man . Mr Richard will know all about it . " 

 " yes , " say Mr Farquhar , gravely . 

 " I shall not   wait till Richard 's return , " say Mr Bradshaw . " we can soon see if the certificate be in the box Watson point out ; if they be there , the Insurance people be no more fit to manage their concern than that cat , and I shall tell they so . if they be not there   as I suspect will prove to be the case , it be just forgetfulness on Benson 's part , as I have say from the first . " 

 " you forget the payment of the dividend , " say Mr Farquhar , in a low voice . 

 " well , sir ! what then ? " say Mr Bradshaw , abruptly . while he speak while his eye meet Mr Farquhar 's the hinted meaning of the latter flash through his mind ; but he be only make angry to find that such a suspicion could pass through any one 's imagination . 

 " I suppose I may go , sir , " say Watson , respectfully , an uneasy consciousness of what be in Mr Farquhar 's thought trouble the faithful old clerk . 

 " yes . go . what do you mean about the dividend ? " ask Mr Bradshaw , impetuously of Mr Farquhar . 

 " simply , that I think there can have be no forgetfulness no mistake on Mr Benson 's part , " say Mr Farquhar , unwilling to put his dim suspicion into word . 

 " then of course it be some blunder of that confound Insurance Company . I will write to they to - day , and make they a little brisker and more correct in their statement . " 

 " do not   you think it would be well to wait till Richard 's return ? he may be able to explain it . " 

 " no , sir ! " say Mr Bradshaw , sharply . " I do not think it would be well . it have not be my way of do business to spare any one , or any company , the consequence of their own carelessness ; nor to obtain information second - hand when I could have it direct from the source . I shall write to the Insurance Office by the next post . " 

 Mr Farquhar see that any further remonstrance on his part would only aggravate his partner 's obstinacy ; and , besides , it be but a suspicion an uncomfortable suspicion . it be possible that some of the clerk at the Insurance Office might have make a mistake . Watson be not sure , after all , that the certificate have be deposit in box A , 24 ; and when he and Mr Farquhar could not find they there , the old man draw more and yet more back from his first assertion of belief that they have be place there . 

 Mr Bradshaw write an angry and indignant reproach of carelessness to the Insurance Company . by the next mail one of their clerk come down to Eccleston ; and have leisurely refresh himself at the inn , and order his dinner with care , he walk up to the great warehouse of Bradshaw and Co. , and send in his card , with a pencil notification , " on the part of the Star Insurance Company , " to Mr Bradshaw himself . 

 Mr Bradshaw hold the card in his hand for a minute or two without raise his eye . then he speak out loud and firm : 

 " desire the gentleman to walk up . stay ! I will ring my bell in a minute or two , and then show he upstairs . " 

 when the errand - boy have close the door , Mr Bradshaw go to a cupboard where he usually keep a glass and a bottle of wine   of which he very seldom partook , for he be an abstemious man . he intend now to take a glass , but the bottle be empty ; and though there be plenty more to be have for ringing , or even simply go into another room , he would not allow himself to do this . he stand and lecture himself in thought . 

 " after all , I be a fool for once in my life . if the certificate be in no box which I have yet examine , that do not imply they may not be in some one which I have not have time to search . Farquhar would stay so late last night ! and even if they be in none of the box here , that do not prove " he give the bell a jerking ring , and it be yet sound when Mr Smith , the insurance clerk , enter . 

 the manager of the Insurance Company have be considerably nettle at the tone of Mr Bradshaw 's letter ; and have instruct the clerk to assume some dignity at first in vindicating   as it be well in his power to do   the character of the proceeding of the Company , but at the same time he be not to go too far , for the firm of Bradshaw and Co. be daily loom large in the commercial world , and if any reasonable explanation could be give it be to be receive , and bygone be bygone . 

 " sit down , sir ! " say Mr Bradshaw . 

 " you be aware , sir , I presume , that I come on the part of Mr Dennison , the manager of the Star Insurance Company , to reply in person to a letter of your , of the 29th , address to he ? " 

 Mr Bradshaw bow . " a very careless piece of business , " he say , stiffly . 

 " Mr Dennison do not think you will consider it as such when you have see the deed of transfer , which I be commission to show you . " 

 Mr Bradshaw take the deed with a steady hand . he wipe his spectacle quietly , without delay , and without hurry , and adjust they on his nose . it be possible that he be rather long in look over the document at least , the clerk have just begin to wonder if he be read through the whole of it , instead of merely look at the signature , when Mr Bradshaw say : " it be possible that it may be of 

 course , you will allow I to take this paper to Mr Benson , to to inquire if this be his signature ? " 

 " there can be no doubt of it , I think , sir , " say the clerk , calmly smile , for he know Mr Benson 's signature well . 

 " I do not   know , sir I do not   know . "   he be speak as if the pronunciation of every word require a separate effort of will , like a man who have receive a slight paralytic stroke . 

 " you have hear , sir , of such a thing as forgery forgery , sir ? " say he , repeat the last word very distinctly ; for he fear that the first time he have say it , it be rather slur over . 

 " oh , sir ! there be no room for imagine such a thing , I assure you . in our affair we become aware of curious forgetfulness on the part of those who be not of business habit . " 

 " still I should like to show it Mr Benson , to prove to he his forgetfulness , you know . I believe , on my soul , it be some of his careless forgetfulness I do , sir , " say he . now he speak very quickly . " it must have be . allow I to convince myself . you shall have it back to - night , or the first thing in the morning . " 

 the clerk do not quite like to relinquish the deed , nor yet do he like to refuse Mr Bradshaw . if that very uncomfortable idea of forgery should have any foundation in truth and he have give up the writing ! there be a thousand chance to one against its be anything but a stupid blunder ; the risk be more imminent of offend one of the director . 

 as he hesitate , Mr Bradshaw speak , very calmly , and almost with a smile on his face . he have regain his self - command . " you be afraid , I see . I assure you , you may trust I . if there have be any fraud if I have the slight suspicion of the truth of the surmise I throw out just now , " he could not quite speak the bare naked word that be chill his heart " I will not fail to aid the end of justice , even though the culprit should be my own son . " 

 he end , as he begin , with a smile such a smile ! the stiff lip refuse to relax and cover the tooth . but all the time he keep say to himself : 

 " I do not   believe it I do not   believe it . I be convinced it be a blunder of that old fool Benson . " 

 but when he have dismiss the clerk , and secure the piece of paper , he go and lock the door , and lay his head on his desk , and moan aloud . 

 he have linger in the office for the two previous night ; at first , occupy himself in search for the certificate of the Insurance share ; but , when all the box and other repository for paper have be ransack , the thought take hold of he that they might be in Richard 's private desk ; and , with the determination which overlook the mean to get at the end , he have first try all his own key on the complicated lock , and then break it open with two decide blow of a poker , the instrument near at hand . he do not find the certificate . Richard have always consider himself careful in destroy any dangerous or tell - tale paper ; but the stern father find enough , in what remain , to convince he that his pattern son more even than his pattern son , his beloved pride be far other than what he seem . 

 Mr Bradshaw do not skip or miss a word . he do not shrink while he read . he fold up letter by letter ; he snuff the candle just when its light begin to wane , and no soon ; but he do not miss or omit one paper he read every word . then , leave the letter in a heap upon the table , and the broken desk to tell its own tale , he lock the door of the room which be appropriate to his son as junior partner , and carry the key away with he . 

 there be a faint hope , even after this discovery of many circumstance of Richard 's life which shock and dismay his father there be still a faint hope that he might not be guilty of forgery that it might be no forgery after all only a blunder an omission a stupendous piece of forgetfulness . that hope be the one straw that Mr Bradshaw clung to . 

 late that night Mr Benson sit in his study . every one else in the house have go to bed ; but he be expect a summon to someone who be dangerously ill . he be not startle , therefore , at the knock which come to the front door about twelve ; but he be rather surprised at the character of the knock , so slow and loud , with a pause between each rap . his study - door be but a step from that which lead into the street . he open it , and there stand Mr Bradshaw ; his large , portly figure not to be mistake even in the dusky night . 

 he say , " that be right . it be you I want to see . " and he walk straight into the study . Mr Benson follow , and shut the door . Mr Bradshaw be stand by the table , fumble in his pocket . he pull out the deed ; and open it , after a pause , in which you might have count five , he hold it out to Mr Benson . 

 " read it ! " say he . he speak not another word until time have be allow for its perusal . then he add : 

 " that be your signature ? " the word be an assertion , but the tone be that of question . 

 " no , it be not , " say Mr Benson , decidedly . " it be very like my writing . I could almost say it be mine , but I know it be not . " 

 " recollect yourself a little . the date be August the third of last year , fourteen month ago . you may have forget it . " the tone of the voice have a kind of eager entreaty in it , which Mr Benson do not notice , he be so startled at the fetch of his own writing . 

 " it be most singularly like mine ; but I could not have sign away these share all the property I have without the slight remembrance of it . " 

 " stranger thing have happen . for the love of Heaven , think if you do not sign it . it be a deed of transfer for those Insurance share , you see . you do not   remember it ? you do not write this name these word ? " he look at Mr Benson with craving wistfulness for one particular answer . Mr Benson be strike at last by the whole proceeding , and glance anxiously at Mr Bradshaw , whose manner , gait , and voice be so different from usual that he might well excite attention . but as soon as the latter be aware of this momentary inspection , he change his tone all at once . 

 " do not   imagine , sir , I wish to force any invention upon you as a remembrance . if you do not write this name , I know who do . once more I ask you , do no glimmering recollection of have need money , we will say I never want you to refuse my subscription to the chapel , God know ! of have sell these accursed share ? oh ! I see by your face you do not write it ; you need not speak to I I know . " 

 he sink down into a chair near he . his whole figure droop . in a moment he be up , and stand straight as an arrow , confront Mr Benson , who could find no clue to this stern man 's agitation . 

 " you say you do not write these word ? " point to the signature , with an untrembling finger . " I believe you ; Richard Bradshaw do write they . " 

 " my dear sir my dear old friend ! " exclaim Mr Benson , " you be rush to a conclusion for which , I be convince , there be no foundation ; there be no reason to suppose that because " 

 " there be reason , sir . do not distress yourself I be perfectly calm . " his stony eye and immovable face do indeed look rigid . " what we have now to do be to punish the offence . I have not one standard for myself and those I love   and , Mr Benson , I do love he   and another for the rest of the world . if a stranger have forge my name , I should have know it be my duty to prosecute he . you must prosecute Richard . " 

 " I will not , " say Mr Benson . 

 " you think , perhaps , that I shall feel it acutely . you be mistaken . he be no long as my son to I . I have always resolve to disown any child of mine who be guilty of sin . I disown Richard . he be as a stranger to I . I shall feel no more at his exposure his punishment " he could not go on , for his voice be choke . " of course , you understand that I must feel shame at our connexion ; it be that that be trouble I ; that be but consistent with a man who have always pride himself on the integrity of his name ; but as for that boy , who have be bring up all his life as I have bring up my child , it must be some innate wickedness ! Sir , I can cut he off , though he have be as my right hand belove . let I be no hindrance to the course of justice , I beg . he have forge your name he have defraud you of money of your all , I think you say . " 

 " someone have forge my name . I be not convinced that it be your son . until I know all the circumstance , I decline to prosecute . " 

 " what circumstance ? " ask Mr Bradshaw , in an authoritative manner , which would have show irritation but for his self - command . 

 " the force of the temptation the previous habit of the person " 

 " of Richard . he be the person , " Mr Bradshaw put in . 

 Mr Benson go on , without take any notice . " I should think it right to prosecute , if I find out that this offence against I be only one of a series commit , with premeditation , against society . I should then feel , as a protector of other more helpless than myself " 

 " it be your all , " say Mr Bradshaw . 

 " it be all my money ; it be not my all , " reply Mr Benson ; and then he go on as if the interruption have never be : " against an habitual offender . I shall not prosecute Richard . not because he be your son do not imagine that ! I should decline take such a step against any young man without first ascertain the particular about he , which I know already about Richard , and which determine I against do what would blast his character for life would destroy every good quality he have . " 

 " what good quality remain to he ? " ask Mr Bradshaw . " he have deceive I he have offend God . " 

 " have we not all offend he ? " Mr Benson say , in a low tone . 

 " not consciously . I never do wrong consciously . but Richard Richard . " the remembrance of the undeceive letter the forgery fill up his heart so completely that he could not speak for a minute or two . yet when he see Mr Benson on the point of say something , he break in : 

 " it be no use talk , sir . you and I can not agree on these subject . once more , I desire you to prosecute that boy , who be no long a child of mine . " 

 " Mr Bradshaw , I shall not prosecute he . I have say it once for all . to - morrow you will be glad that I do not listen to you . I should only do harm by say more at present . " 

 there be always something aggravate in be tell , that the mood in which we be now view thing strongly will not be our mood at some other time . it imply that our present feeling be blind we , and that some more clear - sighted spectator be able to distinguish our future well than we do ourselves . the most shallow person dislike to be tell that any one can gauge his depth . Mr Bradshaw be not soothe by this last remark of Mr Benson 's . he stoop down to take up his hat and be go . Mr Benson see his dizzy way of groping , and give he what he seek for ; but he receive no word of thank . Mr Bradshaw go silently towards the door , but , just as he get there , he turn round , and say : 

 " if there be more people like I , and few like you , there would be less evil in the world , sir . it be your sentimentalist that nurse up sin . " 

 although Mr Benson have be very calm during this interview , he have be much shock by what have be let out respect Richard 's forgery ; not by the fact itself so much as by what it be a sign of . still , he have know the young man from childhood , and have see , and often regret , that his want of moral courage have render he peculiarly liable to all the bad effect arise from his father 's severe and arbitrary mode of treatment . Dick would never have have " pluck " enough to be a harden villain , under any circumstance ; but , unless some good influence , some strength , be bring to bear upon he , he might easily sink into the sneak scoundrel . Mr Benson determine to go to Mr Farquhar be the first thing in the morning , and consult he as a calm , clear - head family friend partner in the business , as well as son and brother - in - law to the people concern . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 an accident to the Dover Coach 
 

 while Mr Benson lie awake for fear of oversleep himself , and so be late at Mr Farquhar 's   it be somewhere about six o'clock dark as an October morning be at that time , Sally come to his door and knock . she be always an early riser ; and if she have not be go to bed long before Mr Bradshaw 's visit last night , Mr Benson might safely have trust to she call he . 

 " here be a woman down below as must see you directly . she will be upstairs after I if you be not down quick . " 

 " be it any one from Clarke 's ? " 

 " no , no ! not it , master , " say she , through the keyhole ; " I reckon it be Mrs Bradshaw , for all she be muffle up . " 

 he need no other word . when he go down , Mrs Bradshaw sit in his easy - chair , sway her body to and fro , and cry without restraint . Mr Benson come up to she , before she be aware that he be there . 

 " oh ! sir , " say she , get up and take hold of both his hand , " you will not   be so cruel , will you ? I have get some money somewhere some money my father settle on I , sir ; I do not   know how much , but I think it be more than two thousand pound , and you shall have it all . if I can not   give it you now , I will make a will , sir . only be merciful to poor Dick do not   go and prosecute he , sir . " 

 " my dear Mrs Bradshaw , do not   agitate yourself in this way . I never mean to prosecute he . " 

 " but Mr Bradshaw say that you must . " 

 " I shall not , indeed . I have tell Mr Bradshaw so . " 

 " have he be here ? oh ! be not he cruel ? I do not   care . I have   be a good wife till now . I know I have . I have do all he bid I , ever since we be marry . but now I will speak my mind , and say to everybody how cruel he be how hard to his own flesh and blood ! if he put poor Dick in prison , I will go too . if I be to choose between my husband and my son , I choose my son ; for he will have no friend , unless I be with he . " 

 " Mr Bradshaw will think well of it . you will see that , when his first anger and disappointment be over , he will not be hard or cruel . " 

 " you do not   know Mr Bradshaw , " say she , mournfully , " if you think he will change . I might beg and beg I have do many a time , when we have little child , and I want to save they a whipping but no begging ever do any good . at last I leave it off . he will not change . " 

 " perhaps not for human entreaty . Mrs Bradshaw , be there nothing more powerful ? " 

 the tone of his voice suggest what he do not say . 

 " if you mean that God may soften his heart , " reply she , humbly , " I be not go to deny God 's power I have nee to think of he , " she continue , burst into fresh tear , " for I be a very miserable woman . only think ! he cast it up against I last night , and say , if I have not spoil Dick this never would have happen . " 

 " he hardly know what he be say last night . I will go to Mr Farquhar 's directly , and see he ; and you have well go home , my dear Mrs Bradshaw ; you may rely upon our do all that we can . " 

 with some difficulty he persuade she not to accompany he to Mr Farquhar 's ; but he have , indeed , to take she to her own door before he could convince she that , at present , she could do nothing but wait the result of the consultation of other . 

 it be before breakfast , and Mr Farquhar be alone ; so Mr Benson have a quiet opportunity of tell the whole story to the husband before the wife come down . Mr Farquhar be not much surprised , though greatly distressed . the general opinion he have always entertain of Richard 's character have predispose he to fear , even before the inquiry respect the Insurance share . but it be still a shock when it come , however much it might have be anticipate . 

 " what can we do ? " say Mr Benson , as Mr Farquhar sit gloomily silent . 

 " that be just what I be ask myself . I think I must see Mr Bradshaw , and try and bring he a little out of this unmerciful frame of mind . that must be the first thing . will you object to accompany I at once ? it seem of particular consequence that we should subdue his obduracy before the affair get wind . " 

 " I will go with you willingly . but I believe I rather serve to irritate Mr Bradshaw ; he be remind of thing he have say to I formerly , and which he think he be bind to act up to . however , I can walk with you to the door , and wait for you   if you will allow I   in the street . I want to know how he be to - day , both bodily and mentally ; for indeed , Mr Farquhar , I should not have be surprise last night if he have drop down dead , so terrible be his strain upon himself . " 

 Mr Benson be leave at the door as he have desire , while Mr Farquhar go in . 

 " oh , Mr Farquhar , what be the matter ? " exclaim the girl , run to he . " Mamma sit cry in the old nursery . we believe she have be there all night . she will not tell we what it be , nor let we be with she ; and papa be lock up in his room , and will not   even answer we when we speak , though we know he be up and awake , for we hear he tramp about all night . " 

 " let I go up to he , " say Mr Farquhar . 

 " he will not   let you in . it will be of no use . " but in spite of what they say , he go up ; and to their surprise , after hear who it be , their father open the door , and admit their brother - in - law . he remain with Mr Bradshaw about half an hour , and then come into the dining - room , where the two girl stand huddle over the fire , regardless of the untasted breakfast behind they ; and , write a few line , he desire they to take his note up to their mother , say it would comfort she a little , and that he should send Jemima , in two or three hour , with the baby perhaps to remain some day with they . he have no time to tell they more ; Jemima would . 

 he leave they , and rejoin Mr Benson . " come home and breakfast with I . I be off to London in an hour or two , and must speak with you first . " 

 on reach his house , he run upstairs to ask Jemima to breakfast alone in her dressing - room , and return in five minute or less . 

 " now I can tell you about it , " say he . " I see my way clearly to a certain point . we must prevent Dick and his father meeting just now , or all hope of Dick 's reformation be go for ever . his father be as hard as the nether mill - stone . he have forbid I his house . " 

 " forbidden you ! " 

 " yes ; because I would not give up Dick as utterly lost and bad ; and because I say I should return to London with the clerk , and fairly tell Dennison   he be a Scotchman , and a man of sense and feel   the real state of the case . by the way , we must not say a word to the clerk ; otherwise he will expect an answer , and make out all sort of inference for himself , from the unsatisfactory reply he must have . Dennison will be upon honour will see every side of the case will know you refuse to prosecute ; the Company of which he be manager be no loser . well ! when I say what I think wise , of all this when I speak as if my course be a settled and decide thing , the grim old man ask I if he be to be an automaton in his own house . he assure I he have no feeling for Dick all the time he be shake like an aspen ; in short , repeat much the same thing he must have say to you last night . however , I defy he ; and the consequence be , I be forbid the house , and , what be more , he say he will not come to the office while I remain a partner . " 

 " what shall you do ? " 

 " send Jemima and the baby . there be nothing like a young child for bring people round to a healthy state of feeling ; and you do not   know what Jemima be , Mr Benson ! no ! though you have   know she from her birth . if she can not   comfort her mother , and if the baby can not   steal into her grandfather 's heart , why I do not   know what you may do to I . I shall tell Jemima all , and trust to her wit and wisdom to work at this end , while I do my good at the other . " 

 " Richard be abroad , be not he ? " 

 " he will be in England to - morrow . I must catch he somewhere ; but that I can easily do . the difficult point will be , what to do with he what to say to he , when I find he . he must give up his partnership , that be clear . I do not tell his father so , but I be resolve upon it . there shall be no tampering with the honour of the firm to which I belong . " 

 " but what will become of he ? " ask Mr Benson , anxiously . 

 " I do not yet know . but , for Jemima 's sake for his dear old father 's sake I will not leave he adrift . I will find he some occupation as clear from temptation as I can . I will do all in my power . and he will do much well , if he have any good in he , as a free agent , not cow by his father into a want of individuality and self - respect . I believe I must dismiss you , Mr Benson , " say he , look at his watch ; " I have to explain all to my wife , and to go to that clerk . you shall hear from I in a day or two . " 

 Mr Benson half envy the young man 's elasticity of mind , and power of act promptly . he himself feel as if he want to sit down in his quiet study , and think over the revelation and event of the last twenty - four hour . it make he dizzy even to follow Mr Farquhar 's plan , as he have briefly detail they ; and some solitude and consideration would be require before Mr Benson could decide upon their justice and wisdom . he have be much shock by the discovery of the overt act of guilt which Richard have perpetrate , low as his opinion of that young man have be for some time ; and the consequence be , that he feel depressed , and unable to rally for the next few day . he have not even the comfort of his sister 's sympathy , as he feel bind in honour not to tell she anything ; and she be luckily so much absorb in some household contest with Sally that she do not notice her brother 's quiet languor . 

 Mr Benson feel that he have no right at this time to intrude into the house which he have be once tacitly forbidden . if he go now to Mr Bradshaw 's without be ask , or send for , he think it would seem like presume on his knowledge of the hide disgrace of one of the family . yet he long to go : he know that Mr Farquhar must be write almost daily to Jemima , and he want to hear what he be do . the fourth day after her husband 's departure she come , within half an hour of the post - delivery , and ask to speak to Mr Benson alone . 

 she be in a state of great agitation , and have evidently be cry very much . 

 " oh , Mr Benson ! " say she , " will you come with I , and tell papa this sad news about Dick ? Walter have write I a letter at last to say he have find he he could not at first ; but now it seem that , the day before yesterday , he hear of an accident which have happen to the Dover coach ; it be overturn two passenger kill , and several badly hurt . Walter say we ought to be thankful , as he be , that Dick be not kill . he say it be such a relief to he on go to the place the little inn near to where the coach be overturn to find that Dick be only severely injure ; not one of those who be kill . but it be a terrible shock to we all . we have have no more dreadful fear to lessen the shock ; mamma be quite unfit for anything , and we none of we dare to tell papa . " Jemima have hard work to keep down her sob thus far , and now they overmaster she . 

 " how be your father ? I have want to hear every day , " ask Mr Benson , tenderly . 

 " it be careless of I not to come and tell you ; but , indeed , I have have so much to do . Mamma would not go near he . he have say something which she seem as if she could not forgive . because he come to meal , she would not . she have almost live in the nursery ; take out all Dick 's old plaything , and what clothe of his be leave , and turn they over , and cry over they . " 

 " then Mr Bradshaw have join you again ; I be afraid , from what Mr Farquhar say , he be go to isolate himself from you all ? " 

 " I wish he have , " say Jemima , cry afresh . " it would have be more natural than the way he have go on ; the only difference from his usual habit be , that he have never go near the office , or else he have come to meal just as usual , and talk just as usual ; and even do what I never know he do before , try to make joke all in order to show we how little he care . " 

 " do he not go out at all ? " 

 " only in the garden . I be sure he do care after all ; he must care ; he can not shake off a child in this way , though he think he can ; and that make I so afraid of tell he of this accident . will you come , Mr Benson ? " 

 he need no other word . he go with she , as she rapidly thread her way through the by - street . when they reach the house , she go in without knock , and put her husband 's letter into Mr Benson 's hand , she open the door of her father 's room , and say " Papa , here be Mr Benson , " leave they alone . 

 Mr Benson feel nervously incapable of know what to do , or to say . he have surprise Mr Bradshaw sit idly over the fire gaze dreamily into the ember . but he have start up , and draw his chair to the table , on see his visitor ; and , after the first necessary word of politeness be over , he seem to expect he to open the conversation . 

 " Mrs Farquhar have ask I , " say Mr Benson , plunge into the subject with a trembling heart , " to tell you about a letter she have receive from her husband ; " he stop for an instant , for he feel that he do not get near the real difficulty , and yet could not tell the good way of approach it . 

 " she need not have give you that trouble . I be aware of the reason of Mr Farquhar 's absence . I entirely disapprove of his conduct . he be regardless of my wish ; and disobedient to the command which , as my son - in - law , I think he would have feel bind to respect . if there be any more agreeable subject that you can introduce , I shall be glad to hear you , sir . " 

 " neither you , nor I , must think of what we like to hear or to say . you must hear what concern your son . " 

 " I have disown the young man who be my son , " reply he , coldly . 

 " the Dover coach have be overturn , " say Mr Benson , stimulate into abruptness by the icy sternness of the father . but , in a flash , he see what lie below that terrible assumption of indifference . Mr Bradshaw glance up in his face one look of agony and then go grey - pale ; so livid that Mr Benson get up to ring the bell in affright , but Mr Bradshaw motion to he to sit still . 

 " oh ! I have be too sudden , sir he be alive , he be alive ! " he exclaim , as he see the ashy face work in a vain attempt to speak ; but the poor lip   so wooden , not a minute ago   go work on and on , as if Mr Benson 's word do not sink down into the mind , or reach the understanding . Mr Benson go hastily for Mrs Farquhar . 

 " oh , Jemima ! " say he , " I have do it so badly I have be so cruel he be very ill , I fear bring water , brandy " and he return with all speed into the room . Mr Bradshaw the great , strong , iron man lie back in his chair in a swoon , a fit . 

 " fetch my mother , Mary . send for the doctor , Elizabeth , " say Jemima , rush to her father . she and Mr Benson do all in their power to restore he . Mrs Bradshaw forget all her vow of estrangement from the dead - like husband , who might never speak to she , or hear she again , and bitterly accuse herself for every angry word she have speak against he during these last few miserable day . 

 before the doctor come , Mr Bradshaw have open his eye and partially rally , although he either do not , or could not speak . he look strike down into old age . his eye be sensible in their expression , but have the dim glaze of many year of life upon they . his low jaw fall from his upper one , give a look of melancholy depression to the face , although the lip hide the unclosed tooth . but he answer correctly   in monosyllable , it be true   all the question which the doctor choose to ask . and the medical man be not so much impressed with the serious character of the seizure as the family , who know all the hide mystery behind , and have see their father lie for the first time with the precursor aspect of death upon his face . rest , watch , and a little medicine be what the doctor prescribe ; it be so slight a prescription , for what have appear to Mr Benson so serious an attack , that he wish to follow the medical man out of the room to make further inquiry , and learn the real opinion which he think must lurk behind . but as he be follow the doctor , he they all be aware of the effort Mr Bradshaw be make to rise , in order to arrest Mr Benson 's departure . he do stand up , support himself with one hand on the table , for his leg shake under he . Mr Benson come back instantly to the spot where he be . for a moment it seem as if he have not the right command of his voice : but at last he say , with a tone of humble , wistful entreaty , which be very touching : 

 " he be alive , sir ; be he not ? " 

 " yes , sir indeed he be ; he be only hurt . he be sure to do well . Mr Farquhar be with he , " say Mr Benson , almost unable to speak for tear . 

 Mr Bradshaw do not remove his eye from Mr Benson 's face for more than a minute after his question have be answer . he seem as though he would read his very soul , and there see if he speak the truth . satisfied at last , he sink slowly into his chair ; and they be silent for a little space , wait to perceive if he would wish for any further information just then . at length he put his hand slowly together in the clasped attitude of prayer , and say " thank God ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXII 

 the Bradshaw Pew again occupy 
 

 if Jemima allow herself now and then to imagine that one good would result from the discovery of Richard 's delinquency , in the return of her father and Mr Benson to something of their old understanding and their old intercourse if this hope flutter through her mind , it be doom to disappointment . Mr Benson would have be most happy to go , if Mr Bradshaw have send for he ; he be on the watch for what might be even the shadow of such an invitation but none come . Mr Bradshaw , on his part , would have be thoroughly glad if the wilful seclusion of his present life could have be break by the occasional visit of the old friend whom he have once forbid the house ; but this prohibition have pass his lip , he stubbornly refuse to do anything which might be construe into unsaying it . Jemima be for some time in despair of his ever return to the office , or resume his old habit of business . he have evidently threaten as much to her husband . all that Jemima could do be to turn a deaf ear to every allusion to this menace , which he throw out from time to time , evidently with a view to see if it have strike deep enough into her husband 's mind for he to have repeat it to his wife . if Mr Farquhar have name it if it be know only to two or three to have be , but for one half - hour even , his resolution Mr Bradshaw could have adhere to it , without any other reason than the maintenance of what he call consistency , but which be in fact doggedness . Jemima be often thankful that her mother be absent , and go to nurse her son . if she have be at home , she would have entreat and implore her husband to fall back into his usual habit , and would have show such a dread of his be as good as his word , that he would have be compel to adhere to it by the very consequence affix to it . Mr Farquhar have hard work , as it be , in pass rapidly enough between the two place attend to his business at Eccleston ; and decide , comfort , and earnestly talk , in Richard 's sick - room . during an absence of his , it be necessary to apply to one of the partner on some matter of importance ; and accordingly , to Jemima 's secret joy , Mr Watson come up and ask if her father be well enough to see he on business ? Jemima carry in this inquiry literally ; and the hesitating answer which her father give be in the affirmative . it be not long before she see he leave the house , accompany by the faithful old clerk ; and when he meet she at dinner , he make no allusion to his morning visitor , or to his subsequent go out . but from that time forwards he go regularly to the office . he receive all the information about Dick 's accident , and his progress towards recovery , in perfect silence , and in as indifferent a manner as he could assume ; but yet he linger about the family sitting - room every morning until the post have come in which bring all letter from the south . 

 when Mr Farquhar at last return to bring the news of Dick 's perfect convalescence , he resolve to tell Mr Bradshaw all that he have do and arrange for his son 's future career ; but , as Mr Farquhar tell Mr Benson afterwards , he could not really say if Mr Bradshaw have attend to one word that he say . 

 " rely upon it , " say Mr Benson , " he have not only attend to it , but treasure up every expression you have use . " 

 " well , I try to get some opinion , or sign of emotion , out of he . I have not much hope of the latter , I must own ; but I think he would have say whether I have do wisely or not in procure that Glasgow situation for Dick that he would , perhaps , have be indignant at my oust he from the partnership so entirely on my own responsibility . " 

 " how do Richard take it ? " 

 " oh , nothing could exceed his penitence . if one have never hear of the proverb , ' when the devil be sick , the devil a monk would be , ' I should have have great faith in he ; or if he have have more strength of character to begin with , or more reality and less outward appearance of good principle instill into he . however , this Glasgow situation be the very thing ; clear , define duty , no great trust repose in he , a kind and watchful head , and introduction to a well class of associate than I fancy he have ever be throw amongst before . for , you know , Mr Bradshaw dread all intimacy for his son , and want he to eschew all society beyond his own family would never allow he to ask a friend home . really , when I think of the unnatural life Mr Bradshaw expect he to lead , I get into charity with he , and have hope . by the way , have you ever succeed in persuade his mother to send Leonard to school ? he may run the same risk from isolation as Dick : not be able to choose his companion wisely when he grow up , but be too much overcome by the excitement of society to be very discreet as to who be his associate . have you speak to she about my plan ? " 

 " yes ! but to no purpose . I can not say that she would even admit an argument on the subject . she seem to have an invincible repugnance to the idea of expose he to the remark of other boy on his peculiar position . " 

 " they need never know of it . besides , soon or later , he must step out of his narrow circle , and encounter remark and scorn . " 

 " true , " say Mr Benson , mournfully . " and you may depend upon it , if it really be the good for Leonard , she will come round to it by - and - by . it be almost extraordinary to see the way in which her earnest and most unselfish devotion to this boy 's real welfare lead she to right and wise conclusion . " 

 " I wish I could tame she so as to let I meet she as a friend . since the baby be bear , she come to see Jemima . my wife tell I , that she sit and hold it soft in her arm , and talk to it as if her whole soul go out to the little infant . but if she hear a strange footstep on the stair , what Jemima call the ' wild - animal look ' come back into her eye , and she steal away like some frightened creature . with all that she have do to redeem her character , she should not be so timid of observation . " 

 " you may well say ' with all that she have do ! ' we of her own household hear little or nothing of what she do . if she want help , she simply tell we how and why ; but if not perhaps because it be some relief to she to forget for a time the scene of suffering in which she have be act the part of comforter , and perhaps because there always be a shy , sweet reticence about she we never should know what she be and what she do , except from the poor people themselves , who would bless she in word if the very thought of she do not choke they with tear . yet , I do assure you , she pass out of all this gloom , and make sunlight in our house . we be never so cheerful as when she be at home . she always have the art of diffuse peace , but now it be positive cheerfulness . and about Leonard ; I doubt if the wise and most thoughtful schoolmaster could teach half as much directly , as his mother do unconsciously and indirectly every hour that he be with she . her noble , humble , pious endurance of the consequence of what be wrong in her early life , seem expressly fit to act upon he , whose position be   unjustly , for he have do no harm   so similar to hers . " 

 " well ! I suppose we must leave it alone for the present . you will think I a hard practical man when I own to you , that all I expect from Leonard 's remain a home - bird be that , with such a mother , it will do he no harm . at any rate , remember my offer be the same for a year two year hence , as now . what do she look forward to make he into , finally ? " 

 " I do not   know . the wonder come into my mind sometimes ; but never into her , I think . it be part of her character part perhaps of that which make she what she be that she never look forward , and seldom back . the present be enough for she . " 

 and so the conversation end . when Mr Benson repeat the substance of it to his sister , she muse awhile , break out into an occasional whistle   although she have cure herself of this habit in a great measure , and at last she say : 

 " now , do you know , I never like poor Dick ; and yet I be angry with Mr Farquhar for get he out of the partnership in such a summary way . I can not   get over it , even though he have offer to send Leonard to school . and here he be reign lord - paramount at the office ! as if you , Thurstan , be not   as well able to teach he as any schoolmaster in England ! but I should not mind that affront , if I be not sorry to think of Dick   though I never could abide he   labour away in Glasgow for a petty salary of nobody know how little , while Mr Farquhar be take half , instead of third , of the profit here ! " 

 but her brother could not tell she and even Jemima do not know , till long afterwards that the portion of income which would have be Dick 's as a junior partner , if he have remain in the business , be carefully lay aside for he by Mr Farquhar ; to be deliver up , with all its accumulate interest , when the prodigal should have prove his penitence by his conduct . 

 when Ruth have no call upon her time , it be indeed a holiday at Chapel - house . she throw off as much as she could of the care and the sadness in which she have be share ; and return fresh and helpful , ready to go about in her soft , quiet way , and fill up every measure of service , and heap it with the fragrance of her own sweet nature . the delicate mending , that the eld woman could no long see to do , be put by for Ruth 's swift and nimble finger . the occasional copying , or patient writing to dictation , that give rest to Mr Benson 's weary spine , be do by she with sunny alacrity . but , most of all , Leonard 's heart rejoice when his mother come home . then come the quiet confidence , the tender exchange of love , the happy walk from which he return strong and strong go from strength to strength as his mother lead the way . it be well , as they see now , that the great shock of the disclosure have take place when it do . she , for her part , wonder at her own cowardliness in have even strive to keep back the truth from her child the truth that be so certain to be make clear , soon or later , and which it be only owe to God 's mercy that she be alive to encounter with he , and , by so encountering , shield and give he good courage . moreover , in her secret heart , she be thankful that all occur while he be yet too young to have much curiosity as to his father . if an unsatisfied feeling of this kind occasionally steal into his mind , at any rate she never hear any expression of it ; for the past be a seal book between they . and so , in the bright strength of good endeavour , the day go on , and grow again to month and year . 

 perhaps one little circumstance which occur during this time have scarcely external importance enough to be call an event ; but in Mr Benson 's mind it take rank as such . one day , about a year after Richard Bradshaw have cease to be a partner in his father 's house , Mr Benson encounter Mr Farquhar in the street , and hear from he of the creditable and respectable manner in which Richard be conduct himself in Glasgow , where Mr Farquhar have lately be on business . 

 " I be determined to tell his father of this , " say he ; " I think his family be far too obedient to his tacit prohibition of all mention of Richard 's name . " 

 " tacit prohibition ? " inquire Mr Benson . 

 " oh ! I dare say I use the word in a wrong sense for the correctness of a scholar ; but what I mean be , that he make a point of immediately leave the room if Richard 's name be mention ; and do it in so mark a manner , that by degree they understand that it be their father 's desire that he should never be allude to ; which be all very well as long as there be nothing pleasant to be say about he ; but to - night I be go there , and shall take good care he do not escape I before I have tell he all I have hear and observe about Richard . he will never be a hero of virtue , for his education have drain he of all moral courage ; but with care , and the absence of all strong temptation for a time , he will do very well ; nothing to gratify paternal pride , but certainly nothing to be ashamed of . " 

 it be on the Sunday after this that the little circumstance to which I have allude take place . 

 during the afternoon service , Mr Benson become aware that the large Bradshaw pew be no long unoccupied . in a dark corner Mr Bradshaw 's white head be to be see , bow down low in prayer . when last he have worship there , the hair on that head be iron - grey , and even in prayer he have stand erect , with an air of conscious righteousness sufficient for all his want , and even some to spare with which to judge other . now , that white and hoary head be never uplifted ; part of his unobtrusiveness might , it be true , be attribute to the uncomfortable feeling which be sure to attend any open withdrawal of the declaration he have once make , never to enter the chapel in which Mr Benson be minister again ; and as such a feeling be natural to all man , and especially to such a one as Mr Bradshaw , Mr Benson instinctively respect it , and pass out of the chapel with his household , without ever direct his regard to the obscure place where Mr Bradshaw still remain immovable . 

 from this day Mr Benson feel sure that the old friendly feeling exist once more between they , although some time might elapse before any circumstance give the signal for a renewal of their intercourse . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 a mother to be proud of 
 

 old people tell of certain year when typhus fever sweep over the country like a pestilence ; year that bring back the remembrance of deep sorrow refuse to be comfort to many a household ; and which those whose beloved pass through the fiery time unscathed , shrink from recall : for great and tremulous be the anxiety miserable the constant watching for evil symptom ; and beyond the threshold of home a dense cloud of depression hang over society at large . it seem as if the alarm be proportionate to the previous light - heartedness of fancied security and indeed it be so ; for , since the day of King Belshazzar , the solemn decree of Doom have ever seem most terrible when they awe into silence the merry reveller of life . so it be this year to which I come in the progress of my story . 

 the summer have be unusually gorgeous . some have complain of the steam heat , but other have point to the lush vegetation , which be profuse and luxuriant . the early autumn be wet and cold , but people do not regard it , in contemplation of some proud rejoicing of the nation , which fill every newspaper and give food to every tongue . in Eccleston these rejoicing be great than in most place ; for , by the national triumph of arm , it be suppose that a new market for the staple manufacture of the place would be open ; and so the trade , which have for a year or two be languish , would now revive with redoubled vigour . besides these legitimate cause of good spirit , there be the rank excitement of a come election , in consequence of Mr Donne have accept a Government office , procure for he by one of his influential relation . this time , the Cranworths rouse themselves from their magnificent torpor of security in good season , and be go through a series of pompous and ponderous hospitality , in order to bring back the Eccleston voter to their allegiance . 

 while the town be full of these subject by turn now think and speak of the great revival of trade now of the chance of the election , as yet some week distant now of the ball at Cranworth Court , in which Mr Cranworth have dance with all the belle of the shopocracy of Eccleston there come creep , creep , in hide , slimy course , the terrible fever that fever which be never utterly banish from the sad haunt of vice and misery , but live in such darkness , like a wild beast in the recess of his den . it have begin in the low irish lodging - house ; but there it be so common it excite little attention . the poor creature die almost without the attendance of the unwarned medical man , who receive their first notice of the spread plague from the roman catholic priest . 

 before the medical man of Eccleston have have time to meet together and consult , and compare the knowledge of the fever which they have severally gain , it have , like the blaze of a fire which have long smoulder , burst forth in many place at once not merely among the loose - living and vicious , but among the decently poor nay , even among the well - to - do and respectable . and to add to the horror , like all similar pestilence , its course be most rapid at first , and be fatal in the great majority of case hopeless from the beginning . there be a cry , and then a deep silence , and then rise the long wail of the survivor . 

 a portion of the Infirmary of the town be add to that already set apart for a fever - ward ; the smitten be carry thither at once , whenever it be possible , in order to prevent the spread of infection ; and on that lazar - house be concentrate all the medical skill and force of the place . 

 but when one of the physician have die , in consequence of his attendance when the customary staff of matron and nurse have be sweep off in two day and the nurse belong to the Infirmary have shrink from be draft into the pestilential fever - ward when high wage have fail to tempt any to what , in their panic , they consider as certain death when the doctor stand aghast at the swift mortality among the untended sufferer , who be dependent only on the care of the most ignorant hireling , too brutal to recognise the solemnity of Death   all this have happen within a week from the first acknowledgment of the presence of the plague   Ruth come one day , with a quieter step than usual , into Mr Benson 's study , and tell he she want to speak to he for a few minute . 

 " to be sure , my dear ! sit down , " say he ; for she be stand and lean her head against the chimney - piece , idly gaze into the fire . she go on stand there , as if she have not hear his word ; and it be a few moment before she begin to speak . then she say : 

 " I want to tell you , that I have be this morning and offer myself as matron to the fever - ward while it be so full . they have accept I ; and I be go this evening . " 

 " oh , Ruth ! I fear this ; I see your look this morning as we speak of this terrible illness . " 

 " why do you say ' fear , ' Mr Benson ? you yourself have be with John Harrison , and old Betty , and many other , I dare say , of whom we have not hear . " 

 " but this be so different ! in such poison air ! among such malignant case ! have you think and weigh it enough , Ruth ? " 

 she be quite still for a moment , but her eye grow full of tear . at last she say , very softly , with a kind of still solemnity : 

 " yes ! I have think , and I have weigh . but through the very midst of all my fear and thought I have feel that I must go . " 

 the remembrance of Leonard be present in both their mind ; but for a few moment long they neither of they speak . then Ruth say : 

 " I believe I have no fear . that be a great preservative , they say . at any rate , if I have a little natural shrinking , it be quite go when I remember that I be in God 's hand ! oh , Mr Benson , " continue she , break out into the irrepressible tear " Leonard , Leonard ! " 

 and now it be his turn to speak out the brave word of faith . 

 " poor , poor mother ! " say he . " be of good heart . he , too , be in God 's hand . think what a flash of time only will separate you from he , if you should die in this work ! " 

 " but he but he it will be long to he , Mr Benson ! he will be alone ! " 

 " no , Ruth , he will not . God and all good man will watch over he . but if you can not still this agony of fear as to what will become of he , you ought not to go . such tremulous passion will predispose you to take the fever . " 

 " I will not be afraid , " she reply , lift up her face , over which a bright light shone , as of God 's radiance . " I be not afraid for myself . I will not be so for my darling . " 

 after a little pause , they begin to arrange the manner of she go , and to speak of the length of time that she might be absent on her temporary duty . in talk of her return , they assume it to be certain , although the exact time when be to they unknown , and would be dependent entirely on the duration of the fever ; but not the less , in their secret heart , do they feel where alone the issue lie . Ruth be to communicate with Leonard and Miss Faith through Mr Benson alone , who insist on his determination to go every evening to the Hospital to learn the proceeding of the day , and the state of Ruth 's health . 

 " it be not alone on your account , my dear ! there may be many sick people of whom , if I can give no other comfort , I can take intelligence to their friend . " 

 all be settle with grave composure ; yet still Ruth linger , as if nerve herself up for some effort . at length she say , with a faint smile upon her pale face : 

 " I believe I be a great coward . I stand here talk because I dread to tell Leonard . " 

 " you must not think of it , " exclaim he . " leave it to I . it be sure to unnerve you . " 

 " I must think of it . I shall have self - control enough in a minute to do it calmly to speak hopefully . for only think , " continue she , smile through the tear that would gather in her eye , " what a comfort the remembrance of the last few word may be to the poor fellow , if " the word be choke , but she smile bravely on . " no ! " say she , " that must be do ; but perhaps you will spare I one thing will you tell Aunt Faith ? I suppose I be very weak , but , know that I must go , and not know what may be the end , I feel as if I could not bear to resist her entreaty just at last . will you tell she , sir , while I go to Leonard ? " 

 silently he consent , and the two rise up and come forth , calm and serene . and calmly and gently do Ruth tell her boy of her purpose ; not dare even to use any unaccustomed tenderness of voice or gesture , lest , by so do , she should alarm he unnecessarily as to the result . she speak hopefully , and bid he be of good courage ; and he catch her bravery , though his , poor boy , have root rather in his ignorance of the actual imminent danger than in her deep faith . 

 when he have go down , Ruth begin to arrange her dress . when she come downstairs she go into the old familiar garden and gather a nosegay of the last linger autumn flower a few rose and the like . 

 Mr Benson have tutor his sister well ; and although Miss Faith 's face be swollen with cry , she speak with almost exaggerated cheerfulness to Ruth . indeed , as they all stand at the front door , make - believe to have careless nothing to say , just as at an ordinary leave - taking , you would not have guess the strained chord of feeling there be in each heart . they linger on , the last ray of the set sun fall on the group . Ruth once or twice have rouse herself to the pitch of say " good - bye , " but when her eye fall on Leonard she be force to hide the quivering of her lip , and conceal her tremble mouth amid the bunch of rose . 

 " they will not   let you have your flower , I be afraid , " say Miss Benson . " doctor so often object to the smell . " 

 " no ; perhaps not , " say Ruth , hurriedly . " I do not think of it . I will only keep this one rise . here , Leonard , darling ! " she give the rest to he . it be her farewell ; for have now no veil to hide her emotion , she summon all her bravery for one parting smile , and , smile , turn away . but she give one look back from the street , just from the last point at which the door could be see , and catch a glimpse of Leonard stand foremost on the step , she run back , and he meet her half - way , and mother and child speak never a word in that close embrace . 

 " now , Leonard , " say Miss Faith , " be a brave boy . I feel sure she will come back to we before very long . " 

 but she be very near cry herself ; and she would have give way , I believe , if she have not find the wholesome outlet of scold Sally , for express just the same opinion respect Ruth 's proceeding as she herself have do not two hour before . take what her brother have say to she as a text , she deliver such a lecture to Sally on want of faith that she be astonish at herself , and so much affect by what she have say that she have to shut the door of communication between the kitchen and the parlour pretty hastily , in order to prevent Sally 's threatened reply from weaken her belief in the righteousness of what Ruth have do . her word have go beyond her conviction . 

 evening after evening Mr Benson go forth to gain news of Ruth ; and night after night he return with good tiding . the fever , it be true , rag ; but no plague come nigh she . he say her face be ever calm and bright , except when cloud by sorrow as she give the account of the death which occur in spite of every care . he say he have never see her face so fair and gentle as it be now , when she be live in the midst of disease and woe . 

 one evening Leonard   for they have grow bolder as to the infection   accompany he to the street on which the hospital abut . Mr Benson leave he there , and tell he to return home ; but the boy linger , attract by the crowd that have gather , and be gaze up intently towards the light window of the hospital . there be nothing beyond to be see ; but the great part of these poor people have friend or relation in that palace of death . 

 Leonard stand and listen . at first their talk consist of vague and exaggerated account   if such could be exaggerate   of the horror of the fever . then they speak of Ruth of his mother ; and Leonard hold his breath to hear . 

 " they say she have be a great sinner , and that this be her penance , " quoth one . and as Leonard gasp , before rush forward to give the speaker straight the lie , an old man speak : 

 " such a one as she have never be a great sinner ; nor do she do her work as a penance , but for the love of God , and of the bless Jesus . she will be in the light of God 's countenance when you and I will be stand afar off . I tell you , man , when my poor wench die , as no one would come near , her head lie at that hour on this woman 's sweet breast . I could fall you , " the old man go on , lift his shake arm , " for call that woman a great sinner . the blessing of they who be ready to perish be upon she . " 

 immediately there arise a clamour of tongue , each with some tale of his mother 's gentle doing , till Leonard grow dizzy with the beating of his glad , proud heart . few be aware how much Ruth have do ; she never speak of it , shrink with sweet shyness from over - much allusion to her own work at all time . her left hand truly know not what her right hand do ; and Leonard be overwhelm now to hear of the love and the reverence with which the poor and outcast have surround she . it be irrepressible . he step forward with a proud bearing , and touch the old man 's arm who have first speak , Leonard try to speak ; but for an instant he could not , his heart be too full : tear come before word , but at length he manage to say : 

 " Sir , I be her son ! " 

 " Thou ! thou her bairn ! God bless you , lad , " say an old woman , push through the crowd . " it be but last night she keep my child quiet with sing psalm the night through . low and sweet , low and sweet , they tell I till many poor thing be hush , though they be out of their mind , and have not hear psalm this many a year . God in heaven bless you , lad ! " 

 many other wild , woe - begone creature press forward with blessing on Ruth 's son , while he could only repeat : 

 " she be my mother . " 

 from that day forward Leonard walk erect in the street of Eccleston , where " many arise and call she blessed . " 

 after some week the virulence of the fever abate ; and the general panic subside indeed , a kind of fool - hardiness succeed . to be sure , in some instance the panic still hold possession of individual to an exaggerated extent . but the number of patient in the hospital be rapidly diminish , and , for money , those be to be find who could supply Ruth 's place . but to she it be owe that the overwrought fear of the town be subdue ; it be she who have go voluntarily , and , with no thought of greed or gain , right into the very jaw of the fierce disease . she bid the inmate of the hospital farewell , and after carefully submit herself to the purification recommend by Mr Davis , the principal surgeon of the place , who have always attend Leonard , she return to Mr Benson 's just at gloame time . 

 they each vie with the other in the tender care . they hasten tea ; they wheel the sofa to the fire ; they make her lie down ; and to all she submit with the docility of a child ; and when the candle come , even Mr Benson 's anxious eye could see no change in her look , but that she seem a little paler . the eye be as full of spiritual light , the gently part lip as rosy , and the smile , if more rare , yet as sweet as ever . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 " I must go and Nurse Mr Bellingham " 
 

 the next morning , Miss Benson would insist upon make Ruth lie down on the sofa . Ruth long to do many thing ; to be much more active ; but she submit , when she find that it would gratify Miss Faith if she remain as quiet as if she be really an invalid . 

 Leonard sit by she hold her hand . every now and then he look up from his book , as if to make sure that she indeed be restore to he . he have bring she down the flower which she have give he the day of her departure , and which he have keep in water as long as they have any greenness or fragrance , and then have carefully dry and put by . she too , smile , have produce the one rise which she have carry away to the hospital . never have the bond between she and her boy be draw so firm and strong . 

 many visitor come this day to the quiet Chapel - house . first of all Mrs Farquhar appear . she look very different from the Jemima Bradshaw of three year ago . happiness have call out beauty ; the colouring of her face be lovely , and vivid as that of an autumn day ; her berry - red lip scarce close over the short white tooth for her smile ; and her large dark eye glow and sparkle with daily happiness . they be soften by a mist of tear as she look upon Ruth . 

 " lie still ! do not   move ! you must be content to - day to be wait upon , and nurse ! I have just see Miss Benson in the lobby , and have charge upon charge not to fatigue you . oh , Ruth ! how we all love you , now we have you back again ! do you know , I teach Rosa to say her prayer as soon as ever you be go to that horrid place , just on purpose that her little innocent lip might pray for you I wish you could hear she say it ' please , dear God , keep Ruth safe . ' oh , Leonard ! be not you proud of your mother ? " 

 Leonard say " yes , " rather shortly , as if he be annoyed that any one else should know , or even have a right to imagine , how proud he be . Jemima go on : 

 " now , Ruth ! I have get a plan for you . Walter and I have partly make it ; and partly it be papa 's do . yes , dear ! papa have be quite anxious to show his respect for you . we all want you to go to the dear Eagle 's Crag for this next month , and get strong , and have some change in that fine air at Abermouth . I be go to take little Rosa there . Papa have lend it to we . and the weather be often very beautiful in November . " 

 " thank you very much . it be very tempting ; for I have be almost long for some such change . I can not tell all at once whether I can go ; but I will see about it , if you will let I leave it open a little . " 

 " oh ! as long as you like , so that you will but go at last . and , Master Leonard ! you be to come too . now , I know I have you on my side . " 

 Ruth think of the place . her only reluctance arise from the remembrance of that one interview on the sand . that walk she could never go again ; but how much remain ! how much that would be a charming balm and refreshment to she ! 

 " what happy evening we shall have together ! do you know , I think Mary and Elizabeth may perhaps come . " 

 a bright gleam of sunshine come into the room . " look ! how bright and propitious for our plan . Dear Ruth , it seem like an omen for the future ! " 

 almost while she speak , Miss Benson enter , bring with her Mr Grey , the rector of Eccleston . he be an elderly man , short and stoutly - build , with something very formal in his manner ; but any one might feel sure of his steady benevolence who notice the expression of his face , and especially of the kindly black eye that gleam beneath his grey and shaggy eyebrow . Ruth have see he at the hospital once or twice , and Mrs Farquhar have meet he pretty frequently in general society . 

 " go and tell your uncle , " say Miss Benson to Leonard . 

 " stop , my boy ! I have just meet Mr Benson in the street , and my errand now be to your mother . I should like you to remain and hear what it be ; and I be sure that my business will give these lady " bow to Miss Benson and Jemima ' so much pleasure , that I need not apologise for enter upon it in their presence . " 

 he pull out his double eye - glass , say , with a grave smile : 

 " you run away from we yesterday so quietly and cunningly , Mrs Denbigh , that you be , perhaps , not aware that the Board be sit at that very time , and try to form a vote sufficiently expressive of our gratitude to you . as Chairman , they request I to present you with this letter , which I shall have the pleasure of reading . " 

 with all due emphasis he read aloud a formal letter from the Secretary to the Infirmary , convey a vote of thank to Ruth . 

 the good rector do not spare her one word , from date to signature ; and then , fold the letter up , he give it to Leonard , say : 

 " there , sir ! when you be an old man , you may read that testimony to your mother 's noble conduct with pride and pleasure . for , indeed , " continue he , turn to Jemima , " no word can express the relief it be to we . I speak of the gentleman compose the Board of the Infirmary . when Mrs Denbigh come forward , the panic be at its height , and the alarm of course aggravate the disorder . the poor creature die rapidly ; there be hardly time to remove the dead body before other be bring in to occupy the bed , so little help be to be procure on account of the universal terror ; and the morning when Mrs Denbigh offer we her service , we seem at the very bad . I shall never forget the sensation of relief in my mind when she tell we what she propose to do ; but we think it right to warn she to the full extent 

 " Nay , madam , " say he , catch a glimpse of Ruth 's change colour , " I will spare you any more praise . I will only say , if I can be a friend to you , or a friend to your child , you may command my poor power to the utmost . " 

 he get up , and bow formally , he take his leave . Jemima come and kiss Ruth . Leonard go upstairs to put the precious letter away . Miss Benson sit cry heartily in a corner of the room . Ruth go to she and throw her arm round her neck , and say : 

 " I could not tell he just then . I durst not speak for fear of break down ; but if I have do right , it be all owe to you and Mr Benson . oh ! I wish I have say how the thought first come into my head from see the thing Mr Benson have do so quietly ever since the fever first come amongst we . I could not speak ; and it seem as if I be take those praise to myself , when all the time I be feel how little I deserve they how it be all owe to you . " 

 " under God , Ruth , " say Miss Benson , speak through her tear . 

 " oh ! I think there be nothing humble one so much as undue praise . while he be read that letter , I could not help feel how many thing I have do wrong ! could he know of of what I have be ? " ask she , drop her voice very low . 

 " yes ! " say Jemima , " he know everybody in Eccleston do know but the remembrance of those day be sweep away . Miss Benson , " she continue , for she be anxious to turn the subject , " you must be on my side , and persuade Ruth to come to Abermouth for a few week . I want she and Leonard both to come . " 

 " I be afraid my brother will think that Leonard be miss his lesson sadly . just of late we could not wonder that the poor child 's heart be so full ; but he must make haste , and get on all the more for his idleness . " Miss Benson pique herself on be a disciplinarian . 

 " oh , as for lesson , Walter be so very anxious that you should give way to his superior wisdom , Ruth , and let Leonard go to school . he will send he to any school you fix upon , accord to the mode of life you plan for he . " 

 " I have no plan , " say Ruth . " I have no mean of planning . all I can do be to try and make he ready for anything . " 

 " well , " say Jemima , " we must talk it over at Abermouth ; for I be sure you will not   refuse to come , dear , dear Ruth ! think of the quiet , sunny day , and the still evening , that we shall have together , with little Rosa to tumble about among the fall leaf ; and there be Leonard to have his first sight of the sea . " 

 " I do think of it , " say Ruth , smile at the happy picture Jemima draw . and both smile at the hopeful prospect before they , they part never to meet again in life . 

 no soon have Mrs Farquhar go than Sally burst in . 

 " oh ! dear , dear ! " say she , look around she . " if I have but know that the rector be come to call , I would ha ' put on the good cover , and the Sunday tablecloth ! you be well enough , " continue she , survey Ruth from head to foot ; " you be always trim and dainty in your gown , though I reckon they cost but tuppence a yard , and you have   a face to set them off ; but as for you "   as she turn to Miss Benson , " I think you might ha ' have something well on than that old stuff , if it have only be to do credit to a parishioner like I , whom he have know ever sin ' my father be his clerk . " 

 " you forget , Sally , I have be make jelly all the morning . how could I tell it be Mr Grey when there be a knock at the door ? " Miss Benson reply . 

 " you might ha ' letten I do the jelly ; i'se warrant I could ha ' pleased Ruth as well as you . if I have but know he be come , I would ha ' slip round the corner and buy ye a neck - ribbon , or summut to lighten ye up . i'se loath he should think I be live with dissenter , that do not   know how to keep themselves trig and smart . " 

 " never mind , Sally ; he never think of I . what he come for , be to see Ruth ; and , as you say , she be always neat and dainty . " 

 " well ! I reckon it can not be help now ; but if I buy ye a ribbon , will you promise to wear it when church - folk come ? for I can not abide the way they have of scoff at the Dissenters about their dress . " 

 " very well ! we will make that bargain , " say Miss Benson ; " and now , Ruth , I will go and fetch you a cup of warm jelly . " 

 " oh ! indeed , Aunt Faith , " say Ruth , " I be very sorry to balk you ; but if you be go to treat I as an invalid , I be afraid I shall rebel . " 

 but when she find that Aunt Faith 's heart be set upon it , she submit very graciously , only dimple up a little , as she find that she must consent to lie on the sofa , and be feed , when , in truth , she feel full of health , with a luxurious sensation of languor steal over she now and then , just enough to make it very pleasant to think of the salt breeze , and the sea beauty which await she at Abermouth . 

 Mr Davis call in the afternoon , and his visit be also to Ruth . Mr and Miss Benson be sit with she in the parlour , and watch she with contented love , as she employ herself in household sewing , and hopefully speak about the Abermouth plan . 

 " well ! so you have our worthy rector here to - day ; I be come on something of the same kind of errand ; only I shall spare you the reading of my letter , which , I will answer for it , he do not . please to take notice , " say he , put down a seal letter , " that I have deliver you a vote of thank from my medical brother ; and open and read it at your leisure ; only not just now , for I want to have a little talk with you on my own behoof . I want to ask you a favour , Mrs Denbigh . " 

 " a favour ! " exclaim Ruth ; " what can I do for you ? I think I may say I will do it , without hear what it be . " 

 " then you be a very imprudent woman , " reply he ; " however , I will take you at your word . I want you to give I your boy . " 

 " Leonard ! " 

 " Aye ! there it be , you see , Mr Benson . one minute she be as ready as can be , and the next , she look at I as if I be an ogre ! " 

 " perhaps we do not   understand what you mean , " say Mr Benson . 

 " the thing be this . you know I have   no child ; and I can not   say I have   ever fret over it much ; but my wife have ; and whether it be that she have infect I , or that I grieve over my good practice go to a stranger , when I ought to have have a son to take it after I , I do not   know ; but , of late , I have   get to look with covetous eye on all healthy boy , and at last I have   settle down my wish on this Leonard of your , Mrs Denbigh . " 

 Ruth could not speak ; for , even yet , she do not understand what he mean . he go on : 

 " now , how old be the lad ? " he ask Ruth , but Miss Benson reply : 

 " he will be twelve next February . " 

 " Umph ! only twelve ! he be tall and old - look for his age . you look young enough , it be true . " he say this last sentence as if to himself , but see Ruth crimson up , he abruptly change his tone . 

 " Twelve , be he ! well , I take he from now . I do not   mean that I really take he away from you , " say he , soften all at once , and become grave and considerate . " his be your son the son of one whom I have see as I have see you , Mrs Denbigh   out and out the good nurse I ever meet with , Miss Benson ; and good nurse be thing we doctor know how to value   his be your son be his great recommendation to I ; not but what the lad himself be a noble boy . I shall be glad to leave he with you as long and as much as we can ; he could not be tie to your apron - string all his life , you know . only I provide for his education , subject to your consent and good pleasure , and he be bind apprentice to I . I , his guardian , bind he to myself , the first surgeon in Eccleston , be the other who he may ; and in process of time he become partner , and some day or other succeed I . now , Mrs Denbigh , what have you get to say against this plan ? my wife be just as full of it as I . come ! begin with your objection . you be not a woman if you have not a whole bag - full of they ready to turn out against any reasonable proposal . " 

 " I do not   know , " falter Ruth . " it be so sudden " 

 " it be very , very kind of you , Mr Davis , " say Miss Benson , a little scandalise at Ruth 's non - expression of gratitude . 

 " Pooh ! pooh ! I will answer for it , in the long run , I be take good care of my own interest . come , Mrs Denbigh , be it a bargain ? " 

 now Mr Benson speak . 

 " Mr Davis , it be rather sudden , as she say . as far as I can see , it be the good as well as the kind proposal that could have be make ; but I think we must give she a little time to think about it . " 

 " well , twenty - four hour ! will that do ? " 

 Ruth lift up her head . " Mr Davis , I be not ungrateful because I can not   thank you "   she be cry while she speak ; " let I have a fortnight to consider about it . in a fortnight I will make up my mind . oh , how good you all be ! " 

 " very well . then this day fortnight Thursday the 28th you will let I know your decision . mind ! if it be against I , I shall not   consider it a decision , for I be determined to carry my point . I be not go to make Mrs Denbigh blush , Mr Benson , by tell you , in her presence , of all I have observe about she this last three week , that have make I sure of the good quality I shall find in this boy of her . I be watch she when she little think it . do you remember that night when Hector O'Brien be so furiously delirious , Mrs Denbigh ? " 

 Ruth go very white at the remembrance . 

 " why now , look there ! how pale she be at the very thought of it . and yet , I assure you , she be the one to go up and take the piece of glass from he which he have break out of the window for the sole purpose of cut his throat , or the throat of any one else , for that matter . I wish we have some other as brave as she be . " 

 " I think the great panic be pass away ! " say Mr Benson . 

 " Aye ! the general feeling of alarm be much weak ; but , here and there , there be as great fool as ever . why , when I leave here , I be go to see our precious member , Mr Donne " 

 " Mr Donne ? " say Ruth . 

 " Mr Donne , who lie ill at the Queen 's come last week , with the intention of canvassing , but be too much alarmed by what he hear of the fever to set to work ; and , in spite of all his precaution , he have take it ; and you should see the terror they be in at the hotel ; landlord , landlady , waiter , servant all ; there be not a creature will go near he , if they can help it ; and there be only his groom a lad he save from drown , I be tell to do anything for he . I must get he a proper nurse , somehow or somewhere , for all my be a Cranworth man . ah , Mr Benson ! you do not   know the temptation we medical man have . think , if I allow your member to die now , as he might very well , if he have no nurse how famously Mr Cranworth would walk over the course ! where be Mrs Denbigh go to ? I hope I have   not frighten she away by remind she of Hector O'Brien , and that awful night , when I do assure you she behave like a heroine ! " 

 as Mr Benson be show Mr Davis out , Ruth open the study - door , and say , in a very calm , low voice : 

 " Mr Benson ! will you allow I to speak to Mr Davis alone ? " 

 Mr Benson immediately consent , think that , in all probability , she wish to ask some further question about Leonard ; but as Mr Davis come into the room , and shut the door , he be strike by her pale , stern face of determination , and await she speak first . 

 " Mr Davis ! I must go and nurse Mr Bellingham , " say she at last , clench her hand tight together , but no other part of her body move from its intense stillness . 

 " Mr Bellingham ? " ask he , astonish at the name . 

 " Mr Donne , I mean , " say she , hurriedly . " his name be Bellingham . " 

 " oh ! I remember hear he have change his name for some property . but you must not think of any more such work just now . you be not fit for it . you be look as white as ash . " 

 " I must go , " she repeat . 

 " nonsense ! here be a man who can pay for the care of the first hospital nurse in London and I doubt if his life be worth the risk of one of theirs even , much more of your . " 

 " we have no right to weigh human life against each other . " 

 " no ! I know we have not . but it be a way we doctor be apt to get into ; and , at any rate , it be ridiculous of you to think of such a thing . just listen to reason . " 

 " I can not ! I can not ! " cry she , with sharp pain in her voice . " you must let I go , dear Mr Davis ! " say she , now speak with soft entreaty . 

 " no ! " say he , shake his head authoritatively . " I will do no such thing . " 

 " listen , " say she , drop her voice , and go all over the deep scarlet ; " he be Leonard 's father ! now ! you will let I go ! " 

 Mr Davis be indeed stagger by what she say , and for a moment he do not speak . so she go on : 

 " you will not tell ! you must not tell ! no one know , not even Mr Benson , who it be . and now it might do he so much harm to have it know . you will not tell ! " 

 " no ! I will not tell , " reply he . " but , Mrs Denbigh , you must answer I this one question , which I ask you in all true respect , but which I must ask , in order to guide both myself and you aright of course I know Leonard be illegitimate in fact , I will give you secret for secret : it be be so myself that first make I sympathise with he , and desire to adopt he . I know that much of your history ; but tell I , do you now care for this man ? answer I truly do you love he ? " 

 for a moment or two she do not speak ; her head be bent down ; then she raise it up , and look with clear and honest eye into his face . 

 " I have be think but I do not know I can not tell I do not   think I should love he , if he be well and happy but you say he be ill and alone how can I help care for he ? how can I help care for he ? " repeat she , cover her face with her hand , and the quick hot tear steal through her finger . " he be Leonard 's father , " continue she , look up at Mr Davis suddenly . " he need not know he shall not that I have ever be near he . if he be like the other , he must be delirious I will leave he before he come to himself but now let I go I must go . " 

 " I wish my tongue have be bite out before I have name he to you . he would do well enough without you ; and , I dare say , if he recognise you , he will only be annoy . " 

 " it be very likely , " say Ruth , heavily . 

 " annoyed , why ! he may curse you for your unasked - for care of he . I have hear my poor mother and she be as pretty and delicate a creature as you be curse for show tenderness when it be not want . now , be persuade by an old man like I , who have see enough of life to make his heart ache leave this fine gentleman to his fate . I will promise you to get he as good a nurse as can be have for money . " 

 " no ! " say Ruth , with dull persistency as if she have not attend to his dissuasion ; " I must go . I will leave he before he recognise I . " 

 " why , then , " say the old surgeon , " if you be so bent upon it , I suppose I must let you . it be but what my mother would have do poor , heart - break thing ! however , come along , and let we make the good of it . it save I a deal of trouble , I know ; for , if I have you for a right hand , I need not worry myself continually with wonder how he be take care of . go ! get your bonnet , you tender - hearted fool of a woman ! let we get you out of the house without any more scene or explanation ; I will make all straight with the Bensons . " 

 " you will not tell my secret , Mr Davis , " she say , abruptly . 

 " no ! not I ! do the woman think I have never to keep a secret of the kind before ? I only hope he will lose his election , and never come near the place again . after all , " continue he , sigh , " I suppose it be but human nature ! " he begin recall the circumstance of his own early life , and dreamily picture scene in the grey die ember of the fire ; and he be almost startled when she stand before he , ready equip , grave , pale , and quiet . 

 " come along ! " say he . " if you be to do any good at all , it must be in these next three day . after that , I will ensure his life for this bout ; and mind ! I shall send you home then ; for he might know you , and I will have no excitement to throw he back again , and no sobbing and cry from you . but now every moment your care be precious to he . I shall tell my own story to the Bensons , as soon as I have instal you . " 

 Mr Donne lie in the good room of the Queen 's Hotel no one with he but his faithful , ignorant servant , who be as much afraid of the fever as any one else could be , but who , nevertheless , would not leave his master his master who have save his life as a child , and afterwards put he in the stable at Bellingham Hall , where he learn all that he know . he stand in a farth corner of the room , watch his delirious master with affrighted eye , not dare to come near he , nor yet willing to leave he . 

 " oh ! if that doctor would but come ! he will kill himself or I and they stupid servant will not   stir a step over the threshold ; how shall I get over the night ? blessing on he here be the old doctor back again ! I hear he creak and scold up the stair ! " 

 the door open , and Mr Davis enter , follow by Ruth . 

 " here be the nurse , my good man such a nurse as there be not in the three county . now , all you will have to do be to mind what she say . " 

 " oh , sir ! he be mortal bad ! will not   you stay with we through the night , sir ? " 

 " look there ! " whisper Mr Davis to the man , ' see how she know how to manage he ! why , I could not do it well myself ! " 

 she have go up to the wild , rag figure , and with soft authority have make he lie down : and then , place a basin of cold water by the bedside , she have dip in it her pretty hand , and be lay their cool dampness on his hot brow , speak in a low soothe voice all the time , in a way that act like a charm in hush his mad talk . 

 " but I will stay , " say the doctor , after he have examine his patient ; " as much on her account as his ! and partly to quieten the fear of this poor , faithful fellow . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 out of darkness into Light 
 

 the third night after this be to be the crisis the turning - point between Life and death . Mr Davis come again to pass it by the bedside of the sufferer . Ruth be there , constant and still , intent upon watch the symptom , and act accord to they , in obedience to Mr Davis 's direction . she have never leave the room . every sense have be strain in watch every power of thought or judgment have be keep on the full stretch . now that Mr Davis come and take her place , and that the room be quiet for the night , she become oppress with heaviness , which yet do not tend to sleep . she could not remember the present time , or where she be . all time of her early youth the day of her childhood be in her memory with a minuteness and fulness of detail which be miserable ; for all along she feel that she have no real grasp on the scene that be pass through her mind that , somehow , they be long go by , and go by for ever and yet she could not remember who she be now , nor where she be , and whether she have now any interest in life to take the place of those which she be conscious have pass away , although their remembrance fill her mind with painful acuteness . her head lie on her arm , and they rest on the table . every now and then she open her eye , and see the large room , handsomely furnish with article that be each one incongruous with the other , as if buy at sale . she see the flickering night - light she hear the ticking of the watch , and the two breathing , each go on at a separate rate one hurry , abruptly stop , and then pant violently , as if to make up for lose time ; and the other slow , steady , and regular , as if the breather be asleep ; but this supposition be contradict by an occasional repressed sound of yawning . the sky through the uncurtained window look dark and black would this night never have an end ? have the sun go down for ever , and would the world at last awaken to a general sense of everlasting night ? 

 then she feel as if she ought to get up , and go and see how the troubled sleeper in yonder bed be struggle through his illness ; but she could not remember who the sleeper be , and she shrink from see some phantom - face on the pillow , such as now begin to haunt the dark corner of the room , and look at she , jibbere and mow as they look . so she cover her face again , and sink into a whirling stupor of sense and feeling . by - and - by she hear her fellow - watcher stirring , and a dull wonder steal over she as to what he be do ; but the heavy languor press she down , and keep she still . at last she hear the word , " come here , " and listlessly obey the command . she have to steady herself in the rock chamber before she could walk to the bed by which Mr Davis stand ; but the effort to do so rouse she , and , although conscious of an oppressive headache , she view with sudden and clear vision all the circumstance of her present position . Mr Davis be near the head of the bed , hold the night - lamp high , and shade it with his hand , that it might not disturb the sick person , who lie with his face towards they , in feeble exhaustion , but with every sign that the violence of the fever have leave he . it so happen that the ray of the lamp fall bright and full upon Ruth 's countenance , as she stand with her crimson lip part with the hurrying breath , and the fever - flush brilliant on her cheek . her eye be wide open , and their pupil distend . she look on the invalid in silence , and hardly understand why Mr Davis have summon she there . 

 " do not   you see the change ? he be well ! the crisis be past ! " 

 but she do not speak ; her look be rivet on his softly - unclose eye , which meet her as they open languidly . she could not stir or speak . she be hold fast by that gaze of his , in which a faint recognition dawn , and grow to strength . 

 he murmur some word . they strain their sense to hear . he repeat they even low than before ; but this time they catch what he be say . 

 " where be the water - lily ? where be the lily in her hair ? " 

 Mr Davis draw Ruth away . 

 " he be still ramble , " say he , " but the fever have leave he . " 

 the grey dawn be now fill the room with its cold light ; be it that make Ruth 's cheek so deadly pale ? could that call out the wild entreaty of her look , as if implore help against some cruel foe that hold she fast , and be wrestle with her Spirit of Life ? she hold Mr Davis 's arm . if she have let it go , she would have fall . 

 " take I home , " she say , and faint dead away . 

 Mr Davis carry she out of the chamber , and send the groom to keep watch by his master . he order a fly to convey she to Mr Benson 's , and lift she in when it come , for she be still half unconscious . it be he who carry she upstairs to her room , where Miss Benson and Sally undressed and lay she in her bed . 

 he await their proceeding in Mr Benson 's study . when Mr Benson come in , Mr Davis say : 

 " do not   blame I . do not   add to my self - reproach . I have kill she . I be a cruel fool to let she go . do not   speak to I . " 

 " it may not be so bad , " say Mr Benson , himself need comfort in that shock . " she may recover . she surely will recover . I believe she will . " 

 " no , no ! she will not . but by she shall , if I can save she . " Mr Davis look defiantly at Mr Benson , as if he be Fate . " I tell you she shall recover , or else I be a murderer . what business have I to take she to nurse he " 

 he be cut short by Sally 's entrance and announcement that Ruth be now prepared to see he . 

 from that time forward Mr Davis devote all his leisure , his skill , his energy , to save she . he call on the rival surgeon to beg he to undertake the management of Mr Donne 's recovery , say , with his usual self - mockery , " I could not answer it to Mr Cranworth if I have bring his opponent round , you know , when I have have such a fine opportunity in my power . now , with your patient , and general radical interest , it will be rather a feather in your cap ; for he may want a good deal of care yet , though he be get on famously so rapidly , in fact , that it be a strong temptation to I to throw he back a relapse , you know . " 

 the other surgeon bow gravely , apparently take Mr Davis in earnest , but certainly very glad of the job thus opportunely throw in his way . in spite of Mr Davis 's real and deep anxiety about Ruth , he could not help chuckle over his rival 's literal interpretation of all he have say . 

 " to be sure , what fool man be ! I do not   know why one should watch and strive to keep they in the world . I have give this fellow something to talk about confidentially to all his patient ; I wonder how much strong a dose the man would have swallow ! I must begin to take care of my practice for that lad yonder . well - a - day ! well - a - day ! what be this sick fine gentleman send here for , that she should run a chance of her life for he ? or why be he send into the world at all , for that matter ? " 

 indeed , however much Mr Davis might labour with all his professional skill however much they might all watch and pray and weep it be but too evident that Ruth " home must go , and take her wage . " poor , poor Ruth ! 

 it might be that , utterly exhaust by watch and nursing , first in the hospital , and then by the bedside of her former lover , the power of her constitution be wear out ; or , it might be , her gentle , pliant sweetness , but she display no outrage or discord even in her delirium . there she lie in the attic - room in which her baby have be bear , her watch over he keep , her confession to he make ; and now she be stretch on the bed in utter helplessness , softly gaze at vacancy with her open , unconscious eye , from which all the depth of their meaning have flee , and all they tell be of a sweet , child - like insanity within . the watcher could not touch she with their sympathy , or come near she in her dim world ; so , mutely , but look at each other from time to time with tearful eye , they take a poor comfort from the one evident fact that , though lose and go astray , she be happy and at peace . they have never hear her sing ; indeed , the simple art which her mother have teach she , have die , with her early joyousness , at that dear mother 's death . but now she sing continually , very soft and low . she go from one childish ditty to another without let or pause , keep a strange sort of time with her pretty finger , as they close and unclose themselves upon the counterpane . she never look at any one with the slight glimpse of memory or intelligence in her face ; no , not even at Leonard . 

 her strength fade day by day ; but she know it not . her sweet lip be part to sing , even after the breath and the power to do so have leave she , and her finger fall idly on the bed . two day she linger thus all but go from they , and yet still there . 

 they stand around her bedside , not speak , or sighing , or moaning ; they be too much awe by the exquisite peacefulness of her look for that . suddenly she open wide her eye , and gaze intently forwards , as if she see some happy vision , which call out a lovely , rapturous , breathless smile . they hold their very breath . 

 " I see the Light come , " say she . " the Light be come , " she say . and , raise herself slowly , she stretch out her arm , and then fall back , very still for evermore . 

 they do not speak . Mr Davis be the first to utter a word . 

 " it be over ! " say he . " she be dead ! " 

 out ring through the room the cry of Leonard : 

 " Mother ! mother ! mother ! you have not leave I alone ! you will not leave I alone ! you be not dead ! mother ! mother ! " 

 they have pen in his agony of apprehension till then , that no wail of her child might disturb her ineffable calm . but now there be a cry hear through the house , of one refuse to be comfort : " Mother ! Mother ! " 

 but Ruth lie dead . 

 

 

 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 the end 
 

 a stupor of grief succeed to Leonard 's passionate cry . he become so much depressed , physically as well as mentally , before the end of the day , that Mr Davis be seriously alarmed for the consequence . he hail with gladness a proposal make by the Farquhars , that the boy should be remove to their house , and place under the fond care of his mother 's friend , who send her own child to abermouth the well to devote herself to Leonard . 

 when they tell he of this arrangement , he at first refuse to go and leave she ; but when Mr Benson say : 

 " she would have wish it , Leonard ! do it for her sake ! " he go away very quietly ; not speak a word , after Mr Benson have make the voluntary promise that he should see she once again . he neither speak nor cry for many hour ; and all Jemima 's delicate wile be call forth , before his heavy heart could find the relief of tear . and then he be so weak , and his pulse so low , that all who love he fear for his life . 

 anxiety about he make a sad distraction from the sorrow for the dead . the three old people , who now form the household in the Chapel - house , go about slowly and dreamily , each with a dull wonder at their heart why they , the infirm and wear - out , be leave , while she be take in her lovely prime . 

 the third day after Ruth 's death , a gentleman come to the door and ask to speak to Mr Benson . he be very much wrap up in fur and cloak , and the upper , expose part of his face be sink and hollow , like that of one but partially recover from illness . Mr and Miss Benson be at Mr Farquhar 's , go to see Leonard , and poor old Sally have be have a hearty cry over the kitchen fire before answer the door - knock . her heart be tenderly incline just then towards any one who have the aspect of suffering ; so , although her master be out , and she be usually chary of admit stranger , she propose to Mr Donne   for it be he   that he should come in and await Mr Benson 's return in the study . he be glad enough to avail himself of her offer ; for he be feeble and nervous , and come on a piece of business which he exceedingly dislike , and about which he feel very awkward . the fire be nearly , if not quite , out ; nor do Sally 's vigorous blow do much good , although she leave the room with an assurance that it would soon burn up . he leant against the chimney - piece , think over event , and with a sensation of discomfort , both external and internal , grow and gather upon he . he almost wonder whether the proposal he mean to make with regard to Leonard could not be well arrange by letter than by an interview . he become very shivery , and impatient of the state of indecision to which his bodily weakness have reduce he . 

 Sally open the door and come in . " would you like to walk upstairs , sir ? " ask she , in a trembling voice , for she have learn who the visitor be from the driver of the fly , who have run up to the house to inquire what be detain the gentleman that he have bring from the Queen 's Hotel ; and , know that Ruth have catch the fatal fever from her attendance on Mr Donne , Sally imagine that it be but a piece of sad civility to invite he upstairs to see the poor dead body , which she have lay out and deck for the grave , with such fond care that she have grow strangely proud of its marble beauty . 

 Mr Donne be glad enough of any proposal of a change from the cold and comfortless room where he have think uneasy , remorseful thought . he fancy that a change of place would banish the train of reflection that be trouble he ; but the change he anticipate be to a well - warm , cheerful sitting - room , with sign of life , and a bright fire therein ; and he be on the last flight of stair , at the door of the room where Ruth lie before he understand whither Sally be conduct he . he shrink back for an instant , and then a strange sting of curiosity impel he on . he stand in the humble low - roof attic , the window open , and the top of the distant snow - cover hill fill up the whiteness of the general aspect . he muffle himself up in his cloak , and shudder , while Sally reverently draw down the sheet , and show the beautiful , calm , still face , on which the last rapturous smile still linger , give an ineffable look of bright serenity . her arm be cross over her breast ; the wimple - like cap mark the perfect oval of her face , while two braid of the wave auburn hair peep out of the narrow border , and lie on the delicate cheek . 

 he be awe into admiration by the wonderful beauty of that dead woman . 

 " how beautiful she be ! " say he , beneath his breath . " do all dead people look so peaceful so happy ? " 

 " not all , " reply Sally , cry . " few have be as good and as gentle as she be in their life . " she quite shake with her sobbing . 

 Mr Donne be disturb by her distress . 

 " come , my good woman ! we must all die " he do not know what to say , and be become infect by her sorrow . " I be sure you love she very much , and be very kind to she in her lifetime ; you must take this from I to buy yourself some remembrance of she . " he have pull out a sovereign , and really have a kindly desire to console she , and reward she , in offer it to she . 

 but she take her apron from her eye , as soon as she become aware of what he be do , and , still hold it midway in her hand , she look at he indignantly , before she burst out : 

 " and who be you , that think to pay for my kindness to she by money ? and I be not kind to you , my darling , " say she , passionately address the motionless , serene body " I be not kind to you . I frabbe you , and plague you from the first , my lamb ! I come and cut off your pretty lock in this very room I do and you say never an angry word to I ; no ! not then , nor many a time after , when I be very sharp and cross to you . no ! I never be kind to you , and I dunnot think the world be kind to you , my darling , but you be go where the angel be very tender to such as you you be , my poor wench ! " she bend down and kiss the lip , from whose marble , unyielde touch Mr Donne recoil , even in thought . 

 just then , Mr Benson enter the room . he have return home before his sister , and come upstairs in search of Sally , to whom he want to speak on some subject relate to the funeral . he bow in recognition of Mr Donne , whom he know as the member for the town , and whose presence impress he painfully , as his illness have be the proximate cause of Ruth 's death . but he try to check this feeling , as it be no fault of Mr Donne 's . Sally steal out of the room , to cry at leisure in her kitchen . 

 " I must apologise for be here , " say Mr Donne . " I be hardly conscious where your servant be lead I to , when she express her wish that I should walk upstairs . " 

 " it be a very common idea in this town , that it be a gratification to be ask to take a last look at the dead , " reply Mr Benson . 

 " and in this case I be glad to have see she once more , " say Mr Donne . " Poor Ruth ! " 

 Mr Benson glance up at he at the last word . how do he know her name ? to he she have only be Mrs Denbigh . but Mr Donne have no idea that he be talk to one unaware of the connexion that have formerly exist between they ; and , though he would have prefer carry on the conversation in a warm room , yet , as Mr Benson be still gaze at she with sad , linger love , he go on : 

 " I do not recognise she when she come to nurse I ; I believe I be delirious . my servant , who have know she long ago , in Fordham , tell I who she be . I can not tell how I regret that she should have die in consequence of her love of I . " 

 Mr Benson look up at he again , a stern light fill his eye as he do so . he wait impatiently to hear more , either to quench or confirm his suspicion . if she have not be lie there , very still and calm , he would have force the word out of Mr Donne , by some abrupt question . as it be , he listen silently , his heart quick - beating . 

 " I know that money be but a poor compensation , be no remedy for this event , or for my youthful folly . " 

 Mr Benson set his tooth hard together , to keep in word little short of a curse . 

 " indeed , I offer her money to almost any amount before ; do I justice , sir , " catch the gleam of indignation on Mr Benson 's face ; " I offer to marry she , and provide for the boy as if he have be legitimate . it be of no use recur to that time , " say he , his voice faltering ; " what be do can not be undo . but I come now to say , that I should be glad to leave the boy still under your charge , and that every expense you think it right to incur in his education I will defray ; and place a sum of money in trust for he say , two thousand pound or more : fix what you will . of course , if you decline retain he , I must find some one else ; but the provision for he shall be the same , for my poor Ruth 's sake . " 

 Mr Benson do not speak . he could not , till he have gather some peace from look at the ineffable repose of the Dead . 

 then , before he answer , he cover up her face ; and in his voice there be the stillness of ice . 

 " Leonard be not unprovide for . those that honour his mother will take care of he . he shall never touch a penny of your money . every offer of service you have make , I reject in his name , and in her presence , " say he , bend towards the Dead . " man may call such action as your , youthful folly ! there be another name for they with God . Sir ! I will follow you downstairs . " 

 all the way down , Mr Benson hear Mr Donne 's voice urge and entreating , but the word he could not recognise for the thought that fill his brain the rapid put together of event that be go on there . and when Mr Donne turn at the door , to speak again , and repeat his offer of service to Leonard , Mr Benson make answer , without well know whether the answer fit the question or not : 

 " I thank God , you have no right , legal or otherwise , over the child . and for her sake , I will spare he the shame of ever hear your name as his father . " 

 he shut the door in Mr Donne 's face . 

 " an ill - breed , puritanical old fellow ! he may have the boy , I be sure , for aught I care . I have do my duty , and will get out of this abominable place as soon as I can . I wish my last remembrance of my beautiful Ruth be not mix up with all these people . " 

 Mr Benson be bitterly oppress with this interview ; it disturb the peace with which he be begin to contemplate event . his anger ruffle he , although such anger have be just , and such indignation well deserve ; and both have be unconsciously present in his heart for year against the unknown seducer , whom he meet face to face by the death - bed of Ruth . 

 it give he a shock which he do not recover from for many day . he be nervously afraid lest Mr Donne should appear at the funeral ; and not all the reason he allege to himself against this apprehension , put it utterly away from he . before then , however , he hear casually   for he would allow himself no inquiry   that he have leave the town . no ! Ruth 's funeral pass over in calm and simple solemnity . her child , her own household , her friend , and Mr Farquhar , quietly walk after the bier , which be bear by some of the poor to whom she have be very kind in her lifetime . and many other stand aloof in the little burying - ground , sadly watch that last ceremony . 

 they slowly disperse ; Mr Benson lead Leonard by the hand , and secretly wonder at his self - restraint . almost as soon as they have let themselves into the Chapel - house , a messenger bring a note from Mrs Bradshaw , with a pot of quince marmalade , which , she say to Miss Benson , she think that Leonard might fancy , and if he do , they be to be sure and let she know , as she have plenty more ; or , be there anything else that he would like ? she would gladly make he whatever he fancy . 

 Poor Leonard ! he lie stretch on the sofa , white and tearless , beyond the power of any such comfort , however kindly offer ; but this be only one of the many homely , simple attention , which all come round he to offer , from Mr Grey , the rector , down to the nameless poor who call at the back door to inquire how it fare with her child . 

 Mr Benson be anxious , accord to dissenting custom , to preach an appropriate funeral sermon . it be the last office he could render to she ; it should be do well and carefully . moreover , it be possible that the circumstance of her life , which be know to all , might be make effective in this manner to work conviction of many truth . accordingly , he make great preparation of thought and paper ; he labour hard , destroy sheet after sheet his eye fill with tear between - while , as he remember some fresh proof of the humility and sweetness of her life . oh , that he could do her justice ! but word seem hard and inflexible , and refuse to fit themselves to his idea . he sit late on Saturday , writing ; he watch through the night till Sunday morning be far advanced . he have never take such pain with any sermon , and he be only half satisfied with it after all . 

 Mrs Farquhar have comfort the bitterness of Sally 's grief by give she very handsome mourning . at any rate , she feel oddly proud and exult when she think of her new black gown ; but when she remember why she wear it , she scold herself pretty sharply for her satisfaction , and take to cry afresh with redoubled vigour . she spend the Sunday morning in alternately smooth down her skirt and adjust her broad hem collar , or bemoan the occasion with tearful earnestness . but the sorrow overcome the little quaint vanity of her heart , as she see troop after troop of humbly - dress mourner pass by into the old chapel . they be very poor but each have mount some rusty piece of crape , or some fade black ribbon . the old come halt and slow the mother carry their quiet , awe - strike babe . 

 and not only these be there but other equally unaccustomed to nonconformist worship : Mr Davis , for instance , to whom Sally act as chaperone ; for he sit in the minister 's pew , as a stranger ; and , as she afterwards say , she have a fellow - feeling with he , be a church - woman herself , and dissenter have such awkward way ; however , she have be there before , so she could set he to right about their fashion . 

 from the pulpit , Mr Benson see one and all the well - fill Bradshaw pew all in deep mourning , Mr Bradshaw conspicuously so   he would have attend the funeral gladly if they would have ask he   the Farquhars the many stranger the still more numerous poor one or two wild - look outcast , who stand afar off , but weep silently and continually . Mr Benson 's heart grow very full . 

 his voice tremble as he read and pray . but he steady it as he open his sermon his great , last effort in her honour the labour that he have pray God to bless to the heart of many . for an instant the old man look on all the upturned face , listen , with wet eye , to hear what he could say to interpret that which be in their heart , dumb and unshape , of God 's doing as show in her life . he look , and , as he gaze , a mist come before he , and he could not see his sermon , nor his hearer , but only Ruth , as she have be stricken low , and crouch from sight , in the upland field by Llan - dhu like a woeful , hunt creature . and now her life be over ! her struggle end ! Sermon and all be forget . he sit down , and hide his face in his hand for a minute or so . then he arise , pale and serene . he put the sermon away , and open the Bible , and read the seventh chapter of Revelations , begin at the ninth verse . 

 before it be finish , most of his hearer be in tear . it come home to they as more appropriate than any sermon could have be . even Sally , though full of anxiety as to what her fellow - Churchman would think of such proceeding , let the sob come freely as she hear the word : 
 

 and he say to I , these be they which come out of great tribulation , and have wash their robe , and make they white in the blood of the Lamb . 

 therefore be they before the throne of God , and serve he day and night in his temple ; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among they . 

 they shall hunger no more , neither thirst any more ; neither shall the sun light on they , nor any heat . 

 for the Lamb which be in the midst of the throne shall feed they , and shall lead they unto living fountain of water , and God shall wipe away all tear from their eye . 
 

 " he preach sermon sometimes , " say Sally , nudge Mr Davis , as they rise from their knee at last . " I make no doubt there be as grand a sermon in yon paper - book as ever we hear in church . I have   hear he pray uncommon fine quite beyond any but learn folk . " 

 Mr Bradshaw have be anxious to do something to testify his respect for the woman , who , if all have entertain his opinion , would have be drive into hopeless sin . accordingly , he order the first stonemason of the town to meet he in the chapel - yard on Monday morning , to take measurement and receive direction for a tombstone . they thread their way among the grassy heap to where Ruth be bury , in the south corner , beneath the great Wych - elm . when they get there , Leonard raise himself up from the new - stir turf . his face be swollen with weeping ; but when he see Mr Bradshaw he calm himself , and check his sob , and , as an explanation of be where he be when thus surprised , he could find nothing to say but the simple word : 

 " my mother be dead , sir . " 

 his eye seek those of Mr Bradshaw with a wild look of agony , as if to find comfort for that great loss in human sympathy ; and at the first word the first touch of Mr Bradshaw 's hand on his shoulder he burst out afresh . 

 " come , come ! my boy ! Mr Francis , I will see you about this to - morrow I will call at your house . let I take you home , my poor fellow . come , my lad , come ! " 

 the first time , for year , that he have enter Mr Benson 's house , he come lead and comfort her son and , for a moment , he could not speak to his old friend , for the sympathy which choke up his voice , and fill his eye with tear .