SYLVIA 's lover . 


 BY 

 ELIZABETH GASKELL 



 oh for thy voice to soothe and bless ! 
 what hope of answer , or redress ? 
 behind the veil ! behind the veil ! Tennyson 



 CHAPTER I 

 MONKSHAVEN 

 on the north - eastern shore of England there be a town call Monkshaven , contain at the present day about fifteen thousand inhabitant . there be , however , but half the number at the end of the last century , and it be at that period that the event narrate in the follow page occur . 

 Monkshaven be a name not unknown in the history of England , and tradition of its have be the landing - place of a throneless queen be current in the town . at that time there have be a fortified castle on the height above it , the site of which be now occupy by a deserted manor - house ; and at an even early date than the arrival of the queen and coeval with the most ancient remain of the castle , a great monastery have stand on those cliff , overlook the vast ocean that blend with the distant sky . monkshaven itself be build by the side of the Dee , just where the river fall into the German Ocean . the principal street of the town run parallel to the stream , and small lane branch out of this , and straggle up the side of the steep hill , between which and the river the house be pen in . there be a bridge across the Dee , and consequently a Bridge Street run at right angle to the High Street ; and on the south side of the stream there be a few house of more pretension , around which lie garden and field . it be on this side of the town that the local aristocracy live . and who be the great people of this small town ? not the young branch of the county family that hold hereditary state in their manor - house on the wild bleak moor , that shut in Monkshaven almost as effectually on the land side as ever the water do on the sea - board . no ; these old family keep aloof from the unsavoury yet adventurous trade which bring wealth to generation after generation of certain family in Monkshaven . 

 the magnate of Monkshaven be those who have the large number of ship engage in the whaling - trade . something like the following be the course of life with a monkshaven lad of this class : he be apprentice as a sailor to one of the great ship - owner to his own father , possibly along with twenty other boy , or , it might be , even more . during the summer month he and his fellow apprentice make voyage to the Greenland sea , return with their cargo in the early autumn ; and employ the winter month in watch the preparation of the oil from the blubber in the melting - shed , and learn navigation from some quaint but experienced teacher , half schoolmaster , half sailor , who season his instruction by stir narration of the wild adventure of his youth . the house of the ship - owner to whom he be apprentice be his home and that of his companion during the idle season between October and March . the domestic position of these boy vary accord to the premium pay ; some take rank with the son of the family , other be consider as little well than servant . yet once on board an equality prevail , in which , if any claim superiority , it be the brave and bright . after a certain number of voyage the monkshaven lad would rise by degree to be captain , and as such would have a share in the venture ; all these profit , as well as all his saving , would go towards build a whale vessel of his own , if he be not so fortunate as to be the child of a ship - owner . at the time of which I write , there be but little division of labour in the monkshaven whale fishery . the same man might be the owner of six or seven ship , any one of which he himself be fit by education and experience to command ; the master of a score of apprentice , each of whom pay a pretty sufficient premium ; and the proprietor of the melting - shed into which his cargo of blubber and whalebone be convey to be fit for sale . it be no wonder that large fortune be acquire by these ship - owner , nor that their house on the south side of the river Dee be stately mansion , full of handsome and substantial furniture . it be also not surprising that the whole town have an amphibious appearance , to a degree unusual even in a seaport . every one depend on the whale fishery , and almost every male inhabitant have be , or hop to be , a sailor . down by the river the smell be almost intolerable to any but monkshaven people during certain season of the year ; but on these unsavoury ' staithe ' the old man and child lounge for hour , almost as if they revel in the odour of train - oil . 

 this be , perhaps , enough of a description of the town itself . I have say that the country for mile all around be moorland ; high above the level of the sea tower the purple crag , whose summit be crown with greensward that steal down the side of the scaur a little way in grassy vein . here and there a brook force its way from the height down to the sea , make its channel into a valley more or less broad in long process of time . and in the moorland hollow , as in these valley , tree and underwood grow and flourish ; so that , while on the bare swell of the high land you shiver at the waste desolation of the scenery , when you drop into these woode ' bottom ' you be charm with the nestling shelter which they give . but above and around these rare and fertile vale there be moor for many a mile , here and there bleak enough , with the red freestone crop out above the scanty herbage ; then , perhaps , there be a brown tract of peat and bog , uncertain footing for the pedestrian who try to make a short cut to his destination ; then on the high sandy soil there be the purple ling , or commonest specie of heather grow in beautiful wild luxuriance . tuft of fine elastic grass be occasionally to be find , on which the little black - face sheep browse ; but either the scanty food , or their goat - like agility , keep they in a lean condition that do not promise much for the butcher , nor yet be their wool of a quality fine enough to make they profitable in that way to their owner . in such district there be little population at the present day ; there be much less in the last century , before agriculture be sufficiently scientific to have a chance of contend with such natural disqualification as the moor present , and when there be no facility of railroad to bring sportsman from a distance to enjoy the shooting season , and make an annual demand for accommodation . 

 there be old stone hall in the valley ; there be bare farmhouse to be see on the moor at long distance apart , with small stack of coarse poor hay , and almost large stack of turf for winter fuel in their farmyard . the cattle in the pasture field belong to these farm look half starve ; but somehow there be an odd , intelligent expression in their face , as well as in those of the black - visage sheep , which be seldom see in the placidly stupid countenance of well - feed animal . all the fence be turf bank , with loose stone pile into wall on the top of these . 

 there be comparative fertility and luxuriance down below in the rare green dale . the narrow meadow stretch along the brookside seem as though the cow could really satisfy their hunger in the deep rich grass ; whereas on the high land the scanty herbage be hardly worth the fatigue of move about in search of it . even in these ' bottom ' the pip sea - wind , follow the current of the stream , stunt and cut low any tree ; but still there be rich thick underwood , tangle and tie together with bramble , and brier - rise ,   sic   and honeysuckle ; and if the farmer in these comparatively happy valley have have wife or daughter who care for gardening , many a flower would have grow on the western or southern side of the rough stone house . but at that time gardening be not a popular art in any part of England ; in the north it be not yet . nobleman and gentleman may have beautiful garden ; but farmer and day - labourer care little for they north of the Trent , which be all I can answer for . a few ' berry ' bush , a black currant tree or two   the leaf to be use in heighten the flavour of tea , the fruit as medicinal for cold and sore throat , a potato ground   and this be not so common at the close of the last century as it be now , a cabbage bed , a bush of sage , and balm , and thyme , and marjoram , with possibly a rose tree , and ' old man ' grow in the midst ; a little plot of small strong coarse onion , and perhaps some marigold , the petal of which flavour the salt - beef broth ; such plant make up a well - furnish garden to a farmhouse at the time and place to which my story belong . but for twenty mile inland there be no forget the sea , nor the sea - trade ; refuse shell - fish , seaweed , the offal of the melting - house , be the staple manure of the district ; great ghastly whale - jaw , bleach bare and white , be the arch over the gate - post to many a field or moorland stretch . out of every family of several son , however agricultural their position might be , one have go to sea , and the mother look wistfully seaward at the change of the keen piping moorland wind . the holiday ramble be to the coast ; no one care to go inland to see aught , unless indeed it might be to the great annual horse - fair hold where the dreary land break into habitation and cultivation . 

 somehow in this country sea thought follow the thinker far inland ; whereas in most other part of the island , at five mile from the ocean , he have all but forget the existence of such an element as salt water . the great Greenland trade of the coast town be the main and primary cause of this , no doubt . but there be also a dread and an irritation in every one 's mind , at the time of which I write , in connection with the neighbour sea . 

 since the termination of the american war , there have be nothing to call for any unusual energy in man the navy ; and the grant require by Government for this purpose diminish with every year of peace . in 1792 this grant touch its minimum for many year . in 1793 the proceeding of the French have set Europe on fire , and the English be rag with anti - gallican excitement , foment into action by every expedient of the Crown and its Ministers . we have our ship ; but where be our man ? the Admiralty have , however , a ready remedy at hand , with ample precedent for its use , and with common   if not statute   law to sanction its application . they issue ' press warrant , ' call upon the civil power throughout the country to support their officer in the discharge of their duty . the sea - coast be divide into district , under the charge of a captain in the navy , who again delegate sub - district to lieutenant ; and in this manner all homeward - bind vessel be watch and wait for , all port be under supervision ; and in a day , if need be , a large number of man could be add to the force of his Majesty 's navy . but if the Admiralty become urgent in their demand , they be also willing to be unscrupulous . Landsmen , if able - body , might soon be train into good sailor ; and once in the hold of the tender , which always await the success of the operation of the press - gang , it be difficult for such prisoner to bring evidence of the nature of their former occupation , especially when none have leisure to listen to such evidence , or be willing to believe it if they do listen , or would act upon it for the release of the captive if they have by possibility both listen and believe . man be kidnap , literally disappear , and nothing be ever hear of they again . the street of a busy town be not safe from such press - gang capture , as Lord Thurlow could have tell , after a certain walk he take about this time on Tower Hill , when he , the attorney - general of England , be impressed , when the Admiralty have its own peculiar way of get rid of tiresome besieger and petitioner . nor yet be lonely inland dweller more secure ; many a rustic go to a statute fair or ' mop , ' and never come home to tell of his hiring ; many a stout young farmer vanish from his place by the hearth of his father , and be no more hear of by mother or lover ; so great be the press for man to serve in the navy during the early year of the war with France , and after every great naval victory of that war . 

 the servant of the Admiralty lie in wait for all merchantman and trader ; there be many instance of vessel return home after long absence , and laden with rich cargo , be board within a day 's distance of land , and so many man press and carry off , that the ship , with her cargo , become unmanageable from the loss of her crew , drift out again into the wild wide ocean , and be sometimes find in the helpless guidance of one or two infirm or ignorant sailor ; sometimes such vessel be never hear of more . the man thus press be take from the near grasp of parent or wife , and be often deprive of the hard earning of year , which remain in the hand of the master of the merchantman in which they have serve , subject to all the chance of honesty or dishonesty , life or death . now all this tyranny   for I can use no other word   be marvellous to we ; we can not imagine how it be that a nation submit to it for so long , even under any warlike enthusiasm , any panic of invasion , any amount of loyal subservience to the govern power . when we read of the military be call in to assist the civil power in back up the press - gang , of party of soldier patrol the street , and sentry with screw bayonet place at every door while the press - gang enter and search each hole and corner of the dwelling ; when we hear of church be surround during divine service by troop , while the press - gang stand ready at the door to seize man as they come out from attend public worship , and take these instance as merely type of what be constantly go on in different form , we do not wonder at Lord Mayors , and other civic authority in large town , complain that a stop be put to business by the danger which the tradesman and their servant incur in leave their house and go into the street , infest by press - gang . 

 whether it be that live in close neighbourhood to the metropolis the centre of politic and news inspire the inhabitant of the southern county with a strong feeling of that kind of patriotism which consist in hat all other nation ; or whether it be that the chance of capture be so much great at all the southern port that the merchant sailor become inure to the danger ; or whether it be that serve in the navy , to those familiar with such town as Portsmouth and Plymouth , have an attraction to most man from the dash and brilliancy of the adventurous employment it be certain that the southerner take the oppression of press - warrant more submissively than the wild north - eastern people . for with they the chance of profit beyond their wage in the whaling or Greenland trade extend to the low description of sailor . he might rise by dare and save to be a ship - owner himself . number around he have do so ; and this very fact make the distinction between class and class less apparent ; and the common venture and danger , the universal interest feel in one pursuit , bind the inhabitant of that line of coast together with a strong tie , the severance of which by any violent extraneous measure , give rise to passionate anger and thirst for vengeance . a Yorkshireman once say to I , ' my county folk be all alike . their first thought be how to resist . why ! I myself , if I hear a man say it be a fine day , catch myself try to find out that it be no such thing . it be so in thought ; it be so in word ; it be so in deed . ' 

 so you may imagine the press - gang have no easy time of it on the Yorkshire coast . in other place they inspire fear , but here rage and hatred . the Lord Mayor of York be warn on 20th January , 1777 , by an anonymous letter , that ' if those man be not send from the city on or before the follow Tuesday , his lordship 's own dwelling , and the Mansion - house also , should be burn to the ground . ' 

 perhaps something of the ill - feeling that prevail on the subject be owe to the fact which I have notice in other place similarly situate . where the land possession of gentleman of ancient family but limited income surround a centre of any kind of profitable trade or manufacture , there be a sort of latent ill - will on the part of the squire to the tradesman , be he manufacturer , merchant , or ship - owner , in whose hand be hold a power of money - making , which no hereditary pride , or gentlemanly love of do nothing , prevent he from use . this ill - will , to be sure , be mostly of a negative kind ; its most common form of manifestation be in absence of speech or action , a sort of torpid and genteel ignore all unpleasant neighbour ; but really the whale - fishery of Monkshaven have become so impertinently and obtrusively prosperous of late year at the time of which I write , the Monkshaven ship - owner be grow so wealthy and consequential , that the squire , who live at home at ease in the old stone manor - house scatter up and down the surround moorland , feel that the check upon the monkshaven trade likely to be inflict by the press - gang , be wisely ordain by the high power   how high they place these power I will not venture to say , to prevent overhaste in get rich , which be a scriptural fault , and they also think that they be only do their duty in back up the Admiralty warrant by all the civil power at their disposal , whenever they be call upon , and whenever they could do so without take too much trouble in affair which do not after all much concern themselves . 

 there be just another motive in the mind of some provident parent of many daughter . the captain and lieutenant employ on this service be mostly agreeable bachelor , bring up to a genteel profession , at the least they be very pleasant visitor , when they have a day to spare ; who know what might come of it ? 

 indeed , these brave officer be not unpopular in Monkshaven itself , except at the time when they be bring into actual collision with the people . they have the frank manner of their profession ; they be know to have serve in those engagement , the very narrative of which at this day will warm the heart of a Quaker , and they themselves do not come prominently forward in the dirty work which , nevertheless , be permit and quietly sanction by they . so while few monkshaven people pass the low public - house over which the navy blue - flag stream , as a sign that it be the rendezvous of the press - gang , without spit towards it in sign of abhorrence , yet , perhaps , the very same person would give some rough token of respect to Lieutenant Atkinson if they meet he in High Street . touch their hat be an unknown gesture in those part , but they would move their head in a droll , familiar kind of way , neither a wag nor a nod , but mean all the same to imply friendly regard . the ship - owner , too , invite he to an occasional dinner or supper , all the time look forward to the chance of his turn out an active enemy , and not by any mean incline to give he ' the run of the house , ' however many unmarried daughter might grace their table . still as he could tell a rattle story , drink hard , and be seldom too busy to come at a short notice , he get on well than any one could have expect with the monkshaven folk . and the principal share of the odium of his business fall on his subordinate , who be one and all regard in the light of mean kidnapper and spy ' varmint , ' as the common people esteem they : and as such they be ready at the first provocation to hunt and to worry they , and little care the press - gang for this . whatever else they be , they be brave and daring . they have law to back they , therefore their business be lawful . they be serve their king and country . they be use all their faculty , and that be always pleasant . there be plenty of scope for the glory and triumph of outwit ; plenty of adventure in their life . it be a lawful and loyal employment , require sense , readiness , courage , and besides it call out that strange love of the chase inherent in every man . fourteen or fifteen mile at sea lie the Aurora , good man - of - war ; and to she be convey the living cargo of several tender , which be station at likely place along the sea - coast . one , the Lively Lady , might be see from the cliff above Monkshaven , not so far away , but hide by the angle of the high land from the constant sight of the townspeople ; and there be always the Randyvow - house   as the public - house with the navy blue - flag be call thereabout   for the crew of the Lively Lady to lounge about , and there to offer drink to unwary passer - by . at present this be all that the press - gang have do at Monkshaven . 




 CHAPTER II 

 home from GREENLAND 

 one hot day , early in October of the year 1796 , two girl set off from their country home to Monkshaven to sell their butter and egg , for they be both farmer ' daughter , though rather in different circumstance ; for Molly Corney be one of a large family of child , and have to rough it accordingly ; Sylvia Robson be an only child , and be much make of in more people 's estimation than Mary 's by her elderly parent . they have each purchase to make after their sale be effect , as sale of butter and egg be effect in those day by the market - woman sit on the step of the great old mutilate cross till a certain hour in the afternoon , after which , if all their good be not disposed of , they take they unwillingly to the shop and sell they at a low price . but good housewife do not despise come themselves to the Butter Cross , and , smell and depreciate the article they want , keep up a perpetual struggle of word , try , often in vain , to beat down price . a housekeeper of the last century would have think that she do not know her business , if she have not go through this preliminary process ; and the farmer ' wife and daughter treat it all as a matter of course , reply with a good deal of independent humour to the customer , who , once have discover where good butter and fresh egg be to be sell , come time after time to depreciate the article she always end in take . there be leisure for all this kind of work in those day . 

 molly have tie a knot on her pink - spot handkerchief for each of the various purchase she have to make ; dull but important article need for the week 's consumption at home ; if she forget any one of they she know she be sure of a good ' rating ' from her mother . the number of they make her pocket - handkerchief look like one of the nine - tail of a ' cat ; ' but not a single thing be for herself , nor , indeed , for any one individual of her numerous family . there be neither much thought nor much money to spend for any but collective want in the Corney family . 

 it be different with Sylvia . she be go to choose her first cloak , not to have an old one of her mother 's , that have go down through two sister , dye for the fourth time   and Molly would have be glad have even this chance be her , but to buy a bran - new duffle cloak all for herself , with not even an eld authority to curb she as to price , only molly to give her admire counsel , and as much sympathy as be consistent with a little patient envy of Sylvia 's happy circumstance . every now and then they wander off from the one grand subject of thought , but Sylvia , with unconscious art , soon bring the conversation round to the fresh consideration of the respective merit of gray and scarlet . these girl be walk bare - foot and carry their shoe and stocking in their hand during the first part of their way ; but as they be draw near Monkshaven they stop , and turn aside along a foot - path that lead from the main - road down to the bank of the Dee . there be great stone in the river about here , round which the water gather and eddy and form deep pool . molly sate down on the grassy bank to wash her foot ; but Sylvia , more active   or perhaps lighter - hearted with the notion of the cloak in the distance , place her basket on a gravelly bit of shore , and , give a long spring , seat herself on a stone almost in the middle of the stream . then she begin dip her little rosy toe in the cool rushing water and whisk they out with childish glee . 

 ' be quiet , wi ' the ' , Sylvia ? Thou'st splash I all ower , and my feyther'll noane be so keen o ' give I a new cloak as thine be , seemingly . ' 

 Sylvia be quiet , not to say penitent , in a moment . she draw up her foot instantly ; and , as if to take herself out of temptation , she turn away from Molly to that side of her stony seat on which the current run shallow , and break by pebble . but once disturb in her play , her thought revert to the great subject of the cloak . she be now as still as a minute before she have be full of frolic and gambol life . she have tuck herself up on the stone , as if it have be a cushion , and she a little sultana . 

 Molly be deliberately wash her foot and draw on her stocking , when she hear a sudden sigh , and her companion turn round so as to face she , and say , 

 ' I wish mother have not   speak up for t ' gray . ' 

 ' why , Sylvia , thou wert say as we top t'brow , as she do nought but bid thee think twice afore settle on scarlet . ' 

 ' ay ! but mother 's word be scarce , and weigh heavy . Feyther 's liker I , and we talk a deal o ' rubble ; but mother 's word be liker to hewn stone . she put a deal o ' meaning in them . and then , ' say Sylvia , as if she be put out by the suggestion , ' she bid I ask cousin Philip for his opinion . I hate a man as have getten an opinion on such - like thing . ' 

 ' well ! we shall niver get to Monkshaven this day , either for to sell our egg and stuff , or to buy thy cloak , if we be sittin ' here much long . T ' sun 's for slant low , so come along , lass , and let us be go . ' 

 ' but if I put on my stocking and shoon here , and jump back into yon wet gravel , I ' se not be fit to be see , ' say Sylvia , in a pathetic tone of bewilderment , that be funnily childlike . she stand up , her bare foot curve round the curve surface of the stone , her slight figure balance as if in act to spring . 

 ' Thou know thou'll have just to jump back barefoot , and wash thy foot afresh , without make all that ado ; thou shouldst ha ' do it at first , like I , and all other sensible folk . but thou'st getten no gumption . ' 

 Molly 's mouth be stop by Sylvia 's hand . she be already on the river bank by her friend 's side . 

 ' now dunnot lecture I ; I be none for a sermon hang on every peg o ' word . I be go to have a new cloak , lass , and I can not heed thee if thou dost lecture . Thou shall have all the gumption , and I will have my cloak . ' 

 it may be doubt whether molly think this an equal division . 

 each girl wear tightly - fit stocking , knit by her own hand , of the blue worst common in that country ; they have on neat high - heeled black leather shoe , come well over the instep , and fasten as well as ornament with bright steel buckle . they do not walk so lightly and freely now as they do before they be shod , but their step be still springy with the buoyancy of early youth ; for neither of they be twenty , indeed I believe Sylvia be not more than seventeen at this time . 

 they clamber up the steep grassy path , with bramble catch at their kilte petticoat , through the copse - wood , till they regain the high road ; and then they ' settle themselves , ' as they call it ; that be to say , they take off their black feel hat , and tie up their cluster hair afresh ; they shake off every speck of wayside dust ; straighten the little shawl   or large neck - kerchief , call they which you will   that be spread over their shoulder , pin below the throat , and confine at the waist by their apron - string ; and then put on their hat again , and pick up their basket , they prepare to walk decorously into the town of Monkshaven . 

 the next turn of the road show they the red peak roof of the closely pack house lie almost directly below the hill on which they be . the full autumn sun bring out the ruddy colour of the tile gable , and deepen the shadow in the narrow street . the narrow harbour at the mouth of the river be crowd with small vessel of all description , make an intricate forest of mast . beyond lie the sea , like a flat pavement of sapphire , scarcely a ripple vary its sunny surface , that stretch out league away till it blend with the softened azure of the sky . on this blue trackless water float score of white - sail fishing boat , apparently motionless , unless you measure their progress by some land - mark ; but still , and silent , and distant as they seem , the consciousness that there be man on board , each go forth into the great deep , add unspeakably to the interest feel in watch they . close to the bar of the river Dee a large vessel lie to . Sylvia , who have only recently come into the neighbourhood , look at this with the same quiet interest as she do at all the other ; but molly , as soon as her eye catch the build of it , cry out aloud 

 ' she be a whaler ! she be a whaler home from t ' Greenland sea ! t ' first this season ! God bless she ! ' and she turn round and shake both Sylvia 's hand in the fulness of her excitement . Sylvia 's colour rise , and her eye sparkle out of sympathy . 

 ' be ta sure ? ' she ask , breathless in her turn ; for though she do not know by the aspect of the different ship on what trade they be bind , yet she be well aware of the paramount interest attach to whale vessel . 

 ' three o'clock ! and it be not high water till five ! ' say Molly . ' if we be sharp we can sell our egg , and be down to the staithe before she come into port . be sharp , lass ! ' 

 and down the steep long hill they go at a pace that be almost a run . a run they dare not make it ; and as it be , the rate at which they walk would have cause destruction among egg less carefully packed . when the descent be end , there be yet the long narrow street before they , bend and swerve from the straight line , as it follow the course of the river . the girl feel as if they should never come to the market - place , which be situate at the crossing of Bridge Street and High Street . there the old stone cross be raise by the monk long ago ; now wear and mutilate , no one esteem it as a holy symbol , but only as the Butter Cross , where market - woman cluster on Wednesday , and whence the town crier make all his proclamation of household sale , thing lose or find , begin with ' oh ! yes , oh ! yes , oh ! yes ! ' and end with ' God bless the king and the lord of this manor , ' and a very brisk ' amen , ' before he go on his way and take off the livery - coat , the colour of which mark he as a servant of the Burnabys , the family who hold manorial right over Monkshaven . 

 of course the much frequent space surround the Butter Cross be the favourite centre for shop ; and on this day , a fine market day , just when good housewife begin to look over their winter store of blanket and flannel , and discover their need betime , these shop ought to have have plenty of customer . but they be empty and of even quieter aspect than their every - day will not . the three - legged creepie - stool that be hire out at a penny an hour to such market - woman as come too late to find room on the step be unoccupied ; knock over here and there , as if people have pass by in haste . 

 molly take in all at a glance , and interpret the sign , though she have no time to explain their meaning , and her consequent course of action , to Sylvia , but dart into a corner shop . 

 ' T ' whaler be come home ! there be one lie outside t ' bar ! ' 

 this be put in the form of an assertion ; but the tone be that of eager cross - questioning . 

 ' ay ! ' say a lame man , mend fishing - net behind a rough deal counter . ' she be come back airly , and she be bring good news o ' t ' other , as I have   heere say . time be I should ha ' be on th ' staithe throw up my cap wit ' t ' good on them ; but now it please t ' Lord to keep I at home , and set I to mind other folk ' gear . see thee , wench , there be a vast o ' folk ha ' leave their skep o ' thing wi ' I while they be away down to t ' quay side . leave I your egg and be off wi ' ye for t ' see t ' fun , for mebbe ye'll live to be palsy yet , and then ye'll be fret ower spilt milk , and that ye do not   tak ' all chance when ye be young . ay , well ! they be out o ' hearin ' o ' my morality ; I would well find a lamiter like mysen to preach to , for it be not iverybody have t ' luck t ' clargy have of say their say out whether folk like it or not . ' 

 he put the basket carefully away with much of such talk as this address to himself while he do so . then he sigh once or twice ; and then he take the well course and begin to sing over his tarry work . 

 Molly and Sylvia be far along the staithe by the time he get to this point of cheerfulness . they run on , regardless of stitch and pain in the side ; on along the river bank to where the concourse of people be gather . there be no great length of way between the Butter Cross and the harbour ; in five minute the breathless girl be close together in the good place they could get for seeing , on the outside of the crowd ; and in as short a time long they be press inward , by fresh arrival , into the very midst of the throng . all eye be direct to the ship , beat her anchor just outside the bar , not a quarter of a mile away . the custom - house officer be just go aboard of she to receive the captain 's report of his cargo , and make due examination . the man who have take he out in his boat be row back to the shore , and bring small fragment of news when they land a little distance from the crowd , which move as one man to hear what be to be tell . Sylvia take a hard grasp of the hand of the old and more experienced Molly , and listen open - mouthed to the answer she be extract from a gruff old sailor she happen to find near she . 

 ' what ship be she ? ' 

 ' T ' Resolution of Monkshaven ! ' say he , indignantly , as if any goose might have know that . 

 ' an ' a good resolution , and a bless ship she be be to I , ' pip out an old woman , close at Mary 's elbow . ' she be bring I home my ae ' lad for he shout to yon boatman to bid he tell I he be well . ' tell Peggy Christison , ' say he   my name be Margaret Christison   ' tell Peggy Christison as her son Hezekiah be come back safe and sound . ' the Lord 's name be praise ! an ' I a widow as never think to see my lad again ! ' 

 it seem as if everybody rely on every one else 's sympathy in that hour of great joy . 

 ' I ax pardon , but if you would gie I just a bit of elbow - room for a minute like , I would hold my babby up , so that he might see daddy 's ship , and happen , my master might see he . he be four month old last Tuesday se'nnight , and his feyther be never clapt eyne on he yet , and he wi ' a tooth through , an another just break , bless he ! ' 

 one or two of the well end of the monkshaven inhabitant stand a little before Molly and Sylvia ; and as they move in compliance with the young mother 's request , they overheard some of the information these ship - owner have receive from the boatman . 

 ' hayne say they will send the manifest of the cargo ashore in twenty minute , as soon as Fishburn have look over the cask . only eight whale , accord to what he say . ' 

 ' no one can tell , ' say the other , ' till the manifest come to hand . ' 

 ' I be afraid he be right . but he bring a good report of the Good Fortune . she be off St Abb 's Head , with something like fifteen whale to her share . ' 

 ' we shall see how much be true , when she come in . ' 

 ' that will be by the afternoon tide to - morrow . ' 

 ' that be my cousin 's ship , ' say Molly to Sylvia . ' he be specksioneer on board the Good Fortune . ' 

 an old man touch she as she speak 

 ' I humbly make my manner , missus , but I be stone blind ; my lad 's aboard yon vessel outside t ' bar ; and my old woman be bed - fast . will she be long , think ye , in make t ' harbour ? because , if so be as she be , I would just make my way back , and speak a word or two to my missus , who will be boil o'er into some mak o ' mischief now she know he be so near . may I be so bold as to ax if t ' Crooked Negro be cover yet ? ' 

 molly stand on tip - toe to try and see the black stone thus name ; but Sylvia , stoop and peep through the glimpse afford between the arm of the move people , see it first , and tell the blind old man it be still above water . 

 ' a watch pot , ' say he , ' ne'er boil , I reckon . it be ta'en a vast o ' watter t ' cover that stone to - day . anyhow , I will have time to go home and rate my missus for worritin ' hersen , as I will be bind she be do , for all as I bid she not , but to keep easy and content . ' 

 ' we would well be off too , ' say Molly , as an opening be make through the press to let out the grope old man . ' egg and butter be yet to sell , and tha ' cloak to be buy . ' 

 ' well , I suppose we have ! ' say Sylvia , rather regretfully ; for , though all the way into Monkshaven her head have be full of the purchase of this cloak , yet she be of that impressible nature that take the tone of feeling from those surround ; and though she know no one on board the Resolution , she be just as anxious for the moment to see she come into harbour as any one in the crowd who have a dear relation on board . so she turn reluctantly to follow the more prudent Molly along the quay back to the Butter Cross . 

 it be a pretty scene , though it be too familiar to the eye of all who then see it for they to notice its beauty . the sun be low enough in the west to turn the mist that fill the distant valley of the river into golden haze . above , on either bank of the Dee , there lie the moorland height swell one behind the other ; the nearer , russet brown with the tint of the fading bracken ; the more distant , gray and dim against the rich autumnal sky . the red and fluted tile of the gable house rise in crowded irregularity on one side of the river , while the new suburb be build in more orderly and less picturesque fashion on the opposite cliff . the river itself be swell and chafe with the incoming tide till its vex water rush over the very foot of the watch crowd on the staithe , as the great sea wave encroach more and more every minute . the quay - side be unsavourily ornament with glitter fish - scale , for the haul of fish be cleanse in the open air , and no sanitary arrangement exist for sweep away any of the relic of this operation . 

 the fresh salt breeze be bring up the lashing , leap tide from the blue sea beyond the bar . behind the return girl there rock the white - sail ship , as if she be all alive with eagerness for her anchor to be heave . 

 how impatient her crew of beat heart be for that moment , how those on land sicken at the suspense , may be imagine , when you remember that for six long summer month those sailor have be as if dead from all news of those they love ; shut up in terrible , dreary Arctic sea from the hungry sight of sweetheart and friend , wife and mother . no one know what might have happen . the crowd on shore grow silent and solemn before the dread of the possible news of death that might toll in upon their heart with this uprushing tide . the whaler go out into the Greenland sea full of strong , hopeful man ; but the whaler never return as they sail forth . on land there be death among two or three hundred man to be mourn over in every half - year 's space of time . whose bone have be leave to blacken on the gray and terrible iceberg ? who lie still until the sea should give up its dead ? who be those who should come back to Monkshaven never , no , never more ? 

 many a heart swell with passionate , unspoken fear , as the first whaler lie off the bar on her return voyage . 

 Molly and Sylvia have leave the crowd in this hushed suspense . but fifty yard along the staithe they pass five or six girl with flushed face and careless attire , who have mount a pile of timber , place there to season for ship - building , from which , as from the step of a ladder or staircase , they could command the harbour . they be wild and free in their gesture , and hold each other by the hand , and sway from side to side , stamp their foot in time , as they sing 

 Weel may the keel row , the keel row , the keel row , 
 Weel may the keel row that my laddie be in ! 
 ' what for be ye go off , now ? ' they call out to our two girl . ' she will be in in ten minute ! ' and without wait for the answer which never come , they resume their song . 

 old sailor stand about in little group , too proud to show their interest in the adventure they could no long share , but quite unable to keep up any semblance of talk on indifferent subject . 

 the town seem very quiet and desert as Molly and Sylvia enter the dark , irregular Bridge Street , and the market - place be as empty of people as before . but the skep and basket and three - legged stool be all clear away . 

 ' Market be over for to - day , ' say Molly Corney , in disappointed surprise . ' we mun make the good on't , and sell to t ' huxter , and a hard bargain they will be for drive . I doubt mother'll be vex . ' 

 she and Sylvia go to the corner shop to reclaim their basket . the man have his joke at they for their delay . 

 ' ay , ay ! lass as have sweetheart a - come home do not   care much what price they get for butter and egg ! I dare say , now , there be some un in yon ship that ' ud give as much as a shilling a pound for this butter if he only know who churn it ! ' this be to Sylvia , as he hand she back her property . 

 the fancy - free Sylvia redden , pout , toss back her head , and hardly deign a farewell word of thank or civility to the lame man ; she be at an age to be affront by any joke on such a subject . molly take the joke without disclaimer and without offence . she rather like the unfounded idea of she have a sweetheart , and be rather surprised to think how devoid of foundation the notion be . if she could have a new cloak as Sylvia be go to have , then , indeed , there might be a chance ! until some such good luck , it be as well to laugh and blush as if the surmise of she have a lover be not very far from the truth , and so she reply in something of the same strain as the lame net - maker to his joke about the butter . 

 ' he will need it all , and more too , to grease his tongue , if iver he reckon to win I for his wife ! ' 

 when they be out of the shop , Sylvia say , in a coax tone , 

 ' molly , who be it ? whose tongue will need grease ? just tell I , and I will never tell ! ' 

 she be so much in earnest that molly be perplexed . she do not quite like say that she have allude to no one in particular , only to a possible sweetheart , so she begin to think what young man have make the most civil speech to she in her life ; the list be not a long one to go over , for her father be not so well off as to make she seek after for her money , and her face be rather of the homely . but she suddenly remember her cousin , the specksioneer , who have give she two large shell , and take a kiss from her half - willing lip before he go to sea the last time . so she smile a little , and then say , 

 ' well ! I dunno . it be ill talk o ' these thing afore one have make up one 's mind . and perhaps if Charley Kinraid behave hissen , I might be bring to listen . ' 

 ' Charley Kinraid ! who be he ? ' 

 ' Yon specksioneer cousin o ' mine , as I be talk on . ' 

 ' and do yo ' think he care for yo ' ? ' ask Sylvia , in a low , tender tone , as if touch on a great mystery . 

 molly only say , ' be quiet wi ' yo ' , ' and Sylvia could not make out whether she cut the conversation so short because she be offend , or because they have come to the shop where they have to sell their butter and egg . 

 ' now , Sylvia , if thou'll leave I thy basket , I will make as good a bargain as iver I can on them ; and thou can be off to choose this grand new cloak as be to be , afore it get any darker . where be ta go to ? ' 

 ' mother say I would well go to Foster 's , ' answer Sylvia , with a shade of annoyance in her face . ' Feyther say just anywhere . ' 

 ' Foster 's be t ' good place ; thou canst try anywhere afterwards . I will be at Foster 's in five minute , for I reckon we mun hasten a bit now . it will be near five o'clock . ' 

 Sylvia hang her head and look very demure as she walk off by herself to Foster 's shop in the market - place . 




 CHAPTER III 

 buy a new cloak 

 Foster 's shop be the shop of Monkshaven . it be keep by two Quaker brother , who be now old man ; and their father have keep it before they ; probably his father before that . People remember it as an old - fashioned dwelling - house , with a sort of supplementary shop with unglazed window project from the low story . these opening have long be fill with pane of glass that at the present day would be account very small , but which seventy year ago be much admire for their size . I can well make you understand the appearance of the place by bid you think of the long opening in a butcher 's shop , and then to fill they up in your imagination with pane about eight inch by six , in a heavy wooden frame . there be one of these window on each side the door - place , which be keep partially close through the day by a low gate about a yard high . half the shop be appropriate to grocery ; the other half to drapery , and a little mercery . the good old brother give all their know customer a kindly welcome ; shake hand with many of they , and ask all after their family and domestic circumstance before proceed to business . they would not for the world have have any sign of festivity at Christmas , and scrupulously keep their shop open at that holy festival , ready themselves to serve soon than tax the conscience of any of their assistant , only nobody ever come . but on New Year 's day they have a great cake , and wine , ready in the parlour behind the shop , of which all who come in to buy anything be ask to partake . yet , though scrupulous in most thing , it do not go against the conscience of these good brother to purchase smuggled article . there be a back way from the river - side , up a covered entry , to the yard - door of the Fosters , and a peculiar kind of knock at this door always bring out either John or Jeremiah , or if not they , their shopman , Philip Hepburn ; and the same cake and wine that the excise officer 's wife might just have be taste , be bring out in the back parlour to treat the smuggler . there be a little locking of door , and drawing of the green silk curtain that be suppose to shut out the shop , but really all this be do very much for form 's sake . everybody in Monkshaven smuggle who could , and every one wear smuggle good who could , and great reliance be place on the excise officer 's neighbourly feeling . 

 the story go that John and Jeremiah Foster be so rich that they could buy up all the new town across the bridge . they have certainly begin to have a kind of primitive bank in connection with their shop , receive and take care of such money as people do not wish to retain in their house for fear of burglar . no one ask they for interest on the money thus deposit , nor do they give any ; but , on the other hand , if any of their customer , on whose character they could depend , want a little advance , the Fosters , after due inquiry make , and in some case due security give , be not unwilling to lend a moderate sum without charge a penny for the use of their money . all the article they sell be as good as they know how to choose , and for they they expect and obtain ready money . it be say that they only keep on the shop for their amusement . other aver that there be some plan of a marriage run in the brother ' head a marriage between William Coulson , Mr. Jeremiah 's wife 's nephew   Mr. Jeremiah be a widower , and Hester Rose , whose mother be some kind of distant relation , and who serve in the shop along with William Coulson and Philip Hepburn . again , this be deny by those who aver that Coulson be no blood relation , and that if the Fosters have intend to do anything considerable for hester , they would never have allow she and her mother to live in such a sparing way , ekee out their small income by have Coulson and Hepburn for lodger . no ; John and Jeremiah would leave all their money to some hospital or to some charitable institution . but , of course , there be a reply to this ; when be there not many side to an argument about a possibility concern which no fact be know ? part of the reply turn on this : the old gentleman have , probably , some deep plan in their head in permit their cousin to take Coulson and Hepburn as lodger , the one a kind of nephew , the other , though so young , the head man in the shop ; if either of they take a fancy to hester , how agreeably matter could be arrange ! 

 all this time hester be patiently wait to serve Sylvia , who be stand before she a little shy , a little perplexed and distract , by the sight of so many pretty thing . 

 hester be a tall young woman , sparely yet largely form , of a grave aspect , which make she look old than she really be . her thick brown hair be smoothly take off her broad forehead , and put in a very orderly fashion , under her linen cap ; her face be a little square , and her complexion sallow , though the texture of her skin be fine . her gray eye be very pleasant , because they look at you so honestly and kindly ; her mouth be slightly compress , as most have it who be in the habit of restrain their feeling ; but when she speak you do not perceive this , and her rare smile slowly break forth show her white even tooth , and when accompany , as it generally be , by a sudden uplifting of her soft eye , it make her countenance very win . she be dress in stuff of sober colour , both in accordance with her own taste , and in unasked compliance with the religious custom of the Fosters ; but hester herself be not a Friend . 

 Sylvia , stand opposite , not look at hester , but gaze at the ribbon in the shop window , as if hardly conscious that any one await the expression of her wish , be a great contrast ; ready to smile or to pout , or to show her feeling in any way , with a character as undeveloped as a child 's , affectionate , wilful , naughty , tiresome , charming , anything , in fact , at present that the chance of an hour call out . hester think her customer the prettiest creature ever see , in the moment she have for admiration before Sylvia turn round and , recall to herself , begin , 

 ' oh , I beg your pardon , miss ; I be think what may the price of yon crimson ribbon be ? ' 

 hester say nothing , but go to examine the shop - mark . 

 ' oh ! I do not mean that I want any , I only want some stuff for a cloak . thank you , miss , but I be very sorry some duffle , please . ' 

 hester silently replace the ribbon and go in search of the duffle . while she be go Sylvia be address by the very person she most wish to avoid , and whose absence she have rejoice over on first enter the shop , her cousin Philip Hepburn . 

 he be a serious - looking young man , tall , but with a slight stoop in his shoulder , bring on by his occupation . he have thick hair stand off from his forehead in a peculiar but not unpleasing manner ; a long face , with a slightly aquiline nose , dark eye , and a long upper lip , which give a disagreeable aspect to a face that might otherwise have be good - look . 

 ' good day , Sylvie , ' he say ; ' what be you want ? how be all at home ? let I help you ! ' 

 Sylvia purse up her red lip , and do not look at he as she reply , 

 ' I be very well , and so be mother ; feyther 's get a touch of rheumatiz , and there be a young woman get what I want . ' 

 she turn a little away from he when she have end this sentence , as if it have comprise all she could possibly have to say to he . but he exclaim , 

 ' you will not   know how to choose , ' and , seat himself on the counter , he swing himself over after the fashion of shop - man . 

 Sylvia take no notice of he , but pretend to be count over her money . 

 ' what do you want , Sylvie ? ' ask he , at last annoy at her silence . 

 ' I do not   like to be call " Sylvie ; " my name be Sylvia ; and I be want duffle for a cloak , if you must know . ' 

 hester now return , with a shop - boy help she to drag along the great roll of scarlet and gray cloth . 

 ' not that , ' say Philip , kick the red duffle with his foot , and speak to the lad . ' it be the gray you want , be it not , Sylvie ? ' he use the name he have have the cousin 's right to call she by since her childhood , without remember her word on the subject not five minute before ; but she do , and be vex . 

 ' please , miss , it be the scarlet duffle I want ; do not   let he take it away . ' 

 hester look up at both their countenance , a little wonder what be their position with regard to each other ; for this , then , be the beautiful little cousin about whom Philip have talk to her mother , as sadly spoil , and shamefully ignorant ; a lovely little dunce , and so forth . hester have picture Sylvia Robson , somehow , as very different from what she be : young , more stupid , not half so bright and charming   for , though she be now both pouting and cross , it be evident that this be not her accustomed mood . Sylvia devote her attention to the red cloth , push aside the gray . 

 Philip Hepburn be vex at his advice be slight ; and yet he urge it afresh . 

 ' this be a respectable , quiet - look article that will go well with any colour ; you niver will be so foolish as to take what will mark with every drop of rain . ' 

 ' I be sorry you sell such good - for - nothing thing , ' reply Sylvia , conscious of her advantage , and relax a little   as little as she possibly could   of her gravity . 

 hester come in now . 

 ' he mean to say that this cloth will lose its first brightness in wet or damp ; but it will always be a good article , and the colour will stand a deal of wear . Mr. Foster would not have have it in his shop else . ' 

 Philip do not like that even a reasonable peace - make interpreter should come between he and Sylvia , so he hold his tongue in indignant silence . 

 hester go on : 

 ' to be sure , this gray be the close make , and would wear the long . ' 

 ' I do not   care , ' say Sylvia , still reject the dull gray . ' I like this good . eight yard , if you please , miss . ' 

 ' a cloak take nine yard , at least , ' say Philip , decisively . 

 ' Mother tell I eight , ' say Sylvia , secretly conscious that her mother would have prefer the more sober colour ; and feel that as she have have her own way in that respect , she be bind to keep to the direction she have receive as to the quantity . but , indeed , she would not have yield to Philip in anything that she could help . 

 there be a sound of child 's foot run up the street from the river - side , shout with excitement . at the noise , Sylvia forget her cloak and her little spirit of vexation , and run to the half - door of the shop . Philip follow because she go . hester look on with passive , kindly interest , as soon as she have complete her duty of measure . one of those girl whom Sylvia have see as she and Molly leave the crowd on the quay , come quickly up the street . her face , which be handsome enough as to feature , be whiten with excess of passionate emotion , her dress untidy and fly , her movement heavy and free . she belong to the low class of seaport inhabitant . as she come near , Sylvia see that the tear be stream down her cheek , quite unconsciously to herself . she recognize Sylvia 's face , full of interest as it be , and stop she clumsy run to speak to the pretty , sympathetic creature . 

 ' she be o'er t ' bar ! she be o'er t ' bar ! I be boun ' to tell mother ! ' 

 she catch at Sylvia 's hand , and shake it , and go on breathless and gasp . 

 ' Sylvia , how come you to know that girl ? ' ask Philip , sternly . ' she be not one for you to be shake hand with . she be know all down t ' quay - side as " Newcastle Bess . " ' 

 ' I can not   help it , ' say Sylvia , half inclined to cry at his manner even more than his word . ' when folk be glad I can not   help be glad too , and I just put out my hand , and she put out her . to think o ' yon ship come in at last ! and if yo'd be down see all t ' folk look and look their eye out , as if they fear they should die afore she come in and bring home the lad they love , yo'd ha ' shake hand wi ' that lass too , and no great harm do . I never set eyne upon she till half an hour ago on th ' staithe , and maybe I will niver see she again . ' 

 hester be still behind the counter , but have move so as to be near the window ; so she hear what they be say , and now put in her word : 

 ' she can not   be altogether bad , for she think o ' tell her mother first thing , accord to what she say . ' 

 Sylvia give Hester a quick , grateful look . but Hester have resume her gaze out of the window , and do not see the glance . 

 and now Molly Corney join they , hastily burst into the shop . 

 ' Hech ! ' say she . ' Hearken ! how they be cry and shout down on t ' quay . T ' gang be among them like t ' day of judgment . Hark ! ' 

 no one speak , no one breathe , I have almost say no heart beat for listening . not long ; in an instant there rise the sharp simultaneous cry of many people in rage and despair . inarticulate at that distance , it be yet an intelligible curse , and the roll , and the roar , and the irregular tramp come near and nearer . 

 ' they be take them to t ' randyvowse , ' say molly . ' eh ! I wish I have King George here just to tell he my mind . ' 

 the girl clench her hand , and set her tooth . 

 ' it be terrible hard ! ' say hester ; ' there be mother , and wife , look out for them , as if they be star dropt out o ' t ' lift . ' 

 ' but can we do nothing for them ? ' cry Sylvia . ' let we go into t ' thick of it and do a bit of help ; I can not   stand quiet and see ' t ! ' half cry , she push forwards to the door ; but Philip hold she back . 

 ' Sylvie ! you must not . do not   be silly ; it be the law , and no one can do aught against it , least of all woman and lass . 

 by this time the vanguard of the crowd come press up Bridge Street , past the window of Foster 's shop . it consist of wild , half - amphibious boy , slowly move backwards , as they be compel by the pressure of the come multitude to go on , and yet anxious to defy and annoy the gang by insult , and curse half choke with their indignant passion , double their fist in the very face of the gang who come on with measured movement , arm to the tooth , their face show white with repressed and determined energy against the bronzed countenance of the half - dozen sailor , who be all they have think it wise to pick out of the whaler 's crew , this be the first time an Admiralty warrant have be use in Monkshaven for many year ; not since the close of the american war , in fact . one of the man be address to his townspeople , in a high pitch voice , an exhortation which few could hear , for , press around this nucleus of cruel wrong , be woman cry aloud , throw up their arm in imprecation , shower down abuse as hearty and rapid as if they have be a greek chorus . their wild , famished eye be strain on face they might not kiss , their cheek be flush to purple with anger or else livid with impotent craving for revenge . some of they look scarce human ; and yet an hour ago these lip , now tightly draw back so as to show the tooth with the unconscious action of an enrage wild animal , have be soft and gracious with the smile of hope ; eye , that be fiery and bloodshot now , have be love and bright ; heart , never to recover from the sense of injustice and cruelty , have be trustful and glad only one short hour ago . 

 there be man there , too , sullen and silent , brood on remedial revenge ; but not many , the great proportion of this class be away in the absent whaler . 

 the stormy multitude swell into the market - place and form a solid crowd there , while the press - gang steadily force their way on into High Street , and on to the rendezvous . a low , deep growl go up from the dense mass , as some have to wait for space to follow the other now and then go up , as a lion 's growl go up , into a shriek of rage . 

 a woman force her way up from the bridge . she live some little way in the country , and have be late in hearing of the return of the whaler after her six month ' absence ; and on rush down to the quay - side , she have be tell by a score of busy , sympathize voice , that her husband be kidnap for the service of the Government . 

 she have need pause in the market - place , the outlet of which be cram up . then she give tongue for the first time in such a fearful shriek , you could hardly catch the word she say . 

 ' Jamie ! Jamie ! will they not let you to I ? ' 

 those be the last word Sylvia hear before her own hysterical burst of tear call every one 's attention to she . 

 she have be very busy about household work in the morning , and much agitated by all she have see and hear since come into Monkshaven ; and so it end in this . 

 molly and Hester take she through the shop into the parlour beyond John Foster 's parlour , for Jeremiah , the eld brother , live in a house of his own on the other side of the water . it be a low , comfortable room , with great beam run across the ceiling , and paper with the same paper as the wall a piece of elegant luxury which take Molly 's fancy mightily ! this parlour look out on the dark courtyard in which there grow two or three poplar , strain upwards to the light ; and through an open door between the back of two house could be see a glimpse of the dancing , heave river , with such ship or fishing coble as happen to be moor in the water above the bridge . 

 they place Sylvia on the broad , old - fashioned sofa , and give her water to drink , and try to still her sobbing and choke . they loose her hat , and copiously splash her face and cluster chestnut hair , till at length she come to herself ; restore , but dripping wet . she sate up and look at they , smooth back her tangle curl off her brow , as if to clear both her eye and her intellect . 

 ' where be I ? oh , I know ! thank you . it be very silly , but somehow it seem so sad ! ' 

 and here she be nearly go off again , but hester say 

 ' ay , it be sad , my poor lass if I may call you so , for I do not   rightly know your name but it be good not think on it for we can do no mak ' o ' good , and it will mebbe set you off again . Yo're Philip Hepburn 's cousin , I reckon , and yo ' bide at Haytersbank Farm ? ' 

 ' yes ; she be Sylvia Robson , ' put in Molly , not see that Hester 's purpose be to make Sylvia speak , and so to divert her attention from the subject which have set she off into hysteric . ' and we come in for market , ' continue Molly , ' and for t ' buy t ' new cloak as her feyther be go to give she ; and , for sure , I think we be I ' luck 's way when we see t ' first whaler , and niver dream as t ' press - gang ' ud be so marred . ' 

 she , too , begin to cry , but her little whimper be stop by the sound of the open door behind she . it be Philip , ask hester by a silent gesture if he might come in . 

 Sylvia turn her face round from the light , and shut her eye . her cousin come close up to she on tip - toe , and look anxiously at what he could see of her avert face ; then he pass his hand so slightly over her hair that he could scarcely be say to touch it , and murmur 

 ' poor lassie ! it be a pity she come to - day , for it be a long walk in this heat ! ' 

 but Sylvia start to her foot , almost push he along . her quickened sens hear an approach step through the courtyard before any of the other be aware of the sound . in a minute afterwards , the glass - door at one corner of the parlour be open from the outside , and Mr. John stand look in with some surprise at the group collect in his usually empty parlour . 

 ' it be my cousin , ' say Philip , redden a little ; ' she come wi ' her friend in to market , and to make purchase ; and she be get a turn wi ' see the press - gang go past carry some of the crew of the whaler to the Randyvowse . 

 ' ay , ay , ' say Mr. John , quickly pass on into the shop on tip - toe , as if he be afraid he be intrude in his own premise , and beckon Philip to follow he there . ' out of strife cometh strife . I guess something of the sort be up from what I hear on t ' bridge as I come across fra ' brother Jeremiah 's . ' here he softly shut the door between the parlour and the shop . ' it beareth hard on th ' expectant woman and childer ; nor be it to be wonder at that they , be unconverted , rage together   poor creature !   like the very heathen . Philip , ' he say , come near to his ' head young man , ' ' keep Nicholas and Henry at work in the ware - room upstairs until this riot be over , for it would grieve I if they be mislead into violence . ' 

 Philip hesitate . 

 ' speak out , man ! always ease an uneasy heart , and never let it get hidebound . ' 

 ' I have think to convoy my cousin and the other young woman home , for the town be like to be rough , and it be get dark . ' 

 ' and thou shalt , my lad , ' say the good old man ; ' and I myself will try and restrain the natural inclination of Nicholas and Henry . ' 

 but when he go to find the shop - boy with a gentle homily on his lip , those to whom it should have be address be absent . in consequence of the riotous state of thing , all the other shop in the market - place have put their shutter up ; and Nicholas and Henry , in the absence of their superior , have follow the example of their neighbour , and , as business be over , they have hardly wait to put the good away , but have hurry off to help their townsman in any struggle that might ensue . 

 there be no remedy for it , but Mr. John look rather discomfited . the state of the counter , and of the disarrange good , be such also as would have irritate any man as orderly but less sweet - temper . all he say on the subject be : ' the old Adam ! the old Adam ! ' but he shake his head long after he have finish speak . 

 ' where be William Coulson ? ' he next ask . ' oh ! I remember . he be not to come back from York till the night close in . ' 

 Philip and his master arrange the shop in the exact order the old man love . then he recollect the wish of his subordinate , and turn round and say 

 ' now go with thy cousin and her friend . hester be here , and old Hannah . I myself will take Hester home , if need be . but for the present I think she have good tarry here , as it be not   many step to her mother 's house , and we may need her help if any of those poor creature fall into suffer wi ' their violence . ' 

 with this , Mr. John knock at the door of the parlour , and wait for permission to enter . with old - fashioned courtesy he tell the two stranger how glad he be that his room have be of service to they ; that he would never have make so bold as to pass through it , if he have be aware how it be occupy . and then go to a corner cupboard , high up in the wall , he pull a key out of his pocket and unlock his little store of wine , and cake , and spirit ; and insist that they should eat and drink while wait for Philip , who be take some last measure for the security of the shop during the night . 

 Sylvia decline everything , with less courtesy than she ought to have show to the offer of the hospitable old man . molly take wine and cake , leave a good half of both , accord to the code of manner in that part of the country ; and also because Sylvia be continually urge she to make haste . for the latter dislike the idea of her cousin 's esteem it necessary to accompany they home , and want to escape from he by set off before he return . but any such plan be frustrate by Philip 's come back into the parlour , full of grave content , which brim over from his eye , with the parcel of Sylvia 's obnoxious red duffle under his arm ; anticipate so keenly the pleasure await he in the walk , that he be almost surprised by the gravity of his companion as they prepare for it . Sylvia be a little penitent for her rejection of Mr. John 's hospitality , now she find out how unavaile for its purpose such rejection have be , and try to make up by a modest sweetness of farewell , which quite win his heart , and make he praise she up to hester in a way to which she , observant of all , could not bring herself fully to respond . what business have the pretty little creature to reject kindly - mean hospitality in the pettish way she do , think hester . and , oh ! what business have she to be so ungrateful and to try and thwart Philip in his thoughtful wish of escort they through the street of the rough , riotous town ? what do it all mean ? 




 CHAPTER IV 

 PHILIP HEPBURN 

 the coast on that part of the island to which this story refer be border by rock and cliff . the inland country immediately adjacent to the coast be level , flat , and bleak ; it be only where the long stretch of dyke - enclose field terminate abruptly in a sheer descent , and the stranger see the ocean creep up the sand far below he , that he be aware on how great an elevation he have be . here and there , as I have say , a cleft in the level land   thus run out into the sea in steep promontory   occur what they would call a ' chine ' in the Isle of Wight ; but instead of the soft south wind steal up the woody ravine , as it do there , the eastern breeze come pip shrill and clear along these northern chasm , keep the tree that venture to grow on the side down to the mere height of scrubby brushwood . the descent to the shore through these ' bottom ' be in most case very abrupt , too much so for a cartway , or even a bridle - path ; but people can pass up and down without difficulty , by the help of a few rude step hew here and there out of the rock . 

 sixty or seventy year ago   not to speak of much late time   the farmer who own or hire the land which lie directly on the summit of these cliff be smuggler to the extent of their power , only partially check by the coast - guard distribute , at pretty nearly equal interspace of eight mile , all along the north - eastern seaboard . still sea - wrack be a good manure , and there be no law against carry it up in great osier basket for the purpose of tillage , and many a secret thing be lodge in hide crevice in the rock till the farmer send trusty people down to the shore for a good supply of sand and seaweed for his land . 

 one of the farm on the cliff have lately be take by Sylvia 's father . he be a man who have roam about a good deal be sailor , smuggl , horse - dealer , and farmer in turn ; a sort of fellow possess by a spirit of adventure and love of change , which do he and his own family more harm than anybody else . he be just the kind of man that all his neighbour find fault with , and all his neighbour like . late in life   for such an imprudent man as he , be one of a class who generally we d , trust to chance and luck for the provision for a family , farmer Robson marry a woman whose only want of practical wisdom consist in take he for a husband . she be Philip Hepburn 's aunt , and have have the charge of he until she marry from her widow brother 's house . he it be who have let she know when Haytersbank Farm have be to let ; esteem it a likely piece of land for his uncle to settle down upon , after a somewhat unprosperous career of horse - dealing . the farmhouse lie in the shelter of a very slight green hollow scarcely scoop out of the pasture field by which it be surround ; the short crisp turf come creep up to the very door and window , without any attempt at a yard or garden , or any nearer enclosure of the building than the stone dyke that form the boundary of the field itself . the building be long and low , in order to avoid the rough violence of the wind that sweep over that wild , bleak spot , both in winter and summer . it be well for the inhabitant of that house that coal be extremely cheap ; otherwise a southerner might have imagine that they could never have survive the cutting of the bitter gale that pip all round , and seem to seek out every crevice for admission into the house . 

 but the interior be warm enough when once you have mount the long bleak lane , full of round rough stone , enough to lame any horse unaccustomed to such road , and have cross the field by the little dry , hard footpath , which tack about so as to keep from directly face the prevail wind . Mrs. Robson be a Cumberland woman , and as such , be a clean housewife than the farmer ' wife of that north - eastern coast , and be often shock at their way , show it more by her look than by her word , for she be not a great talker . this fastidiousness in such matter make her own house extremely comfortable , but do not tend to render she popular among her neighbour . indeed , Bell Robson pique herself on her housekeeping generally , and once in - door in the gray , bare stone house , there be plenty of comfort to be have besides cleanliness and warmth . the great rack of clap - bread hung overhead , and Bell Robson 's preference of this kind of oat - cake over the leavened and partly sour kind use in Yorkshire be another source of her unpopularity . flitch of bacon and ' hand '   i.e. , shoulder of cure pork , the leg or ham be sell , as fetch a well price   abound ; and for any visitor who could stay , neither cream nor fine wheaten flour be want for ' turf cake ' and ' singing hinny , ' with which it be the delight of the northern housewife to regale the honour guest , as he sip their high - price tea , sweeten with dainty sugar . 

 this night farmer Robson be fidget in and out of his house - door , climb the little eminence in the field , and come down disappoint in a state of fretful impatience . his quiet , taciturn wife be a little put out by Sylvia 's non - appearance too ; but she show her anxiety by be short than usual in her reply to his perpetual wonder as to where the lass could have be tarrying , and by knit away with extra diligence . 

 ' I have   a vast o ' mind to go down to Monkshaven mysen , and see after t ' child . it be well on for seven . ' 

 ' no , Dannel , ' say his wife ; ' thou'd good not . Thy leg have be pain thee this week past , and thou'rt not up to such a walk . I will rouse Kester , and send he off , if thou think'st there be need on it . ' 

 ' A'll noan ha ' Kester rouse . who be to go afield betime after t ' sheep in t ' morn , if he be ca'e up to - neet ? he would miss t ' lass , and find a public - house , a reckon , ' say Daniel , querulously . 

 ' I be not afeard o ' Kester , ' reply Bell . ' he be a good one for know folk I ' th ' dark . but if thou'd rather , I will put on my hood and cloak and just go to th ' end o ' th ' lane , if thou'lt have an eye to th ' milk , and see as it do na ' boil o'er , for she canna stomach it if it be bishoppe e'er so little . ' 

 before Mrs. Robson , however , have put away her knitting , voice be hear at a good distance down the lane , but come nearer every moment , and once more Daniel climb the little brow to look and to listen . 

 ' it be a ' reet ! ' say he , hobble quickly down . ' niver fidget theesel ' wi ' gettin ' ready to go search for she . I will tak ' thee a bet it be Philip Hepburn 's voice , convoy her home , just as I say he would , an hour sin ' . ' 

 Bell do not answer , as she might have do , that this probability of Philip 's bring Sylvia home have be her own suggestion , set aside by her husband as utterly unlikely . another minute and the countenance of both parent imperceptibly and unconsciously relax into pleasure as Sylvia come in . 

 she look very rosy from the walk , and the October air , which begin to be frosty in the evening ; there be a little cloud over her face at first , but it be quickly disperse as she meet the love eye of home . Philip , who follow she , have an excited , but not altogether please look about he . he receive a hearty greeting from Daniel , and a quiet one from his aunt . 

 ' tak ' off thy pan o ' milk , missus , and set on t ' kettle . milk may do for wench , but Philip and I be for a drop o ' good holland and watter this cold night . I be a'most chill to t ' marrow wi ' look out for thee , lass , for t ' mother be in a peck o ' trouble about thy none coin home I ' t ' dayleet , and I would to keep hearken out on t ' browhead . ' 

 this be entirely untrue , and Bell know it to be so ; but her husband do not . he have persuade himself now , as he have do often before , that what he have in reality do for his own pleasure or satisfaction , he have do in order to gratify some one else . 

 ' the town be rough with a riot between the press - gang and the whale folk ; and I think I would well see Sylvia home . ' 

 ' ay , ay , lad ; always welcome , if it be only as an excuse for t ' liquor . but t ' whaler , say'st ta ? why , be t ' whaler in ? there be none I ' sight yesterday , when I be down on t ' shore . it be early day for them as yet . and t ' curse old press - gang 's agate again , do its devil 's work ! ' 

 his face change as he end his speech , and show a steady passion of old hatred . 

 ' ay , missus , yo ' may look . I wunnot pick and choose my word , noather for yo ' nor for nobody , when I speak o ' that daume gang . I be none ashamed o ' my word . they be true , and I be ready to prove them . where be my forefinger ? ay ! and as good a top - joint of a thumb as iver a man have ? I wish I would keep them I ' sperit , as they do thing at t ' ' potticary 's , just to show t ' lass what flesh and bone I make away wi ' to get free . I up wi ' a hatchet when I see as I be fast a - board a man - o'-war stand out for sea it be in t ' time o ' the war wi ' Amerikay , an ' I could na stomach the thought o ' be murder I ' my own language so I up wi ' a hatchet , and I say to Bill Watson , say I , " now , my lad , if thou'll do I a kindness , I will pay thee back , niver fear , and they will be glad enough to get shut on we , and send we to old England again . just come down with a will . " now , missus , why can not   ye sit still and listen to I , ' stead o ' pottering after pan and what not ? ' say he , speak crossly to his wife , who have hear the story score of time , and , it must be confess , be make some noise in prepare bread and milk for Sylvia 's supper . 

 Bell do not say a word in reply , but Sylvia tap his shoulder with a pretty little authoritative air . 

 ' it be for I , feyther . I be just keen - set for my supper . once let I get quickly set down to it , and Philip there to his glass o ' grog , and you will never have such listener in your life , and mother 's mind will be at ease too . ' 

 ' Eh ! thou be a wilfu ' wench , ' say the proud father , give she a great slap on her back . ' well ! set thee down to thy victual , and be quiet wi ' thee , for I want to finish my tale to Philip . but , perhaps , I have   tell it yo ' afore ? ' say he , turn round to question Hepburn . 

 Hepburn could not say that he have not hear it , for he pique himself on his truthfulness . but instead of frankly and directly own this , he try to frame a formal little speech , which would soothe Daniel 's mortified vanity ; and , of course , it have the directly opposite effect . Daniel resent be treat like a child , and yet turn his back on Philip with all the wilfulness of one . Sylvia do not care for her cousin , but hat the discomfort of have her father displease ; so she take up her tale of adventure , and tell her father and mother of her afternoon 's proceeding . Daniel pretend not to listen at first , and make ostentatious noise with his spoon and glass ; but by - and - by he get quite warm and excited about the doing of the press - gang , and scold both Philip and Sylvia for not have learn more particular as to what be the termination of the riot . 

 ' I have   be whale mysel ' , ' say he ; ' and I have   heerd tell as whaler wear knife , and I would ha ' gi'en t ' gang a taste o ' my whittle , if I have be cotche up just as I would set my foot a - shore . ' 

 ' I do not   know , ' say Philip ; ' we be at war wi ' the French , and we should not   like to be beat ; and yet if our number be not equal to theirs , we stand a strong chance of it . ' 

 ' not a bit on't   so be d d ! ' say Daniel Robson , bring down his fist with such violence on the round deal table , that the glass and earthenware shake again . ' Yo'd not strike a child or a woman , for sure ! yet it ' ud be like it , if we do na ' give the Frenchies some ' vantage if we take them wi ' equal number . it be not fair play , and that be one place where t ' shoe pinch . it be not fair play two way . it be not fair play to cotch up man as have no call for fightin ' at another man 's biddin ' , though they have   no objection to fight a bit on their own account and who be just land , all keen after bread i'stead o ' biscuit , and flesh - meat i'stead o ' junk , and bed i'stead o ' hammock .   I make naught o ' t ' sentiment side , for I be niver gi'en up to such carnal - mindedness and poesy .   it be noane fair to cotch them up and put them in a stifle hole , all line with metal for fear they should whittle their way out , and send them off to sea for year an ' year to come . and again it be no fair play to t ' French . four o ' they be rightly match wi ' one o ' we ; and if we go an ' fight them four to four it be like as if yo ' fall to beatin ' Sylvie there , or little Billy Croxton , as be not   breeched . and that be my mind . Missus , where 's t ' pipe ? ' 

 Philip do not smoke , so take his turn at talk , a chance he seldom have with Daniel , unless the latter have his pipe between his lip . so after Daniel have fill it , and use Sylvia 's little finger as a stopper to ram down the tobacco a habit of his to which she be so accustomed that she lay her hand on the table by he , as naturally as she would have fetch he his spittoon when he begin to smoke Philip arrange his argument , and begin 

 ' I be for fair play wi ' the French as much as any man , as long as we can be sure o ' beat they ; but , I say , make sure o ' that , and then give they ivery advantage . now I reckon Government be not sure as yet , for I ' the paper it say as half th ' ship I ' th ' Channel have not   get their proper complement o ' man ; and all as I say be , let Government judge a bit for we ; and if they say they be hamper for want o ' man , why we must make it up somehow . John and Jeremiah Foster pay in taxis , and Militiaman pay in person ; and if sailor can not pay in taxis , and will not pay in person , why they must be make to pay ; and that be what th ' press - gang be for , I reckon . for my part , when I read o ' the way those french chap be go on , I be thankful to be govern by King George and a British Constitution . ' 

 Daniel take his pipe out of his mouth at this . 

 ' and when do I say a word again King George and the Constitution ? I only ax them to govern I as I judge well , and that be what I call representation . when I give my vote to Measter Cholmley to go up to t ' Parliament House , I as good as say , ' now yo ' go up theer , sir , and tell them what I , Dannel Robson , think right , and what I , Dannel Robson , wish to have do . ' else I would be darn if I would ha ' gi'en my vote to he or any other man . and div yo ' think I want Seth Robson    as be my own brother 's son , and mate to a collier   to be cotche up by a press - gang , and ten to one his wage all unpaid ? Div yo ' think I would send up Measter Cholmley to speak up for that piece o ' work ? not i. ' he take up his pipe again , shake out the ash , puff it into a spark , and shut his eye , preparatory to listen . 

 ' but , ask pardon , law be make for the good of the nation , not for your good or mine . ' 

 Daniel could not stand this . he lay down his pipe , open his eye , star straight at Philip before speak , in order to enforce his word , and then say slowly 

 ' Nation here ! nation theere ! I be a man and yo're another , but nation 's nowheere . if Measter Cholmley talk to I I ' that fashion , he would look long for another vote frae I . I can make out King George , and Measter Pitt , and yo ' and I , but nation ! nation , go hang ! ' 

 Philip , who sometimes pursue an argument long than be politic for himself , especially when he feel sure of be on the conquering side , do not see that Daniel Robson be pass out of the indifference of conscious wisdom into that state of anger which ensue when a question become personal in some unspoken way . Robson have contest this subject once or twice before , and have the remembrance of former dispute to add to his present vehemence . so it be well for the harmony of the evening that Bell and Sylvia return from the kitchen to sit in the house - place . they have be to wash up the pan and basin use for supper ; Sylvia have privately show off her cloak , and get over her mother 's shake of the head at its colour with a coax kiss , at the end of which her mother have adjust her cap with a ' there ! there ! ha ' do wi ' thee , ' but have no more heart to show her disapprobation ; and now they come back to their usual occupation until it should please their visitor to go ; then they would rake the fire and be off to bed ; for neither Sylvia 's spinning nor Bell 's knitting be worth candle - light , and morning hour be precious in a dairy . 

 People speak of the way in which harp - playing set off a graceful figure ; spinning be almost as become an employment . a woman stand at the great wool - wheel , one arm extend , the other hold the thread , her head throw back to take in all the scope of her occupation ; or if it be the less spinning - wheel for flax and it be this that Sylvia move forwards to - night the pretty sound of the buzzing , whir motion , the attitude of the spinner , foot and hand alike engage in the business the bunch of gay coloured ribbon that tie the bundle of flax on the rock all make it into a picturesque piece of domestic business that may rival harp - play any day for the amount of softness and grace which it call out . 

 Sylvia 's cheek be rather flush by the warmth of the room after the frosty air . the blue ribbon with which she have think it necessary to tie back her hair before put on her hat to go to market have get rather loose , and allow she disarrange curl to stray in a manner which would have annoy she extremely , if she have be upstairs to look at herself in the glass ; but although they be not set in the exact fashion which Sylvia esteem as correct , they look very pretty and luxuriant . her little foot , place on the ' traddle ' , be still encase in its smartly buckle shoe not slightly to her discomfort , as she be unaccustomed to be shod in walk far ; only as Philip have accompany they home , neither she nor Molly have like to go barefoot . her round mottled arm and ruddy taper hand draw out the flax with nimble , agile motion , keep time to the movement of the wheel . all this Philip could see ; the great part of her face be lose to he as she half avert it , with a shy dislike to the way in which she know from past experience that cousin Philip always star at she . and avert it as she would she hear with silent petulance the harsh screech of Philip 's chair as he heavily drag it on the stone floor , sit on it all the while , and feel that he be move round so as to look at she as much as be in his power , without absolutely turn his back on either her father or mother . she get herself ready for the first opportunity of contradiction or opposition . 

 ' well , wench ! and have ta buy this grand new cloak ? ' 

 ' yes , feyther . it be a scarlet one . ' 

 ' ay , ay ! and what do mother say ? ' 

 ' oh , mother 's content , ' say Sylvia , a little doubt in her heart , but determine to defy Philip at all hazard . 

 ' Mother will put up with it if it do na spot would be near fact , I be think , ' say Bell , quietly . 

 ' I want Sylvia to take the gray , ' say Philip . 

 ' and I choose the red ; it be so much gayer , and folk can see I the far off . Feyther like to see I at first turn o ' t ' lane , do not   yo ' , feyther ? and I will niver turn out when it be boun ' for to rain , so it shall niver get a spot near it , mammy . ' 

 ' I reckon it be to wear I ' bad weather , ' say Bell . ' leastway that be the pretext for coax feyther out o ' it . ' 

 she say it in a kindly tone , though the word become a prudent rather than a fond mother . but Sylvia understand she well than Daniel do as it appear . 

 ' Hou'd thy tongue , mother . she niver speak a pretext at all . ' 

 he do not rightly know what a ' pretext ' be : Bell be a touch well educate than her husband , but he do not acknowledge this , and make a particular point of differ from she whenever she use a word beyond his comprehension . 

 ' she be a good lass at time ; and if she like to wear a yellow - orange cloak she should have it . here be Philip here , as stand up for law and press - gang , I will set he to find we a law again please our lass ; and she our only one . Thou dostn't   think on that , mother ! 

 Bell do think of that often ; oftener than her husband , perhaps , for she remember every day , and many time a day , the little one that have be bear and have die while its father be away on some long voyage . but it be not her way to make reply . 

 Sylvia , who have more insight into her mother 's heart than Daniel , break in with a new subject . 

 ' oh ! as for Philip , he be be preach up law all t ' way home . I say naught , but let molly hold her own ; or else I could ha ' tell a tale about silk an ' lace an ' thing . ' 

 Philip 's face flush . not because of the smuggling ; every one do that , only it be consider polite to ignore it ; but he be annoy to perceive how quickly his little cousin have discover that his practice do not agree with his preaching , and vex , too , to see how delighted she be to bring out the fact . he have some little idea , too , that his uncle might make use of his practice as an argument against the preaching he have lately be indulge in , in opposition to Daniel ; but Daniel be too far go in his Hollands - and - water to do more than enunciate his own opinion , which he do with hesitate and labour distinctness in the following sentence : 

 ' what I think and say be this . law be make for to keep some folk fra ' harm other . press - gang and coast - guard harm I I ' my business , and keep I fra ' get what I want . Theerefore , what I think and say be this : Measter Cholmley should put down press - gang and coast - guard . if that theere be not   reason I ax yo ' to tell I what be ? an ' if Measter Cholmley do not   do what I ax he , he may go whistle for my vote , he may . ' 

 at this period in his conversation , Bell Robson interfere ; not in the least from any feeling of disgust or annoyance , or dread of what he might say or do if he go on drinking , but simply as a matter of health . Sylvia , too , be in no way annoyed ; not only with her father , but with every man whom she know , except her cousin Philip , be it a matter of course to drink till their idea become confused . so she simply put her wheel aside , as preparatory to go to bed , when her mother say , in a more decide tone than that which she have use on any other occasion but this , and similar one 

 ' come , measter , you have   have as much as be good for you . ' 

 ' let a ' be ! let a ' be , ' say he , clutch at the bottle of spirit , but perhaps rather more good - humour with what he have drunk than he be before ; he jerk a little more into his glass before his wife carry it off , and lock it up in the cupboard , put the key in her pocket , and then he say , wink at Philip 

 ' eh ! my man . niver gie a woman t ' whip hand o'er yo ' ! Yo ' see what it bring a man to ; but for a ' that I will vote for Cholmley , an ' d t ' press - gang ! ' 

 he have to shout out the last after Philip , for Hepburn , really anxious to please his aunt , and dislike drinking habit himself by constitution , be already at the door , and set out on his return home , think , it must be confess , far more of the character of Sylvia 's shake of the hand than of the parting word of either his uncle or aunt . 




 CHAPTER V 

 STORY of THE PRESS - gang 

 for a few day after the evening mention in the last chapter the weather be dull . not in quick , sudden shower do the rain come down , but in constant drizzle , blot out all colour from the surround landscape , and fill the air with fine gray mist , until people breathe more water than air . at such time the consciousness of the nearness of the vast unseen sea act as a dreary depression to the spirit ; but besides act on the nerve of the excitable , such weather affect the sensitive or ail in material way . Daniel Robson 's fit of rheumatism incapacitate he from stir abroad ; and to a man of his active habit , and somewhat inactive mind , this be a great hardship . he be not ill - temper naturally , but this state of confinement make he more ill - temper than he have ever be before in his life . he sit in the chimney - corner , abuse the weather and doubt the wisdom or desirableness of all his wife see fit to do in the usual daily household matter . the ' chimney - corner ' be really a corner at Haytersbank . there be two project wall on each side of the fire - place , run about six foot into the room , and a stout wooden settle be place against one of these , while opposite be the circular - back ' master 's chair , ' the seat of which be compose of a square piece of wood judiciously hollow out , and place with one corner to the front . here , in full view of all the operation go on over the fire , sit Daniel Robson for four live - long day , advise and direct his wife in all such minor matter as the boiling of potato , the making of porridge , all the work on which she specially pique herself , and on which she would have take advice no ! not from the most skilled housewife in all the three Ridings . but , somehow , she manage to keep her tongue quiet from tell he , as she would have do any woman , and any other man , to mind his own business , or she would pin a dish - clout to his tail . she even check Sylvia when the latter propose , as much for fun as for anything else , that his ignorant direction should be follow , and the consequence bring before his eye and his nose . 

 ' na , na ! ' say Bell , ' th ' feyther 's feyther , and we mun respect he . but it be dree work havin' a man I ' th ' house , nursing th ' fire , an ' such weather too , and not a soul come near we , not even to fall out wi ' he ; for thee and I must na ' do that , for th ' Bible 's sake , dear ; and a good stand - up wordy quarrel would do he a power of good ; stir his blood like . I wish Philip would turn up . ' 

 Bell sigh , for in these four day she have experience somewhat of Madame de Maintenon 's difficulty   and with few resource to meet it   of try to amuse a man who be not amusable . for Bell , good and sensible as she be , be not a woman of resource . Sylvia 's plan , undutiful as it be in her mother 's eye , would have do Daniel more good , even though it might have make he angry , than his wife 's quiet , careful monotony of action , which , however it might conduce to her husband 's comfort when he be absent , do not amuse he when present . 

 Sylvia scout the notion of cousin Philip come into their household in the character of an amusing or entertaining person , till she nearly make her mother angry at her ridicule of the good steady young fellow , to whom Bell look up as the pattern of all that early manhood should be . but the moment Sylvia see she have be give her mother pain , she leave off her wilful little joke , and kiss she , and tell she she would manage all famously , and run out of the back - kitchen , in which mother and daughter have be scrub the churn and all the wooden implement of butter - making . Bell look at the pretty figure of her little daughter , as , run past with her apron throw over her head , she darken the window beneath which her mother be do her work . she pause just for a moment , and then say , almost unawares to herself , ' bless thee , lass , ' before resume her scouring of what already look almost snow - white . 

 Sylvia scamper across the rough farmyard in the wetting , drizzle rain to the place where she expect to find Kester ; but he be not there , so she have to retrace her step to the cow - house , and , make her way up a rough kind of ladder - staircase fix straight against the wall , she surprise Kester as he sit in the wool - loft , look over the fleece reserve for the home - spinning , by pop her bright face , swathe round with her blue woollen apron , up through the trap - door , and thus , her head the only visible part , she address the farm - servant , who be almost like one of the family . 

 ' Kester , feyther 's just tiring hissel ' wi ' weariness an ' vexation , sit by t ' fireside wi ' his hand afore he , an ' nought to do . an ' mother and I can not   think on aught as will rouse he up to a bit of a laugh , or aught more cheerful than a scolding . now , Kester , thou mun just be off , and find Harry Donkin th ' tailor , and bring he here ; it be gettin ' on for Martinmas , an ' he will be come his round , and he may as well come here first as last , and feyther 's clothe want a deal o ' mend up , and Harry be always full of his news , and anyhow he will do for feyther to scold , an ' be a new person too , and that be somewhat for all on we . now go , like a good old Kester as yo ' be . ' 

 Kester look at she with loving , faithful admiration . he have set himself his day 's work in his master 's absence , and be very desirous of finish it , but , somehow , he never dream of resist Sylvia , so he only state the case . 

 ' T ' ' ool be a vast o ' muck in ' t , an ' a thowt as a'd fettle it , an ' do it up ; but a reckon a mun do yo'r biddin ' . ' 

 ' there be a good old kester , ' say she , smile , and nod her muffled head at he ; then she dip down out of his sight , then rise up again   he have never take his slow , mooney eye from the spot where she have disappear   to say ' now , Kester , be wary and deep thou mun tell Harry Donkin not to let on as we have   send for he , but just to come in as if he be on his round , and take we first ; and he mun ask feyther if there be any work for he to do ; and I will answer for ' t , he will have a welcome and a half . now , be deep and fause , mind thee ! ' 

 ' A'se deep an ' fause enow wi ' simple folk ; but what can a do I ' Donkin be as fause as I as happen he may be ? ' 

 ' Ga way wi ' thee ! I ' Donkin be Solomon , thou mun be t ' Queen o ' Sheba ; and i'se bind for to say she outwit he at last ! ' 

 Kester laugh so long at the idea of his be the Queen of Sheba , that Sylvia be back by her mother 's side before the cachinnation end . 

 that night , just as Sylvia be prepare to go to bed in her little closet of a room , she hear some shot rattle at her window . she open the little casement , and see Kester stand below . he recommence where he leave off , with a laugh 

 ' he , he , he ! A 's be t ' queen ! a'se ta'en Donkin on t ' reet side , an ' he will coom in to - morrow , just permiskus , an ' ax for work , like as if ' t be a favour ; t ' oud felley be a bit cross - grained at startin ' , for he be workin ' at farmer Crosskey 's up at t ' other side o ' t ' town , wheer they put a strike an ' a half of maut intil t ' beer , when most folk put nobbut a strike , an t ' make he ill to convince : but he will coom , niver fear ! ' 

 the honest fellow never say a word of the shilling he have pay out of his own pocket to forward Sylvia 's wish , and to persuade the tailor to leave the good beer . all his anxiety now be to know if he have be miss , and if it be likely that a scolding await he in the morning . 

 ' T ' oud measter do not   set up his back , 'cause a do not   coom in t ' supper ? ' 

 ' he question a bit as to what thou be about , but mother do not   know , an ' I hold my peace . mother carry thy supper in t ' loft for thee . ' 

 ' a'll gang after ' t , then , for a'm like a pair o ' bellows wi ' t ' wind out ; just two flat side wi ' nowt betwixt . ' 

 the next morning , Sylvia 's face be a little red than usual when Harry Donkin 's bow - leg be see circle down the path to the house door . 

 ' here be Donkin , for sure ! ' exclaim Bell , when she catch sight of he a minute after her daughter . ' well , I just call that lucky ! for he will be company for thee while Sylvia and I have to turn th ' cheese . ' 

 this be too original a remark for a wife to make in Daniel 's opinion , on this especial morning , when his rheumatism be twinge he more than usual , so he reply with severity 

 ' that be all t ' woman know about it . Wi ' they it be " coompany , coompany , coompany , " an ' they think a man 's no well than theirsel . A'd have yo ' to know a've   a vast o ' thought in myself ' , as I be noane willing to lay out for t ' benefit o ' every man . A've   niver get time for meditation sin ' a be marry ; leastway , sin ' a left t ' sea . Aboard ship , wi ' niver a woman wi'n league o ' hail , and upo ' t ' masthead , in special , a could . ' 

 ' then I would well tell Donkin as we have   no work for he , ' say Sylvia , instinctively manage her father by agree with he , instead of reasoning with or contradict he . 

 ' now , theere you go ! ' wrench himself round , for fear Sylvia should carry she meekly make threat into execution . ' Ugh ! ugh ! ' as his limb hurt he . ' come in , Harry , come in , and talk a bit o ' sense to I , for a've   be shut up wi ' woman these four day , and a'm a'most a nateral by this time . A'se bind for ' t , they will find yo ' some wark , if ' t 's nought but for to save their own finger . ' 

 so Harry take off his coat , and seat himself professional - wise on the hastily - clear dresser , so that he might have all the light afford by the long , low casement window . then he blow in his thimble , suck his finger , so that they might adhere tightly together , and look about for a subject for open conversation , while Sylvia and her mother might be hear open and shut drawer and box - lid before they could find the article that need repair , or that be require to mend each other . 

 ' woman 's well enough I ' their way , ' say Daniel , in a philosophize tone , ' but a man may have too much on them . now there be I , leg - fast these four day , and a'll make free to say to yo ' , a'd rather a deal ha ' be load dung I ' t ' wet weather ; an ' a reckon it be th ' be wi ' nought but woman as tire I so : they talk so foolish it get int ' t ' bone like . now thou know'st thou'rt not call much of a man oather , but bless yo ' , t ' ninth part 's summut to be thankful for , after nought but woman . an ' yet , yo ' see , they be for send yo ' away I ' their foolishness ! well ! missus , and who be to pay for t ' fettling of all they clothe ? ' as Bell come down with her arm full . she be go to answer her husband meekly and literally accord to she will not , but Sylvia , already detect the increase cheerfulness of his tone , call out from behind her mother 

 ' I be , feyther . I be go for to sell my new cloak as I buy Thursday , for the mending on your old coat and waistcoat . ' 

 ' Hearken till she , ' say Daniel , chuckle . ' she be a true wench . three day sin ' noane so full as she o ' t ' new cloak that now she be fain t ' sell . ' 

 ' ay , Harry . if feyther will not   pay yo ' for make all these old clothe as good as new , I will sell my new red cloak soon than yo ' shall go unpaid . ' 

 ' a reckon it be a bargain , ' say Harry , cast sharp , professional eye on the heap before he , and single out the good article as to texture for examination and comment . 

 ' they be all again these metal button , ' say he . ' silk weaver have be petition Ministers t ' make a law to favour silk button ; and I do hear tell as there be informer go about spyin ' after metal button , and as how they could haul yo ' before a justice for wear on them . ' 

 ' a be we d in them , and a'll wear them to my dyin ' day , or a'll wear noane at a ' . they be for make such a pack o ' law , they will be for meddle wi ' my fashion o ' sleep next , and tax I for ivery snore a give . they have   be after t ' winder , and after t ' vittle , and after t ' very saut to ' t ; it be dearer by hauf an ' more nor it be when a be a boy : they be a meddlesome set o ' folk , law - maker be , an ' a'll niver believe King George have ought t ' do wi ' ' t. but mark my word ; I be we d wi ' brass button , and brass button a'll wear to my death , an ' if they moither I about it , a'll wear brass button I ' my coffin ! ' 

 by this time Harry have arrange a certain course of action with Mrs Robson , conduct the consultation and agreement by sign . his thread be fly fast already , and the mother and daughter feel more free to pursue their own business than they have do for several day ; for it be a good sign that Daniel have take his pipe out of the square hollow in the fireside wall , where he usually keep it , and be prepare to diversify his remark with satisfying interlude of puffing . 

 ' why , look ye ; this very baccy have a run for ' t. it come ashore sew up neatly enough I ' a woman 's stay , as be wife to a fishing - smack down at t ' bay yonder . she be a lean thing as iver you see , when she go for t ' see her husband aboard t ' vessel ; but she coom back lustier by a deal , an ' wi ' many a thing on she , here and theere , beside baccy . an ' that be I ' t ' face o ' coast - guard and yon tender , an ' a ' . but she make as though she be tipsy , an ' so they do nought but curse she , an ' get out on her way . ' 

 ' speak of t ' tender , there be be a piece o ' wark I ' monkshaven this week wi ' t ' press - gang , ' say Harry . 

 ' ay ! ay ! our lass be tell about ' t ; but , Lord bless ye ! there be no gettin ' t ' right on a story out on a woman though a will say this for our Sylvie , she be as bright a lass as iver a man look at . ' 

 now the truth be , that Daniel have not like to demean himself , at the time when Sylvia come back so full of what she have see at Monkshaven , by evince any curiosity on the subject . he have then think that the next day he would find some business that should take he down to the town , when he could learn all that be to be learn , without flatter his womankind by ask question , as if anything they might say could interest he . he have a strong notion of be a kind of domestic Jupiter . 

 ' it be make a deal o ' wark I ' monkshaven . folk have get to think nought o ' t ' tender , she lie so still , an ' t ' leftenant pay such a good price for all he want for t ' ship . but o ' Thursday t ' resolution , first whaler back this season , come in port , and t ' press - gang show their tooth , and carry off four as good able - body seaman as iver I make trouser for ; and t ' place be all up like a nest o ' wasp , when yo've   set your foot in t ' midst . they be so mad , they be ready for t ' fight t ' very pavin ' stone . ' 

 ' a wish a'd be theere ! a just wish a had ! a've   a score for t ' reckon up wi ' t ' press - gang ! ' 

 and the old man lift up his right hand his hand on which the forefinger and thumb be maim and useless partly in denunciation , and partly as a witness of what he have endure to escape from the service , abhor because it be force . his face become a totally different countenance with the expression of settled and unrelenting indignation , which his word call out . 

 ' g'on , man , g'on , ' say Daniel , impatient with Donkin for the little delay occasion by the necessity of arrange his work more fully . 

 ' ay ! ay ! all in good time ; for a've   a long tale to tell yet ; an ' a mun have some ' un to iron I out my seam , and look I out my bit , for there be none here fit for my purpose . ' 

 ' dang thy bit ! here , Sylvie ! Sylvie ! come and be tailor 's man , and let t ' chap get settle sharp , for a'm fain t ' hear his story . ' 

 Sylvia take her direction , and place her iron in the fire , and run upstairs for the bundle which have be put aside by her careful mother for occasion like the present . it consist of small piece of various coloured cloth , cut out of old coat and waistcoat , and similar garment , when the whole have become too much worn for use , yet when part have be good enough to be treasure by a thrifty housewife . Daniel grow angry before Donkin have select his pattern and settle the work to his own mind . 

 ' well , ' say he at last ; ' a mought be a young man a - go a wooin ' , by t ' pain thou'st take for t ' match my oud clothe . I do not   care if they be patch wi ' scarlet , a tell thee ; so as thou'lt work away at thy tale wi ' thy tongue , same time as thou work at thy needle wi ' thy finger . ' 

 ' then , as a be say , all Monkshaven be like a nest o ' wasp , flyin ' hither and thither , and makin ' sich a buzzin ' and a talkin ' as niver be ; and each wi ' his sting out , ready for t ' vent his venom o ' rage and revenge . and woman cryin ' and sobbin ' I ' t ' street when , Lord help we ! o ' Saturday come a bad time than iver ! for all Friday there have be a kind o ' expectation an ' dismay about t ' Good Fortune , as t ' mariner have say be off St Abb 's Head o ' Thursday , when t ' Resolution come in ; and there be wife and maid wi ' husband an ' sweetheart aboard t ' Good Fortune ready to throw their eye out on their head wi ' gazin ' , gazin ' nor'ards over t'sea , as be all one haze o ' blankness wi ' t ' rain ; and when t ' afternoon tide come in , an ' niver a line on she to be see , folk be oncertain as t ' whether she be hold off for fear o ' t ' tender as be out o ' sight , too or what be her mak ' o ' go on . an ' t ' poor wet draggle woman folk come up t ' town , some slowly cryin ' , as if their heart be sick , an ' other just bent their head to t ' wind , and go straight to their home , nother look nor speak to ony one ; but bar their door , and stiffen theirsel up for a night o ' wait . Saturday morn yo'll mind Saturday morn , it be stormy and gusty , downreet dirty weather theere stand t ' folk again by daylight , a watch an ' a straining , and by that tide t ' Good Fortune come o'er t ' bar . but t ' exciseman have send back her news by t ' boat as take them there . they have a deal of oil , and a vast o ' blubber . but for all that her flag be droop I ' t ' rain , half mast high , for mourning and sorrow , an ' they have a dead man aboard a dead man as be live and strong last sunrise . an ' there be another as lie between life an ' death , and there be seven more as should ha ' be theere as be not , but be carry off by t ' gang . t ' frigate as we ' n a ' hear tell on , as lie off Hartlepool , get tiding fra ' t ' tender as capture t ' seaman o ' Thursday : and t ' Aurora , as they ca'e she , make off for t ' nor'ard ; and nine league off St Abb 's Head , t ' resolution think she be , she see'd t ' frigate , and know by her build she be a man - o'-war , and guess she be bind on king 's kidnapping . I see t ' wounded man mysen wi ' my own eye ; and he will live ! he will live ! niver a man die yet , wi ' such a strong purpose o ' vengeance in he . he could barely speak , for he be badly shoot , but his colour coome and go , as t ' master 's mate an ' t ' captain tell I and some other how t ' Aurora fire at them , and how t ' innocent whaler hoist her colour , but afore they be fairly run up , another shot coome close in t ' shroud , and then t ' Greenland ship be t ' windward , bear down on t ' frigate ; but as they know she be an oud fox , and bend on mischief , Kinraid   that be he who lie a - die , only he will noane die , a'se bind , the specksioneer , bade t ' man go down between deck , and fasten t ' hatch well , an ' he would stand guard , he an ' captain , and t ' oud master 's mate , be leave upo ' deck for t ' give a welcome just skin - deep to t ' boat 's crew fra ' t ' Aurora , as they could see come t'ward they o'er t ' watter , wi ' their reg'lar man - o'-war 's rowing ' 

 ' damn them ! ' say Daniel , in soliloquy , and under his breath . 

 Sylvia stand , poise her iron , and listen eagerly , afraid to give Donkin the hot iron for fear of interrupt the narrative , unwilling to put it into the fire again , because that action would perchance remind he of his work , which now the tailor have forget , so eager be he in tell his story . 

 ' well ! they coome on over t ' watter wi ' great bound , and up t ' side they coome like locust , all armed man ; an ' t ' captain say he see Kinraid hide away his whale knife under some tarpaulin ' , and he know he mean mischief , an ' he would no more ha ' stop he wi ' a word nor he would ha ' stop he fra ' kill a whale . and when t ' Aurora 's man be aboard , one on them run to t ' helm ; and at that t ' captain say , he feel as if his wife be kiss afore his face ; but say he , " I bethink I on t ' man as be shut up below hatch , an ' I remember t ' folk at Monkshaven as be look out for we even then ; an ' I say to mysel ' , I would speak fair as long as I could , more by token o ' the whaling - knife , as I could see glint bright under t ' black tarpaulin . " so he speak quite fair and civil , though he see'd they be near t ' Aurora , and t ' Aurora be near they . then t ' navy captain hail he thro ' t ' trumpet , wi ' a great rough blast , and , say he , " order your man to come on deck . " and t ' captain of t ' whaler say his man cry up from under t ' hatch as they would niver be gi'en up wi'out bloodshed , and he see Kinraid take out his pistol , and look well to t ' priming ; so he say to t ' navy captain , " we be protect Greenland - man , and you have no right t ' meddle wi ' we . " but t ' navy captain only bellow t ' more , " order your man t ' come on deck . if they will not   obey you , and you have lose the command of your vessel , I reckon you be in a state of mutiny , and you may come aboard t ' Aurora and such man as be willing t ' follow you , and I will fire int ' the rest . " Yo ' see , that be t ' depth o ' the man : he be for pretend and pretexte as t ' captain could na manage his own ship , and as he would help he . but our Greenland captain be noane so poor - spirit , and say he , " she be full of oil , and I ware you of consequence if you fire into she . anyhow , pirate , or no pirate "   for t ' word pirate stick in his gizzard , " I be a honest monkshaven man , an ' I come fra ' a land where there be great iceberg and many a deadly danger , but niver a press - gang , thank God ! and that be what you be , I reckon . " they be the word he tell I , but whether he speak them out so bold at t ' time , i'se not so sure ; they be in his mind for t ' speak , only maybe prudence get t ' well on he , for he say he pray I ' his heart to bring his cargo safe to t ' owner , come what might . well , t ' Aurora 's man aboard t ' Good Fortune cry out " might they fire down t ' hatch , and bring t ' man out that a way ? " and then t ' specksioneer , he speak , an ' he say he stand ower t ' hatch , and he have two good pistol , and summut besides , and he do not   care for his life , bein ' a bachelor , but all below be married man , yo ' see , and he will put an end to t ' first two chap as come near t ' hatch . an ' they say he pick two off as make for t ' come near , and then , just as he be stoop for t ' whale knife , an ' it be as big as a sickle ' 

 ' teach folk as do not   know a whale knife , ' cry Daniel . ' I be a Greenland - man mysel ' . ' 

 ' they shoot he through t ' side , and dizzy he , and kick he aside for dead ; and fire down t ' hatch , and kill one man , and disable two , and then t ' rest cry for quarter , for life be sweet , e'en aboard a king 's ship ; and t ' Aurora carry them off , wound man , an ' able man , an ' all : leave Kinraid for dead , as be not   dead , and Darley for dead , as be dead , an ' t ' captain and master 's mate as be too old for work ; and t ' captain , as love Kinraid like a brother , pour rum down his throat , and bandage he up , and have send for t ' first doctor in Monkshaven for to get t ' slug out ; for they say there be niver such a harpooner in a ' t ' Greenland sea ; an ' I can speak fra ' my own see he be a fine young fellow where he lie theere , all stark and wan for weakness and loss o ' blood . but Darley 's dead as a door - nail ; and there be to be such a burying of he as niver be see afore I ' monkshaven , come Sunday . and now gi ' us t ' iron , wench , and let us lose no more time a - talk . ' 

 ' it be noane loss o ' time , ' say Daniel , move himself heavily in his chair , to feel how helpless he be once more . ' if a be as young as once a be nay , lad , if a have na these sore rheumatic , now a reckon as t ' press - gang ' ud find out as t ' should not   do such thing for nothing . bless thee , man ! it be waur nor I ' my youth I ' th ' Ameriky war , and then ' t be bad enough . ' 

 ' and Kinraid ? ' say Sylvia , draw a long breath , after the effort of realize it all ; her cheek have flush up , and her eye have glitter during the progress of the tale . 

 ' oh ! he will do . he will not die . life 's stuff be in he yet . ' 

 ' he will be Molly Corney 's cousin , I reckon , ' say Sylvia , bethink she with a blush of Molly Corney 's implication that he be more than a cousin to she , and immediately long to go off and see Molly , and hear all the little detail which woman do not think it beneath they to give to woman . from that time Sylvia 's little heart be bent on this purpose . but it be not one to be openly avow even to herself . she only want sadly to see Molly , and she almost believe herself that it be to consult she about the fashion of her cloak ; which Donkin be to cut out , and which she be to make under his direction ; at any rate , this be the reason she give to her mother when the day 's work be do , and a fine gleam come out upon the pale and watery sky towards evening . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 the SAILOR 's FUNERAL 

 Moss Brow , the Corney 's house , be but a disorderly , comfortless place . you have to cross a dirty farmyard , all puddle and dungheap , on stepping - stone , to get to the door of the house - place . that great room itself be sure to have clothe hang to dry at the fire , whatever day of the week it be ; some one of the large irregular family have have what be call in the district a ' dab - wash ' of a few article , forget on the regular day . and sometimes these article lie in their dirty state in the untidy kitchen , out of which a room , half parlour , half bedroom , open on one side , and a dairy , the only clean place in the house , at the opposite . in face of you , as you enter the door , be the entrance to the working - kitchen , or scullery . still , in spite of disorder like this , there be a well - to - do aspect about the place ; the Corneys be rich in their way , in flock and herd as well as in child ; and to they neither dirt nor the perpetual bustle arise from ill - order work detract from comfort . they be all of an easy , good - temper nature ; Mrs. Corney and her daughter give every one a welcome at whatever time of the day they come , and would just as soon sit down for a gossip at ten o'clock in the morning , as at five in the evening , though at the former time the house - place be full of work of various kind which ought to be get out of hand and do with : while the latter hour be towards the end of the day , when farmer ' wife and daughter be usually ' clean ' be the word then , ' dress ' be that in vogue now . of course in such a household as this Sylvia be sure to be gladly receive . she be young , and pretty , and bright , and bring a fresh breeze of pleasant air about she as her appropriate atmosphere . and besides , Bell Robson hold her head so high that visit from her daughter be rather esteem as a favour , for it be not everywhere that Sylvia be allow to go . 

 ' sit yo ' down , sit yo ' down ! ' cry Dame Corney , dust a chair with her apron ; ' a reckon Molly will be in I ' no time . she be nobbut go int ' t ' orchard , to see if she can find wind - fall enough for t ' make a pie or two for t ' lad . they like nowt so weel for supper as apple - pie sweeten wi ' treacle , crust stout and leathery , as stand chew , and we hannot getten in our apple yet . ' 

 ' if molly be in t ' orchard , I will go find she , ' say Sylvia . 

 ' well ! yo ' lass will have your conk '   private talk , ' a know ; secret 'bout sweetheart and such like , ' say Mrs. Corney , with a knowing look , which make Sylvia hate she for the moment . ' A've   not forget as a be young mysen . tak ' care ; there be a pool o ' mucky watter just outside t ' back - door . ' 

 but Sylvia be half - way across the back - yard bad , if possible , than the front as to the condition in which it be keep and have pass through the little gate into the orchard . it be full of old gnarl apple - tree , their trunk cover with gray lichen , in which the cunning chaffinch build her nest in spring - time . the canker branch remain on the tree , and add to the knot interweave overhead , if they do not to the productiveness ; the grass grow in long tuft , and be wet and tangle under foot . there be a tolerable crop of rosy apple still hang on the gray old tree , and here and there they show ruddy in the green boss of untrimmed grass . why the fruit be not gather , as it be evidently ripe , would have puzzle any one not acquaint with the Corney family to say ; but to they it be always a maxim in practice , if not in precept , ' do nothing to - day that you can put off till to - morrow , ' and accordingly the apple drop from the tree at any little gust of wind , and lie rotting on the ground until the ' lad ' want a supply of pie for supper . 

 molly see Sylvia , and come quickly across the orchard to meet she , catch her foot in knot of grass as she hurry along . 

 ' well , lass ! ' say she , ' who would ha ' think o ' see yo ' such a day as it have be ? ' 

 ' but it be clear up now beautiful , ' say Sylvia , look up at the soft evening sky , to be see through the apple bough . it be of a tender , delicate gray , with the faint warmth of a promising sunset ting it with a pink atmosphere . ' rain be over and go , and I want to know how my cloak be to be make ; for Donkin 's work at our house , and I want to know all about the news , yo ' know . ' 

 ' what news ? ' ask Molly , for she have hear of the affair between the Good Fortune and the Aurora some day before ; and , to tell the truth , it have rather pass out of her head just at this moment . 

 ' hannot yo ' hear all about t ' press - gang and t ' whaler , and t ' great fight , and Kinraid , as be your cousin , act so brave and grand , and lie on his death - bed now ? ' 

 ' oh ! ' say Molly , enlighten as to Sylvia 's ' news , ' and half surprised at the vehemence with which the little creature speak ; ' yes ; a heerd that day ago . but Charley 's noane on his death - bed , he be a deal well ; an ' mother say as he be to be move up here next week for nursin ' and well air nor he get I ' t ' town yonder . ' 

 ' oh ! I be so glad , ' say Sylvia , with all her heart . ' I think he would maybe die , and I should niver see he . ' 

 ' a'll promise yo ' shall see he ; that be t ' say if a ' go on well , for he be getten an ugly hurt . Mother say as there be four blue mark on his side as'll last he his life , an ' t ' doctor fear bleed I ' his inside ; and then he will drop down dead when no one look for ' t. ' 

 ' but you say he be well , ' say Sylvia , blanch a little at this account . 

 ' ay , he be well , but life 's uncertain , special after gun - shot wound . ' 

 ' he act very fine , ' say Sylvia , meditate . 

 ' a allay know he would . many be the time a've   heerd he say " honour bright , " and now he be show how bright his be . ' 

 molly do not speak sentimentally , but with a kind of proprietorship in Kinraid 's honour , which confirm Sylvia in her previous idea of a mutual attachment between she and her cousin . consider this notion , she be a little surprised at Molly 's next speech . 

 ' An ' about yer cloak , be you for a hood or a cape ? a reckon that be the question . ' 

 ' oh , I do not   care ! tell I more about Kinraid . do yo ' really think he will get well ? ' 

 ' dear ! how t ' lass take on about he . A'll tell he what a deal of interest a young woman tak I ' he ! ' 

 from that time Sylvia never ask another question about he . in a somewhat dry and altered tone , she say , after a little pause 

 ' I think on a hood . what do you say to it ? ' 

 ' well ; hood be a bit old - fashioned , to my mind . if ' t be mine , I would have a cape cut I ' three point , one to tie on each shoulder , and one to dip down handsome behind . but let yo ' an ' I go to Monkshaven church o ' Sunday , and see Measter Fishburn 's daughter , as have their thing make I ' York , and notice a bit how they be make . we need not   do it I ' church , but just scan them o'er I ' t ' churchyard , and there will be no harm do . besides , there be to be this grand burryin ' o ' t ' man t ' press - gang shot , and ' t will be like kill two bird at once . ' 

 ' I should like to go , ' say Sylvia . ' I feel so sorry like for the poor sailor shoot down and kidnap just as they be come home , as we see'd them o ' Thursday last . I will ask mother if she will let I go . ' 

 ' ay , do . I know my mother will let I , if she do not   go hersen ; for it will be a sight to see and to speak on for many a long year , after what I have   heerd . and Miss Fishburns be sure to be theere , so I would just get Donkin to cut out cloak itsel ' , and keep back yer mind fra ' fixing o ' either cape or hood till Sunday 's turn'd . ' 

 ' will yo ' set I part o ' t ' way home ? ' say Sylvia , see the die daylight become more and more crimson through the blackening tree . 

 ' no ; I can not . a should like it well enough , but somehow , there be a deal o ' work to be do yet , for t ' hour slip through one 's finger so as there be no knowing . mind yo ' , then , o ' Sunday . A'll be at t ' stile one o'clock punctual ; and we will go slowly into t ' town , and look about we as we go , and see folk 's dress ; and go to t ' church , and say wer prayer , and come out and have a look at t ' funeral . ' 

 and with this programme of proceeding settle for the following Sunday , the girl whom neighbourhood and parity of age have force into some measure of friendship part for the time . 

 Sylvia hasten home , feel as if she have be absent long ; her mother stand on the little knoll at the side of the house watch for she , with her hand shade her eye from the low ray of the set sun : but as soon as she see her daughter in the distance , she return to her work , whatever that might be . she be not a woman of many word , or of much demonstration ; few observer would have guess how much she love her child ; but Sylvia , without any reasoning or observation , instinctively know that her mother 's heart be bind up in she . 

 her father and Donkin be go on much as when she have leave they ; talk and disputing , the one compel to be idle , the other stitch away as fast as he talk . they seem as if they have never miss Sylvia ; no more do her mother for that matter , for she be busy and absorb in her afternoon dairy - work to all appearance . but Sylvia have note the watch not three minute before , and many a time in she after life , when no one care much for her out - going and in - coming , the straight , upright figure of her mother , front the set sun , but search through its blind ray for a sight of her child , rise up like a sudden - see picture , the remembrance of which smite Sylvia to the heart with a sense of a lost blessing , not duly value while possess . 

 ' well , feyther , and how be a ' wi ' you ? ' ask Sylvia , go to the side of his chair , and lay her hand on his shoulder . 

 ' Eh ! harkee till this lass o ' mine . she think as because she be go galraverge , I maun ha ' miss she and be ail . why , lass , Donkin and I have have t ' most sensible talk a've   have this many a day . A've   gi'en he a vast o ' knowledge , and he be do I a power o ' good . please God , to - morrow a'll tak ' a start at walk , if t ' weather hold up . ' 

 ' ay ! ' say Donkin , with a touch of sarcasm in his voice ; ' feyther and I have settle many puzzle ; it be be a loss to Government as they hannot be here for profit by our wisdom . we have   do away wi ' taxis and press - gang , and many a plague , and beat t ' french I ' our own mind , that be to say . ' 

 ' it be a wonder t ' I as those Lunnon folk can not   see thing clear , ' say Daniel , all in good faith . 

 Sylvia do not quite understand the state of thing as regarded politic and taxis and politic and taxis be all one in her mind , it must be confess but she see that her innocent little scheme of give her father the change of society afford by Donkin 's coming have answer ; and in the gladness of her heart she go out and run round the corner of the house to find Kester , and obtain from he that sympathy in her success which she dare not ask from her mother . 

 ' Kester , Kester , lad ! ' say she , in a loud whisper ; but Kester be suppere the horse , and in the clamp of their foot on the round stable pavement , he do not hear she at first . she go a little far into the stable . ' Kester ! he be a vast well , he will go out to - morrow ; it be all Donkin 's do . I be beholden to thee for fetch he , and I will try and spare thee waistcoat front out o ' t ' stuff for my new red cloak . Thou'll like that , Kester , will not   ta ? ' 

 Kester take the notion in slowly , and weigh it . 

 ' na , lass , ' say he , deliberately , after a pause . ' a could na ' bear to see thee wi ' thy cloak scrimpit . a like t ' see a wench look bonny and smart , an ' a tak ' a kind o ' pride in thee , an should be a'most as much hurt I ' my mind to see thee I ' a pinched cloak as if old Moll 's tail here be dock too short . na , lass , a'se niver get a mirroring glass for t ' see mysen in , so what be waistcoat to I ? keep thy stuff to thysen , theere be a good wench ; but a'se main and glad about t ' measter . place be not   like itsen when he be shut up and cranky . ' 

 he take up a wisp of straw and begin rub down the old mare , and hiss over his work as if he wish to consider the conversation as end . and Sylvia , who have string herself up in a momentary fervour of gratitude to make the generous offer , be not sorry to have it refuse , and go back plan what kindness she could show to Kester without its involve so much sacrifice to herself . for give waistcoat front to he would deprive she of the pleasant power of select a fashionable pattern in Monkshaven churchyard next Sunday . 

 that wish - for day seem long a - come , as wish - for day most frequently do . her father get well by slow degree , and her mother be pleased by the tailor 's good piece of work ; show the neatly - place patch with as much pride as many matron take in new clothe now - a - day . and the weather clear up into a dim kind of autumnal fineness , into anything but an indian summer as far as regard gorgeousness of colour , for on that coast the mist and sea fog early spoil the brilliancy of the foliage . yet , perhaps , the more do the silvery gray and brown of the inland scenery conduce to the tranquillity of the time , the time of peace and rest before the fierce and stormy winter come on . it seem a time for gather up human force to encounter the come severity , as well as of store up the produce of harvest for the need of winter . old people turn out and sun themselves in that calm St. Martin 's summer , without fear of ' the heat o ' th ' sun , or the come winter 's rage , ' and we may read in their pensive , dreamy eye that they be wean themselves away from the earth , which probably many may never see dressed in her summer glory again . 

 many such old people set out betime , on the Sunday afternoon to which Sylvia have be so look forward , to scale the long flight of stone step wear by the foot of many generation which lead up to the parish church , place on a height above the town , on a great green area at the summit of the cliff , which be the angle where the river and the sea meet , and so overlook both the busy crowded little town , the port , the shipping , and the bar on the one hand , and the wide illimitable tranquil sea on the other type of life and eternity . it be a good situation for that church . Homeward - bind sailor catch sight of the tower of St Nicholas , the first land object of all . they who go forth upon the great deep might carry solemn thought with they of the word they have hear there ; not conscious thought , perhaps rather a distinct if dim conviction that buy and selling , eat and marrying , even life and death , be not all the reality in existence . nor be the word that come up to their remembrance word of sermon preach there , however impressive . the sailor mostly sleep through the sermon ; unless , indeed , there be incident such as be involve in what be call ' funeral discourse ' to be narrate . they do not recognize their daily fault or temptation under the grand alias befit their appearance from a preacher 's mouth . but they know the old , oft - repeat word pray for deliverance from the familiar danger of lightning and tempest ; from battle , murder , and sudden death ; and nearly every man be aware that he leave behind he some one who would watch for the prayer for the preservation of those who travel by land or by water , and think of he , as God - protect the more for the earnestness of the response then give . 

 there , too , lie the dead of many generation ; for St. Nicholas have be the parish church ever since Monkshaven be a town , and the large churchyard be rich in the dead . master , mariner , ship - owner , seaman : it seem strange how few other trade be represent in that great plain so full of upright gravestone . here and there be a memorial stone , place by some survivor of a large family , most of whom perish at sea : ' suppose to have perish in the Greenland sea , ' ' shipwreck in the Baltic , ' ' drown off the coast of Iceland . ' there be a strange sensation , as if the cold sea - wind must bring with they the dim phantom of those lose sailor , who have die far from their home , and from the hallowed ground where their father lay . 

 each flight of step up to this churchyard end in a small flat space , on which a wooden seat be place . on this particular Sunday , all these seat be fill by aged people , breathless with the unusual exertion of climbing . you could see the church stair , as it be call , from nearly every part of the town , and the figure of the numerous climber , diminish by distance , look like a busy ant - hill , long before the bell begin to ring for afternoon service . all who could manage it have put on a bit of black in token of mourning ; it might be very little ; an old ribbon , a rusty piece of crape ; but some sign of mourning be show by every one down to the little child in its mother 's arm , that innocently clutch the piece of rosemary to be throw into the grave ' for remembrance . ' Darley , the seaman shoot by the press - gang , nine league off St. Abb 's Head , be to be bury to - day , at the accustomed time for the funeral of the poor class , directly after evening service , and there be only the sick and their nurse - tender who do not come forth to show their feeling for the man whom they look upon as murder . the crowd of vessel in harbour bear their flag half - mast high ; and the crew be make their way through the High Street . the gentlefolk of Monkshaven , full of indignation at this interference with their ship , full of sympathy with the family who have lose their son and brother almost within sight of his home , come in unusual number no lack of pattern for Sylvia ; but her thought be far otherwise and more suitably occupy . the unwonted sternness and solemnity visible on the countenance of all whom she meet awed and affect she . she do not speak in reply to Molly 's remark on the dress or appearance of those who strike she . she feel as if these speech jar on she , and annoy she almost to irritation ; yet molly have come all the way to Monkshaven Church in her service , and deserve forbearance accordingly . the two mount the step alongside of many people ; few word be exchange , even at the breathing place , so often the little centre of gossip . look over the sea there be not a sail to be see ; it seem bared of life , as if to be in serious harmony with what be go on inland . 

 the church be of old Norman architecture ; low and massive outside : inside , of vast space , only a quarter of which be fill on ordinary Sundays . the wall be disfigure by numerous tablet of black and white marble intermix , and the usual ornamentation of that style of memorial as erect in the last century , of weep willow , urn , and droop figure , with here and there a ship in full sail , or an anchor , where the seafaring idea prevalent through the place have launch out into a little originality . there be no wood - work , the church have be strip of that , most probably when the neighbouring monastery have be destroy . there be large square pew , line with green baize , with the name of the family of the most flourishing ship - owner paint white on the door ; there be pew , not so large , and not line at all , for the farmer and shopkeeper of the parish ; and numerous heavy oaken bench which , by the united effort of several man , might be bring within earshot of the pulpit . these be be remove into the most convenient situation when molly and Sylvia enter the church , and after two or three whisper sentence they take their seat on one of these . 

 the vicar of Monkshaven be a kindly , peaceable old man , hat strife and troubled water above everything . he be a vehement Tory in theory , as become his cloth in those day . he have two bugbear to fear the French and the Dissenters . it be difficult to say of which he have the bad opinion and the most intense dread . perhaps he hat the dissenter most , because they come near in contact with he than the French ; besides , the French have the excuse of be papist , while the dissenter might have belong to the Church of England if they have not be utterly deprave . yet in practice Dr Wilson do not object to dine with Mr. Fishburn , who be a personal friend and follower of Wesley , but then , as the doctor would say , ' Wesley be an Oxford man , and that make he a gentleman ; and he be an ordain minister of the Church of England , so that grace can never depart from he . ' but I do not know what excuse he would have allege for send broth and vegetable to old Ralph Thompson , a rabid Independent , who have be give to abuse the Church and the vicar , from a dissenting pulpit , as long as ever he could mount the stair . however , that inconsistency between Dr Wilson 's theory and practice be not generally know in Monkshaven , so we have nothing to do with it . 

 Dr Wilson have have a very difficult part to play , and a still more difficult sermon to write , during this last week . the Darley who have be kill be the son of the vicar 's gardener , and Dr Wilson 's sympathy as a man have be all on the bereaved father 's side . but then he have receive , as the old magistrate in the neighbourhood , a letter from the captain of the Aurora , explanatory and exculpatory . Darley have be resist the order of an officer in his Majesty 's service . what would become of due subordination and loyalty , and the interest of the service , and the chance of beat those confound French , if such conduct as Darley 's be to be encourage ?   Poor Darley ! he be past all evil effect of human encouragement now ! 

 so the vicar mumble hastily over a sermon on the text , ' in the midst of life we be in death ' ; which might have do as well for a baby cut off in a convulsion - fit as for the strong man shoot down with all his eager blood hot within he , by man as hot - blooded as himself . but once when the old doctor 's eye catch the up - turn , strain gaze of the father Darley , seek with all his soul to find a grain of holy comfort in the chaff of word , his conscience smite he . have he nothing to say that should calm anger and revenge with spiritual power ? no breath of the comforter to soothe repine into resignation ? but again the discord between the law of man and the law of Christ stand before he ; and he give up the attempt to do more than he be do , as beyond his power . though the hearer go away as full of anger as they have enter the church , and some with a dull feeling of disappointment as to what they have get there , yet no one feel anything but kindly towards the old vicar . his simple , happy life lead amongst they for forty year , and open to all man in its daily course ; his sweet - temper , cordial way ; his practical kindness , make he belove by all ; and neither he nor they think much or care much for admiration of his talent . respect for his office be all the respect he think of ; and that be concede to he from old traditional and hereditary association . in look back to the last century , it appear curious to see how little our ancestor have the power of put two thing together , and perceive either the discord or harmony thus produce . be it because we be far off from those time , and have , consequently , a great range of vision ? will our descendant have a wonder about we , such as we have about the inconsistency of our forefather , or a surprise at our blindness that we do not perceive that , hold such and such opinion , our course of action must be so and so , or that the logical consequence of particular opinion must be conviction which at present we hold in abhorrence ? it seem puzzle to look back on man such as our vicar , who almost hold the doctrine that the King could do no wrong , yet be ever ready to talk of the glorious Revolution , and to abuse the Stuarts for have entertain the same doctrine , and try to put it in practice . but such discrepancy run through good man 's life in those day . it be well for we that we live at the present time , when everybody be logical and consistent . this little discussion must be take in place of Dr Wilson 's sermon , of which no one could remember more than the text half an hour after it be deliver . even the doctor himself have the recollection of the word he have utter sweep out of his mind , as , have doff his gown and don his surplice , he come out of the dusk of his vestry and go to the church - door , look into the broad light which come upon the plain of the church - yard on the cliff ; for the sun have not yet set , and the pale moon be slowly rise through the silvery mist that obscure the distant moor . there be a thick , dense crowd , all still and silent , look away from the church and the vicar , who await the bringing of the dead . they be watch the slow black line wind up the long step , rest their heavy burden here and there , stand in silent group at each landing - place ; now lose to sight as a piece of broken , overhang ground intervene , now emerge suddenly near ; and overhead the great church bell , with its mediaeval inscription , familiar to the vicar , if to no one else who hear it , I to the grave do summon all , keep on its heavy booming monotone , with which no other sound from land or sea , near or distant , intermingle , except the cackle of the goose on some far - away farm on the moor , as they be come home to roost ; and that one noise from so great a distance seem only to deepen the stillness . then there be a little movement in the crowd ; a little push from side to side , to make a path for the corpse and its bearer an aggregate of the fragment of room . 

 with bent head and spend strength , those who carry the coffin move on ; behind come the poor old gardener , a brown - black funeral cloak throw over his homely dress , and support his wife with step scarcely less feeble than her own . he have come to church that afternoon , with a promise to she that he would return to lead she to the funeral of her firstborn ; for he feel , in his sore perplexed heart , full of indignation and dumb anger , as if he must go and hear something which should exorcize the unwonted longing for revenge that disturb his grief , and make he conscious of that great blank of consolation which faithfulness produce . and for the time he be faithless . how come God to permit such cruel injustice of man ? permit it , he could not be good . then what be life , and what be death , but woe and despair ? the beautiful solemn word of the ritual have do he good , and restore much of his faith . though he could not understand why such sorrow have befall he any more than before , he have come back to something of his childlike trust ; he keep say to himself in a whisper , as he mount the weary step , ' it be the Lord 's doing ' ; and the repetition soothe he unspeakably . behind this old couple follow their child , grow man and woman , come from distant place or farmhouse service ; the servant at the vicarage , and many a neighbour , anxious to show their sympathy , and most of the sailor from the crew of the vessel in port , join in procession , and follow the dead body into the church . 

 there be too great a crowd immediately within the door for Sylvia and Molly to go in again , and they accordingly betook themselves to the place where the deep grave be wait , wide and hungry , to receive its dead . there , lean against the headstone all around , be many stand look over the broad and placid sea , and turn to the soft salt air which blow on their hot eye and rigid face ; for no one speak of all that number . they be think of the violent death of he over whom the solemn word be now be say in the gray old church , scarcely out of their hearing , have not the sound be break by the measured lapping of the tide far beneath . 

 suddenly every one look round towards the path from the churchyard step . two sailor be support a ghastly figure that , with feeble motion , be draw near the open grave . 

 ' it be t ' specksioneer as try to save he ! it be he as be leave for dead ! ' the people murmur round . 

 ' it be Charley Kinraid , as I be a sinner ! ' say Molly , start forward to greet her cousin . 

 but as he come on , she see that all his strength be need for the mere action of walk . the sailor , in their strong sympathy , have yield to his earn entreaty , and carry he up the step , in order that he might see the last of his messmate . they place he near the grave , rest against a stone ; and he be hardly there before the vicar come forth , and the great crowd pour out of the church , follow the body to the grave . 

 Sylvia be so much wrapt up in the solemnity of the occasion , that she have no thought to spare at the first moment for the pale and haggard figure opposite ; much less be she aware of her cousin Philip , who now single she out for the first time from among the crowd , press to her side , with an intention of companionship and protection . 

 as the service go on , ill - check sob rise from behind the two girl , who be among the foremost in the crowd , and by - and - by the cry and the wail become general . Sylvia 's tear rain down her face , and her distress become so evident that it attract the attention of many in that inner circle . among other who notice it , the specksioneer 's hollow eye be catch by the sight of the innocent bloom childlike face opposite to he , and he wonder if she be a relation ; yet , see that she bear no badge of mourning , he rather conclude that she must have be a sweetheart of the dead man . 

 and now all be over : the rattle of the gravel on the coffin ; the last long , linger look of friend and lover ; the rosemary sprig have be cast down by all who be fortunate enough to have bring they and oh ! how much Sylvia wish she have remember this last act of respect and slowly the outer rim of the crowd begin to slacken and disappear . 

 now Philip speak to Sylvia . 

 ' I never dream of see you here . I think my aunt always go to Kirk Moorside . ' 

 ' I come with Molly Corney , ' say Sylvia . ' Mother be stay at home with feyther . ' 

 ' how be his rheumatic ? ' ask Philip . 

 but at the same moment molly take hold of Sylvia 's hand , and say 

 ' a want t ' get round and speak to Charley . Mother will be main and glad to hear as he be getten out ; though , for sure , he look as though he would ha ' be well in 's bed . Come , Sylvia . ' 

 and Philip , fain to keep with Sylvia , have to follow the two girl close up to the specksioneer , who be prepare for his slow laborious walk back to his lodging . he stop on see his cousin . 

 ' well , Molly , ' say he , faintly , put out his hand , but his eye pass her face to look at Sylvia in the background , her tear - stain face full of shy admiration of the near approach to a hero she have ever see . 

 ' well , Charley , a niver be so take aback as when a saw yo ' theere , like a ghost , a - standin ' agin a gravestone . how white and wan yo ' do look ! ' 

 ' ay ! ' say he , wearily , ' wan and weak enough . ' 

 ' but I hope you be get well , sir , ' say Sylvia , in a low voice , long to speak to he , and yet wonder at her own temerity . 

 ' thank you , my lass . I be o'er th ' bad . ' 

 he sigh heavily . 

 Philip now speak . 

 ' we be do he no kindness a - keep he stand here I ' t ' night - fall , and he so tired . ' and he make as though he would turn away . Kinraid 's two sailor friend back up Philip 's word with such urgency , that , somehow , Sylvia think they have be to blame in speak to he , and blush excessively with the idea . 

 ' Yo'll come and be nurse at Moss Brow , Charley , ' say molly ; and Sylvia drop her little maidenly curtsey , and say , ' good - by ; ' and go away , wonder how molly could talk so freely to such a hero ; but then , to be sure , he be a cousin , and probably a sweetheart , and that would make a great deal of difference , of course . 

 meanwhile her own cousin keep close by her side . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 TETE - a - tete . the will 

 ' and now tell I all about th ' folk at home ? ' say Philip , evidently prepare to walk back with the girl . he generally come to Haytersbank every Sunday afternoon , so Sylvia know what she have to expect the moment she become aware of his neighbourhood in the churchyard . 

 ' my feyther be be sadly trouble with his rheumatic this week past ; but he be a vast well now , thank you kindly . ' then , address herself to Molly , she ask , ' have your cousin a doctor to look after he ? ' 

 ' ay , for sure ! ' say Molly , quickly ; for though she know nothing about the matter , she be determined to suppose that her cousin have everything become an invalid as well as a hero . ' he be well - to - do , and can afford everything as he need , ' continue she . ' his feyther 's leave he money , and he be a farmer out up in Northumberland , and he be reckon such a specksioneer as never , never be , and get what wage he ask for and a share on every whale he harpoon beside . ' 

 ' I reckon he will have to make himself scarce on this coast for awhile , at any rate , ' say Philip . 

 ' An ' what for should he ? ' ask Molly , who never like Philip at the good of time , and now , if he be go to disparage her cousin in any way , be ready to take up arm and do battle . 

 ' why , they do say as he fire the shot as have kill some o ' the men - o'-war 's man , and , of course , if he have , he will have to stand his trial if he be catch . ' 

 ' what lie people do say ! ' exclaim Molly . ' he niver kill nought but whale , a'll be bind ; or , if he do , it be all right and proper as he should , when they be for steal he an ' all t ' other , and do kill poor Darley as we come fra ' seeming bury . a suppose , now yo're such a Quaker that , if some one be to break through fra ' t ' other side o ' this dyke and offer for to murder Sylvia and I , yo'd look on wi ' yo'r hand hang by yo'r side . ' 

 ' but t ' press - gang have law on their side , and be do nought but what they would warrant for . ' 

 ' Th ' tender 's go away , as if she be ashamed o ' what she have do , ' say Sylvia , ' and t ' flag 's down fra ' o'er the Randyvowse . there will be no more press - ganging here awhile . ' 

 ' no ; feyther say , ' continue Molly , ' as they have   make t ' place too hot t ' hold them , come so strong afore people have getten use to their way o ' catchin ' up poor lad just come fra ' t ' Greenland sea . t ' folk ha ' their blood so up they would think no harm o ' fight them I ' t ' street ay , and o ' kill them , too , if they be for use fire - arm , as t ' Aurora 's man do . ' 

 ' woman be so fond o ' bloodshed , ' say Philip ; ' for t ' hear you talk , who would ha ' think you would just come fra ' crying ower the grave of a man who be kill by violence ? I should ha ' think you would see enough of what sorrow come o ' fighting . why , they lad o ' t ' Aurora as they say Kinraid shoot down have father and mother , maybe , a look out for they to come home . ' 

 ' I do not   think he could ha ' kill they , ' say Sylvia ; ' he look so gentle . ' 

 but Molly do not like this half - and - half view of the case . 

 ' a dare say he do kill them dead ; he be not one to do thing by half . and a think he serve them reet , that be what a do . ' 

 ' be na ' this Hester , as serf in Foster 's shop ? ' ask Sylvia , in a low voice , as a young woman come through a stile in the stone wall by the roadside , and suddenly appear before they . 

 ' yes , ' say Philip . ' why , Hester , where have you be ? ' he ask , as they draw near . 

 hester redden a little , and then reply , in her slow , quiet way 

 ' I have   be sit with Betsy Darley she that be bed - ridden . it be lonesome for she when the other be away at the burying . ' 

 and she make as though she would have pass ; but Sylvia , all her sympathy alive for the relation of the murder man , want to ask more question , and put her hand on Hester 's arm to detain she a moment . hester suddenly draw back a little , redden still more , and then reply fully and quietly to all Sylvia ask . 

 in the agricultural county , and among the class to which these four person belong , there be little analysis of motive or comparison of character and action , even at this present day of enlightenment . sixty or seventy year ago there be still less . I do not mean that amongst thoughtful and serious people there be not much reading of such book as Mason on Self - Knowledge and Law 's serious Call , or that there be not the experience of the Wesleyans , that be relate at class - meeting for the edification of the hearer . but , take as a general ride , it may be say that few know what manner of man they be , compare to the number now who be fully conscious of their virtue , quality , failing , and weakness , and who go about compare other with themselves not in a spirit of Pharisaism and arrogance , but with a vivid self - consciousness that more than anything else deprive character of freshness and originality . 

 to return to the party we leave stand on the high - raise footway that run alongside of the bridle - road to Haytersbank . Sylvia have leisure in her heart to think ' how good hester be for sit with the poor bed - ride sister of Darley ! ' without have a pang of self - depreciation in the comparison of her own conduct with that she be capable of so fully appreciate . she have go to church for the end of vanity , and remain to the funeral for curiosity and the pleasure of the excitement . in this way a modern young lady would have condemn herself , and therefore lose the simple , purify pleasure of admiration of another . 

 hester pass onwards , go down the hill towards the town . the other three walk slowly on . all be silent for a few moment , then Sylvia say 

 ' how good she be ! ' 

 and Philip reply with ready warmth , 

 ' yes , she be ; no one know how good but we , who live in the same house wi ' she . ' 

 ' her mother be an old Quakeress , bean't   she ? ' molly inquire . 

 ' Alice Rose be a Friend , if that be what you mean , ' say Philip . 

 ' well , well ! some folk 's so particular . be William Coulson a Quaker , by which a mean a friend ? ' 

 ' yes ; they be all on them right - down good folk . ' 

 ' deary I ! what a wonder yo ' can speak to such sinner as Sylvia and I , after keepin ' company with so much goodness , ' say Molly , who have not yet forgive Philip for doubt Kinraid 's power of kill man . ' be na ' it , Sylvia ? ' 

 but Sylvia be too highly strung for banter . if she have not be one of those who go to mock , but remain to pray , she have go to church with the thought of the cloak - that - be - to - be uppermost in her mind , and she have come down the long church stair with life and death suddenly become real to her mind , the endure sea and hill form a contrast background to the vanishing away of man . she be full of a solemn wonder as to the abide - place of the soul of the dead , and a childlike dread lest the number of the elect should be accomplish before she be include therein . how people could ever be merry again after they have be at a funeral , she could not imagine ; so she answer gravely , and slightly beside the question : 

 ' I wonder if I be a friend if I should be good ? ' 

 ' Gi ' I your red cloak , that be all , when yo ' turn Quaker ; they will none let thee wear scarlet , so it will be of no use t ' thee . ' 

 ' I think thou'rt good enough as thou art , ' say Philip , tenderly at least as tenderly as he durst , for he know by experience that it do not do to alarm her girlish coyness . either one speech or the other make Sylvia silent ; neither be accordant to her mood of mind ; so perhaps both contribute to her quietness . 

 ' folk say William Coulson look sweet on Hester Rose , ' say Molly , always up in monkshaven gossip . it be in the form of an assertion , but be say in the tone of a question , and as such Philip reply to it . 

 ' yes , I think he like she a good deal ; but he be so quiet , I never feel sure . John and Jeremiah would like the match , I have   a notion . ' 

 and now they come to the stile which have fill Philip 's eye for some minute past , though neither of the other have perceive they be so near it ; the stile which lead to Moss Brow from the road into the field that slop down to Haystersbank . here they would leave Molly , and now would begin the delicious tete - a - tete walk , which Philip always try to make as linger as possible . to - day he be anxious to show his sympathy with Sylvia , as far as he could read what be pass in her mind ; but how be he to guess the multitude of tangle thought in that unseen receptacle ? a resolution to be good , if she could , and always to be think on death , so that what seem to she now as simply impossible , might come true that she might ' dread the grave as little as her bed ' ; a wish that Philip be not come home with she ; a wonder if the specksioneer really have kill a man , an idea which make her shudder ; yet from the awful fascination about it , her imagination be compel to dwell on the tall , gaunt figure , and try to recall the wan countenance ; a hatred and desire of revenge on the press - gang , so vehement that it sadly militate against her intention of try to be good ; all these notion , and wonder , and fancy , be whirl about in Sylvia 's brain , and at one of their prompting she speak , 

 ' how many mile away be t ' Greenland sea ? I mean , how long do they take to reach ? ' 

 ' I do not   know ; ten day or a fortnight , or more , maybe . I will ask . ' 

 ' oh ! feyther will tell I all about it . he be be there many a time . ' 

 ' I say , Sylvie ! my aunt say I be to give you lesson this winter I ' write and cipher . I can begin to come up now , two evening , maybe , a week . t ' shop close early after November come in . ' 

 Sylvia do not like learn , and do not want he for her teacher ; so she answer in a dry little tone , 

 ' it will use a deal o ' candle - light ; mother will not like that . I can not   see to spell wi'out a candle close at my elbow . ' 

 ' niver mind about candle . I can bring up a candle wi ' me , for I should be burn one at Alice Rose 's . ' 

 so that excuse would not do . Sylvia beat her brain for another . 

 ' write cramp my hand so , I can not   do any sewing for a day after ; and feyther want his shirt very bad . ' 

 ' but , Sylvia , I will teach you geography , and ever such a vast o ' fine thing about t ' country , on t ' map . ' 

 ' be t ' Arctic sea down on t ' map ? ' she ask , in a tone of great interest . 

 ' yes ! Arctics , and tropic , and equator , and equinoctial line ; we will take them turn and turn about ; we will do write and cipher one night , and geography t ' other . ' 

 Philip speak with pleasure at the prospect , but Sylvia relax into indifference . 

 ' I be no scholard ; it be like throw away labour to teach I , I be such a dunce at my book . now there be Betsy Corney , third girl , she as be young than Molly , she would be a credit to you . there niver be such a lass for potter ower book . ' 

 if Philip have have his wit about he , he would have pretend to listen to this proposition of a change of pupil , and then possibly Sylvia might have repent make it . but he be too much mortified to be diplomatic . 

 ' my aunt ask I to teach you a bit , not any neighbour 's lass . ' 

 ' well ! if I mun be teach , I mun ; but I would rayther be whip and ha ' do with it , ' be Sylvia 's ungracious reply . 

 a moment afterwards , she repent of her little spirit of unkindness , and think that she should not like to die that night without make friend . sudden death be very present in her thought since the funeral . so she instinctively choose the good method of make friend again , and slip her hand into his , as he walk a little sullenly at her side . she be half afraid , however , when she find it firmly hold , and that she could not draw it away again without make what she call in her own mind a ' fuss . ' so , hand in hand , they slowly and silently come up to the door of Haytersbank Farm ; not unseen by Bell Robson , who sate in the window - seat , with her Bible open upon her knee . she have read her chapter aloud to herself , and now she could see no long , even if she have wish to read more ; but she gaze out into the darken air , and a dim look of contentment come like moonshine over her face when she see the cousin approach . 

 ' that be my prayer day and night , ' say she to herself . 

 but there be no unusual aspect of gladness on her face , as she light the candle to give they a more cheerful welcome . 

 ' Wheere 's feyther ? ' say Sylvia , look round the room for Daniel . 

 ' he be be to Kirk Moorside Church , for t ' see a bit o ' th ' world , as he can be it . and sin ' then he be go out to th ' cattle ; for Kester 's ta'en his turn of play hissel ' , now that father 's well . ' 

 ' I have   be talk to Sylvia , ' say Philip , his head still full of his pleasant plan , his hand still tingle from the touch of her , ' about turn schoolmaster , and come up here two night a week for t ' teach she a bit o ' writing and cipher . ' 

 ' and geography , ' put in Sylvia ; ' for , ' think she , ' if I be to learn they thing I do not   care a pin about , anyhow I will learn what I do care to know , if it will tell I about t ' Greenland sea , and how far they be off . ' 

 that same evening , a trio alike in many outward circumstance sate in a small neat room in a house opening out of a confine court on the hilly side of the High Street of Monkshaven a mother , her only child , and the young man who silently love that daughter , and be favour by Alice Rose , though not by hester . 

 when the latter return from her afternoon 's absence , she stand for a minute or two on the little flight of steep step , whiten to a snowy whiteness ; the aspect of the whole house partook of the same character of irreproachable cleanliness . it be wedge up into a space which necessitate all sort of odd projection and irregularity in order to obtain sufficient light for the interior ; and if ever the being situate in a dusky , confine corner might have be make an excuse for dirt , Alice Rose 's house have that apology . yet the small diamond pane of glass in the casement window be keep so bright and clear that a great sweet - scented - leave geranium grow and flourish , though it do not flower profusely . the leaf seem to fill the air with fragrance as soon as Hester summon up energy enough to open the door . perhaps that be because the young Quaker , William Coulson , be crush one between his finger and thumb , while wait to set down Alice 's next word . for the old woman , who look as if many year of life remain in she yet , be solemnly dictate she last will and testament . 

 it have be on her mind for many month ; for she have something to leave beyond the mere furniture of the house . something a few pound in the hand of John and Jeremiah Foster , her cousin : and it be they who have suggest the duty on which she be engage . she have ask William Coulson to write down her wish , and he have consent , though with some fear and trepidation ; for he have an idea that he be infringe on a lawyer 's prerogative , and that , for aught he know , he might be prosecute for make a will without a licence , just as a man might be punish for sell wine and spirit without go through the preliminary legal form that give permission for such a sale . but to his suggestion that Alice should employ a lawyer , she have reply 

 ' that would cost I five pound sterling ; and thee canst do it as well , if thee'll but attend to my word . ' 

 so he have buy , at her desire , a black - edge sheet of fine - wove paper , and a couple of good pen , on the previous Saturday ; and while wait for she to begin her dictation , and full serious thought himself , he have almost unconsciously make the grand flourish at the top of the paper which he have learn at school , and which be there call a spread - eagle . 

 ' what art thee do there ? ' ask Alice , suddenly alive to his proceeding . 

 without a word he show she his handiwork . 

 ' it be a vanity , ' say she , ' and ' t may make t ' will not stand . folk may think I be na in my right mind , if they see such fly - leg and cob - webs a - top . write , " this be my doing , William Coulson , and none of Alice Rose 's , she be in her sound mind . " ' 

 ' I do not   think it be need , ' say William . nevertheless he write down the word . 

 ' Hast thee put that I be in my sound mind and seven sens ? then make the sign of the Trinity , and write , " in the name of the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost . " ' 

 ' be that the right way o ' begin a will ? ' say Coulson , a little startled . 

 ' my father , and my father 's father , and my husband have it a - top of theirs , and I be noane go for to cease fra ' following after they , for they be godly man , though my husband be o ' t ' episcopal persuasion . ' 

 ' it be do , ' say William . 

 ' Hast thee date it ? ' ask Alice . 

 ' Nay . ' 

 ' then date it third day , ninth month . now , art ready ? ' 

 Coulson nod . 

 ' i , Alice Rose , do leave my furniture   that be , my bed and chest o ' drawer , for thy bed and thing be thine , and not mine , and settle , and saucepan , and dresser , and table , and kettle , and all the rest of my furniture , to my lawful and only daughter , Hester Rose . I think that be safe for she to have all , be ' t not , William ? ' 

 ' I think so , too , ' say he , write on all the time . 

 ' and thee shalt have t ' roller and paste - board , because thee be so fond o ' pudding and cake . it will serve thy wife after I be go , and I trust she will boil her paste long enough , for that be be t ' secret o ' mine , and thee'll noane be so easy t ' please . ' 

 ' I din't   reckon on marriage , ' say William . 

 ' Thee'll marry , ' say Alice . ' thee like to have thy victual hot and comfortable ; and there be noane many but a wife as'll look after that for t ' please thee . ' 

 ' I know who could please I , ' sigh forth William , ' but I can not   please she . ' 

 Alice look sharply at he from over her spectacle , which she have put on the well to think about the disposal of her property . 

 ' Thee art think on our hester , ' say she , plainly out . 

 he start a little , but look up at she and meet her eye . 

 ' hester care noane for I , ' say he , dejectedly . 

 ' bide a while , my lad , ' say Alice , kindly . ' young woman do not   always know their own mind . Thee and she would make a marriage after my own heart ; and the Lord have be very good to I hitherto , and I think he will bring it t ' pass . but do not   thee let on as thee care for her so much . I sometimes think she weary o ' thy look and thy way . show up thy manly heart , and make as though thee have much else to think on , and no leisure for to dawdle after she , and she will think a deal more on thee . and now mend thy pen for a fresh start . I give and bequeath do thee put " give and bequeath , " at th ' beginning ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say William , look back . ' thee didst not tell I " give and bequeath ! " ' 

 ' then it will not   be legal , and my bit o ' furniture will be take to London , and put into chancery , and hester will have noane on it . ' 

 ' I can write it over , ' say William . 

 ' well , write it clear then , and put a line under it to show those be my special word . Hast thee do it ? then now start afresh . I give and bequeath my book o ' sermon , as be bind in good calfskin , and lie on the third shelf o ' corner cupboard at the right hand o ' t ' fire - place , to Philip Hepburn ; for I reckon he be as fond o ' reading sermon as thee art o ' light , well - boil paste , and I would be glad for each on ye to have somewhat ye like for to remember I by . be that down ? there ; now for my cousin John and Jeremiah . they be rich I ' world 's gear , but they will prize what I leave them if I could only onbethink I what they would like . Hearken ! be na ' that our hester 's step ? put it away , quick ! I be noane for grieve her wi ' tell she what I have   be about . we will take a turn at t ' will next First Day ; it will serve we for several Sabbaths to come , and maybe I can think on something as will suit cousin John and cousin Jeremiah afore then . ' 

 hester , as be mention , pause a minute or two before lift the latch of the door . when she enter there be no unusual sign of write about ; only Will Coulson look very red , and crush and smell at the geranium leaf . 

 hester come in briskly , with the little stock of enforce cheerfulness she have stop at the door to acquire . but it fade away along with the faint flush of colour in her cheek ; and the mother 's quick eye immediately note the wan heavy look of care . 

 ' I have keep t ' pot in t ' oven ; it will have a'most get a ' t ' goodness out of t ' tea by now , for it will be an hour since I make it . poor lass , thou look'st as if thou need a good cup o ' tea . it be dree work sit wi ' Betsy Darley , be it ? and how do she look on her affliction ? ' 

 ' she take it sore to heart , ' say Hester , take off her hat , and fold and smooth away her cloak , before put they in the great oak chest   or ' ark , ' as it be call , in which they be lay from Sunday to Sunday . 

 as she open the lid a sweet scent of dry lavender and rose - leaf come out . William step hastily forwards to hold up the heavy lid for she . she lift up her head , look at he full with her serene eye , and thank he for his little service . then she take a creepie - stool and sate down on the side of the fire - place , have she back to the window . 

 the hearth be of the same spotless whiteness as the step ; all that be black about the grate be polished to the utmost extent ; all that be of brass , like the handle of the oven , be burnish bright . her mother place the little black earthenware teapot , in which the tea have be stew , on the table , where cup and saucer be already set for four , and a large plate of bread and butter cut . then they sate round the table , bow their head , and keep silence for a minute or two . 

 when this grace be end , and they be about to begin , Alice say , as if without premeditation , but in reality with a keen shrinking of heart out of sympathy with her child 

 ' Philip would have be in to his tea by now , I reckon , if he have be come . ' 

 William look up suddenly at hester ; her mother carefully turn her head another way . but she answer quite quietly 

 ' he will be go to his aunt 's at Haytersbank . I meet he at t ' top o ' t ' Brow , with his cousin and Molly Corney . ' 

 ' he be a deal there , ' say William . 

 ' yes , ' say hester . ' it be likely ; he and his aunt come from Carlisle - way , and must need cle together in these strange part . ' 

 ' I see he at the burying of yon Darley , ' say William . 

 ' it be a vast o ' people go past th ' entry end , ' say Alice . ' it be a'most like election time ; I be just come back fra ' meeting when they be all go up th ' church step . I meet yon sailor as , they say , use violence and do murder ; he look like a ghost , though whether it be his bodily wound , or the sense of his sin stir within he , it be not for I to say . and by t ' time I be back here and settle to my Bible , t ' folk be return , and it be tramp , tramp , past th ' entry end for well nor a quarter of an hour . ' 

 ' they say Kinraid have getten slug and gun - shot in his side , ' say hester . 

 ' he be niver one Charley Kinraid , for sure , as I know at Newcastle , ' say William Coulson , rouse to sudden and energetic curiosity . 

 ' I do not   know , ' reply hester ; ' they call he just Kinraid ; and Betsy Darley say he be t ' most daring specksioneer of all that go off this coast to t ' Greenland sea . but he be be in Newcastle , for I mind I she say her poor brother meet with he there . ' 

 ' how didst thee come to know he ? ' inquire Alice . 

 ' I can not abide he if it be Charley , ' say William . ' he keep company with my poor sister as be dead for well nor two year , and then he leave off come to see she and go wi ' another girl , and it just break her heart . ' 

 ' he do not   look now as if he iver could play at that game again , ' say Alice ; ' he have have a warn fra ' the Lord . whether it be a call no one can tell . but to my eyne he look as if he have be call , and be go . ' 

 ' then he will meet my sister , ' say William , solemnly ; ' and I hope the Lord will make it clear to he , then , how he kill she , as sure as he shoot down yon sailor ; an ' if there be a gnash o ' tooth for murder I ' that other place , I reckon he will have his share on't . he be a bad man yon . ' 

 ' Betsy say he be such a friend to her brother as niver be ; and he be send her word and promise to go and see she , first place he go out to . 

 but William only shake his head , and repeat his last word , 

 ' he be a bad man , he be . ' 

 when Philip come home that Sunday night , he find only Alice up to receive he . the usual bedtime in the household be nine o'clock , and it be but ten minute past the hour ; but Alice look displeased and stern . 

 ' Thee art late , lad , ' say she , shortly . 

 ' I be sorry ; it be a long way from my uncle 's , and I think clock be different , ' say he , take out his watch to compare it with the round moon 's face that tell the time to Alice . 

 ' I know nought about thy uncle 's , but thee art late . take thy candle , and begone . ' 

 if Alice make any reply to Philip 's ' good - night , ' he do not hear it . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 attraction and repulsion 

 a fortnight have pass over and winter be advance with rapid stride . in bleak northern farmstead there be much to be do before November weather should make the road too heavy for half - feed horse to pull cart through . there be the turf , par up on the distant moor , and leave out to dry , to be carry home and stack ; the brown fern be to be store up for winter bed for the cattle ; for straw be scarce and dear in those part ; even for thatch , heather   or rather ling   be use . then there be meat to salt while it could be have ; for , in default of turnip and mangold - wurzel , there be a great slaughtering of barren cow as soon as the summer herbage fail ; and good housewife store up their Christmas piece of beef in pickle before Martinmas be over . Corn be to be grind while yet it could be carry to the distant mill ; the great rack for oat - cake , that swing at the top of the kitchen , have to be fill . and last of all come the pig - killing , when the second frost set in . for up in the north there be an idea that the ice store in the first frost will melt , and the meat cure then taint ; the first frost be good for nothing but to be throw away , as they express it . 

 there come a breathing - time after this last event . the house have have its last autumn cleaning , and be neat and bright from top to bottom , from one end to another . the turf be lead ; the coal cart up from Monkshaven ; the wood store ; the corn ground ; the pig kill , and the ham and head and hand lie in salt . the butcher have be glad to take the good part of a pig of Dame Robson 's careful feeding ; but there be unusual plenty in the Haytersbank pantry ; and as Bell survey it one morning , she say to her husband 

 ' I wonder if yon poor sick chap at Moss Brow would fancy some o ' my sausage . they be something to crack on , for they be make fra ' an old Cumberland receipt , as be not know I ' yorkshire yet . ' 

 ' Thou 's allay so set upo ' Cumberland way ! ' say her husband , not displeased with the suggestion , however . ' still , when folk be sick they han their fancy , and maybe Kinraid will be glad o ' thy sausage . I ha ' know sick folk tak ' t ' eat snail . ' 

 this be not complimentary , perhaps . but Daniel go on to say that he do not mind if he step over with the sausage himself , when it be too late to do anything else . Sylvia long to offer to accompany her father ; but , somehow , she do not like to propose it . towards dusk she come to her mother to ask for the key of the great bureau that stand in the house - place as a state piece of furniture , although its use be to contain the family 's good wear apparel , and store of linen , such as might be suppose to be more need upstairs . 

 ' what for do yo ' want my key ? ' ask Bell . 

 ' only just to get out one of t ' damask napkin . ' 

 ' the good napkin , as my mother span ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Sylvia , her colour heightening . ' I think as how it would set off t ' sausage . ' 

 ' a good clean homespun cloth will serve they well , ' say Bell , wonder in her own mind what be come over the girl , to be think of set off sausage that be to be eat , not to be look at like a picture - book . she might have wonder still more , if she have see Sylvia steal round to the little flower border she have persuade Kester to make under the wall at the sunny side of the house , and gather the two or three Michaelmas daisy , and the one bud of the China rise , that , grow against the kitchen chimney , have escape the frost ; and then , when her mother be not look , softly open the cloth inside of the little basket that contain the sausage and a fresh egg or two , and lie her autumn blossom in one of the fold of the towel . 

 after Daniel , now pretty clear of his rheumatism , have have his afternoon meal   tea be a Sunday treat , he prepare to set out on his walk to Moss Brow ; but as he be take his stick he catch the look on Sylvia 's face ; and unconsciously interpret its dumb wistfulness . 

 ' Missus , ' say he , ' t ' wench have nought more t ' do , have she ? she may as well put on her cloak and step down wi ' I , and see Molly a bit ; she will be company like . ' 

 Bell consider . 

 ' there 's t ' yarn for thy stocking as be yet to spin ; but she can go , for I will do a bit at ' t mysel ' , and there be nought else agate . ' 

 ' put on thy thing in a jiffy , then , and let us be off , ' say Daniel . 

 and Sylvia do not need another word . down she come in a twinkling , dress in her new red cloak and hood , her face peep out of the fold of the latter , bright and blushing . 

 ' Thou should'st na ' ha ' put on thy new cloak for a night walk to Moss Brow , ' say Bell , shake her head . 

 ' shall I go take it off , and put on my shawl ? ' ask Sylvia , a little dolefully . 

 ' na , na , come along ! a'm noane go for t ' wait o ' woman 's chop and change . come along ; come , Lassie ! '   this last to his dog . 

 so Sylvia set off with a dancing heart and a dancing step , that have to be restrain to the sober gait her father choose . the sky above be bright and clear with the light of a thousand star , the grass be crisp under their foot with the come hoar frost ; and as they mount to the high ground they could see the dark sea stretch away far below they . the night be very still , though now and then crisp sound in the distant air sound very near in the silence . Sylvia carry the basket , and look like little Red Riding Hood . her father have nothing to say , and do not care to make himself agreeable ; but Sylvia enjoy her own thought , and any conversation would have be a disturbance to she . the long monotonous roll of the distant wave , as the tide bear they in , the multitudinous rush at last , and then the retreating rattle and trickle , as the baffle water fall back over the shingle that skirt the sand , and divide they from the cliff ; her father 's measure tread , and slow , even movement ; Lassie 's patter all lull Sylvia into a reverie , of which she could not have give herself any definite account . but at length they arrive at Moss Brow , and with a sudden sigh she quit the subject of her dreamy meditation , and follow her father into the great house - place . it have a more comfortable aspect by night than by day . the fire be always keep up to a wasteful size , and the dancing blaze and the partial light of candle leave much in shadow that be well ignore in such a disorderly family . but there be always a warm welcome to friend , however roughly give ; and after the word of this be speak , the next rise up equally naturally in the mind of Mrs Corney . 

 ' and what will ye tak ' ? eh ! but t ' measter will be fine and vex at your comin ' when he be away . he be off to Horncastle t ' sell some colt , and he will not be back till to - morrow 's neet . but here be Charley Kinraid as we have   getten to nurse up a bit , and ' t ' lad will be back fra ' Monkshaven in a crack o ' no time . ' 

 all this be address to Daniel , to whom she know that none but masculine company would be acceptable . amongst uneducated people whose range of subject and interest do not extend beyond their daily life it be natural that when the first blush and hurry of youth be over , there should be no great pleasure in the conversation of the other sex . man have plenty to say to man , which in their estimation   gain from tradition and experience   woman can not understand ; and farmer of a much later date than the one of which I be write , would have contemptuously consider it as a loss of time to talk to woman ; indeed , they be often more communicative to the sheep - dog that accompany they through all the day 's work , and frequently become a sort of dumb confidant . Farmer Robson 's Lassie now lie down at her master 's foot , place her nose between her paw , and watch with attentive eye the preparation go on for refreshment preparation which , to the disappointment of her canine heart , consist entirely of tumbler and sugar . 

 ' where 's t ' wench ? ' say Robson , after he have shake hand with Kinraid , and speak a few word to he and to Mrs. Corney . ' she be getten ' a basket wi ' sausage in them , as my missus have make , and she be a rare hand at sausage ; there be noane like she in a ' t ' three Ridings , I will be bind ! ' 

 for Daniel could praise his wife 's power in her absence , though he do not often express himself in an appreciative manner when she be by to hear . but Sylvia 's quick sense catch up the manner in which Mrs. Corney would apply the way in which her mother 's housewifery have be exalt , and step forwards out of the shadow , she say , 

 ' Mother think , maybe , you have not   kill a pig yet , and sausage be always a bit savoury for any one who be na ' well , and ' 

 she might have go on but that she catch Kinraid 's eye look at she with kindly admiration . she stop speak , and Mrs. Corney take up the word 

 ' as for sausage , I ha ' niver have a chance this year , else I stand again any one for t ' making of them . Yorkshire hams be a vast thought on , and I will niver let another county woman say as she can make well sausage nor I . but , as I be say , I would niver a chance ; for our pig , as I be sa fond on , and fed mysel ' , and as would ha ' be fourteen stone by now if he be an ounce , and as know I as well as any Christian , and a pig , as I may say , that I just idolize , go and take a fit a week after Michaelmas Day , and die , as if it have be to spite I ; and t ' next be na ' ready for killing , nor wunnot be this six week . so I be much beholden to your missus , and so be Charley , I be sure ; though he be ta'en a turn to betterin ' sin ' he come out here to be nurse . ' 

 ' I be a deal well , ' say Kinraid ; ' a'most ready for t ' press - gang to give chase to again . ' 

 ' but folk say they be go off this coast for one while , ' add Daniel . 

 ' they be go down towards Hull , as I have   be tell , ' say Kinraid . ' but they be a deep set , they will be here before we know where we be , some of these day . ' 

 ' see thee here ! ' say Daniel , exhibit his maimed hand ; ' a reckon a serve them out time o ' t ' Ameriky war . ' and he begin the story Sylvia know so well ; for her father never make a new acquaintance but what he tell he of his self - mutilation to escape the press - gang . it have be do , as he would himself have own , to spite himself as well as they ; for it have oblige he to leave a sea - life , to which , in comparison , all life spend on shore be bad than nothing for dulness . for Robson have never reach that rank aboard ship which make his be unable to run up the rigging , or to throw a harpoon , or to fire off a gun , of no great consequence ; so he have to be thankful that an opportune legacy enable he to turn farmer , a great degradation in his opinion . but his blood warm , as he tell the specksioneer , towards a sailor , and he press Kinraid to beguile the time when he be compel to be ashore , by come over to see he at Haytersbank , whenever he feel inclined . 

 Sylvia , appear to listen to Molly 's confidence , be hearken in reality to all this conversation between her father and the specksioneer ; and at this invitation she become especially attentive . 

 Kinraid reply , 

 ' I be much oblige to ye , I be sure ; maybe I can come and spend an ev'ning wi ' you ; but as soon as I be get round a bit , I must go see my own people as live at Cullercoats near Newcastle - upo'-Tyne . ' 

 ' well , well ! ' say Daniel , rise to take leave , with unusual prudence as to the amount of his drink . ' thou'lt see , thou'lt see ! I shall be main glad to see thee ; if thou'lt come . but I have   na ' lad to keep thee company , only one sprig of a wench . Sylvia , come here , an let us show thee to this young fellow ! ' 

 Sylvia come forwards , ruddy as any rose , and in a moment Kinraid recognize she as the pretty little girl he have see cry so bitterly over Darley 's grave . he rise up out of true sailor 's gallantry , as she shyly approach and stand by her father 's side , scarcely dare to lift her great soft eye , to have one fair gaze at his face . he have to support himself by one hand rest on the dresser , but she see he be look far well young , less haggard than he have seem to she before . his face be short and expressive ; his complexion have be weatherbeaten and bronze , though now he look so pale ; his eye and hair be dark , the former quick , deep - set , and penetrate ; the latter curly , and almost in ringlet . his tooth gleam white as he smile at she , a pleasant friendly smile of recognition ; but she only blush the deep , and hang her head . 

 ' I will come , sir , and be thankful . I daresay a turn'll do I good , if the weather hold up , an ' th ' frost keep on . ' 

 ' that be right , my lad , ' say Robson , shake he by the hand , and then Kinraid 's hand be hold out to Sylvia , and she could not avoid the same friendly action . 

 Molly Corney follow she to the door , and when they be fairly outside , she hold Sylvia back for an instant to say , 

 ' be na ' he a fine likely man ? I be so glad as yo've   see he , for he be to be off next week to Newcastle and that neighbourhood . ' 

 ' but he say he would come to we some night ? ' ask Sylvia , half in a fright . 

 ' ay , I will see as he do ; never fear . for I should like yo ' for to know he a bit . he be a rare talker . I will mind he o ' come to yo ' . ' 

 somehow , Sylvia feel as if this repeat promise of remind Kinraid of his promise to come and see her father take away part of the pleasure she have anticipate from his visit . yet what could be more natural than that Molly Corney should wish her friend to be acquaint with the man whom Sylvia believe to be all but Molly 's engaged lover ? 

 ponder these thought , the walk home be as silent as that go to Moss Brow have be . the only change seem to be that now they face the brilliant northern light flash up the sky , and that either this appearance or some of the whale narration of Kinraid have stir up Daniel Robson 's recollection of a sea ditty , which he keep sing to himself in a low , unmusical voice , the burden of which be , ' for I love the tossin ' say ! ' Bell meet they at the door . 

 ' well , and here ye be at home again ! and Philip have be , Sylvie , to give thee thy cipher lesson ; and he stay awhile , think thou'd be come back . ' 

 ' I be very sorry , ' say Sylvia , more out of deference to her mother 's tone of annoyance , than because she herself care either for her lesson or her cousin 's disappointment . 

 ' he will come again to - morrow night , he say . but thou must take care , and mind the night he say he will come , for it be a long way to come for nought . ' 

 Sylvia might have repeat she ' I be very sorry ' at this announcement of Philip 's intention ; but she restrain herself , inwardly and fervently hop that molly would not urge the fulfilment of the specksioneer 's promise for to - morrow night , for Philip 's be there would spoil all ; and besides , if she sate at the dresser at her lesson , and Kinraid at the table with her father , he might hear all , and find out what a dunce she be . 

 she need not have be afraid . with the next night Hepburn come ; and Kinraid do not . after a few word to her mother , Philip produce the candle he have promise , and some book and a quill or two . 

 ' what for hast thou bring candle ? ' ask Bell , in a half - affront tone . 

 Hepburn smile . 

 ' Sylvia think it would take a deal of candlelight , and be for make it into a reason not to learn . I should ha ' used t ' candle if I have stay at home , so I just bring they wi ' I . ' 

 ' then thou may'st just take they back again , ' say Bell , shortly , blow out that which he have light , and place one of her own on the dresser instead . 

 Sylvia catch her mother 's look of displeasure , and it make she docile for the evening , although she owe her cousin a grudge for her enforce good behaviour . 

 ' now , Sylvia , here be a copy - book wi ' t ' Tower o ' London on it , and we will fill it wi ' as pretty writing as any in t ' North Riding . ' 

 Sylvia sate quite still , unenlivene by this prospect . 

 ' here be a pen as will nearly write of itsel ' , ' continue Philip , still try to coax she out her sullenness of manner . 

 then he arrange she in the right position . 

 ' do not   lay your head down on your left arm , you will ne'er see to write straight . ' 

 the attitude be change , but not a word be speak . Philip begin to grow angry at such determined dumbness . 

 ' be you tired ? ' ask he , with a strange mixture of crossness and tenderness . 

 ' yes , very , ' be her reply . 

 ' but thou ought'st not to be tired , ' say Bell , who have not yet get over the offence to her hospitality ; who , moreover , like her nephew , and have , to boot , a great respect for the learning she have never acquire . 

 ' Mother ! ' say Sylvia , burst out , ' what be the use on my writing " Abednego , " " Abednego , " " Abednego , " all down a page ? if I could see t ' use on ' t , I would ha ' axed father to send I t ' school ; but I be none want to have learn . ' 

 ' it be a fine thing , tho ' , be learn . my mother and my grandmother have it : but th ' family come down I ' the world , and Philip 's mother and I , we have none of it ; but I ha ' set my heart on thy have it , child . ' 

 ' my finger be stiff , ' plead Sylvia , hold up her little hand and shake it . 

 ' let we take a turn at spelling , then , ' say Philip . 

 ' what be t ' use on't ? ' ask captious Sylvia . 

 ' why , it help one I ' read an ' writing . ' 

 ' and what do read and writing do for one ? ' 

 her mother give she another of the severe look that , quiet woman as she be , she could occasionally bestow upon the refractory , and Sylvia take her book and glance down the column Philip point out to she ; but , as she justly consider , one man might point out the task , but twenty could not make she learn it , if she do not choose ; and she sit herself down on the edge of the dresser , and idly gaze into the fire . but her mother come round to look for something in the drawer of the dresser , and as she pass her daughter she say in a low voice 

 ' Sylvie , be a good lass . I set a deal o ' store by learn , and father ' ud never send thee to school , as have stick by I sore . ' 

 if Philip , sit with his back to they , hear these word he be discreet enough not to show that he hear . and he have his reward ; for in a very short time , Sylvia stand before he with her book in her hand , prepare to say her spelling . at which he also stand up by instinct , and listen to her slow succeed letter ; help she out , when she look up at he with a sweet childlike perplexity in her face : for a dunce as to book - learn poor Sylvia be and be likely to remain ; and , in spite of his assumed office of schoolmaster , Philip Hepburn could almost have echo the word of the lover of Jess MacFarlane 

 I send my love a letter , 
 but , alas ! she canna read , 
 and I lo'e her a ' the well . 
 still he know his aunt 's strong wish on the subject , and it be very delightful to stand in the relation of teacher to so dear and pretty , if so wilful , a pupil . 

 perhaps it be not very flattering to notice Sylvia 's great joy when her lesson be over , sadly shorten as they be by Philip 's desire not to be too hard upon she . Sylvia dance round to her mother , bent her head back , and kiss her face , and then say defyingly to Philip , 

 ' if iver I write thee a letter it shall just be full of nothing but " Abednego ! Abednego ! Abednego ! " ' 

 but at this moment her father come in from a distant expedition on the moor with Kester to look after the sheep he have pasture there before the winter set fairly in . he be tired , and so be Lassie , and so , too , be Kester , who , lift his heavy leg one after the other , and smooth down his hair , follow his master into the house - place , and seat himself on a bench at the farth end of the dresser , patiently await the supper of porridge and milk which he share with his master . Sylvia , meanwhile , coax Lassie poor footsore dog to her side , and give she some food , which the creature be almost too tired to eat . Philip make as though he would be go , but Daniel motion to he to be quiet . 

 ' sit thee down , lad . as soon as I have   have my victual , I want t ' hear a bit o ' news . ' 

 Sylvia take her sewing and sit at the little round table by her mother , share the light of the scanty dip - candle . no one speak . every one be absorb in what they be do . what Philip be do be , gaze at Sylvia learn her face off by heart . 

 when every scrap of porridge be clear out of the mighty bowl , Kester yawn , and wish good - night , withdraw to his loft over the cow - house . then Philip pull out the weekly York paper , and begin to read the late account of the war then rag . this be give Daniel one of his great pleasure ; for though he could read pretty well , yet the double effort of reading and understand what he read be almost too much for he . he could read , or he could understand what be read aloud to he ; read be no pleasure , but listening be . 

 besides , he have a true John bullish interest in the war , without very well know what the English be fight for . but in those day , so long as they fight the French for any cause , or for no cause at all , every true patriot be satisfied . Sylvia and her mother do not care for any such far - extend interest ; a little bit of York news , the stealing of a few apple out of a scarborough garden that they know , be of far more interest to they than all the battle of Nelson and the North . 

 Philip read in a high - pitch and unnatural tone of voice , which deprive the word of their reality ; for even familiar expression can become unfamiliar and convey no idea , if the utterance be force or affect . Philip be somewhat of a pedant ; yet there be a simplicity in his pedantry not always to be meet with in those who be self - teach , and which might have interest any one who care to know with what labour and difficulty he have acquire the knowledge which now he prize so highly ; read out latin quotation as easily as if they be English , and take a pleasure in rolling polysyllable , until all at once look askance at Sylvia , he see that her head have fall back , her pretty rosy lip open , her eye fast shut ; in short , she be asleep . 

 ' ay , ' say Farmer Robson , ' and t ' reading have a'most send I off . mother would look angry now if I be to tell yo ' yo ' have a right to a kiss ; but when I be a young man I would ha ' kiss a pretty girl as I see asleep , afore yo'd say Jack Robson . ' 

 Philip tremble at these word , and look at his aunt . she give he no encouragement , stand up , and make as though she have never hear her husband 's speech , by extend her hand , and wish he ' good - night . ' at the noise of the chair move over the flag floor , Sylvia start up , confused and annoy at her father 's laughter . 

 ' ay , lass ; it be iver a good time t ' fall asleep when a young fellow be by . here be Philip here as thou'rt bind t ' give a pair o ' glove to . ' 

 Sylvia go like fire ; she turn to her mother to read her face . 

 ' it be only father 's joke , lass , ' say she . ' Philip know manner too well . ' 

 ' he would well , ' say Sylvia , flame round at he . ' if he have a touch I , I would niver ha ' speak to he no more . ' and she look even as it be as if she be far from forgive he . 

 ' hoot , lass ! wench be bring up sa mim , now - a - day ; I ' my time they would ha ' thought na ' such great harm of a kiss . ' 

 ' good - night , Philip , ' say Bell Robson , think the conversation unseemly . 

 ' good - night , aunt , good - night , Sylvie ! ' but Sylvia turn she back on he , and he could hardly say ' good - night ' to Daniel , who have cause such an unpleasant end to an evening that have at one time be go on so well . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 the specksioneer 

 a few day after , Farmer Robson leave Haytersbank betime on a longish day 's journey , to purchase a horse . Sylvia and her mother be busy with a hundred household thing , and the early winter 's evening close in upon they almost before they be aware . the consequence of darkness in the country even now be to gather the member of a family together into one room , and to make they settle to some sedentary employment ; and it be much more the case at the period of my story , when candle be far dear than they be at present , and when one be often make to suffice for a large family . 

 the mother and daughter hardly speak at all when they sit down at last . the cheerful click of the knitting - needle make a pleasant home - sound ; and in the occasional snatch of slumber that overcome her mother , Sylvia could hear the long - rush boom of the wave , down below the rock , for the Haytersbank gulley allow the sullen roar to come up so far inland . it might have be about eight o'clock though from the monotonous course of the evening it seem much later when Sylvia hear her father 's heavy step cranch down the pebbly path . more unusual , she hear his voice talk to some companion . 

 curious to see who it could be , with a lively instinctive advance towards any event which might break the monotony she have begin to find somewhat dull , she spring up to open the door . half a glance into the gray darkness outside make she suddenly timid , and she draw back behind the door as she open it wide to admit her father and Kinraid . 

 Daniel Robson come in bright and boisterous . he be pleased with his purchase , and have have some drink to celebrate his bargain . he have ride the new mare into Monkshaven , and leave she at the smithy there until morning , to have her foot look at , and to be new shod . on his way from the town he have meet Kinraid wander about in search of Haytersbank Farm itself , so he have just bring he along with he ; and here they be , ready for bread and cheese , and aught else the mistress would set before they . 

 to Sylvia the sudden change into brightness and bustle occasion by the entrance of her father and the specksioneer be like that which you may effect any winter 's night , when you come into a room where a great lump of coal lie hot and slumber on the fire ; just break it up with a judicious blow from the poker , and the room , late so dark , and dusk , and lone , be full of life , and light , and warmth . 

 she move about with pretty household briskness , attend to all her father 's want . Kinraid 's eye watch she as she go backwards and forwards , to and fro , into the pantry , the back - kitchen , out of light into shade , out of the shadow into the broad firelight where he could see and note her appearance . she wear the high - crown linen cap of that day , surmount her lovely mass of golden brown hair , rather than conceal they , and tie firm to her head by a broad blue ribbon . a long curl hang down on each side of her neck her throat rather , for her neck be conceal by a little spotted handkerchief carefully pin across at the waist of her brown stuff gown . 

 how well it be , think the young girl , that she have doff her bed - gown and linsey - woolsey petticoat , her working - dress , and make herself smart in her stuff gown , when she sate down to work with her mother . 

 by the time she could sit down again , her father and Kinraid have their glass fill , and be talk of the relative merit of various kind of spirit ; that lead on to tale of smuggling , and the different contrivance by which they or their friend have elude the preventive service ; the nightly relay of man to carry the good inland ; the keg of brandy find by certain farmer whose horse have go so far in the night , that they could do no work the next day ; the clever way in which certain woman manage to bring in prohibit good ; in fact , that when a woman do give her mind to smuggle , she be more full of resource , and trick , and impudence , and energy than any man . there be no question of the morality of the affair ; one of the great sign of the real progress we have make since those time seem to be that our daily concern of buying and sell , eat and drinking , whatsoever we do , be more test by the real practical standard of our religion than they be in the day of our grandfather . neither Sylvia nor her mother be in advance of their age . both listen with admiration to the ingenious device , and act as well as speak lie , that be talk about as fine and spirited thing . yet if Sylvia have attempt one tithe of this deceit in her every - day life , it would have half break her mother 's heart . but when the duty on salt be strictly and cruelly enforce , make it penal to pick up rough dirty lump contain small quantity that might be throw out with the ash of the brine - house on the high - road ; when the price of this necessary be so increase by the tax upon it as to make it an expensive , sometimes an unattainable , luxury to the work man , Government do more to demoralise the popular sense of rectitude and uprightness than heap of sermon could undo . and the same , though in small measure , be the consequence of many other taxis . it may seem curious to trace up the popular standard of truth to taxation ; but I do not think the idea would be so very far - fetched . 

 from smuggling adventure it be easy to pass on to story of what have happen to Robson , in his youth a sailor in the Greenland sea , and to Kinraid , now one of the good harpooner in any whaler that sail off the coast . 

 ' there be three thing to be afeare on , ' say Robson , authoritatively : ' there be t ' ice , that be bad ; there be dirty weather , that be bad ; and there be whale theirselve , as be t ' bad of all ; leastway , they be I ' my day ; t ' darn brute may ha ' larnt well manner sin ' . when I be young , they could niver be get to let theirsel be harpoon wi'out flounderin ' and makin ' play wi ' their tale and their fin , till t ' say be all in a foam , and t ' boat ' crew be all o'er wi ' spray , which I ' they latitude be a kind o ' shower - bath not need . ' 

 ' Th ' whale have not   mend their manner , as you call it , ' say Kinraid ; ' but th ' ice be not to be speak lightly on . I be once in th ' ship John of Hull , and we be in good green water , and be keen after whale ; and ne'er thought harm of a great gray iceberg as be on our lee - bow , a mile or so off ; it look as if it have be there from the day of Adam , and be likely to see th ' last man out , and it ne'er a bit big nor small in all they thousand and thousand o ' year . well , the fast - boat be out after a fish , and I be specksioneer in one ; and we be so keen after capture our whale , that none on we ever see that we be drift away from they right into deep shadow o ' th ' iceberg . but we be set upon our whale , and I harpoon it ; and as soon as it be dead we lash its fin together , and fasten its tail to our boat ; and then we take breath and look about we , and away from we a little space be th ' other boat , wi ' two other fish make play , and as likely as not to break loose , for I may say as I be th ' good harpooner on board the John , wi'out say great thing o ' mysel ' . so I say , " my lad , one o ' you stay I ' th ' boat by this fish , " the fin o ' which , as I say , I would reeve a rope through mysel ' , and which be as dead as Noah 's grandfather " and th ' rest on we shall go off and help th ' other boat wi ' their fish . " for , you see , we have another boat close by in order to sweep th ' fish .   I suppose they sweep fish I ' your time , master ? ' 

 ' ay , ay ! ' say Robson ; ' one boat lie still hold t ' end o ' t ' line ; t ' other make a circuit round t ' fish . ' 

 ' well ! luckily for we we have our second boat , for we all get into it , ne'er a man on we be leave I ' th ' fast - boat . and say I , " but who be to stay by t ' dead fish ? " and no man answer , for they be all as keen as I for to go and help our mate ; and we think as we could come back to our dead fish , as have a boat for a buoy , once we have help our mate . so off we row , every man Jack on we , out o ' the black shadow o ' th ' iceberg , as look as steady as th ' pole - star . well ! we have na ' be a dozen fathom away fra ' th ' boat as we have leave , when crash ! down wi ' a roar noise , and then a gulp of the deep water , and then a shower o ' blinding spray ; and when we have wipe our eye clear , and getten our heart down agen fra ' our mouth , there be never a boat nor a glitter belly o ' e'er a great whale to be see ; but th ' iceberg be there , still and grim , as if a hundred ton or more have fall off all in a mass , and crush down boat , and fish , and all , into th ' deep water , as go half through the earth in they latitude . Th ' coal - miner round about Newcastle way may come upon our good boat if they mine deep enough , else ne'er another man will see she . and I leave as good a clasp - knife in she as ever I clapt eye on . ' 

 ' but what a mercy no man stay in she , ' say Bell . 

 ' why , mistress , I reckon we a ' must die some way ; and I would as soon go down into the deep water as be choke up wi ' mould . ' 

 ' but it must be so cold , ' say Sylvia , shudder and give a little poke to the fire to warm her fancy . 

 ' cold ! ' say her father , ' what do ye stay - at - home know about cold , a should like to know ? if yo'd be where a be once , north latitude 81 , in such a frost as ye ha ' niver know , no , not I ' deep winter , and it be June I ' they sea , and a whale I ' sight , and a be off in a boat after she : an ' t ' ill - mannered brute , as soon as she be harpoon , up wi ' her big awkward tail , and strike t ' boat I ' her stern , and chuck I out into t ' watter . that be cold , a can tell the ' ! first , I smart all ower I , as if my skin be suddenly stript off I : and next , ivery bone I ' my body have getten t ' toothache , and there be a great roar I ' my ear , an ' a great dizziness I ' my eye ; an ' t ' boat 's crew keep throwin ' out their oar , an ' a kept clutchin ' at them , but a could na ' make out where they be , my eye dazzle so wi ' t ' cold , an ' I think I be bind for " kingdom come , " an ' a try to remember t ' Creed , as a might die a Christian . but all a could think on be , " what be your name , M or N ? " an ' just as a be give up both word and life , they heave I aboard . but , bless ye , they have but one oar ; for they have throw a ' t ' other after I ; so yo ' may reckon , it be some time afore we could reach t ' ship ; an ' a've   heerd tell , a be a precious sight to look on , for my clothe be just hard frozen to I , an ' my hair a'most as big a lump o ' ice as yon iceberg he be a - tell we on ; they rub I as missus theere be rub t ' ham yesterday , and gav ' me brandy ; an ' a've   niver getten t ' frost out o ' my bone for a ' their rubbin ' , and a deal o ' brandy as I ' ave ta'en sin ' . talk o ' cold ! it be little yo ' woman know o ' cold ! ' 

 ' but there be heat , too , I ' some place , ' say Kinraid . I be once a voyage I ' an American . they go for th ' most part south , to where you come round to t ' cold again ; and they will stay there for three year at a time , if need be , go into winter harbour I ' some o ' th ' Pacific Islands . well , we be I ' th ' southern seas , a - seeking for good whaling - ground ; and , close on our larboard beam , there be a great wall o ' ice , as much as sixty foot high . and say our captain as be a dare - devil , if ever a man be " there will be an opening in yon dark gray wall , and into that opening I will sail , if I coast along it till th ' day o ' judgment . " but , for all our sailing , we never seem to come near to th ' opening . the water be rock beneath we , and the sky be steady above we ; and th ' ice rise out o ' the water , and seem to reach up into the sky . we sail on , and we sail on , for more day nor I could count . our captain be a strange , wild man , but once he look a little pale when he come upo ' deck after his turn - in , and see the green - gray ice go straight up on our beam . many on we think as the ship be bewitch for th ' captain 's word ; and we get to speak low , and to say our prayer o ' night , and a kind o ' dull silence come into th ' very air ; our voice do na ' rightly seem our own . and we sail on , and we sail on . all at once , th ' man as be on watch give a cry : he see a break in the ice , as we would begin to think be everlaste ; and we all gather towards the bow , and the captain call to th ' man at the helm to keep she course , and cock his head , and begin to walk the quarter - deck jaunty again . and we come to a great cleft in th ' long weary rock of ice ; and the side o ' th ' cleft be not jagged , but go straight sharp down into th ' foaming water . but we take but one look at what lie inside , for our captain , with a loud cry to God , bid the helmsman steer nor'ards away fra ' th ' mouth o ' Hell . we all see wi ' our own eye , inside that fearsome wall o ' ice seventy mile long , as we could swear to inside that gray , cold ice , come leap flame , all red and yellow wi ' heat o ' some unearthly kind out o ' th ' very water o ' the sea ; make our eye dazzle wi ' their scarlet blaze , that shoot up as high , nay , high than th ' ice around , yet never so much as a shred on ' t be melt . they do say that some beside our captain see the black devil dart hither and thither , quick than the very flame themselves ; anyhow , he see they . and as he know it be his own daring as have lead he to have that peep at terror forbid to any on we afore our time , he just dwine away , and we have not   take but one whale afore our captain die , and first mate take th ' command . it be a prosperous voyage ; but , for all that , I will never sail those sea again , nor ever take wage aboard an American again . ' 

 ' eh , dear ! but it be awful t ' think o ' sit wi ' a man that have see th ' doorway into hell , ' say Bell , aghast . 

 Sylvia have drop her work , and sit gaze at Kinraid with fascinated wonder . 

 Daniel be just a little annoyed at the admiration which his own wife and daughter be bestow on the specksioneer 's wonderful story , and he say 

 ' ay , ay . if a'd be a talker , ye'd ha ' think a deal more on I nor ye've   iver do yet . A've   see such thing , and do such thing . ' 

 ' tell we , father ! ' say Sylvia , greedy and breathless . 

 ' some on them be past tell , ' he reply , ' an some be not to be have for t ' asking , see as how they might bring a man into trouble . but , as a said , if a have a fancy to reveal all as be on my mind a could make t ' hair on your head lift up your cap well , we will say an inch , at least . Thy mother , lass , have heerd one or two on them . Thou mind the story o ' my ride on a whale 's back , Bell ? that will maybe be within this young fellow 's comprehension o ' t ' danger ; thou 's heerd I tell it , hastn't   ta ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Bell ; ' but it be a long time ago ; when we be court . ' 

 ' An ' that be afore this young lass be bear , as be a'most up to woman 's estate . but sin ' those day a ha ' be o'er busy to tell story to my wife , an ' as a'll warrant she be forget it ; an ' as Sylvia here niver heerd it , if yo'll fill your glass , Kinraid , yo ' shall ha ' t ' benefit o't . 

 ' a be a specksioneer mysel , though , after that , a rayther direct my talent int ' t ' smuggling branch o ' my profession ; but a be once a whale aboord t ' Ainwell of Whitby . an ' we be anchor off t ' coast o ' Greenland one season , an ' we would getten a cargo o ' seven whale ; but our captain he be a keen - eyed chap , an ' niver above do any man 's work ; an ' once seein ' a whale he throw himself int ' a boat an ' go off to it , makin ' signal to I , an ' another specksioneer as be off for diversion I ' another boat , for to come after he sharp . well , afore we come alongside , captain have harpoon t ' fish ; an ' say he , " now , Robson , all ready ! give into she again when she come to t ' top ; " an ' I stand up , right leg foremost , harpoon all ready , as soon as iver I cotche a sight o ' t ' whale , but niver a fin could a see . ' Twere no wonder , for she be right below t ' boat in which a be ; and when she want to rise , what do t ' great ugly brute do but come wi ' her head , as be like cast iron , up bang again t ' bottom o ' t ' boat . I be throw up in t ' air like a shuttlecock , I an ' my line an ' my harpoon up we go , an ' many a good piece o ' timber wi ' us , an ' many a good fellow too ; but a have t ' look after mysel ' , an a be up high I ' t ' air , afore I could say Jack Robinson , an ' a thowt a be safe for another dive int ' saut water ; but i'stead a come down plump on t ' back o ' t ' whale . ay ! yo ' may stare , master , but theere a be , an ' main an ' slippery it be , only a stick my harpoon intil she an ' steady mysel ' , an ' look abroad o'er t ' vast o ' wave , and get sea - sick in a manner , an ' put up a prayer as she may not   dive , and it be as good a prayer for wishin ' it might come true as iver t ' clargyman an ' t ' clerk too put up I ' monkshaven church . well , a reckon it be heerd , for all a be I ' they north latitude , for she keep steady , an ' a do my good for t ' keep steady ; an ' ' deed a be too steady , for a be fast wi ' t ' harpoon line , all knot and tangle about I . T ' captain , he sing out for I to cut it ; but it be easy singin ' out , and it be noane so easy fumblin ' for your knife I ' t ' pocket o ' your drawer , when yo've   t ' hold hard wi ' t ' other hand on t ' back of a whale , swimmin ' fourteen knot an hour . at last a think to mysel ' a can not   get free o ' t ' line , and t ' line be fast to t ' harpoon , and t ' harpoon be fast to t ' whale ; and t ' whale may go down fathom deep wheniver t ' maggot stir I ' her head ; an ' t ' watter 's cold , an noane good for drownin ' in ; a can not   get free o ' t ' line , and a connot get my knife out o ' my breech pocket though t ' captain should can ' it mutiny to disobey order , and t ' line 's fast to t ' harpoon let us see if t ' harpoon 's fast to t ' whale . so a tugged , and a lugged , and t ' whale do not   mistake it for ticklin ' , but she cock up her tail , and throw out shower o ' water as be ice or iver it touch I ; but a pull on at t ' shank , an ' a be only afeard as she would not   keep at t ' top wi ' it stick in she ; but at last t ' harpoon break , an ' just I ' time , for a reckon she be near as tired o ' I as a be on she , and down she go ; an ' a have hard work to make for t ' boat as be near enough to catch I ; for what wi ' t ' whale 's being but slippery an ' t ' watter be cold , an ' I hamper wi ' t ' line an ' t ' piece o ' harpoon , it be a chance , missus , as thou have stop an oud maid . ' 

 ' eh dear a ' I ! ' say Bell , ' how well I mind yo'r tell I that tale ! it be twenty - four year ago come October . I think I never could think enough on a man as have ride on a whale 's back ! ' 

 ' Yo ' may learn t ' way of winnin ' t ' woman , ' say Daniel , wink at the specksioneer . 

 and Kinraid immediately look at Sylvia . it be no premeditated action ; it come as naturally as waken in the morning when his sleep be end ; but Sylvia colour as red as any rise at his sudden glance , colour so deeply that he look away until he think she have recover her composure , and then he sit gaze at she again . but not for long , for Bell suddenly start up , do all but turn he out of the house . it be late , she say , and her master be tired , and they have a hard day before they next day ; and it be keep Ellen Corney up ; and they have have enough to drink , more than be good for they , she be sure , for they have both be take she in with their story , which she have be foolish enough to believe . no one see the real motive of all this almost inhospitable haste to dismiss her guest , how the sudden fear have take possession of she that he and Sylvia be ' fancy each other ' . Kinraid have say early in the evening that he have come to thank she for her kindness in send the sausage , as he be off to his own home near Newcastle in a day or two . but now he say , in reply to Daniel Robson , that he would step in another night before long and hear some more of the old man 's yarn . 

 Daniel have just have enough drink to make he very good - temper , or else his wife would not have dare to have act as she do ; and this maudlin amiability take the shape of hospitable urgency that Kinraid should come as often as he like to Haytersbank ; come and make it his home when he be in these part ; stay there altogether , and so on , till Bell fairly shut the outer door to , and lock it before the specksioneer have well get out of the shadow of their roof . 

 all night long Sylvia dreamed of burn volcano spring out of icy southern sea . but , as in the specksioneer 's tale the flame be people with demon , there be no human interest for she in the wondrous scene in which she be no actor , only a spectator . with daylight come waken and little homely every - day wonder . do Kinraid mean that he be go away really and entirely , or do he not ? be he Molly Corney 's sweetheart , or be he not ? when she have argue herself into certainty on one side , she suddenly wheel about , and be just of the opposite opinion . at length she settle that it could not be settle until she see Molly again ; so , by a strong gulp effort , she resolutely determine to think no more about he , only about the marvel he have tell . she might think a little about they when she sit at night , spin in silence by the household fire , or when she go out in the gloaming to call the cattle home to be milk , and saunter back behind the patient , slow - gaite creature ; and at time on future summer day , when , as in the past , she take her knitting out for the sake of the freshness of the faint sea - breeze , and drop down from ledge to ledge of the rock that face the blue ocean , establish herself in a perilous nook that have be her haunt ever since her parent have come to Haytersbank Farm . from thence she have often see the distant ship pass to and fro , with a certain sort of lazy pleasure in watch their swift tranquillity of motion , but no thought as to where they be bind to , or what strange place they would penetrate to before they turn again , homeward bind . 




 CHAPTER x 

 a refractory PUPIL 

 Sylvia be still full of the specksioneer and his story , when Hepburn come up to give she the next lesson . but the prospect of a little sensible commendation for write a whole page full of flourish ' abednego , ' have lose all the slight charm it have ever possess . she be much more inclined to try and elicit some sympathy in her interest in the peril and adventure of the northern sea , than to bend and control her mind to the right formation of letter . unwisely enough , she endeavour to repeat one of the narrative that she have hear from Kinraid ; and when she find that Hepburn   if , indeed , he do not look upon the whole as a silly invention   consider it only as an interruption to the real business in hand , to which he would try to listen as patiently as he could , in the hope of Sylvia 's apply herself diligently to her copy - book when she have clear her mind , she contract her pretty lip , as if to check they from make any further appeal for sympathy , and set about her writing - lesson in a very rebellious frame of mind , only restrain by her mother 's presence from spoken mutiny . 

 ' after all , ' say she , throw down her pen , and opening and shut she weary , cramped hand , ' I see no good in tire myself wi ' learning for t ' write letter when I'se never get one in a ' my life . what for should I write answer , when there be niver a one write to I ? and if I have one , I could not   read it ; it be bad enough wi ' a book o ' print as I have   niver see afore , for there be sure to be new - fangle word in ' t. I be sure I wish the man be farre who plague his brain wi ' strike out new word . why can not   folk just ha ' a set on them for good and a ' ? ' 

 ' why ! you will be after use two or three hundred yoursel ' every day as you live , Sylvie ; and yet I must use a great many as you never think on about t ' shop ; and t ' folk in t ' field want their set , let alone the high English that parson and lawyer speak . ' 

 ' well , it be weary work be read and writing . can not you learn I something else , if we mun do lesson ? ' 

 ' there 's sum and geography , ' say Hepburn , slowly and gravely . 

 ' Geography ! ' say Sylvia , brightening , and perhaps not pronounce the word quite correctly , ' I would like yo ' to learn I geography . there be a deal o ' place I want to hear all about . ' 

 ' well , I will bring up a book and a map next time . but I can tell you something now . there be four quarter in the globe . ' 

 ' what be that ? ' ask Sylvia . 

 ' the globe be the earth ; the place we live on . ' 

 ' go on . which quarter be Greenland ? ' 

 ' Greenland be no quarter . it be only a part of one . ' 

 ' maybe it be a half quarter . ' 

 ' no , not so much as that . ' 

 ' half again ? ' 

 ' no ! ' he reply , smile a little . 

 she think he be make it into a very small place in order to tease she ; so she pout a little , and then say , 

 ' Greenland be all t ' geography I want to know . except , perhaps , York . I would like to learn about York , because of t ' race , and London , because King George live there . ' 

 ' but if you learn geography at all , you must learn 'bout all place : which of they be hot , and which be cold , and how many inhabitant be in each , and what be the river , and which be the principal town . ' 

 ' I be sure , Sylvie , if Philip will learn thee all that , thou'lt be such a sight o ' knowledge as ne'er a one o ' th ' preston have be sin ' my great - grandfather lose his property . I should be main proud o ' thee ; ' twould seem as if we be preston o ' slaideburn once more . ' 

 ' I would do a deal to pleasure yo ' , mammy ; but weary befa ' rich and land , if folk that have them be to write " abednego " by t ' score , and to get hard word int ' their brain , till they work like barm , and end wi ' crack them . ' 

 this seem to be Sylvia 's last protest against learn for the night , for after this she turn docile , and really take pain to understand all that Philip could teach she , by mean of the not unskilful , though rude , map which he draw for she with a piece of charred wood on his aunt 's dresser . he have ask his aunt 's leave before begin what Sylvia call his ' dirty work ; ' but by - and - by even she become a little interested in start from a great black spot call Monkshaven , and in the shaping of land and sea around that one centre . Sylvia hold her round chin in the palm of her hand , support her elbow on the dresser ; look down at the progress of the rough drawing in general , but now and then glance up at he with sudden inquiry . all along he be not so much absorb in his teaching as to be unconscious of her sweet proximity . she be in her good mood towards he ; neither mutinous nor saucy ; and he be strive with all his might to retain her interest , speak well than ever he have do before   such brightness do love call forth !   understand what she would care to hear and to know ; when , in the middle of an attempt at explain the cause of the long polar day , of which she have hear from her childhood , he feel that her attention be no long his ; that a discord have come in between their mind ; that she have pass out of his power . this certainty of intuition last but for an instant ; he have no time to wonder or to speculate as to what have affect she so adversely to his wish before the door open and Kinraid come in . then Hepburn know that she must have hear his come footstep , and recognize they . 

 he angrily stiffen himself up into coldness of demeanour . almost to his surprise , Sylvia 's greeting to the new comer be as cold as his own . she stand rather behind he ; so perhaps she do not see the hand which Kinraid stretch out towards she , for she do not place her own little palm in it , as she have do to Philip an hour ago . and she hardly speak , but begin to pore over the rough black map , as if seize with strong geographical curiosity , or determine to impress Philip 's lesson deep on her memory . 

 still Philip be dismay by see the warm welcome which Kinraid receive from the master of the house , who come in from the back premise almost at the same time as the specksioneer enter at the front . Hepburn be uneasy , too , at find Kinraid take his seat by the fireside , like one accustom to the way of the house . pipe be soon produce . Philip dislike smoking . possibly Kinraid do so too , but he take a pipe at any rate , and light it , though he hardly use it at all , but keep talk to farmer Robson on sea affair . he have the conversation pretty much to himself . Philip sit gloomily by ; Sylvia and his aunt be silent , and old Robson smoke his long clay pipe , from time to time take it out of his mouth to spit into the bright copper spittoon , and to shake the white ash out of the bowl . before he replace it , he would give a short laugh of relish interest in Kinraid 's conversation ; and now and then he put in a remark . Sylvia perch herself sideways on the end of the dresser , and make pretence to sew ; but Philip could see how often she pause in her work to listen . 

 by - and - by , his aunt speak to he , and they keep up a little side conversation , more because Bell Robson feel that her nephew , her own flesh and blood , be put out , than for any special interest they either of they feel in what they be say . perhaps , also , they neither of they dislike show that they have no great faith in the story Kinraid be tell . Mrs. Robson , at any rate , know so little as to be afraid of believe too much . 

 Philip be sit on that side of the fire which be near to the window and to Sylvia , and opposite to the specksioneer . at length he turn to his cousin and say in a low voice 

 ' I suppose we can not   go on with our spell at geography till that fellow 's go ? ' 

 the colour come into Sylvia 's cheek at the word ' that fellow ' ; but she only reply with a careless air 

 ' well , I be one as think enough be as good as a feast ; and I have   have enough of geography this one night , thank you kindly all the same . ' 

 Philip take refuge in offended silence . he be maliciously pleased when his aunt make so much noise with her preparation for supper as quite to prevent the sound of the sailor 's word from reach Sylvia 's ear . she see that he be glad to perceive that her effort to reach the remainder of the story be baulk ! this nettle she , and , determine not to let he have his malicious triumph , and still more to put a stop to any attempt at private conversation , she begin to sing to herself as she sit at her work ; till , suddenly seize with a desire to help her mother , she dexterously slip down from her seat , pass Hepburn , and be on her knee toast cake right in front of the fire , and just close to her father and Kinraid . and now the noise that Hepburn have so rejoice in prove his foe . he could not hear the little merry speech that dart backwards and forwards as the specksioneer try to take the toasting - fork out of Sylvia 's hand . 

 ' how come that sailor chap here ? ' ask Hepburn of his aunt . ' he be none fit to be where Sylvia be . ' 

 ' Nay , I dunnot know , ' say she ; ' the Corneys make we acquaint first , and my master be quite fain of his company . ' 

 ' and do you like he , too , aunt ? ' ask Hepburn , almost wistfully ; he have follow Mrs. Robson into the dairy on pretence of help she . 

 ' I be none fond on he ; I think he tell we traveller 's tale , by way o ' see how much we can swallow . but the master and Sylvia think that there never be such a one . ' 

 ' I could show they a score as good as he down on the quayside . ' 

 ' well , laddie , keep a calm sough . some folk like some folk and other do not . wherever I be there will allay be a welcome for thee . ' 

 for the good woman think that he have be hurt by the evident absorption of her husband and daughter with their new friend , and wish to make all easy and straight . but do what she would , he do not recover his temper all evening : he be uncomfortable , put out , not enjoy himself , and yet he would not go . he be determined to assert his great intimacy in that house by outstay Kinraid . at length the latter get up to go ; but before he go , he must need bend over Sylvia and say something to she in so low a tone that Philip could not hear it ; and she , seize with a sudden fit of diligence , never look up from her sewing ; only nod her head by way of reply . at last he take his departure , after many a little delay , and many a quick return , which to the suspicious Philip seem only pretence for take steal glance at Sylvia . as soon as he be decidedly go , she fold up her work , and declare that she be so much tired that she must go to bed there and then . her mother , too , have be doze for the last half - hour , and be only too glad to see sign that she might betake herself to her natural place of slumber . 

 ' take another glass , Philip , ' say farmer Robson . 

 but Hepburn refuse the offer rather abruptly . he draw near to Sylvia instead . he want to make she speak to he , and he see that she wish to avoid it . he take up the readiest pretext . it be an unwise one as it prove , for it deprive he of his chance of occasionally obtain her undivided attention . 

 ' I do not   think you care much for learn geography , Sylvie ? ' 

 ' not much to - night , ' say she , make a pretence to yawn , yet look timidly up at his countenance of displeasure . 

 ' nor at any time , ' say he , with grow anger ; ' nor for any kind of learn . I do bring some book last time I come , mean to teach you many a thing but now I will just trouble you for my book ; I put they on yon shelf by the Bible . ' 

 he have a mind that she should bring they to he ; that , at any rate , he should have the pleasure of receive they out of her hand . 

 Sylvia do not reply , but go and take down the book with a languid , indifferent air . 

 ' and so you will not   learn any more geography , ' say Hepburn . 

 something in his tone strike she , and she look up in his face . there be mark of stern offence upon his countenance , and yet in it there be also an air of wistful regret and sadness that touch she . 

 ' Yo're niver angry with I , Philip ? soon than vex yo ' , I will try and learn . only , I be just stupid ; and it mun be such a trouble to you . ' 

 Hepburn would fain have snatch at this half proposal that the lesson should be continue , but he be too stubborn and proud to say anything . he turn away from the sweet , plead face without a word , to wrap up his book in a piece of paper . he know that she be stand quite still by his side , though he make as if he do not perceive she . when he have do he abruptly wish they all ' good - night , ' and take his leave . 

 there be tear in Sylvia 's eye , although the feeling in her heart be rather one of relief . she have make a fair offer , and it have be treat with silent contempt . a few day afterwards , her father come in from monkshaven market , and drop out , among other piece of news , that he have meet Kinraid , who be bind for his own home at Cullercoats . he have desire his respect to Mrs. Robson and her daughter ; and have bid Robson say that he would have come up to Haytersbank to wish they good - by , but that as he be press for time , he hop they would excuse he . but Robson do not think it worth while to give this long message of mere politeness . indeed , as it do not relate to business , and be only send to woman , Robson forget all about it , pretty nearly as soon as it be utter . so Sylvia go about fret herself for one or two day , at her hero 's apparent carelessness of those who have at any rate treat he more like a friend than an acquaintance of only a few week ' standing ; and then , her anger quench her incipient regard , she go about her daily business pretty much as though he have never be . he have go away out of her sight into the thick mist of unseen life from which he have emerge go away without a word , and she might never see he again . but still there be a chance of she see he when he come to marry Molly Corney . perhaps she should be bridesmaid , and then what a pleasant merry time the wedding - day would be ! the Corneys be all such kind people , and in their family there never seem to be the check and restraint by which her own mother hedge her round . then there come an overwhelming self - reproach burst of love for that ' own mother ' ; a humiliation before her slight wish , as penance for the moment 's unspoken treason ; and thus Sylvia be lead to request her cousin Philip to resume his lesson in so meek a manner , that he slowly and graciously accede to a request which he be yearn to fulfil all the time . 

 during the ensue winter , all go on in monotonous regularity at Haytersbank Farm for many week . Hepburn come and go , and think Sylvia wonderfully improve in docility and sobriety ; and perhaps also he notice the improvement in her appearance . for she be at that age when a girl change rapidly , and generally for the well . Sylvia shoot up into a tall young woman ; her eye deepen in colour , her face increase in expression , and a sort of consciousness of unusual good look give she a slight tinge of coquettish shyness with the few stranger whom she ever see . Philip hail her interest in geography as another sign of improvement . he have bring back his book of map to the farm ; and there he sit on many an evening teach his cousin , who have strange fancy respect the place about which she wish to learn , and be coolly indifferent to the very existence of other town , and country , and sea far more famous in story . she be occasionally wilful , and at time very contemptuous as to the superior knowledge of her instructor ; but , in spite of it all , Philip go regularly on the appoint evening to Haytersbank through keen black east wind , or drive snow , or slush thaw ; for he like dearly to sit a little behind she , with his arm on the back of her chair , she stoop over the outspread map , with her eye , could he have see they , a good deal fix on one spot in the map , not Northumberland , where Kinraid be spend the winter , but those wild northern sea about which he have tell they such wonder . 

 one day towards spring , she see Molly Corney come towards the farm . the companion have not meet for many week , for Molly have be from home visit her relation in the north . Sylvia open the door , and stand smile and shiver on the threshold , glad to see her friend again . molly call out , when a few pace off , 

 ' why , Sylvia , be that thee ! why , how thou'rt grow , to be sure ! what a bonny lass thou be ! ' 

 ' dunnot talk nonsense to my lass , ' say Bell Robson , hospitably leave her iron and come to the door ; but though the mother try to look as if she think it nonsense , she could hardly keep down the smile that shine out of her eye , as she put her hand on Sylvia 's shoulder , with a fond sense of proprietorship in what be be praise . 

 ' oh ! but she be , ' persist molly . ' she be grow quite a beauty sin ' I see she . and if I do not   tell she so , the man will . ' 

 ' be quiet wi ' thee , ' say Sylvia , more than half offend , and turn away in a huff at the open bareface admiration . 

 ' ay ; but they will , ' persevere molly . ' Yo'll not keep she long , Mistress Robson . and as mother say , yo'd feel it a deal more to have yer daughter leave on hand . ' 

 ' Thy mother have many , I have but this one , ' say Mrs. Robson , with severe sadness ; for now molly be get to talk as she dislike . but Molly 's purpose be to bring the conversation round to her own affair , of which she be very full . 

 ' yes ! I tell mother that wi ' so many as she have , she ought to be thankful to t ' one as get off quick . ' 

 ' who ? which be it ? ' ask Sylvia , a little eagerly , see that there be news of a wedding behind the talk . 

 ' why ! who should it be but I ? ' say Molly , laugh a good deal , and redden a little . ' I have   not go fra ' home for nought ; I'se pick up a measter on my travel , leastway one as be to be . ' 

 ' Charley Kinraid , ' say Sylvia smile , as she find that now she might reveal Molly 's secret , which hitherto she have keep sacred . 

 ' Charley Kinraid be hang ! ' say Molly , with a toss of her head . ' Whatten good be a husband who be at sea half t ' year ? ha ha , my measter be a canny Newcassel shopkeeper , on t ' side . a reckon a've   do pretty well for mysel ' , and a'll wish yo ' as good luck , Sylvia . for yo ' see , '   turn to Bell Robson , who , perhaps , she think would more appreciate the substantial advantage of her engagement than Sylvia ,   ' though Measter Brunton be near upon forty if he be a day , yet he turn over a matter of two hundred pound every year ; an he be a good - look man of his year too , an ' a kind , good - temper feller int ' t ' bargain . he be be marry once , to be sure ; but his childer be dead a ' ' cept one ; an ' I do not   mislike childer either ; an ' a'll feed them well , an ' get them to bed early , out o ' t ' road . ' 

 Mrs. Robson give she her grave good wish ; but Sylvia be silent . she be disappoint ; it be a come down from the romance with the specksioneer for its hero . molly laugh awkwardly , understand Sylvia 's thought well than the latter imagine . 

 ' Sylvia 's noane so well pleased . why , lass ! it be a ' t ' well for thee . there be Charley to t ' fore now , which if a'd marry he , he would not ha ' be ; and he be say more nor once what a pretty lass yo'd grow into by - and - by . ' 

 Molly 's prosperity be give she an independence and fearlessness of talk such as have seldom appear hitherto ; and certainly never before Mrs. Robson . Sylvia be annoy at Molly 's whole tone and manner , which be loud , laughing , and boisterous ; but to her mother they be positively repugnant . she say shortly and gravely , 

 ' Sylvia 's none so set upo ' matrimony ; she be content to bide wi ' I and her father . let a be such talk , it be not I ' my way . ' 

 molly be a little subdued ; but still her elation at the prospect of be so well married keep crop out of all the other subject which be introduce ; and when she go away , Mrs. Robson break out in an unwonted strain of depreciation . 

 ' that be the way wi ' some lass . they be like a cock on a dunghill , when they have   tease a silly chap into wed them . it be cock - a - doodle - do , I have   cotche a husband , cock - a - doodle - doo , wi ' them . I have   no patience wi ' such like ; I beg , Sylvie , thou'lt not get too thick wi ' Molly . she be not pretty behaved , make such an ado about man - kind , as if they be two - head calf to be run after . ' 

 ' but Molly be a good - hearted lass , mother . only I never dream but what she be troth - plight wi ' Charley Kinraid , ' say Sylvia , meditatively . 

 ' that wench will be troth - plight to th ' first man as will we d she and keep she I ' plenty ; that be a ' she think about , ' reply Bell , scornfully . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 vision of the future 

 before May be out , Molly Corney be marry and have leave the neighbourhood for Newcastle . although Charley Kinraid be not the bridegroom , Sylvia 's promise to be bridesmaid be claim . but the friendship bring on by the circumstance of neighbourhood and parity of age have become very much weaken in the time that elapse between Molly 's engagement and wedding . in the first place , she herself be so absorb in her preparation , so elated by her good fortune in get marry , and marry , too , before her eld sister , that all her fault blossom out full and strong . Sylvia feel she to be selfish ; Mrs. Robson think she not maidenly . a year before she would have be far more miss and regret by Sylvia ; now it be almost a relief to the latter to be free from the perpetual call upon her sympathy , from the constant demand upon her congratulation , make by one who have no thought or feel to bestow on other ; at least , not in these week of ' cock - a - doodle - dooing , ' as Mrs. Robson persist in call it . it be seldom that Bell be take with a humorous idea ; but this once have hatch a solitary joke , she be always cluck it into notice to go on with her own poultry simile . 

 every time during that summer that Philip see his cousin , he think she pretty than she have ever be before ; some new touch of colour , some fresh sweet charm , seem to have be add , just as every summer day call out new beauty in the flower . and this be not the addition of Philip 's fancy . hester Rose , who meet Sylvia on rare occasion , come back each time with a candid , sad acknowledgement in her heart that it be no wonder that Sylvia be so much admired and love . 

 one day hester have see she sit near her mother in the market - place ; there be a basket by she , and over the clean cloth that cover the yellow pound of butter , she have lay the hedge - rose and honeysuckle she have gather on the way into Monkshaven ; her straw hat be on her knee , and she be busy place some of the flower in the ribbon that go round it . then she hold it on her hand , and turn it round about , put her head on one side , the well to view the effect ; and all this time , Hester , peep at she through the fold of the stuff display in Foster 's window , see she with admire , wistful eye ; wonder , too , if Philip , at the other counter , be aware of his cousin 's be there , so near to he . then Sylvia put on her hat , and , look up at Foster 's window , catch Hester 's face of interest , and smile and blush at the consciousness of have be watch over her little vanity , and hester smile back , but rather sadly . then a customer come in , and she have to attend to her business , which , on this as on all market day , be great . in the midst she be aware of Philip rush bare - head out of the shop , eager and delight at something he see outside . there be a little look - glass hang against the wall on Hester 's side , place in that retire corner , in order that the good woman who come to purchase head - gear of any kind might see the effect thereof before they conclude their bargain . in a pause of custom , Hester , half - ashamed , steal into this corner , and look at herself in the glass . what do she see ? a colourless face , dark soft hair with no light gleam in it , eye that be melancholy instead of smile , a mouth compress with a sense of dissatisfaction . this be what she have to compare with the bright bonny face in the sunlight outside . she give a gulp to check the sigh that be rise , and come back , even more patient than she have be before this disheartening peep , to serve all the whim and fancy of purchaser . 

 Sylvia herself have be rather put out by Philip 's way of come to she . ' it make she look so silly , ' she think ; and ' what for must he make a sight of himself , come among the market folk in that - a - way ' ; and when he take to admire her hat , she pull out the flower in a pet , and throw they down , and trample they under foot . 

 ' what for art thou do that , Sylvie ? ' say her mother . ' the flower be well enough , though may - be thy hat might ha ' be stain . ' 

 ' I do not   like Philip to speak to I so , ' say Sylvia , pouting . 

 ' how ? ' ask her mother . 

 but Sylvia could not repeat his word . she hang her head , and look red and pre - occupied , anything but please . Philip have address his first expression of personal admiration at an unfortunate tune . 

 it just show what different view different man and woman take of their fellow - creature , when I say that hester look upon Philip as the good and most agreeable man she have ever know . he be not one to speak of himself without be question on the subject , so his Haytersbank relation , only come into the neighborhood in the last year or two , know nothing of the trial he have surmount , or the difficult duty he have perform . his aunt , indeed , have strong faith in he , both from partial knowledge of his character , and because he be of her own tribe and kin ; but she have never learn the small detail of his past life . Sylvia respect he as her mother 's friend , and treat he tolerably well as long as he preserve his usual self - restraint of demeanour , but hardly ever think of he when he be absent . 

 now Hester , who have watch he daily for all the year since he have first come as an errand - boy into Foster 's shop watch with quiet , modest , yet observant eye have see how devoted he be to his master 's interest , have know of his careful and punctual ministration to his absent mother 's comfort , as long as she be live to benefit by his silent , frugal self - denial . 

 his methodical appropriation of the few hour he could call his own be not without its charm to the equally methodical hester ; the way in which he reproduce any lately acquire piece of knowledge knowledge so wearisome to Sylvia be delightfully instructive to hester although , as she be habitually silent , it would have require an observer more interested in discover her feeling than Philip be to have perceive the little flush on the pale cheek , and the brightness in the half - veil eye whenever he be talk . she have not think of love on either side . love be a vanity , a worldliness not to be speak about , or even think about . once or twice before the Robsons come into the neighbourhood , an idea have cross her mind that possibly the quiet , habitual way in which she and Philip live together , might drift they into matrimony at some distant period ; and she could not bear the humble advance which Coulson , Philip 's fellow - lodger , sometimes make . they seem to disgust she with he . 

 but after the robson settle at Haytersbank , Philip 's evening be so often spend there that any unconscious hop Hester might , unawares , have entertain , die away . at first she have feel a pang akin to jealousy when she hear of Sylvia , the little cousin , who be pass out of childhood into womanhood . once early in those day she have venture to ask Philip what Sylvia be like . Philip have not warm up at the question , and have give rather a dry catalogue of her feature , hair , and height , but hester , almost to her own surprise , persevered , and jerk out the final question . 

 ' be she pretty ? ' 

 Philip 's sallow cheek grow deep by two or three shade ; but he answer with a tone of indifference , 

 ' I believe some folk think she so . ' 

 ' but do you ? ' persevered hester , in spite of she be aware that he somehow dislike the question . 

 ' there be no need for talk o ' such thing , ' he answer , with abrupt displeasure . 

 hester silence her curiosity from that time . but her heart be not quite at ease , and she keep on wonder whether Philip think his little cousin pretty until she see she and he together , on that occasion of which we have speak , when Sylvia come to the shop to buy her new cloak ; and after that hester never wonder whether Philip think his cousin pretty or no , for she know quite well . Bell Robson have her own anxiety on the subject of her daughter 's increase attraction . she apprehend the danger consequent upon certain fact , by a mental process more akin to intuition than reason . she be uncomfortable , even while her motherly vanity be flatter , at the admiration Sylvia receive from the other sex . this admiration be make evident to her mother in many way . when Sylvia be with she at market , it might have be think that the doctor have prescribe a diet of butter and egg to all the man under forty in Monkshaven . at first it seem to Mrs. Robson but a natural tribute to the superior merit of her farm produce ; but by degree she perceive that if Sylvia remain at home , she stand no well chance than her neighbour of an early sale . there be more customer than formerly for the fleece store in the wool - loft ; comely young butcher come after the calf almost before it have be decide to sell it ; in short , excuse be seldom want to those who wish to see the beauty of Haytersbank Farm . all this make Bell uncomfortable , though she could hardly have tell what she dread . Sylvia herself seem unspoilt by it as far as her home relation be concern . a little thoughtless she have always be , and thoughtless she be still ; but , as her mother have often say , ' Yo ' canna put old head on young shoulder ; ' and if blame for her carelessness by her parent , Sylvia be always as penitent as she could be for the time be . to be sure , it be only to her father and mother that she remain the same as she have be when an awkward lassie of thirteen . out of the house there be the most contradictory opinion of she , especially if the voice of woman be to be listen to . she be ' an ill - favour , overgrown thing ' ; ' just as bonny as the first rise I ' June , and as sweet I ' her nature as t ' honeysuckle a - climbing round it ; ' she be ' a vixen , with a tongue sharp enough to make yer very heart bleed ; ' she be ' just a bit o ' sunshine wheriver she go ; ' she be sulky , lively , witty , silent , affectionate , or cold - hearted , accord to the person who speak about she . in fact , her peculiarity seem to be this that every one who know she talk about she either in praise or blame ; in church , or in market , she unconsciously attract attention ; they could not forget her presence , as they could that of other girl perhaps more personally attractive . now all this be a cause of anxiety to her mother , who begin to feel as if she would rather have have her child pass by in silence than so much notice . Bell 's opinion be , that it be creditable to a woman to go through life in the shadow of obscurity , never name except in connexion with good housewifery , husband , or child . too much talk about a girl , even in the way of praise , disturb Mrs. Robson 's opinion of she ; and when her neighbour tell she how her own daughter be admire , she would reply coldly , ' she be just well enough , ' and change the subject of conversation . but it be quite different with her husband . to his loose , less - restrained mind , it be agreeable to hear of , and still more to see , the attention which his daughter 's beauty receive . he feel it as reflect consequence on himself . he have never trouble his mind with speculation as to whether he himself be popular , still less whether he be respect . he be pretty welcome wherever he go , as a jovial good - natured man , who have do adventurous and illegal thing in his youth , which in some measure entitle he to speak out his opinion on life in general in the authoritative manner he generally use ; but , of the two , he prefer consort with young man , to take a sober stand of respectability with the elder of the place ; and he perceive , without reason upon it , that the gay dare spirit be more desirous of his company when Sylvia be by his side than at any other time . one or two of these would saunter up to Haytersbank on a Sunday afternoon , and lounge round his field with the old farmer . Bell keep herself from the nap which have be her weekly solace for year , in order to look after Sylvia , and on such occasion she always turn as cold a shoulder to the visitor as her sense of hospitality and of duty to her husband would permit . but if they do not enter the house , old Robson would always have Sylvia with he when he go the round of his land . Bell could see they from the upper window : the young man stand in the attitude of listener , while Daniel lay down the law on some point , enforce his word by pantomimic action with his thick stick ; and Sylvia , half turn away as if from some too admiring gaze , be possibly pick flower out of the hedge - bank . these Sunday afternoon stroll be the plague of Bell 's life that whole summer . then it take as much of artifice as be in the simple woman 's nature to keep Daniel from insist on have Sylvia 's company every time he go down to Monkshaven . and here , again , come a perplexity , the acknowledgement of which in distinct thought would have be an act of disloyalty , accord to Bell 's conscience . if Sylvia go with her father , he never drink to excess ; and that be a good gain to health at any rate   drinking be hardly a sin against moral in those day , and in that place ; so , occasionally , she be allow to accompany he to Monkshaven as a check upon his folly ; for he be too fond and proud of his daughter to disgrace she by any open excess . but one Sunday afternoon early in November , Philip come up before the time at which he usually pay his visit . he look grave and pale ; and his aunt begin , 

 ' why , lad ! what be be ado ? Thou'rt look as peak and pin as a Methody preacher after a love - feast , when he be talk hisself to death 's door . Thee dost na ' get good milk enow , that be what it be , such stuff as monkshaven folk put up wi ' ! ' 

 ' no , aunt ; I be quite well . only I be a bit put out vex like at what I have   heerd about Sylvie . ' 

 his aunt 's face change immediately . 

 ' and whatten folk say of she , next thing ? ' 

 ' oh , ' say Philip , strike by the difference of look and manner in his aunt , and subdue by see how instantly she take alarm . ' it be only my uncle ; he should na ' take a girl like she to a public . she be wi ' he at t ' " Admiral 's Head " upo ' all soul ' day that be all . there be many a one there beside , it be statute fair ; but such a one as our Sylvie ought not to be cheapen wi ' t ' rest . ' 

 ' and he take she there , do he ? ' say Bell , in severe meditation . ' I have never no opinion o ' th ' wench as will set theirselve to be hire for servant I ' th ' fair ; they be a bad lot , as can not find place for theirselve 'bout going and stannin ' to be star at by folk , and grinnin ' wi ' th ' plough - lad when no one 's look ; it be a bad look - out for t ' missus as take one o ' these wench for a servant ; and dost ta mean to say as my Sylvie go and demean hersel ' to dance and marlock wi ' a ' th ' fair - folk at th ' " Admiral 's head ? " ' 

 ' no , no , she do na ' dance ; she barely set foot I ' th ' room ; but it be her own pride as save she ; uncle would niver ha ' keep she from it , for he have fall in wi ' Hayley o ' Seaburn and one or two other , and they be have a glass I ' t ' bar , and Mrs. Lawson , t ' landlady , know how there be they who would come and dance among parish ' prentice if need be , just to get a word or a look wi ' Sylvie ! so she tempt she in , say that the room be all smartened and fine wi ' flag ; and there be they in the room as tell I that they never be so startled as when they see our Sylvie 's face peep in among all t ' flustered maid and man , rough and red wi ' weather and drink ; and Jem Macbean , he say she be just like a bit o ' apple - blossom among peony ; and some man , he do not   know who , go up and speak to she ; an ' either at that , or at some o ' t ' word she hear for they would get a good way on afore that time she go quite white and mad , as if fire be come out of her eye , and then she turn red and leave the room , for all t ' landlady try to laugh it off and keep she in . ' 

 ' I will be down to Monkshaven before I be a day old , and tell Margaret Lawson some on my mind as she will not forget in a hurry . ' 

 Bell move as though she would put on her cloak and hood there and then . 

 ' Nay , it be not in reason as a woman I ' that line o ' life should not   try to make her house agreeable , ' say Philip . 

 ' not wi ' my wench , ' say Bell , in a determined voice . 

 Philip 's information have make a deep impression on his aunt than he intend . he himself have be annoy more at the idea that Sylvia would be speak of as have be at a rough piece of rustic gaiety a yearly festival for the low class of Yorkshire servant , out - door as well as in - door than at the affair itself , for he have learn from his informant how instantaneous her appearance have be . he stand watch his aunt 's troubled face , and almost wish that he have not speak . at last she heave a deep sigh , and stir the fire , as if by this little household occupation to compose her mind , she say 

 ' it be a pity as wench be not   lad , or married folk . I could ha ' wish but it be the Lord 's will it would ha ' be summut to look to , if she have have a brother . my master be so full on his own thought , yo ' see , he be no mind leave for think on she , what wi ' th ' oat , and th ' wool , and th ' young colt , and his venture I ' th ' Lucky Mary . ' 

 she really believe her husband to have the serious and important occupation for his mind that she have be teach to consider befit the superior intellect of the masculine gender ; she would have tax herself severely , if , even in thought , she have blame he , and Philip respect her feeling too much to say that Sylvia 's father ought to look after she more closely if he make such a pretty creature so constantly his companion ; yet some such speech be only just pent within Philip 's closed lip . again his aunt speak 

 ' I use to think as she and yo ' might fancy one another , but thou'rt too old - fashioned like for she ; ye would na ' suit ; and it be as well , for now I can say to thee , that I would take it very kindly if thou would'st look after she a bit . ' 

 Philip 's countenance fall into gloom . he have to gulp down certain feeling before he could make answer with discretion . 

 ' how can I look after she , and I tie to the shop more and more every day ? ' 

 ' I could send she on a bit of an errand to Foster 's , and then , for sure , yo ' might keep an eye upon she when she be in th ' town ; and just walk a bit way with she when she be in th ' street , and keep t ' other fellow off her Ned Simpson , t ' butcher , in ' special , for folk do say he mean no good by any girl he go wi ' and I will ask father to leave she a bit more wi ' I . they be come down th ' brow , and Ned Simpson wi ' they . now , Philip , I look to thee to do a brother 's part by my wench , and warn off all as be not   fit . ' 

 the door open , and the coarse strong voice of Simpson make itself hear . he be a stout man , comely enough as to form and feature , but with a depth of colour in his face that betoken the come on of the habit of the sot . his Sunday hat be in his hand , and he smooth the long nap of it , as he say , with a mixture of shyness and familiarity 

 ' Sarvant , missus . Yo'r measter be fain that I should come in an ' have a drop ; no offence , I hope ? ' 

 Sylvia pass quickly through the house - place , and go upstairs without speak to her cousin Philip or to any one . he sit on , dislike the visitor , and almost dislike his hospitable uncle for have bring Simpson into the house , sympathize with his aunt in the spirit which prompt her curt answer , and in the interval of all these feeling wonder what ground she have for speak as if she have now give up all thought of Sylvia and he ever be marry , and in what way he be too ' old - fashioned . ' 

 Robson would gladly have persuade Philip to join he and Simpson in their drink , but Philip be in no sociable mood , and sate a little aloof , watch the staircase down which soon or later Sylvia must come ; for , as perhaps have be already say , the stair go up straight out of the kitchen . and at length his yearn watch be reward ; first , the little pointed toe come daintily in sight , then the trim ankle in the tight blue stocking , the wool of which be spin and the web of which be knit by her mother 's careful hand ; then the full brown stuff petticoat , the arm hold the petticoat back in decent fold , so as not to encumber the descend foot ; the slender neck and shoulder hide under the fold square of fresh white muslin ; the crown beauty of the soft innocent face radiant in colour , and with the light brown curl cluster around . she make her way quickly to Philip 's side ; how his heart beat at her approach ! and even more when she enter into a low - voice tete - a - tete . 

 ' be not   he go yet ? ' say she . ' I can not abide he ; I could ha ' pinched father when he ask he for t ' come in . ' 

 ' maybe , he will not stay long , ' say Philip , hardly understand the meaning of what he say , so sweet be it to have she make her whisper confidence to he . 

 but Simpson be not go to let she alone in the dark corner between the door and the window . he begin pay she some coarse country compliment too strong in their direct flattery for even her father 's taste , more especially as he see by his wife 's set lip and frown brow how much she disapprove of their visitor 's style of conversation . 

 ' come , measter , leave t ' lass alone ; she be set up enough a'ready , her mother make such a deal on she . Yo ' an ' me 's man for sensible talk at our time o ' life . an ' , as I be say , t ' horse be a weaver if iver one be , as any one could ha ' tell as have come within a mile on he . ' 

 and in this way the old farmer and the bluff butcher chat on about horse , while Philip and Sylvia sate together , he turn over all manner of hope and project for the future , in spite of his aunt 's opinion that he be too ' old - fashion ' for her dainty , bloom daughter . perhaps , too , Mrs. Robson see some reason for change her mind on this head as she watch Sylvia this night , for she accompany Philip to the door , when the time come for he to start homeward , and bid he ' good - night ' with unusual fervour , add 

 ' Thou'st be a deal o ' comfort to I , lad a'most as one as if thou wert a child o ' my own , as at time I could welly think thou art to be . anyways , I trust to thee to look after the lile lass , as have no brother to guide she among man and man 's very kittle for a woman to deal wi ; but if thou'lt have an eye on whom she consort wi ' , my mind will be easy . ' 

 Philip 's heart beat fast , but his voice be as calm as usual when he reply 

 ' I would just keep she a bit aloof from Monkshaven folk ; a lass be always the more thought on for be chary of herself ; and as for t ' rest , I will have an eye to the folk she go among , and if I see that they do not   befit she , I will just give she a warning , for she be not one to like such chap as yon Simpson there ; she can see what be become in a man to say to a lass , and what be not . ' 

 Philip set out on his two - mile walk home with a tumult of happiness in his heart . he be not often carry away by delusion of his own creating ; to - night he think he have good ground for believe that by patient self - restraint he might win Sylvia 's love . a year ago he have nearly earn her dislike by obtrude upon her look and word betoken his passionate love . he alarm her girlish coyness , as well as weary she with the wish he have then feel that she should take an interest in his pursuit . but , with unusual wisdom , he have perceive his mistake ; it be many month now since he have betray , by word or look , that she be anything more to he than a little cousin to be care for and protect when need be . the consequence be that she have become tame , just as a wild animal be tame ; he have remain tranquil and impassive , almost as if he do not perceive her shy advance towards friendliness . these advance be make by she after the lesson have cease . she be afraid lest he be displeased with her behaviour in reject his instruction , and be not easy till she be at peace with he ; and now , to all appearance , he and she be perfect friend , but nothing more . in his absence she would not allow her young companion to laugh at his grave sobriety of character , and somewhat prim demeanour ; she would even go against her conscience , and deny that she perceive any peculiarity . when she want it , she seek his advice on such small subject as come up in her daily life ; and she try not to show sign of weariness when he use more word and more difficult word than be necessary to convey his idea . but her ideal husband be different from Philip in every point , the two image never for an instant merge into one . to Philip she be the only woman in the world ; it be the one subject on which he dare not consider , for fear that both conscience and judgment should decide against he , and that he should be convince against his will that she be an unfit mate for he , that she never would be his , and that it be waste of time and life to keep she shrine in the dear sanctuary of his being , to the exclusion of all the serious and religious aim which , in any other case , he would have be the first to acknowledge as the object he ought to pursue . for he have be bring up among the Quakers , and share in their austere distrust of a self - seek spirit ; yet what else but self - seeking be his passionate prayer , ' give I Sylvia , or else , I die ? ' no other vision have ever cross his masculine fancy for a moment ; his be a rare and constant love that deserve a well fate than it meet with . at this time his hope be high , as I have say , not merely as to the growth of Sylvia 's feeling towards he , but as to the probability of his soon be in a position to place she in such comfort , as his wife , as she have never enjoy before . 

 for the brother Foster be think of retire from business , and relinquish the shop to their two shopman , Philip Hepburn and William Coulson . to be sure , it be only by look back for a few month , and notice chance expression and small indication , that this intention of theirs could be discover . but every step they take tend this way , and Philip know their usual practice of deliberation too well to feel in the least impatient for the quick progress of the end which he see steadily approach . the whole atmosphere of life among the friend at this date partook of this character of self - repression , and both Coulson and Hepburn share in it . Coulson be just as much aware of the prospect opening before he as Hepburn ; but they never speak together on the subject , although their mutual knowledge might be occasionally imply in their conversation on their future life . meanwhile the Fosters be impart more of the background of their business to their successor . for the present , at least , the brother mean to retain an interest in the shop , even after they have give up the active management ; and they sometimes think of set up a separate establishment as banker . the separation of the business , the introduction of their shopman to the distant manufacturer who furnish their good   in those day the system of ' traveller ' be not so widely organize as it be at present , all these step be in gradual progress ; and already Philip see himself in imagination in the dignified position of joint master of the principal shop in Monkshaven , with Sylvia instal as his wife , with certainly a silk gown , and possibly a gig at her disposal . in all Philip 's vision of future prosperity , it be Sylvia who be to be aggrandize by they ; his own life be to be spend as it be now , pretty much between the four shop wall . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 NEW YEAR 's FETE 

 all this enlargement of interest in the shop occupy Philip fully for some month after the period refer to in the precede chapter . remember his last conversation with his aunt , he might have be uneasy at his inability to perform his promise and look after his pretty cousin , but that about the middle of November Bell Robson have fall ill of a rheumatic fever , and that her daughter have be entirely absorb in nursing she . no thought of company or gaiety be in Sylvia 's mind as long as her mother 's illness last ; vehement in all her feeling , she discover in the dread of lose her mother how passionately she be attach to she . Hitherto she have suppose , as child so often do , that her parent would live for ever ; and now when it be a question of day , whether by that time the following week her mother might not be bury out of her sight for ever , she cling to every semblance of service to be render , or affection show , as if she hop to condense the love and care of year into the few day only that might remain . Mrs. Robson linger on , begin slowly to recover , and before Christmas be again sit by the fireside in the house - place , wan and pull down , muffle up with shawl and blanket , but still there once more , where not long before Sylvia have scarcely expect to see she again . Philip come up that evening and find Sylvia in wild spirit . she think that everything be do , now that her mother have once come downstairs again ; she laugh with glee ; she kiss her mother ; she shake hand with Philip , she almost submit to a speech of more than usual tenderness from he ; but , in the midst of his word , her mother 's pillow want arrange and she go to her chair , pay no more heed to his word than if they have be address to the cat , that lie on the invalid 's knee be purr out her welcome to the weak hand feebly stroke she back . Robson himself soon come in , look old and more subdue since Philip have see he last . he be very urgent that his wife should have some spirit and water ; but on her refusal , almost as if she loathe the thought of the smell , he content himself with share her tea , though he keep abuse the beverage as ' wash the heart out of a man , ' and attribute all the degeneracy of the world , grow up about he in his old age , to the drinking of such slop . at the same time , his little self - sacrifice put he in an unusually good temper ; and , mingle with his real gladness at have his wife once more on the way to recovery , bring back some of the old charm of tenderness combine with light - heartedness , which have win the sober Isabella Preston long ago . he sit by her side , hold her hand , and talk of old time to the young couple opposite ; of his adventure and escape , and how he have win his wife . she , faintly smile at the remembrance of those day , yet half - ashamed at have the little detail of her courtship reveal , from time to time keep say , 

 ' for shame wi ' thee , Dannel I never do , ' and faint denial of a similar kind . 

 ' niver believe she , Sylvie . she be a woman , and there be niver a woman but like to have a sweetheart , and can tell when a chap 's castin ' sheep' - eye at she ; ay , an ' afore he know what he be about hissen . she be a pretty one then , be my old ' ooman , an ' like they as think she so , though she do cock her head high , as bein ' a Preston , which be a family o ' standin ' and mean I ' those part aforetime . there be Philip there , I will warrant , be as proud o ' bein ' Preston by t ' mother 's side , for it run I ' t ' blood , lass . a can tell when a child of a Preston tak be to be proud o ' their kin , by t ' cut o ' their nose . now Philip 's and my missus 's have a turn beyond common I ' their nostril , as if they be sniffin ' at t ' rest of we world , an ' seein ' if we be good enough for them to consort wi ' . Thee an ' me , lass , be robson oat - cake folk , while they be pie - crust . Lord ! how Bell use to speak to I , as short as though a be not   a Christian , an ' a ' t ' time she love I as her very life , an ' well a know it , tho ' a'd to mak ' as tho ' a do not . Philip , when thou go courtin ' , come t ' I , and a'll give thee many a wrinkle . A've   show , too , as a know well how t ' choose a good wife by token an ' sign , hannot a , missus ? come t ' I , my lad , and show I t ' lass , an ' a'll just tak ' a squint at she , an ' tell yo ' if she will do or not ; an ' if she will do , a'll teach yo ' how to win she . ' 

 ' they say another o ' yon corney girl be go to be marry , ' say Mrs. Robson , in her faint deliberate tone . 

 ' by gosh , an ' it be well thou'st speak on them ; a be as clean forgettin ' it as iver could be . a meet Nanny Corney I ' monkshaven last neet , and she ax I for t ' let our Sylvia come o ' New Year 's Eve , an ' see Molly an ' her man , that ' n as be we d beyond Newcassel , they will be over at her feyther 's , for t ' New Year , an ' there be to be a merry - making . ' 

 Sylvia 's colour come , her eye brighten , she would have like to go ; but the thought of her mother come across she , and her feature fall . her mother 's eye catch the look and the change , and know what both mean as well as if Sylvia have speak out . 

 ' Thursday se'nnight , ' say she . ' I will be rare and strong by then , and Sylvie shall go play hersen ; she be be nurse - tend long enough . ' 

 ' you be but weakly yet , ' say Philip shortly ; he do not intend to say it , but the word seem to come out in spite of himself . 

 ' a say as our lass should come , God willin ' , if she only come and go , an ' thee go on sprightly , old ' ooman . an ' a'll turn nurse - tender mysen for t ' occasion , ' special if thou can stand t ' good honest smell o ' whisky by then . so , my lass , get up thy smart clothe , and cut t ' good on them out , as become a Preston . maybe , a'll fetch thee home , an ' maybe Philip will convoy thee , for Nanny Corney bade thee to t ' merry - making , as well . she say her measter would be seem ' thee about t ' wool afore then . ' 

 ' I do not   think as I can go , ' say Philip , secretly pleased to know that he have the opportunity in his power ; ' I be half bind to go Wi ' Hester Rose and her mother to t ' watch - night . ' 

 ' be hester a Methodee ? ' ask Sylvia in surprise . 

 ' no ! she be neither a Methodee , nor a Friend , nor a Church person ; but she be a turn for serious thing , choose wherever they be find . ' 

 ' well , then , ' say good - natured farmer Robson , only see the surface of thing , ' a'll make shift to fetch Sylvie back fra ' t ' merry - making , and thee an ' thy young woman can go to t ' prayer - makin ' ; it be every man to his taste , say I. ' 

 but in spite of his half - promise , nay against his natural inclination , Philip be lure to the Corneys ' by the thought of meet Sylvia , of watch she and exult in her superiority in pretty look and way to all the other girl likely to be assemble . besides   he tell his conscience   he be pledge to his aunt to watch over Sylvia like a brother . so in the interval before New Year 's Eve , he silently revel as much as any young girl in the anticipation of the happy coming time . 

 at this hour , all the actor in this story have play out their part and go to their rest , there be something touch in record the futile effort make by Philip to win from Sylvia the love he yearn for . but , at the time , any one who have watch he might have be amuse to see the grave , awkward , plain young man study pattern and colour for a new waistcoat , with his head a little on one side , after the meditative manner common to those who be choose a new article of dress . they might have smile could they have read in his imagination the frequent rehearsal of the come evening , when he and she should each be dress in their gala attire , to spend a few hour under a bright , festive aspect , among people whose company would oblige they to assume a new demeanour towards each other , not so familiar as their every - day manner , but allow more scope for the expression of rustic gallantry . Philip have so seldom be to anything of the kind , that , even have Sylvia not be go , he would have feel a kind of shy excitement at the prospect of anything so unusual . but , indeed , if Sylvia have not be go , it be very probable that Philip 's rigid conscience might have be arouse to the question whether such party do not savour too much of the world for he to form one in they . 

 as it be , however , the fact to he be simply these . he be go and she be go . the day before , he have hurry off to Haytersbank Farm with a small paper parcel in his pocket a ribbon with a little briar - rose pattern run upon it for Sylvia . it be the first thing he have ever venture to give she the first thing of the kind would , perhaps , be more accurate ; for when he have first begin to teach she any lesson , he have give she Mavor 's Spelling - book , but that he might have do , out of zeal for knowledge , to any dunce of a little girl of his acquaintance . this ribbon be quite a different kind of present ; he touch it tenderly , as if he be caress it , when he think of she wear it ; the briar - rise   sweetness and thorn   seem to be the very flower for she ; the soft , green ground on which the pink and brown pattern run , be just the colour to show off her complexion . and she would in a way belong to he : her cousin , her mentor , her chaperon , her lover ! while other only admire , he might hope to appropriate ; for of late they have be such happy friend ! her mother approve of he , her father like he . a few month , perhaps only a few week more of self - restraint , and then he might go and speak openly of his wish , and what he have to offer . for he have resolve , with the quiet force of his character , to wait until all be finally settle between he and his master , before he declare himself to either Sylvia or her parent . the interval be spend in patient , silent endeavour to recommend himself to she . 

 he have to give his ribbon to his aunt in charge for Sylvia , and that be a disappointment to his fancy , although he try to reason himself into think that it be well so . he have not time to wait for her return from some errand on which she have go , for he be daily more and more occupy with the affair of the shop . 

 Sylvia make many a promise to her mother , and more to herself , that she would not stay late at the party , but she might go as early as she like ; and before the December daylight have fade away , Sylvia present herself at the Corneys ' . she be to come early in order to help to set out the supper , which be arrange in the large old flagged parlour , which serve as good bed - room as well . it open out of the house - place , and be the sacred room of the house , as chamber of a similar description be still consider in retire farmhouse in the north of England . they be use on occasion like the one now describe for purpose of hospitality ; but in the state bed , overshadow so large a portion of the floor , the birth and , as far as may be , the death , of the household take place . at the Corneys ' , the united effort of some former generation of the family have produce patchwork curtain and coverlet ; and patchwork be patchwork in those day , before the early Yates and Peels have find out the secret of print the parsley - leaf . scrap of costly indian chintz and palempour be intermix with commoner black and red calico in minute hexagon ; and the variety of pattern serve for the useful purpose of promote conversation as well as the more obvious one of display the work - woman 's taste . Sylvia , for instance , begin at once to her old friend , Molly Brunton , who have accompany she into this chamber to take off her hat and cloak , with a remark on one of the chintz . stoop over the counterpane , with a face into which the flush would come whether or no , she say to Molly , 

 ' dear ! I never seed this one afore this for all t ' world like th ' eye in a peacock 's tail . ' 

 ' Thou be see it many a time and oft , lass . but be not   thou surprised to find Charley here ? we pick he up at Shields , quite by surprise like ; and when Brunton and I say as we be comin ' here , nought would serve he but comin ' with we , for t ' see t ' new year in . it be a pity as your mother 's ta'en this time for t ' fall ill and want yo ' back so early . ' 

 Sylvia have take off her hat and cloak by this time , and begin to help Molly and a young unmarried sister in lay out the substantial supper . 

 ' here , ' continue Mrs. Brunton ; ' stick a bit o ' holly I ' yon pig 's mouth , that be the way we do thing I ' newcassel ; but folk be so behindhand in Monkshaven . it be a fine thing to live in a large town , Sylvia ; an ' if yo're look out for a husband , I would advise yo ' to tak ' one as life in a town . I feel as if I be bury alive comin ' back here , such an out - o'-t'-way place after t ' side , wheere there be many a hundred cart and carriage go past in a day . I have   a great mind for t ' tak yo ' two lassie back wi ' I , and let yo ' see a bit o ' t ' world ; may - be , I may yet . 

 her sister Bessy look much pleased with this plan , but Sylvia be rather inclined to take offence at Molly 's patronizing way , and reply , 

 ' I be none so fond o ' noise and bustle ; why , yo'll not be able to hear yoursel speak wi ' all they cart and carriage . I would rayther bide at home ; let alone that mother can not   spare I . ' 

 it be , perhaps , a rather ungracious way of answer Molly Brunton 's speech , and so she feel it to be , although her invitation have be none of the most courteously word . she irritate Sylvia still far by repeat her last word , 

 ' " mother can not   spare I ; " why , mother will have to spare thee sometime , when t ' time for wedding come . ' 

 ' I be none go to be we d , ' say Sylvia ; ' and if I be , I would niver go far fra ' mother . ' 

 ' eh ! what a spoilt darling it be . how Brunton will laugh when I tell he about yo ' ; Brunton be a rare one for laughin ' . it be a great thing to have get such a merry man for a husband . why ! he have his joke for every one as come into t ' shop ; and he will ha ' something funny to say to everything this evenin ' . ' 

 Bessy see that Sylvia be annoy , and , with more delicacy than her sister , she try to turn the conversation . 

 ' that be a pretty ribbon in thy hair , Sylvia ; I would like to have one o ' t ' same pattern . Feyther like pickle walnut stick about t ' round o ' beef , Molly . ' 

 ' I know what I be about , ' reply Mrs. Brunton , with a toss of her married head . 

 Bessy resume her inquiry . 

 ' be there any more to be have wheere that come fra ' , Sylvia ? ' 

 ' I do not   know , ' reply Sylvia . ' it come fra ' Foster 's , and yo ' can ask . ' 

 ' what might it cost ? ' say Betsy , finger an end of it to test its quality . 

 ' I can not   tell , ' say Sylvia , ' it be a present . ' 

 ' niver mak ' ado about t ' price , ' say molly ; ' I will gi'e thee enough on ' t to tie up thy hair , just like Sylvia 's . only thou hastn't   such wealth o ' curl as she have ; it will niver look t ' same I ' thy straight lock . and who might it be as give it thee , Sylvia ? ' ask the unscrupulous , if good - natured Molly . 

 ' my cousin Philip , he as be shopman at Foster 's , ' say Sylvia , innocently . but it be far too good an opportunity for the exercise of Molly 's kind of wit for she to pass over . 

 ' oh , oh ! our cousin Philip , be it ? and he will not be live so far away from your mother ? I have   no need be a witch to put two and two together . he be a coming here to - night , be not   he , Bessy ? ' 

 ' I wish yo ' would not   talk so , Molly , ' say Sylvia ; ' I and Philip be good enough friend , but we niver think on each other in that way ; leastway , I do not . ' 

 ' sweet butter ! now that be my mother 's old - fashioned way ; as if folk must eat sweet butter now - a - day , because her mother do !   that way , ' continue Molly , in the manner that annoy Sylvia so much , repeat her word as if for the purpose of laugh at they . ' " that way ? " and pray what be t ' way yo're speak on ? I niver say nought about marrying , do I , that yo ' need look so red and shameface about yo'r cousin Philip ? but , as Brunton say , if t ' cap fit yo ' , put it on . I be glad he be comin ' to - night tho ' , for as I be do makin ' love and courtin ' , it be next good t ' watch other folk ; an ' yo'r face , Sylvia , have letten I into a secret , as I have some glimpse on afore I be we d. ' 

 Sylvia secretly determine not to speak a word more to Philip than she could help , and wonder how she could ever have like molly at all , much less have make a companion of she . the table be now lay out , and nothing remain but to criticize the arrangement a little . 

 Bessy be full of admiration . 

 ' Theere , Molly ! ' say she . ' Yo ' niver seed more vittle bring together I ' newcassel , I will be bind ; there will be above half a hundredweight o ' butcher 's meat , beside pie and custard . I have   eat no dinner these two day for think on ' t ; it be be a weary burden on my mind , but it be off now I see how well it look . I tell mother not to come near it till we would spread it all out , and now I will go fetch she . ' 

 Bessy run off into the house - place . 

 ' it be well enough in a country kind o ' way , ' say Molly , with the faint approbation of condescension . ' but if I have think on , I would ha ' bring them down a beast or two do I ' sponge - cake , wi ' currant for his eye to give t ' table an air . ' 

 the door be open , and Bessy come in smile and blush with proud pleasure . her mother follow she on tip - toe , smooth down her apron , and with her voice subdue to a whisper : 

 ' ay , my lass , it be fine ! but dunnot mak ' an ado about it , let them think it be just our common way . if any one say aught about how good t ' vittle be , tak ' it calm , and say we'n well I ' t ' house , it will mak ' them eat wi ' a well appetite , and think the more on we . Sylvie , I be much beholden t ' ye for comin ' so early , and helpin ' t ' lass , but yo ' mun come in t ' house - place now , t ' folk be gatherin ' , an ' yo'r cousin 's be ask after yo ' a'ready . ' 

 molly give she a nudge , which make Sylvia 's face go all aflame with angry embarrassment . she be conscious that the watching which Molly have threaten she with begin directly ; for Molly go up to her husband , and whisper something to he which set he off in a chuckle laugh , and Sylvia be aware that his eye follow she about with know look all the evening . she would hardly speak to Philip , and pretend not to see his outstretched hand , but pass on to the chimney - corner , and try to shelter herself behind the broad back of farmer Corney , who have no notion of relinquish his customary place for all the young people who ever come to the house , or for any old people either , for that matter . it be his household throne , and there he sit with no more idea of abdicate in favour of any comer than King George at St James 's . but he be glad to see his friend ; and have pay they the unwonted compliment of shaving on a week - day , and put on his Sunday coat . the united effort of wife and child have fail to persuade he to make any farth change in his attire ; to all their argument on this head he have reply , 

 ' they as do not   like t ' see I I ' my work - a - day wescut and breech may bide away . ' 

 it be the long sentence he say that day , but he repeat it several time over . he be glad enough to see all the young people , but they be not ' of his kidney , ' as he express it to himself , and he do not feel any call upon himself to entertain they . he leave that to his bustling wife , all smartness and smile , and to his daughter and son - in - law . his effort at hospitality consist in sit still , smoke his pipe ; when any one come , he take it out of his mouth for an instant , and nod his head in a cheerful friendly way , without a word of speech ; and then return to his smoking with the great relish for the moment 's intermission . he think to himself : 

 ' they be a set o ' young chap as think more on t ' lass than on baccy ; they will find out their mistake in time ; give them time , give them time . ' 

 and before eight o'clock , he go as quietly as a man of twelve stone can upstairs to bed , have make a previous arrangement with his wife that she should bring he up about two pound of spiced beef , and a hot tumbler of stiff grog . but at the beginning of the evening he form a good screen for Sylvia , who be rather a favourite with the old man , for twice he speak to she . 

 ' feyther smoke ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Sylvia . 

 ' reach I t ' baccy - box , my lass . ' 

 and that be all the conversation that pass between she and her near neighbour for the first quarter of an hour after she come into company . 

 but , for all her screen , she feel a pair of eye be fix upon she with a glow of admiration deepen their honest brightness . somehow , look in what direction she would , she catch the glance of those eye before she could see anything else . so she play with her apron - string , and try not to feel so conscious . there be another pair of eye , not such beautiful , sparkle eye , deep - set , earnest , sad , nay , even gloomy , watch she every movement ; but of this she be not aware . Philip have not recover from the rebuff she have give he by refuse his offer hand , and be stand still , in angry silence , when Mrs. Corney thrust a young woman just arrive upon his attention . 

 ' Come , Measter Hepburn , here be Nancy Pratt wi'out ev'n a soul to speak t ' she , an ' yo ' mopin ' theere . she say she know yo ' by sight fra ' have deal at Foster 's these six year . see if yo ' can not   find summut t ' say t ' each other , for I mun go pour out tea . dixon , an ' walker , an ' Elliotts , an ' Smiths be come , ' say she , mark off the family on her finger , as she look round and call over their name ; ' an ' there be only Will Latham an ' his two sister , and Roger Harbottle , an ' Taylor t ' come ; an ' they will turn up afore tea 's end . ' 

 so she go off to her duty at the one table , which , place alongside of the dresser , be the only article of furniture leave in the middle of the room : all the seat be arrange as close to the four wall as could be manage . the candle of those day give but a faint light compare to the light of the immense fire , which it be a point of hospitality to keep at the high roaring , blaze pitch ; the young woman occupy the seat , with the exception of two or three of the elder one , who , in an eager desire to show their capability , insist on help Mrs. Corney in her duty , very much to her annoyance , as there be certain little contrivance for eke out cream , and adjust the strength of the cup of tea to the worldly position of the intend drinker , which she do not like every one to see . the young man , whom tea do not embolden , and who have as yet have no chance of strong liquor , cluster in rustic shyness round the door , not speak even to themselves , except now and then , when one , apparently the wag of the party , make some whisper remark , which set they all off laugh ; but in a minute they check themselves , and pass the back of their hand across their mouth to compose that unlucky feature , and then some would try to fix their eye on the rafter of the ceiling , in a manner which be decorous if rather abstract from the business in hand . Most of these be young farmer , with whom Philip have nothing in common , and from whom , in shy reserve , he have withdraw himself when he first come in . but now he wish himself among they soon than set to talk to Nancy Pratt , when he have nothing to say . and yet he might have have a companion less to his mind , for she be a decent young woman of a sober age , less inclined to giggle than many of the young one . but all the time that he be make commonplace remark to she he be wonder if he have offend Sylvia , and why she would not shake hand with he , and this pre - occupation of his thought do not make he an agreeable companion . Nancy Pratt , who have be engage for some year to a mate of a whaling - ship , perceive something of his state of mind , and take no offence at it ; on the contrary , she try to give he pleasure by admire Sylvia . 

 ' I have   often heerd tell on she , ' say she , ' but I niver think she be be so pretty , and so staid and quiet - like too . T ' most part o ' girl as have look like hers be always gape - gaze to catch other folk 's eye , and see what be think on them ; but she look just like a child , a bit flustered wi ' come into company , and gettin ' into as dark a corner and bidin ' as still as she can . 

 just then Sylvia lift up her long , dark lash , and catch the same glance which she have so often meet before Charley Kinraid be stand talk to Brunton on the opposite side of the fire - place she start back into the shadow as if she have not expect it , and in so do spill her tea all over her gown . she could almost have cry , she feel herself so awkward , and as if everything be go wrong with she ; she think that every one would think she have never be in company before , and do not know how to behave ; and while she be thus flutter and crimson , she see through her tearful eye Kinraid on his knee before she , wipe her gown with his silk pocket handkerchief , and hear he speak through all the buzz of commiserate voice . 

 ' your cupboard handle be so much I ' th ' way I hurt my elbow against it only this very afternoon . ' 

 so perhaps it be no clumsiness of her , as they would all know , now , since he have so skilfully lay the blame somewhere else ; and after all it turn out that her accident have be the mean of bring he across to her side , which be much more pleasant than have he opposite , star at she ; for now he begin to talk to she , and this be very pleasant , although she be rather embarrassed at their tete - a - tete at first . 

 ' I do not know you again when I first see you , ' say he , in a tone which imply a good deal more than be utter in word . 

 ' I know yo ' at once , ' she reply , softly , and then she blush and play with her apron - string , and wonder if she ought to have confess to the clearness of her recollection . 

 ' you be grow up into well , perhaps it be not manner to say what you be grow into anyhow , I shall not   forget yo ' again . ' 

 more play with her apron - string , and head hang still low down , though the corner of her mouth would go up in a shy smile of pleasure . Philip watch it all as greedily as if it give he delight . 

 ' Yo'r father , he will be well and hearty , I hope ? ' ask Charley . 

 ' yes , ' reply Sylvia , and then she wish she could originate some remark ; he would think she so stupid if she just keep on say such little short bit of speech , and if he think her stupid he might perhaps go away again to his former place . 

 but he be quite far enough go in love of her beauty , and pretty modest way , not to care much whether she talk or no , so long as she show herself so pleasingly conscious of his close neighbourhood . 

 ' I must come and see the old gentleman ; and your mother , too , ' he add more slowly , for he remember that his visit last year have not be quite so much welcome by Bell Robson as by her husband ; perhaps it be because of the amount of drink which he and Daniel manage to get through of an evening . he resolve this year to be more careful to please the mother of Sylvia . 

 when tea be end there be a great bustle and shifting of place , while Mrs. Corney and her daughter carry out tray full of use cup , and great platter of uneaten bread and butter into the back - kitchen , to be wash up after the guest be go . just because she be so conscious that she do not want to move , and break up the little conversation between herself and Kinraid , Sylvia force herself to be as active in the service go on as become a friend of the house ; and she be too much her mother 's own daughter to feel comfortable at leave all the thing in the disorder which to the Corney girl be second nature . 

 ' this milk mun go back to t ' dairy , I reckon , ' say she , load herself with milk and cream . 

 ' niver fash thysel ' about it , ' say Nelly Corney , ' Christmas come but one a year , if it do go sour ; and mother say she would have a game at forfeits first thing after tea to loosen folk 's tongue , and mix up t ' lad and lass , so come along . ' 

 but Sylvia steer her careful way to the cold chill of the dairy , and would not be satisfied till she have carry away all the unused provision into some fresher air than that heat by the fire and oven use for the long day 's cooking of pie and cake and much roast meat . 

 when they come back a round of red - faced ' lad , ' as young man up to five - and - thirty be call in Lancashire and Yorkshire if they be not married before , and lass , whose age be not to be define , be play at some country game , in which the woman be apparently more interested than the man , who look shamefaced , and afraid of each other 's ridicule . Mrs. Corney , however , know how to remedy this , and at a sign from she a great jug of beer be bring in . this jug be the pride of her heart , and be in the shape of a fat man in white knee - breech , and a three - cornered hat ; with one arm he support the pipe in his broad , smile mouth , and the other be place akimbo and form the handle . there be also a great china punch - bowl fill with grog make after an old ship - receipt current in these part , but not too strong , because if their visitor have too much to drink at that early part of the evening ' it would spoil t ' fun , ' as Nelly Corney have observe . her father , however , after the notion of hospitality prevalent at that time in high circle , have stipulate that each man should have ' enough ' before he leave the house ; enough meaning in monkshaven parlance the liberty of get drunk , if they think fit to do it . 

 before long one of the lad be seize with a fit of admiration for Toby the name of the old gentleman who contain liquor and go up to the tray for a close inspection . he be speedily follow by other amateur of curious earthenware ; and by - and - by Mr. Brunton   who have be charge by his mother - in - law with the due supplying of liquor by his father - in - law that every man should have his fill , and by his wife and her sister that no one should have too much , at any rate at the beginning of the evening ,   think fit to carry out Toby to be replenish ; and a fast spirit of enjoyment and mirth begin to reign in the room . 

 Kinraid be too well seasoned to care what amount of liquor he drink ; Philip have what be call a weak head , and dislike muddle himself with drink because of the immediate consequence of intense feeling of irritability , and the more distant one of a rack headache next day ; so both these two preserve very much the same demeanour they have hold at the beginning of the evening . 

 Sylvia be by all acknowledge and treat as the belle . when they play at blind - man's - buff go where she would , she be always catch ; she be call out repeatedly to do what be require in any game , as if all have a pleasure in see her light figure and deft way . she be sufficiently pleased with this to have get over her shyness with all except Charley . when other pay she their rustic compliment she toss her head , and make her little saucy repartee ; but when he say something low and flattering , it be too honey - sweet to her heart to be throw off thus . and , somehow , the more she yield to this fascination the more she avoid Philip . he do not speak flatteringly he do not pay compliment he watch she with discontent , long eye , and grow more inclined every moment , as he remember his anticipation of a happy evening , to cry out in his heart vanita vanitatum . 

 and now come cry the forfeit . molly Brunton kneel down , her face bury in her mother 's lap ; the latter take out the forfeit one by one , and as she hold they up , say the accustomed formula , 

 ' a fine thing and a very fine thing , what must he   or she   do who own this thing . ' 

 one or two have be tell to kneel to the prettiest , bow to the witty , and kiss those they love well ; other have have to bite an inch off the poker , or such play upon word . and now come Sylvia 's pretty new ribbon that Philip have give she   he almost long to snatch it out of Mrs. Corney 's hand and burn it before all their face , so annoyed be he with the whole affair . 

 ' a fine thing and a very fine thing a most particular fine thing choose how she come by it . what must she do as own this thing ? ' 

 ' she must blow out t ' candle and kiss t ' candlestick . ' 

 in one instant Kinraid have hold of the only candle within reach , all the other have be put up high on inaccessible shelf and other place . Sylvia go up and blow out the candle , and before the sudden partial darkness be over he have take the candle into his finger , and , accord to the traditional meaning of the word , be in the place of the candlestick , and as such be to be kiss . every one laugh at innocent Sylvia 's face as the meaning of her penance come into it , every one but Philip , who almost choke . 

 ' I be candlestick , ' say Kinraid , with less of triumph in his voice than he would have have with any other girl in the room . 

 ' Yo ' mun kiss t ' candlestick , ' cry the Corneys , ' or yo'll niver get yo'r ribbon back . ' 

 ' and she set a deal o ' store by that ribbon , ' say Molly Brunton , maliciously . 

 ' I will none kiss t ' candlestick , nor he either , ' say Sylvia , in a low voice of determination , turn away , full of confusion . 

 ' Yo'll not get yo'r ribbon if yo ' dunnot , ' cry one and all . 

 ' I do not   care for t ' ribbon , ' say she , flash up with a look at her tormentor , now her back be turn to Kinraid . ' an ' I wunnot play any more at such like game , ' she add , with fresh indignation rise in her heart as she take her old place in the corner of the room a little away from the rest . 

 Philip 's spirit rise , and he yearn to go to she and tell she how he approve of her conduct . alas , Philip ! Sylvia , though as modest a girl as ever live , be no prude , and have be bring up in simple , straightforward country way ; and with any other young man , except , perhaps , Philip 's self , she would have think no more of make a rapid pretence of kiss the hand or cheek of the temporary ' candlestick ' , than our ancestress do in a much high rank on similar occasion . Kinraid , though mortify by his public rejection , be more conscious of this than the inexperienced Philip ; he resolve not to be baulk , and watch his opportunity . for the time he go on play as if Sylvia 's conduct have not affect he in the least , and as if he be hardly aware of her defection from the game . as she see other submit , quite as a matter of course , to similar penance , she begin to be angry with herself for have think twice about it , and almost to dislike herself for the strange consciousness which have make it at the time seem impossible to do what she be tell . her eye keep fill with tear as her isolate position in the gay party , the thought of what a fool she have make of herself , keep recur to her mind ; but no one see she , she think , thus cry ; and , ashame to be discover when the party should pause in their game , she steal round behind they into the great chamber in which she have help to lay out the supper , with the intention of bath her eye , and take a drink of water . one instant Charley Kinraid be miss from the circle of which he be the life and soul ; and then back he come with an air of satisfaction on his face , intelligible enough to those who have see his game ; but unnoticed by Philip , who , amidst the perpetual noise and movement around he , have not perceive Sylvia 's leave the room , until she come back at the end of about a quarter of an hour , look lovely than ever , her complexion brilliant , her eye droop , her hair neatly and freshly arrange , tie with a brown ribbon instead of that she be suppose to have forfeit . she look as if she do not wish her return to be notice , steal softly behind the romp lad and lass with noiseless motion , and altogether such a contrast to they in her cool freshness and modest neatness , that both Kinraid and Philip find it difficult to keep their eye off she . but the former have a secret triumph in his heart which enable he to go on with his merry - making as if it absorb he ; while Philip drop out of the crowd and come up to where she be stand silently by Mrs. Corney , who , arm akimbo , be laugh at the frolic and fun around she . Sylvia start a little when Philip speak , and keep her soft eye avert from he after the first glance ; she answer he shortly , but with unaccustomed gentleness . he have only ask she when she would like he to take her home ; and she , a little surprised at the idea of go home when to she the evening seem only begin , have answer 

 ' go home ? I do not   know ! it be New Year 's eve ! ' 

 ' ay ! but yo'r mother will lie awake till yo ' come home , Sylvie ! ' 

 but Mrs. Corney , have hear his question , break in with all sort of upbraiding . ' go home ! not see t ' New Year in ! why , what should take them home these six hour ? be not   there a moon as clear as day ? and do such a time as this come often ? and be they to break up the party before the New Year come in ? and be there not supper , with a spice round of beef that have be in pickle pretty nigh sin ' Martinmas , and ham , and mince - pie , and what not ? and if they think any evil of her master 's go to bed , or that by that early retirement he mean to imply that he do not bid his friend welcome , why he would not stay up beyond eight o'clock for King George upon his throne , as he would tell they soon enough , if they would only step upstairs and ask he . well ; she know what it be to want a daughter when she be ail , so she would say nought more , but hasten supper . 

 and this idea now take possession of Mrs. Corney 's mind , for she would not willingly allow one of her guest to leave before they have do justice to her preparation ; and , cut her speech short , she hastily leave Sylvia and Philip together . 

 his heart beat fast ; his feeling towards she have never be so strong or so distinct as since her refusal to kiss the ' candlestick . ' he be on the point of speak , of say something explicitly tender , when the wooden trencher which the party be use at their play , come bowl between he and Sylvia , and spin out its little period right betwixt they . every one be move from chair to chair , and when the bustle be over Sylvia be seat at some distance from he , and he leave stand outside the circle , as if he be not play . in fact , Sylvia have unconsciously take his place as actor in the game while he remain spectator , and , as it turn out , an auditor of a conversation not intend for his ear . he be wedge against the wall , close to the great eight - day clock , with its round moon - like smile face form a ludicrous contrast to his long , sallow , grave countenance , which be pretty much at the same level above the sanded floor . before he sit Molly Brunton and one of her sister , their head close together in too deep talk to attend to the progress of the game . Philip 's attention be catch by the word 

 ' I will lay any wager he kiss she when he run off into t ' parlour . ' 

 ' she be so coy she would niver let he , ' reply Bessy Corney . 

 ' she could not   help hersel ' ; and for all she look so demure and prim now '   and then both head be turn in the direction of Sylvia , ' I be as sure as I be bear that Charley be not t ' chap to lose his forfeit ; and yet yo ' see he say nought more about it , and she be leave off be ' fear of he . ' 

 there be something in Sylvia 's look , ay , and in Charley Kinraid 's , too , that shoot conviction into Philip 's mind . he watch they incessantly during the interval before supper ; they be intimate , and yet shy with each other , in a manner that enrage while it bewilder Philip . what be Charley say to she in that whisper voice , as they pass each other ? why do they linger near each other ? why do Sylvia look so dreamily happy , so startled at every call of the game , as if recall from some pleasant idea ? why do Kinraid 's eye always seek she while hers be avert , or downcast , and her cheek all aflame ? Philip 's dark brow grow dark as he gaze . he , too , start when Mrs. Corney , close at his elbow , bid he go in to supper along with some of the elder one , who be not play ; for the parlour be not large enough to hold all at once , even with the squeeze and cramming , and sit together on chair , which be not at all out of etiquette at Monkshaven . Philip be too reserved to express his disappointment and annoyance at be thus arrest in his painful watch over Sylvia ; but he have no appetite for the good thing set before he , and find it hard work to smile a sickly smile when call upon by Josiah Pratt for applause at some country joke . when supper be end , there be some little discussion between Mrs. Corney and her son - in - law as to whether the different individual of the company should be call upon for song or story , as be the will not at such convivial meeting . Brunton have be help his mother - in - law in urge people to eat , heap their plate over their shoulder with unexpected good thing , fill the glass at the upper end of the table , and the mug which supply the deficiency of glass at the low . and now , every one be satisfy , not to say stuff to repletion , the two who have be attend to their want stand still , hot and exhausted . 

 ' they be a'most stawe , ' say Mrs. Corney , with a pleased smile . ' it will be manner t ' ask some one as know how to sing . ' 

 ' it may be manner for full man , but not for fast , ' reply Brunton . ' folk in t ' next room will be want their victual , and singing be allay out o ' tune to empty belly . ' 

 ' but there be they here as will take it ill if they be not ask . I heerd Josiah Pratt a - clear his throat not a minute ago , an ' he think as much on his singin ' as a cock do on his crowin ' . ' 

 ' if one sing I be afeard all on them will like to hear their own pipe . ' 

 but their dilemma be solve by Bessy Corney , who open the door to see if the hungry one outside might not come in for their share of the entertainment ; and in they rush , bright and riotous , scarcely give the first party time to rise from their seat ere they take their place . one or two young man , release from all their previous shyness , help Mrs. Corney and her daughter to carry off such dish as be actually empty . there be no time for change or washing of plate ; but then , as Mrs. Corney laughingly observe , 

 ' we be a ' on we friend , and some on we mayhap sweetheart ; so no need to be particular about plate . they as get clean one be lucky ; and they as do not , and can not put up wi ' plate that have be use , mun go without . ' 

 it seem to be Philip 's luck this night to be pen up in place ; for again the space between the bench and the wall be fill up by the in - rush before he have time to make his way out ; and all he could do be to sit quiet where he be . but between the busy head and over - reach arm he could see Charley and Sylvia , sit close together , talk and listen more than eat . she be in a new strange state of happiness not to be reason about , or account for , but in a state of more exquisite feeling than she have ever experience before ; when , suddenly lift her eye , she catch Philip 's face of extreme displeasure . 

 ' oh , ' say she , ' I must go . there be Philip look at I so . ' 

 ' Philip ! ' say Kinraid , with a sudden frown upon his face . 

 ' my cousin , ' she reply , instinctively comprehend what have flash into his mind , and anxious to disclaim the suspicion of have a lover . ' Mother tell he to see I home , and he be noan one for stay up late . ' 

 ' but you need not   go . I will see yo ' home . ' 

 ' Mother 's but ailing , ' say Sylvia , a little conscience - smite at have so entirely forget everything in the delight of the present , ' and I say I would not   be late . ' 

 ' and do you allay keep to your word ? ' ask he , with a tender meaning in his tone . 

 ' Allays ; leastway I think so , ' reply she , blush . 

 ' then if I ask you not to forget I , and you give I your word , I may be sure you will keep it . ' 

 ' it be not   I as forget you , ' say Sylvia , so softly as not to be hear by he . 

 he try to make she repeat what she have say , but she would not , and he could only conjecture that it be something more tell - tale than she like to say again , and that alone be very charming to he . 

 ' I shall walk home with you , ' say he , as Sylvia at last rise to depart , warn by a further glimpse of Philip 's angry face . 

 ' no ! ' say she , hastily , ' I can not   do with yo " ; for somehow she feel the need of pacify Philip , and know in her heart that a third person join their tete - a - tete walk would only increase his displeasure . 

 ' why not ? ' say Charley , sharply . 

 ' oh ! I do not   know , only please do not ! ' 

 by this time her cloak and hood be on , and she be slowly make her way down her side of the room follow by Charley , and often interrupt by indignant remonstrance against her departure , and the early breaking - up of the party . Philip stand , hat in hand , in the doorway between the kitchen and parlour , watch she so intently that he forget to be civil , and draw many a jest and gibe upon he for his absorption in his pretty cousin . 

 when Sylvia reach he , he say , 

 ' yo're ready at last , be yo ' ? ' 

 ' yes , ' she reply , in her little beseech tone . ' Yo've   not be want to go long , han yo ' ? I ha ' but just eat my supper . ' 

 ' Yo've   be so full of talk , that be be the reason your supper last so long . that fellow 's none go wi ' we ? ' say he sharply , as he see Kinraid rummage for his cap in a heap of man 's clothe , throw into the back - kitchen . 

 ' no , ' say Sylvia , in affright at Philip 's fierce look and passionate tone . ' I tell he not . ' 

 but at that moment the heavy outer door be open by Daniel Robson himself bright , broad , and rosy , a jolly impersonation of Winter . his large drover 's coat be cover with snow - flake , and through the black frame of the doorway might be see a white waste world of sweep fell and field , with the dark air fill with the pure down - fall . Robson stamp his snow - laden foot and shake himself well , still stand on the mat , and let a cold frosty current of fresh air into the great warm kitchen . he laugh at they all before he speak . 

 ' it be a coud new year as I be lettin ' in though it be noan t ' new year yet . Yo'll a ' be snow up , as sure as my name s Dannel , if yo ' stop for twel ' o'clock . Yo'd well mak ' haste and go whoam . why , Charley , my lad ! how beest ta ? who would ha ' think o ' see thee I ' these part again ! Nay , missus , nay , t ' new year mun find its way int ' t ' house by itsel ' for I ; for a ha ' promise my oud woman to bring Sylvie whoam as quick as may - be ; she be lyin ' awake and frettin ' about t ' snow and what not . thank yo ' kindly , missus , but a'll tak ' nought to eat ; just a drop o ' something hot to keep out coud , and wish yo ' a ' the compliment o ' the season . Philip , my man , yo'll not be sorry to be spar t ' walk round by Haytersbank such a neet . my missus be I ' such a way about Sylvie that a thought a'd just step off mysel ' , and have a peep at yo ' a ' , and bring she some wrap . Yo'r sheep will be a ' fold , a reckon , Measter Pratt , for there will niver be a nibble o ' grass to be see this two month , accordin ' to my readin ' ; and a've   be at sea long enough , and on land long enough t ' know sign and wonder . it be good stuff that , any way , and worth comin ' for , ' after he have gulp down a tumblerful of half - and - half grog . ' Kinraid , if ta do not   come and see I afore thou'rt many day ouder , thee and me'll have word . come , Sylvie , what art ta about , keepin ' I here ? here 's Mistress Corney mixin ' I another jorum . well , this time a'll give " T ' married happy , and t ' single we d ! " ' 

 Sylvia be all this while stand by her father quite ready for departure , and not a little relieved by his appearance as her convoy home . 

 ' I be ready to see Haytersbank to - night , master ! ' say Kinraid , with easy freedom a freedom which Philip envy , but could not have imitate , although he be deeply disappointed at the loss of his walk with Sylvia , when he have intend to exercise the power his aunt have delegate to he of remonstrance if her behaviour have be light or thoughtless , and of warn if he see cause to disapprove of any of her associate . 

 after the robson have leave , a blank fall upon both Charley and Philip . in a few minute , however , the former , accustom to prompt decision , resolve that she and no other should be his wife . accustomed to popularity among woman , and well verse in the incipient sign of their liking for he , he anticipate no difficulty in win she . satisfy with the past , and pleasantly hopeful about the future , he find it easy to turn his attention to the next prettiest girl in the room , and to make the whole gathering bright with his ready good temper and buoyant spirit . 

 Mrs. Corney have feel it her duty to press Philip to stay , now that , as she say , he have no one but himself to see home , and the new year so near come in . to any one else in the room she would have add the clinching argument , ' a shall take it very unkind if yo ' go now ' ; but somehow she could not say this , for in truth Philip 's look show that he would be but a wet blanket on the merriment of the party . so , with as much civility as could be muster up between they , he take leave . shut the door behind he , he go out into the dreary night , and begin his lonesome walk back to Monkshaven . the cold sleet almost blind he as the sea - wind drive it straight in his face ; it cut against he as it be blow with drift force . the roar of the wintry sea come bear on the breeze ; there be more light from the whitened ground than from the dark laden sky above . the field - path would have be a matter of perplexity , have it not be for the well - know gap in the dyke - side , which show the whitened land beyond , between the two dark stone wall . yet he go clear and straight along his way , have unconsciously leave all guidance to the animal instinct which co - exist with the human soul , and sometimes take strange charge of the human body , when all the nobler power of the individual be absorb in acute suffering . at length he be in the lane , toil up the hill , from which , by day , Monkshaven might be see . now all feature of the landscape before he be lose in the darkness of night , against which the white flake come close and near , thick and fast . on a sudden , the bell of Monkshaven church ring out a welcome to the new year , 1796 . from the direction of the wind , it seem as if the sound be fling with strength and power right into Philip 's face . he walk down the hill to its merry sound its merry sound , his heavy heart . as he enter the long High Street of Monkshaven he could see the watch light put out in parlour , chamber , or kitchen . the new year have come , and expectation be end . reality have begin . 

 he turn to the right , into the court where he lodge with Alice Rose . there be a light still burn there , and cheerful voice be hear . he open the door ; Alice , her daughter , and Coulson stand as if await he . hester 's wet cloak hang on a chair before the fire ; she have her hood on , for she and Coulson have be to the watch - night . 

 the solemn excitement of the service have leave its trace upon her countenance and in her mind . there be a spiritual light in her usually shadowed eye , and a slight flush on her pale cheek . merely personal and self - conscious feeling be merge in a love good - will to all her fellow - creature . under the influence of this large charity , she forget her habitual reserve , and come forward as Philip enter to meet he with her new year 's wish wish that she have previously interchange with the other two . 

 ' a happy new year to you , Philip , and may God have you in his keeping all the day thereof ! ' 

 he take her hand , and shake it warmly in reply . the flush on her cheek deepen as she withdraw it . Alice Rose say something curtly about the lateness of the hour and her be much tired ; and then she and her daughter go upstairs to the front chamber , and Philip and Coulson to that which they share at the back of the house . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 perplexitie 

 Coulson and Philip be friendly , but not intimate . they never have have a dispute , they never be confidential with each other ; in truth , they be both reserved and silent man , and , probably , respect each other the more for be so self - contain . there be a private feeling in Coulson 's heart which would have make a less amiable fellow dislike Philip . but of this the latter be unconscious : they be not apt to exchange many word in the room which they occupy jointly . 

 Coulson ask Philip if he have enjoy himself at the Corneys ' , and Philip reply , 

 ' not much ; such party be noane to my liking . ' 

 ' and yet thou break off from t ' watch - night to go there . ' 

 no answer ; so Coulson go on , with a sense of the duty lay upon he , to improve the occasion the first that have present itself since the good old Methodist minister have give his congregation the solemn warning to watch over the opportunity of various kind which the come year would present . 

 ' Jonas Barclay tell we as the pleasure o ' this world be like apple o ' Sodom , pleasant to look at , but ash to taste . ' 

 Coulson wisely leave Philip to make the application for himself . if he do he make no sign , but throw himself on his bed with a heavy sigh . 

 ' be yo ' not go to undress ? ' say Coulson , as he cover he up in bed . 

 there have be a long pause of silence . Philip do not answer he , and he think he have fall asleep . but he be rouse from his first slumber by Hepburn 's soft movement about the room . Philip have think well of it , and , with some penitence in his heart for his gruffness to the unoffending Coulson , be try not to make any noise while he undress . 

 but he could not sleep . he keep see the Corneys ' kitchen and the scene that have take place in it , pass like a pageant before his closed eye . then he open they in angry weariness at the recur vision , and try to make out the outline of the room and the furniture in the darkness . the white ceiling slop into the whitewashed wall , and against they he could see the four rush - bottom chair , the look - glass hang on one side , the old carve oak - chest   his own property , with the initial of forgotten ancestor cut upon it , which hold his clothe ; the box that belong to Coulson , sleep soundly in the bed in the opposite corner of the room ; the casement window in the roof , through which the snowy ground on the steep hill - side could be plainly see ; and when he get so far as this in the catalogue of the room , he fall into a troubled feverish sleep , which last two or three hour ; and then he awake with a start , and a consciousness of uneasiness , though what about he could not remember at first . 

 when he recollect all that have happen the night before , it impress he much more favourably than it have do at the time . if not joy , hope have come in the morning ; and , at any rate , he could be up and be do , for the late wintry light be steal down the hill - side , and he know that , although Coulson lie motionless in his sleep , it be past their usual time of rise . still , as it be new year 's day , a time of some licence , Philip have mercy on his fellow - shopman , and do not waken he till just as he be leave the room . 

 carry his shoe in his hand , he go softly downstairs for he could see from the top of the flight that neither Alice nor her daughter be down yet , as the kitchen shutter be not unclosed . it be Mrs. Rose 's habit to rise early , and have all bright and clean against her lodger come down ; but then , in general , she go to rest before nine o'clock , whereas the last night she have not go till past twelve . Philip go about undo the shutter , and try to break up the rake coal , with as little noise as might be , for he have compassion on the tired sleeper . the kettle have not be fill , probably because Mrs. Rose have be unable to face the storm of the night before , in take it to the pump just at the entrance of the court . when Philip come back from fill it , he find Alice and Hester both in the kitchen , and try to make up for lost time by hasten over their work . hester look busy and notable with her gown pin up behind she , and her hair all tuck away under a clean linen cap ; but Alice be angry with herself for her late sleeping , and that and other cause make she speak crossly to Philip , as he come in with his snowy foot and well - fill kettle . 

 ' look the ' there ! droppin ' and drippin ' along t ' flag as be clean last night , and meddlin ' wi ' woman 's work as a man have no business wi ' . ' 

 Philip be surprised and annoyed . he have find relief from his own thought in do what he believe would help other . he give up the kettle to she snatch hand , and sate down behind the door in momentary ill - temper . but the kettle be well fill , and consequently heavy than the old woman expect , and she could not manage to lift it to the crook from which it generally hang suspend . she look round for hester , but she be go into the back - kitchen . in a minute Philip be at her side , and have heave it to its place for she . she look in his face for a moment wistfully , but hardly condescend to thank he ; at least the sound of the word do not pass the lip that form they . rebuff by her manner , he go back to his old seat , and mechanically watch the preparation for breakfast ; but his thought go back to the night before , and the comparative ease of his heart be go . the first stir of a new day have make he feel as if he have have no sufficient cause for his annoyance and despondency the previous evening ; but now , condemn to sit quiet , he review look and word , and see just reason for his anxiety . after some consideration he resolve to go that very night to Haytersbank , and have some talk with either Sylvia or her mother ; what the exact nature of this purposed conversation should be , he do not determine ; much would depend on Sylvia 's manner and mood , and on her mother 's state of health ; but at any rate something would be learn . 

 during breakfast something be learn nearer home ; though not all that a man less unconscious and more vain than Philip might have discover . he only find out that Mrs. Rose be displeased with he for not have go to the watch - night with hester , accord to the plan make some week before . but he soothe his conscience by remember that he have make no promise ; he have merely speak of his wish to be present at the service , about which hester be speak ; and although at the time and for a good while afterwards , he have fully intend going , yet as there have be William Coulson to accompany she , his absence could not have be seriously notice . still he be make uncomfortable by Mrs. Rose 's change of manner ; once or twice he say to himself that she little know how miserable he have be during his ' gay evening , ' as she would persist in call it , or she would not talk at he with such persevere bitterness this morning . before he leave for the shop , he speak of his intention of go to see how his aunt be , and of pay she a new year 's day visit . 

 Hepburn and Coulson take it in turn week and week about to go first home to dinner ; the one who go first sate down with Mrs. Rose and her daughter , instead of have his portion put in the oven to keep warm for he . to - day it be Hepburn 's turn to be last . all morning the shop be full with customer , come rather to offer good wish than to buy , and with an unspoken remembrance of the cake and wine which the two hospitable brother Foster make a point of offering to all comer on new year 's day . it be busy work for all for hester on her side , where cap , ribbon , and woman 's gear be exclusively sell for the shopman and boy in the grocery and drapery department . Philip be try to do his business with his mind far away ; and the consequence be that his manner be not such as to recommend he to the customer , some of whom recollect it as very different , courteous and attentive , if grave and sedate . one buxom farmer 's wife notice the change to he . she have a little girl with she , of about five year old , that she have lift up on the counter , and who be watch Philip with anxious eye , occasionally whisper in her mother 's ear , and then hide her face against her cloak . 

 ' she be think a deal o ' come to see yo ' , and a dunnot think as yo ' mind she at all . my pretty , he be clean forget as how he say last new year 's day , he would gi ' thee a barley - sugar stick , if thou'd hem he a handkercher by this . ' 

 the child 's face be bury in the comfortable breadth of duffle at these word , while the little outstretched hand hold a small square of coarse linen . 

 ' ay , she be noane forget it , and have do she five stitch a day , bless she ; and a dunnot believe as yo ' know she again . she be Phoebe Moorsom , and a'm Hannah , and a've   deal at t ' shop reg'lar this fifteen year . ' 

 ' I be very sorry , ' say Philip . ' I be up late last night , and I be a bit daze to - day . well ! this be nice work , Phoebe , and I be sure I be very much beholden to yo ' . and here be five stick o ' barley - sugar , one for every stitch , and thank you kindly , Mrs. Moorsom , too . ' 

 Philip take the handkerchief and hop he have make honourable amend for his want of recognition . but the wee lassie refuse to be lift down , and whisper something afresh into her mother 's ear , who smile and bid she be quiet . Philip see , however , that there be some wish ungratified on the part of the little maiden which he be expect to inquire into , and , accordingly , he do his duty . 

 ' she be a little fool ; she say yo ' promise to gi'e she a kiss , and t ' make her yo'r wife . ' 

 the child burrow her face close into her mother 's neck , and refuse to allow the kiss which Philip willingly offer . all he could do be to touch the back of the little white fat neck with his lip . the mother carry she off only half satisfied , and Philip feel that he must try and collect his scattered wit , and be more alive to the occasion . 

 towards the dinner - hour the crowd slacken ; Hester begin to replenish decanter and bottle , and to bring out a fresh cake before she go home to dinner ; and Coulson and Philip look over the joint present they always make to she on this day . it be a silk handkerchief of the prettiest colour they could pick out of the shop , intend for she to wear round her neck . each try to persuade the other to give it to she , for each be shy of the act of presentation . Coulson be , however , the most resolute ; and when she return from the parlour the little parcel be in Philip 's hand . 

 ' here , hester , ' say he , go round the counter to she , just as she be leave the shop . ' it be from Coulson and I ; a handkerchief for yo ' to wear ; and we wish yo ' a happy New Year , and plenty on them ; and there be many a one wish the same . ' 

 he take her hand as he say this . she go a little paler , and her eye brighten as though they would fill with tear as they meet his ; she could not have help it , do what she would . but she only say , ' thank yo ' kindly , ' and go up to Coulson she repeat the word and action to he ; and then they go off together to dinner . 

 there be a lull of business for the next hour . John and Jeremiah be din like the rest of the world . even the eld errand - boy have vanish . Philip rearrange disorderly good ; and then sate down on the counter by the window ; it be the habitual place for the one who stay behind ; for except on market - day there be little or no custom during the noon - hour . formerly he use to move the drapery with which the window be ornament , and watch the passer - by with careless eye . but now , though he seem to gaze abroad , he see nothing but vacancy . all the morning since he get up he have be try to fight through his duty lean against a hope a hope that first have bow , and then have break as soon as he really try its weight . there be not a sign of Sylvia 's like for he to be gather from the most careful recollection of the past evening . it be of no use think that there be . it be well to give it up altogether and at once . but what if he could not ? what if the thought of she be bind up with his life ; and that once tear out by his own free will , the very root of his heart must come also ? 

 no ; he be resolve he would go on ; as long as there be life there be hope ; as long as Sylvia remain unpledged to any one else , there be a chance for he . he would remodel his behaviour to she . he could not be merry and light - hearted like other young man ; his nature be not cast in that mould ; and the early sorrow that have leave he a lonely orphan might have mature , but have not enliven , his character . he think with some bitterness on the power of easy talk about trifle which some of those he have meet with at the Corneys ' have exhibit . but then he feel stir within he a force of endure love which he believe to be unusual , and which seem as if it must compel all thing to his wish in the end . a year or so ago he have think much of his own cleverness and his painfully acquire learning , and he have imagine that these be the quality which be to gain Sylvia . but now , whether he have try they and have fail to win even her admiration , or whether some true instinct have tell he that a woman 's love may be gain in many way soon than by mere learning , he be only angry with himself for his past folly in make himself her school nay , her taskmaster . to - night , though , he would start off on a new tack . he would not even upbraid she for her conduct the night before ; he have show she his displeasure at the time ; but she should see how tender and forgiving he could be . he would lure she to he rather than find fault with she . there have perhaps be too much of that already . 

 when Coulson come back Philip go to his solitary dinner . in general he be quite alone while eat it ; but to - day Alice Rose choose to bear he company . she watch he with cold severe eye for some time , until he have appease his languid appetite . then she begin with the rebuke she have in store for he ; a rebuke the motif to which be not entirely reveal even to herself . 

 ' Thou be none so keen after thy food as common , ' she begin . ' plain victual go ill down after feastin ' . ' 

 Philip feel the colour mount to his face ; he be not in the mood for patiently stand the brunt of the attack which he see be come , and yet he have a reverent feeling for woman and for age . he wish she would leave he alone ; but he only say ' I have nought but a slice o ' cold beef for supper , if you will call that feasting . ' 

 ' neither do godly way savour delicately after the pleasure of the world , ' continue she , unheede his speech . ' thou wert will not to seek the house of the Lord , and I think well on thee ; but of late thou'st change , and fall away , and I mun speak what be in my heart towards thee . ' 

 ' Mother , ' say Philip , impatiently   both he and Coulson call Alice ' mother ' at time , ' I do not   think I be fall away , and any way I can not stay now to be it be new year 's day , and t ' shop be throng . ' 

 but Alice hold up her hand . her speech be ready , and she must deliver it . 

 ' Shop here , shop there . the flesh and the devil be gettin ' hold on yo ' , and yo ' need more nor iver to seek t ' way o ' grace . new year 's day come and say , " watch and pray , " and yo ' say , " Nay , I will seek feast and market - place , and let time and season come and go without heedin ' into whose presence they be hasten I . " Time be , Philip , when thou'd niver ha ' letten a merry - make keep thee fra ' t ' watch - night , and t ' company o ' the godly . ' 

 ' I tell yo ' it be no merry - making to I , ' say Philip , with sharpness , as he leave the house . 

 Alice sit down on the near seat , and leant her head on her wrinkle hand . 

 ' he be tangle and snare , ' say she ; ' my heart have yearn after he , and I esteem he as one o ' the elect . and more nor I yearn after he . o Lord , I have but one child ! o Lord , spare she ! but o'er and above a ' I would like to pray for his soul , that Satan might not have it , for he come to I but a little lad . ' 

 at that moment Philip , smite by his conscience for his hard manner of speech , come back ; but Alice do not hear or see he till he be close by she , and then he have to touch she to recall her attention . 

 ' Mother , ' say he , ' I be wrong . I be fret by many thing . I should not   ha ' speak so . it be ill - do of I . ' 

 ' oh , my lad ! ' say she , look up and put her thin arm on his shoulder as he stoop , ' Satan be desire after yo ' that he may sift yo ' as wheat . bide at whoam , bide at whoam , and go not after they as care nought for holy thing . why need yo ' go to Haytersbank this night ? ' 

 Philip redden . he could not and would not give it up , and yet it be difficult to resist the pleading of the usually stern old woman . 

 ' Nay , ' say he , withdraw himself ever so little from her hold ; ' my aunt be but ail , they be my own flesh and blood , and as good folk as need be , though they may not   be o ' our o ' your way o ' thinking in a ' thing . ' 

 ' our way your way o ' thinking , say he , as if they be no long his'n . and as good folk as need be , ' repeat she , with return severity . ' they 's Satan 's word , tho ' yo ' speak them , Philip . I can do nought again Satan , but I can speak to they as can ; an ' we will see which pull hard , for it will be well for thee to be rive and rent I ' twain than to go body and soul to hell . ' 

 ' but do not   think , mother , ' say Philip , his last word of conciliation , for the clock have give warning for two , ' as I be boun ' for hell , just because I go t ' see my own folk , all I ha ' left o ' kin . ' and once more , after lay his hand with as much of a caress as be in his nature on her , he leave the house . 

 probably Alice would have consider the first word that greet Philip on his entrance into the shop as an answer to her prayer , for they be such as put a stop to his plan of go to see Sylvia that evening ; and if Alice have form her inchoate thought into word , Sylvia would have appear as the near earthly representative of the spirit of temptation whom she dread for Philip . 

 as he take his place behind the counter , Coulson say to he in a low voice , 

 ' Jeremiah Foster have be round to bid we to sup wi ' he to - night . he say that he and John have a little matter o ' business to talk over with we . ' 

 a glance from his eye to Philip tell the latter that Coulson believe the business speak of have something to do with the partnership , respect which there have be a silent intelligence for some time between the shopman . 

 ' and what do thou say ? ' ask Philip , doggedly unwilling , even yet , to give up his purpose visit . 

 ' say ! why , what could a say , but that we would come ? there be summat up , for sure ; and summat as he think we should be glad on . I could tell it fra ' t ' look on his face . ' 

 ' I do not   think as I can go , ' say Philip , feel just then as if the long - hop - for partnership be as nothing compare to his plan . it be always distasteful to he to have to give up a project , or to disarrange an intended order of thing , such be his nature ; but to - day it be absolute pain to yield his own purpose . 

 ' why , man alive ? ' say Coulson , in amaze at his reluctance . 

 ' I do not   say I might not   go , ' say Philip , weigh consequence , until call off to attend to customer . 

 in the course of the afternoon , however , he feel himself more easy in defer his visit to Haytersbank till the next evening . Charley Kinraid enter the shop , accompany by Molly Brunton and her sister ; and though they all go towards Hester 's side of the shop , and Philip and Coulson have many people to attend to , yet Hepburn 's sharpen ear catch much of what the young woman be say . from that he gather that Kinraid have promise they new year 's gift , for the purchase of which they be come ; and after a little more listening he learn that Kinraid be return to Shields the next day , have only come over to spend a holiday with his relation , and be tie with ship 's work at the other end . they all talk together lightly and merrily , as if his go or staying be almost a matter of indifference to himself and his cousin . the principal thought of the young woman be to secure the article they most fancy ; Charley Kinraid be   so Philip think   especially anxious that the young and prettiest should be please . Hepburn watch he perpetually with a kind of envy of his bright , courteous manner , the natural gallantry of the sailor . if it be but clear that Sylvia take as little thought of he as he do of she , to all appearance , Philip could even have give he praise for manly good look , and a certain kind of geniality of disposition which make he ready to smile pleasantly at all stranger , from baby upwards . 

 as the party turn to leave the shop they see Philip , the guest of the night before ; and they come over to shake hand with he across the counter ; Kinraid 's hand be proffer among the number . last night Philip could not have believe it possible that such a demonstration of fellowship should have pass between they ; and perhaps there be a slight hesitation of manner on his part , for some idea or remembrance cross Kinraid 's mind which bring a keen searching glance into the eye which for a moment be fasten on Philip 's face . in spite of himself , and during the very action of hand - shake , Philip feel a cloud come over his face , not alter or move his feature , but take light and peace out of his countenance . 

 molly Brunton begin to say something , and he gladly turn to look at she . she be ask he why he go away so early , for they have keep it up for four hour after he leave , and last of all , she add   turn to Kinraid , her cousin Charley have dance a hornpipe among the platter on the ground . 

 Philip hardly know what he say in reply , the mention of that pas seul lift such a weight off his heart . he could smile now , after his grave fashion , and would have shake hand again with Kinraid have it be require ; for it seem to he that no one , care ever so little in the way that he do for Sylvia , could have bear four mortal hour of a company where she have be , and be not ; least of all could have dance a hornpipe , either from gaiety of heart , or even out of complaisance . he feel as if the yearning after the absent one would have be a weight to his leg , as well as to his spirit ; and he imagine that all man be like himself . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 PARTNERSHIP 

 as darkness close in , and the New Year 's throng become scarce , Philip 's hesitation about accompany Coulson fade away . he be more comfortable respect Sylvia , and his go to see she might be defer ; and , after all , he feel that the wish of his master ought to be attend to , and the honour of an invitation to the private house of Jeremiah not to be slight for anything short of a positive engagement . besides , the ambitious man of business exist strongly in Philip . it would never do to slight advance towards the second great earthly object in his life ; one also on which the first depend . 

 so when the shop be close , the two set out down Bridge Street to cross the river to the house of Jeremiah Foster . they stand a moment on the bridge to breathe the keen fresh sea air after their busy day . the water come down , swell full and dark , with rapid rush speed from the snow - feed spring high up on the moorland above . the close - pack house in the old town seem a cluster of white roof irregularly pile against the more unbroken white of the hill - side . light twinkle here and there in the town , and be sling from stern and bow of the ship in the harbour . the air be very still , settle in for a frost ; so still that all distant sound seem near : the rumble of a return cart in the High Street , the voice on board ship , the closing of shutter and barring of door in the new town to which they be bind . but the sharp air be fill , as it be , with saline particle in a freezing state ; little pungent crystal of sea salt burn lip and cheek with their cold keenness . it would not do to linger here in the very centre of the valley up which pass the current of atmosphere come straight with the rush tide from the icy northern sea . besides , there be the unusual honour of a supper with Jeremiah Foster await they . he have ask each of they separately to a meal before now ; but they have never go together , and they feel that there be something serious in the conjuncture . 

 they begin to climb the steep height lead to the freshly - build row of the new town of Monkshaven , feel as if they be rise into aristocratic region where no shop profane the street . Jeremiah Foster 's house be one of six , undistinguished in size , or shape , or colour ; but notice in the daytime by all passer - by for its spotless cleanliness of lintel and doorstep , window and window frame . the very brick seem as though they come in for the daily scrubbing which brighten handle , knocker , all down to the very scraper . 

 the two young man feel as shy of the interview with their master under such unusual relation of guest and host , as a girl do of her first party . each rather draw back from the decide step of knock at the door ; but with a rebuffing shake at his own folly , Philip be the one to give a loud single rap . as if they have be wait for , the door fly open , and a middle - aged servant stand behind , as spotless and neat as the house itself ; and smile a welcome to the familiar face . 

 ' let I dust yo ' a bit , William , ' say she , suit the action to the word . ' you have   be leanin ' again some whitewash , a'll be bind . ay , Philip , ' continue she , turn he round with motherly freedom , ' yo'll do if yo'll but gi ' your shoon a polishin ' wipe on yon other mat . this'n for takin ' t ' roughest mud off . Measter allay polish on that . ' 

 in the square parlour the same precise order be observe . every article of furniture be free from speck of dirt or particle of dust ; and everything be place either in a parallel line , or at exact right - angle with every other . even John and Jeremiah sit in symmetry on opposite side of the fire - place ; the very smile on their honest face seem draw to a line of exactitude . 

 such formality , however admirable , be not calculate to promote ease : it be not until after supper until a good quantity of Yorkshire pie have be swallow , and wash down , too , with the good and most generous wine in Jeremiah 's cellar that there be the least geniality among they , in spite of the friendly kindness of the host and his brother . the long silence , during which mute thank for the meal be give , have come to an end , Jeremiah call for pipe , and three of the party begin to smoke . 

 politic in those day be tickle subject to meddle with , even in the most private company . the nation be in a state of terror against France , and against any at home who might be suppose to sympathise with the enormity she have just be commit . the oppressive act against seditious meeting have be pass the year before ; and people be doubtful to what extremity of severity it might be construe . even the law authority forget to be impartial , but either their alarm or their interest make too many of they vehement partisan instead of calm arbiter , and thus destroy the popular confidence in what should have be consider the supreme tribunal of justice . yet for all this , there be some who dare to speak of reform of Parliament , as a preliminary step to fair representation of the people , and to a reduction of the heavy war - taxation that be imminent , if not already impose . but these pioneer of 1830 be generally obnoxious . the great body of the people glory in be Tories and hater of the French , with whom they be on tenter - hook to fight , almost unaware of the rise reputation of the young corsican warrior , whose name would be use ere a dozen year have pass to hush english baby with a terror such as that of Marlborough once have for the French . 

 at such a place as Monkshaven all these opinion be hold in excess . one or two might , for the mere sake of argument , dispute on certain point of history or government ; but they take care to be very sure of their listener before such argument touch on anything of the present day ; for it have be not unfrequently find that the public duty of prosecute opinion not your own overrode the private duty of respect confidence . Most of the monkshaven politician confine themselves , therefore , to such general question as these : ' could an Englishman lick more than four frenchman at a time ? ' ' what be the proper punishment for member of the Corresponding Society   correspondence with the french directory , hang and quarter , or burn ? ' ' would the forthcoming child of the Princess of Wales be a boy or a girl ? if a girl , would it be more loyal to call it Charlotte or Elizabeth ? ' 

 the Fosters be quite secure enough of their guest this evening to have speak freely on politic have they be so inclined . and they do begin on the outrage which have be lately offer to the king in cross St James 's Park to go and open the House of Lords ; but soon , so accustomed be their mind to caution and restraint , the talk drop down to the high price of provision . bread at 1 . 3d . the quartern loaf , accord to the London test . wheat at 120s . per quarter , as the home - bake northerner view the matter ; and then the conversation die away to an ominous silence . John look at Jeremiah , as if ask he to begin . Jeremiah be the host , and have be a married man . Jeremiah return the look with the same meaning in it . John , though a bachelor , be the eld brother . the great church bell , bring from the monkshaven monastery century ago , high up on the opposite hill - side , begin to ring nine o'clock ; it be get late . Jeremiah begin : 

 ' it seem a bad time for start any one on business , wi ' price and taxis and bread so dear ; but John and I be get into year , and we have   no child to follow we : yet we would fain draw out of some of our worldly affair . we would like to give up the shop , and stick to banking , to which there seemeth a plain path . but first there be the stock and goodwill of the shop to be dispose on . ' 

 a dead pause . this opening be not favourable to the hope of the two moneyless young man who have be hop to succeed their master by the more gradual process of partnership . but it be only the kind of speech that have be agree upon by the two brother with a view of impress on Hepburn and Coulson the great and unusual responsibility of the situation into which the Fosters wish they to enter . in some way the talk of many be much less simple and straightforward in those day than it be now . the study of effect show in the London diner - out of the last generation , who prepare their conversation beforehand , be not without its parallel in humbler sphere , and for different object than self - display . the brother Foster have all but rehearse the speech they be about to make this evening . they be aware of the youth of the party to whom they be go to make a most favourable proposal ; and they dread that if that proposal be too lightly make , it would be too lightly consider , and the duty involve in it too carelessly enter upon . so the role of one brother be to suggest , that of the other to repress . the young man , too , have their reserve . they foresaw , and have long foresee , what be come that evening . they be impatient to hear it in distinct word ; and yet they have to wait , as if unconscious , during all the long preamble . do age and youth never play the same part now ? to return . John Foster reply to his brother : 

 ' the stock and goodwill ! that would take much wealth . and there will be fixture to be consider . Philip , canst thee tell I the exact amount of stock in the shop at present ? ' 

 it have only just be take ; Philip have it at his finger ' end . ' one thousand nine hundred and forty - one pound , thirteen shilling and twopence . ' 

 Coulson look at he in a little dismay , and could not repress a sigh . the figure put into word and speak aloud seem to indicate so much large an amount of money than when quickly write down in numeral . but Philip read the countenance , nay , by some process of which he be not himself aware , he read the mind of the brother , and feel no dismay at what he see there . 

 ' and the fixture ? ' ask John Foster . 

 ' the appraiser value they at four hundred and thirty - five pound three and sixpence when father die . we have add to they since , but we will reckon they at that . how much do that make with the value of the stock ? ' 

 ' two thousand one hundred and seventy - six pound , sixteen shilling and eightpence , ' say Philip . 

 Coulson have do the sum quick , but be too much dishearten by the amount to speak . 

 ' and the goodwill ? ' ask the pitiless John . ' what dost thee set that at ? ' 

 ' I think , brother , that that would depend on who come forward with the purchase - money of the stock and fixture . to some folk we might make it sit easy , if they be know to we , and those as we wish well to . if Philip and William here , for instance , say they would like to purchase the business , I reckon thee and I would not ask them so much as we should ask Millers '   miller be an upstart petty rival shop at the end of the bridge in the New Town . 

 ' I wish Philip and William be to come after we , ' say John . ' but that be out of the question , ' he continue , know all the while that , far from be out of the question , it be the very question , and that it be as good as settle at this very time . 

 no one speak . then Jeremiah go on : 

 ' it be out of the question , I reckon ? ' 

 he look at the two young man . Coulson shake his head . Philip more bravely say , 

 ' I have fifty - three pound seven and fourpence in yo'r hand , Master John , and it be all I have I ' the world . ' 

 ' it be a pity , ' say John , and again they be silent . half - past nine strike . it be time to be begin to make an end . ' perhaps , brother , they have friend who could advance them the money . we might make it sit light to they , for the sake of their good service ? ' 

 Philip reply , 

 ' there be no one who can put forwards a penny for I : I have but few kin , and they have little to spare beyond what they need . ' 

 Coulson say 

 ' my father and mother have nine on we . ' 

 ' let alone , let alone ! ' say John , relent fast ; for he be weary of his part of cold , stern prudence . ' brother , I think we have enough of this world 's good to do what we like wi ' our own . ' 

 Jeremiah be a little scandalize at the rapid melting away of assumed character , and take a good pull at his pipe before he reply 

 ' Upwards of two thousand pound be a large sum to set on the well - being and well - doing of two lad , the elder of whom be not three - and - twenty . I fear we must look far a - field . ' 

 ' why , John , ' reply Jeremiah , ' it be but yesterday thee saidst thee would rather have Philip and William than any man o ' fifty that thee know . and now to bring up their youth again they . ' 

 ' well , well ! t ' half on it be thine , and thou shall do even as thou wilt . but I think as I must have security for my moiety , for it be a risk a great risk . have ye any security to offer ? any expectation ? any legacy , as other folk have a life - interest in at present ? ' 

 no ; neither of they have . so Jeremiah rejoin 

 ' then , I suppose , I mun do as thee dost , John , and take the security of character . and it be a great security too , lad , and t ' good o ' all , and one that I could not   ha ' do without ; no , not if yo'd pay I down five thousand for goodwill , and stock , and fixture . for John Foster and Son have be a shop I ' monkshaven this eighty year and more ; and I dunnot think there be a man live or dead , for that matter as can say Fosters wrong he of a penny , or give short measure to a child or a Cousin Betty . ' 

 they all four shake hand round with the same heartiness as if it have be a legal ceremony necessary to the completion of the partnership . the old man 's face be bright with smile ; the eye of the young one sparkle with hope . 

 ' but , after all , ' say Jeremiah , ' we have   not tell you particular . Yo're thank we for a pig in a poke ; but we have more forethought , and we put all down on a piece o ' paper . ' 

 he take down a fold piece of paper from the mantel - shelf , put on his horn spectacle , and begin to read aloud , occasionally peer over his glass to note the effect on the countenance of the young man . the only thing he be in the habit of read aloud be a chapter in the Bible daily to his housekeeper servant ; and , like many , he reserve a peculiar tone for that solemn occupation a tone which he unconsciously employ for the present enumeration of pound , shilling , and penny . 

 ' average return of the last three year , one hundred and twenty - seven pound , three shilling , and seven penny and one - sixth a week . profit thereupon thirty - four per cent . as near as may be . clear profit of the concern , after deduct all expense except rent for t ' house be our own one thousand two hundred and two pound a year . ' 

 this be far more than either Hepburn or Coulson have imagine it to be ; and a look of surprise , almost amount to dismay , creep over their face , in spite of their endeavour to keep simply motionless and attentive . 

 ' it be a deal of money , lad , and the Lord give you grace to guide it , ' say Jeremiah , put down his paper for a minute . 

 ' amen , ' say John , shake his head to give effect to his word . 

 ' now what we propose be this , ' continue Jeremiah , begin afresh to refer to his paper : ' we will call t ' value of stock and fixture two thousand one hundred and fifty . you may have John Holden , appraiser and auctioneer , in to set a price on they if yo ' will ; or yo ' may look over book and bill ; or , well still , do both , and so check one again t'other ; but for t ' sake o ' make the ground o ' the bargain , I state the sum as above ; and I reckon it so much capital leave in yo'r hand for the use o ' which yo're bind to pay we five per cent . quarterly that be one hundred and seven pound ten per annum at least for t ' first year ; and after it will be reduce by the gradual payment on our money , which must be at the rate of twenty per cent . , thus pay we our principal back in five year . and the rent , include all back yard , right of wharfage , warehouse , and premise , be reckon by we to be sixty - five pound per annum . so yo ' will have to pay we , John and Jeremiah Foster , brother , six hundred and twelve pound ten out of the profit of the first year , leave , at the present rate of profit , about five hundred and eighty - nine pound ten , for the share to be divide between yo ' . ' 

 the plan have , in all its detail , be carefully arrange by the two brother . they be afraid lest Hepburn and Coulson should be dazzle by the amount of profit , and have so arrange the slide - scale of payment as to reduce the first year 's income to what the eld man think a very moderate sum , but what to the young one appear an amount of wealth such as they , who have neither of they ever own much more than fifty pound , consider almost inexhaustible . it be certainly a remarkable instance of prosperity and desert meeting together so early in life . 

 for a moment or two the brother be disappoint at not hear any reply from either of they . then Philip stand up , for he feel as if anything he could say sit down would not be sufficiently expressive of gratitude , and William instantly follow his example . Hepburn begin in a formal manner , something the way in which he have read in the York newspaper that honourable member return thank when their health be give . 

 ' I can hardly express my feeling '   Coulson nudge he   ' his feeling , too of gratitude . oh , Master John ! Master Jeremiah , I think it might come I ' time ; nay , I have   think it might come afore long ; but I niver think as it would be so much , or make so easy . we have   get good kind friend we have , have we not , William ? and we will do our good , and I hope as we shall come up to their wish . ' 

 Philip 's voice quiver a little , as some remembrance pass across his mind ; at this unusual moment of expansion out it come . ' I wish mother could ha ' see this day . ' 

 ' she shall see a well day , my lad , when thy name and William 's be paint over t ' shop - door , and J. and J. Foster black out . ' 

 ' Nay , master , ' say William , ' that mun never be . I would a'most soon not come in for the business . anyhow , it must be ' late J. and J. Foster , ' and I be not sure as I can stomach that . ' 

 ' well , well , William , ' say John Foster , highly gratified , ' there be time enough to talk over that . there be one thing more to be say , be there not , brother Jeremiah ? we do not wish to have this talk over in Monkshaven until shortly before the time when yo ' must enter on the business . we have our own arrangement to make wi ' regard to the banking concern , and there will be lawyer 's work to do , after yo've   examine book and look over stock again together ; may - be we have   overstate it , or t ' fixture be not   worth so much as we say . anyhow yo ' must each on yo ' give we yo'r word for to keep fra ' name this night 's conversation to any one . meantime , Jeremiah and I will have to pay account , and take a kind of farewell of the merchant and manufacturer with whom foster have have dealing this seventy or eighty year ; and when and where it seem fitting to we we will take one of yo ' to introduce as our successor and friend . but all that be to come . but yo ' must each give we yo'r word not to name what have pass here to any one till further speech on the subject have pass between we . ' 

 Coulson immediately give the promise . Philip 's assent come lag . he have think of Sylvia live , almost as much as of the dead mother , whose last word have be a committal of her child to the Father of the friendless ; and now that a short delay be place between the sight of the cup and his enjoyment of it , there be an impatient chafing in the mind of the composed and self - restrain Philip ; and then repentance quick as lightning efface the feeling , and he pledge himself to the secrecy which be enjoin . some few more detail as to their mode of procedure of verify the Fosters ' statement , which to the young man seem a perfectly unnecessary piece of business of probable journey and introduction , and then farewell be bid , and Hepburn and Coulson be in the passage don their wrap , and rather to their indignation be assist therein by Martha , who be accustom to the office with her own master . suddenly they be recall into the parlour . 

 John Foster be fumble with the paper a little nervously : Jeremiah speak 

 ' we have not think it necessary to commend hester Rose to you ; if she have be a lad she would have have a third o ' the business along wi ' yo ' . be a woman , it be ill trouble she with a partnership ; well give she a fix salary till such time as she marry . ' 

 he look a little knowingly and curiously at the face of the young man he address . William Coulson seem sheepish and uncomfortable , but say nothing , leave it as usual to Philip to be spokesman . 

 ' if we have not   care for Hester for hersel ' , master , we should ha ' care for she as be forespeak by yo ' . Yo ' and Master John shall fix what we ought t ' pay she ; and I think I may make bold to say that , as our income rise , hers shall too eh , Coulson ? '   a sound of assent quite distinct enough ; ' for we both look on she as a sister and on Alice like a mother , as I tell she only this very day . ' 




 CHAPTER XV 

 a difficult question 

 Philip go to bed with that kind of humble penitent gratitude in his heart , which we sometimes feel after a sudden revulsion of feeling from despondency to hope . the night before it seem as if all event be so arrange as to thwart he in his dearest wish ; he feel now as if his discontent and repining , not twenty - four hour before , have be almost impious , so great be the change in his circumstance for the well . now all seem promise for the fulfilment of what he most desire . he be almost convinced that he be mistake in think that Kinraid have have anything more than a sailor 's admiration for a pretty girl with regard to Sylvia ; at any rate , he be go away to - morrow , in all probability not to return for another year   for Greenland ship leave for the northern sea as soon as there be a chance of the ice be break up , and ere then he himself might speak out openly , lay before her parent all his fortunate prospect , and before she all his deep passionate love . 

 so this night his prayer be more than the mere form that they have be the night before ; they be a vehement expression of gratitude to God for have , as it be , interfere on his behalf , to grant he the desire of his eye and the lust of his heart . he be like too many of we , he do not place his future life in the hand of God , and only ask for grace to do his will in whatever circumstance might arise ; but he yearn in that terrible way after a blessing which , when grant under such circumstance , too often turn out to be equivalent to a curse . and that spirit bring with it the material and earthly idea that all event that favour our wish be answer to our prayer ; and so they be in one sense , but they need prayer in a deep and high spirit to keep we from the temptation to evil which such event invariably bring with they . 

 Philip little know how Sylvia 's time have be pass that day . if he have , he would have lay down this night with even a heavy heart than he have do on the last . 

 Charley Kinraid accompany his cousin as far as the spot where the path to Haytersbank Farm diverge . then he stop his merry talk , and announce his intention of go to see farmer Robson . Bessy Corney look disappointed and a little sulky ; but her sister Molly Brunton laugh , and say , 

 ' tell truth , lad ! Dannel Robson would niver have a call fra ' thee if he have not   a pretty daughter . ' 

 ' indeed , but he would , ' reply Charley , rather annoyed ; ' when I have   say a thing , I do it . I promise last night to go see he ; besides , I like the old man . ' 

 ' well ! when shall we tell mother yo're comin ' whoam ? ' 

 ' toward eight o'clock may - be soon . ' 

 ' why it be bare five now ! bless t ' lad , do he think o ' stay theere a ' neet , and they up so late last night , and Mrs. Robson ail beside ? mother will not think it kind on yo ' either , will she , Bess ? ' 

 ' I dunno . Charley mun do as he like ; I daresay no one'll miss he if he do bide away till eight . ' 

 ' well , well ! I can not   tell what I shall do ; but yo'd good not stop linger here , for it be get on , and there will be a keen frost by t ' look o ' the star . ' 

 Haytersbank be close for the night as far as it ever be close ; there be no shutter to the window , nor do they care to draw the inside curtain , so few be the passer - by . the house door be fasten ; but the shippen door a little on in the same long low block of building stand open , and a dim light make an oblong upon the snowy ground outside . as Kinraid draw near he hear talk there , and a woman 's voice ; he throw a pass glance through the window into the fire - light house - place , and see Mrs. Robson asleep by the fireside in her easy - chair , he go on . 

 there be the intermittent sound of the sharp whistling of milk into the pail , and Kester , sit on a three - legged stool , cajole a capricious cow into let her fragrant burden flow . Sylvia stand near the farther window - ledge , on which a horn lantern be place , pretend to knit at a gray worsted stocking , but in reality laugh at Kester 's futile endeavour , and find quite enough to do with her eye , in keep herself untouched by the whisk tail , or the occasional kick . the frosty air be mellow by the warm and odorous breath of the cattle breath that hang about the place in faint misty cloud . there be only a dim light ; such as it be , it be not dearly define against the dark heavy shadow in which the old black rafter and manger and partition be envelop . 

 as Charley come to the door , Kester be say , ' quiet wi ' thee , wench ! theere now , she be a beauty , if she will stand still . there be niver sich a cow I ' t ' riding ; if she will only behave hersel ' . she be a bonny lass , she be ; let down her milk , theere be a pretty ! ' 

 ' why , Kester , ' laugh Sylvia , ' thou'rt ask she for her milk wi ' as many pretty speech as if thou wert woo a wife ! ' 

 ' hey , lass ! ' say Kester , turn a bit towards she , and shut one eye to cock the other the well upon she ; an operation which pucker up his already wrinkle face into a thousand new line and fold . ' an ' how do thee know how a man woo a wife , that thee talk so knowin ' about it ? that be tellin ' . some un 's be tryin ' it on thee . ' 

 ' there be niver a one be so impudent , ' say Sylvia , redden and toss her head a little ; ' I would like to see them try I ! ' 

 ' well , well ! ' say Kester , wilfully misunderstand her meaning , ' thou mun be patient , wench ; and if thou be a good lass , may - be thy turn will come and they will try it . ' 

 ' I wish thou'd talk of what thou be some knowledge on , Kester , i'stead of I ' that silly way , ' reply Sylvia . 

 ' then a mun talk no more 'bout woman , for they be past knowin ' , an ' druv e'en King Solomon silly . ' 

 at this moment Charley step in . Sylvia give a little start and drop her ball of worsted . Kester make as though absorb in his task of cajole Black Nell ; but his eye and ear be both vigilant . 

 ' I be go into the house , but I see yo'r mother asleep , and I do not   like to waken she , so I just come on here . be yo'r father to the fore ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Sylvia , hang down her head a little , wonder if he could have hear the way in which she and Kester have be talk , and think over her little foolish joke with anger against herself . ' Father be go to Winthrop about some pig as he be heerd on . he will not be back till seven o'clock or so . ' 

 it be but half - past five , and Sylvia in the irritation of the moment believe that she wish Kinraid would go . but she would have be extremely disappointed if he have . Kinraid himself seem to have no thought of the kind . he see with his quick eye , not unaccustomed to woman , that his come so unexpectedly have flutter Sylvia , and anxious to make she quite at her ease with he , and not unwilling to conciliate Kester , he address his next speech to he , with the same kind of air of interest in the old man 's pursuit that a young man of a different class sometimes put on when talk to the chaperone of a pretty girl in a ball - room . 

 ' that be a handsome beast yo've   just be milk , master . ' 

 ' ay ; but handsome be as handsome do . it be only yesterday as she aim her leg right at t ' pail wi ' t ' aftering in . she know it be aftering as well as any Christian , and t ' more t ' mischief t ' well she like it ; an ' if a have not   be too quick for she , it would have a ' go swash down I ' t ' litter . this'n be a far well cow I ' t ' long run , she be just a steady goer , ' as the milky down - pour come musical and even from the stall next to Black Nell 's . 

 Sylvia be knit away vigorously , think all the while that it be a great pity she have not put on a well gown , or even a cap with bright ribbon , and quite unconscious how very pretty she look stand against the faint light , her head a little bent down ; her hair catch bright golden touch , as it fall from under her little linen cap ; her pink bed - gown , confine by her apron - string , give a sort of easy grace to her figure ; her dark full linsey petticoat short above her trim ancle , look far more suitable to the place where she be stand than her long gown of the night before would have do . Kinraid be want to talk to she , and to make her talk , but be uncertain how to begin . in the meantime Kester go on with the subject last speak about . 

 ' Black Nell 's at her fourth calf now , so she ought to ha ' leave off her trick and turn sober - like . but bless yo ' , there be some cow as will be skittish till they be fat for t ' butcher . not but what a like milk she well nor a steady goer ; a man have allay summat to be watchin ' for ; and a'm kind o ' set up when a've   master she at last . t ' young missus theere , she be mighty fond o ' comin ' t ' see Black Nell at her tantrum . she would niver come near I if a ' cow be like this'n . ' 

 ' do you often come and see the cow milk ? ' ask Kinraid , 

 ' many a time , ' say Sylvia , smile a little . ' why , when we be throng , I help Kester ; but now we have   only Black Nell and Daisy give milk . Kester know as I can milk Black Nell quite easy , ' she continue , half vex that Kester have not name this accomplishment . 

 ' ay ! when she be in a good frame o ' mind , as she be sometimes . but t ' difficulty be to milk she at all time . ' 

 ' I wish I would come a bit soon . I should like t ' have see you milk Black Nell , ' address Sylvia . 

 ' Yo'd well come to - morrow e'en , and see what a hand she will mak ' on she , ' say Kester . 

 ' to - morrow night I shall be far on my road back to Shields . ' 

 ' to - morrow ! ' say Sylvia , suddenly look up at he , and then drop her eye , as she find he have be watch for the effect of his intelligence on she . 

 ' I mun be back at t ' whaler , where I be engage , ' continue he . ' she be fit up after a fresh fashion , and as I have   be one as want new way , I mun be on the spot for t ' look after she . maybe I shall take a run down here afore sail in March . I be sure I shall try . ' 

 there be a good deal mean and understand by these last few word . the tone in which they be speak give they a tender intensity not lose upon either of the hearer . Kester cock his eye once more , but with as little obtrusiveness as he could , and ponder the sailor 's look and way . he remember his come about the place the winter before , and how the old master have then appear to have take to he ; but at that time Sylvia have seem to Kester too little removed from a child to have either art or part in Kinraid 's visit ; now , however , the case be different . Kester in his sphere among his circle of acquaintance , narrow though it be have hear with much pride of Sylvia 's bear away the bell at church and at market , wherever girl of her age be congregate . he be a north countryman , so he give out no further sign of his feeling than his mistress and Sylvia 's mother have do on a like occasion . 

 ' T ' lass be weel enough , ' say he ; but he grin to himself , and look about , and listen to the hearsay of every lad , wonder who be handsome , and brave , and good enough to be Sylvia 's mate . now , of late , it have seem to the canny farm - servant pretty clear that Philip Hepburn be ' after she ' ; and to Philip , Kester have an instinctive objection , a kind of natural antipathy such as have exist in all age between the dweller in a town and those in the country , between agriculture and trade . so , while Kinraid and Sylvia keep up their half - tender , half - jesting conversation , Kester be make up his slow persistent mind as to the desirability of the young man then present as a husband for his darling , as much from his be other than Philip in every respect , as from the individual good quality he possess . Kester 's first opportunity of favour Kinraid 's suit consist in be as long as possible over his milking ; so never be cow that require such ' strip , ' or be expect to yield such ' aftering ' , as Black Nell and Daisy that night . but all thing must come to an end ; and at length Kester get up from his three - legged stool , on see what the other do not that the dip - candle in the lantern be come to an end and that in two or three minute more the shippen would be in darkness , and so his pail of milk be endanger . in an instant Sylvia have start out of her delicious dreamland , her droop eye be raise , and recover their power of observation ; her ruddy arm be free from the apron in which she have enfold they , as a protection from the gathering cold , and she have seize and adjust the wooden yoke across her shoulder , ready to bear the brim milk - pail to the dairy . 

 ' look yo ' at she ! ' exclaim Kester to Charley , as he adjust the fragrant pail on the yoke . ' she think she be missus a ready , and she be allay for carry in t ' milk since t ' rhumatiz cotche my shouther I ' t ' back end ; and when she say " Yea , " it be as much as my heed 's worth to say " Nay . " ' 

 and along the wall , round the corner , down the round slippery stone of the ramble farmyard , behind the building , do Sylvia trip , safe and well - poise , though the ground wear all one coating of white snow , and in many place be so slippery as to oblige Kinraid to linger near Kester , the lantern - bearer . Kester do not lose his opportunity , though the cold misty night air provoke his asthmatic cough when - ever he breathe , and often interrupt his word . 

 ' she be a good wench a good wench as iver be an come on a good stock , an ' that be summat , whether in a cow or a woman . A've   know she from a baby ; she be a reet down good un . ' 

 by this time they have reach the back - kitchen door , just as Sylvia have unladen herself , and be strike a light with flint and tinder . the house seem warm and invite after the pierce outer air , although the kitchen into which they enter contain only a raked and slumber fire at one end , over which , on a crook , hang the immense pan of potato cook for the evening meal of the pig . to this pan Kester immediately address himself , swing it round with ease , owe to the admirable simplicity of the old - fashioned machinery . Kinraid stand between Kester and the door into the dairy , through which Sylvia have vanish with the milk . he half wish to conciliate Kester by help he , but he seem also attract , by a force which annihilate his will , to follow she wherever she go . Kester read his mind . 

 ' let alone , let alone , ' say he ; ' pig ' vittle take noan such dainty carryin ' as milk . a may set it down an ' niver spill a drop ; she be noan fit for t ' serve swine , nor yo ' other , mester ; well help her t ' teem t ' milk . ' 

 so Kinraid follow the light his light into the icy chill of the dairy , where the bright polished tin can be quickly dim with the warm , sweet - smell milk , that Sylvia be empty out into the brown pan . in his haste to help she , Charley take up one of the pail . 

 ' eh ? that'n be to be strain . Yo ' have a ' the cow 's hair in . Mother 's very particular , and can not abide a hair . ' 

 so she go over to her awkward dairymaid , and before she but not before he be aware of the sweet proximity , she be adjust his happy awkward arm to the new office of hold a milk - strainer over the bowl , and pour the white liquid through it . 

 ' there ! ' say she , look up for a moment , and half blushing ; ' now yo'll know how to do it next time . ' 

 ' I wish next time be to come now , ' say Kinraid ; but she have return to her own pail , and seem not to hear he . he follow she to her side of the dairy . ' I have   but a short memory , can yo ' not show I again how t ' hold t ' strainer ? ' 

 ' no , ' say she , half laugh , but hold her strainer fast in spite of his insinuate effort to unlock her finger . ' but there be no need to tell I yo've   getten a short memory . ' 

 ' why ? what have I do ? how dun you know it ? ' 

 ' last night , ' she begin , and then she stop , and turn away her head , pretend to be busy in her dairy duty of rinse and such like . 

 ' well ! ' say he , half conjecture her meaning , and flatter by it , if his conjecture be right . ' last night what ? ' 

 ' oh , yo ' know ! ' say she , as if impatient at be both literally and metaphorically follow about , and drive into a corner . 

 ' no ; tell I , ' persist he . 

 ' well , ' say she , ' if yo ' will have it , I think yo ' show yo'd but a short memory when yo ' do not   know I again , and yo ' be five time at this house last winter , and that be not so long sin ' . but I suppose yo ' see a vast o ' thing on yo'r voyage by land or by sea , and then it be but natural yo ' should forget . ' she wish she could go on talk , but could not think of anything more to say just then ; for , in the middle of her sentence , the flattering interpretation he might put upon her word , on her know so exactly the number of time he have be to Haytersbank , flash upon she , and she want to lead the conversation a little far afield to make it a little less personal . this be not his wish , however . in a tone which thrill through she , even in her own despite , he say , 

 ' do yo ' think that can ever happen again , Sylvia ? ' 

 she be quite silent ; almost tremble . he repeat the question as if to force she to answer . drive to bay , she equivocate . 

 ' what happen again ? let I go , I dunno what yo're talk about , and I be a'most numb wi ' cold . ' 

 for the frosty air come sharp in through the open lattice window , and the ice be already form on the milk . Kinraid would have find a ready way of keep his cousin , or indeed most young woman , warm ; but he pause before he dare put his arm round Sylvia ; she have something so shy and wild in her look and manner ; and her very innocence of what her word , speak by another girl , might lead to , inspire he with respect , and keep he in check . so he content himself with say , 

 ' I will let yo ' go into t ' warm kitchen if yo'll tell I if yo ' think I can ever forget yo ' again . ' 

 she look up at he defiantly , and set her red lip firm . he enjoy her determination not to reply to this question ; it show she feel its significance . her pure eye look steadily into his ; nor be the expression in his such as to daunt she or make she afraid . they be like two child defy each other ; each determine to conquer . at last she unclose her lip , and nod her head as if in triumph , say , as she fold her arm once more in her check apron , 

 ' Yo'll have to go home sometime . ' 

 ' not for a couple of hour yet , ' say he ; ' and yo'll be freeze first ; so yo'd well say if I can ever forget yo ' again , without more ado . ' 

 perhaps the fresh voice break on the silence , perhaps the tone be less modulated than they have be before , but anyhow Bell Robson 's voice be hear call Sylvia through the second door , which open from the dairy to the house - place , in which her mother have be till this moment asleep . Sylvia dart off in obedience to the call ; glad to leave he , as at the moment Kinraid resentfully imagine . through the open door he hear the conversation between mother and daughter , almost unconscious of its meaning , so difficult do he find it to wrench his thought from the idea he have just be form with Sylvia 's bright lovely face right under his eye . 

 ' Sylvia ! ' say her mother , ' who be yonder ? ' Bell be sit up in the attitude of one startle out of slumber into intensity of listening ; her hand on each of the chair - arm , as if just go to rise . ' there be a fremd man I ' t ' house . I heerd his voice ! ' 

 ' it be only it be just Charley Kinraid ; he be a - talk to I I ' t ' dairy . ' 

 ' I ' t ' dairy , lass ! and how com'd he I ' t ' dairy ? ' 

 ' he com'd to see feyther . Feyther ask he last night , ' say Sylvia , conscious that he could overhear every word that be say , and a little suspecting that he be no great favourite with her mother . 

 ' Thy feyther 's out ; how com'd he I ' t ' dairy ? ' persevere Bell . 

 ' he com'd past this window , and see yo ' asleep , and do not   like for t ' waken yo ' ; so he com'd on to t ' shippen , and when I carry t ' milk in - ' 

 but now Kinraid come in , feel the awkwardness of his situation a little , yet with an expression so pleasant and manly in his open face , and in his exculpatory manner , that Sylvia lose his first word in a strange kind of pride of possession in he , about which she do not reason nor care to define the ground . but her mother rise from her chair somewhat formally , as if she do not intend to sit down again while he stay , yet be too weak to be keep in that standing attitude long . 

 ' I be afeared , sir , Sylvie have not   tell yo ' that my master 's out , and not like to be in till late . he will be main and sorry to have miss yo ' . ' 

 there be nothing for it after this but to go . his only comfort be that on Sylvia 's rosy face he could read unmistakable sign of regret and dismay . his sailor 's life , in bring he suddenly face to face with unexpected event , have give he something of that self - possession which we consider the attribute of a gentleman ; and with an apparent calmness which almost disappoint Sylvia , who construe it into a symptom of indifference as to whether he go or stay , he bid her mother good - night , and only say , in hold her hand a minute long than be absolutely necessary , 

 ' I be come back ere I sail ; and then , may - be , you will answer yon question . ' 

 he speak low , and her mother be rearrange herself in her chair , else Sylvia would have have to repeat the previous word . as it be , with soft thrilling idea ring through she , she could get her wheel , and sit down to her spinning by the fire ; wait for her mother to speak first , Sylvia dream her dream . 

 Bell Robson be partly aware of the state of thing , as far as it lie on the surface . she be not aware how deep down certain feeling have penetrate into the girl 's heart who sit on the other side of the fire , with a little sad air diffuse over her face and figure . Bell look upon Sylvia as still a child , to be warn off forbid thing by threat of danger . but the forbidden thing be already taste , and possible danger in its full acquisition only serve to make it more precious - sweet . 

 Bell sit upright in her chair , gaze into the fire . her milk - white linen mob - cap fringe round and soften her face , from which the usual apple - red be banish by illness , and the feature , from the same cause , render more prominent and stern . she have a clean buff kerchief round her neck , and stuff into the bosom of her Sunday woollen gown of dark blue , if she have be in working - trim she would have wear a bedgown like Sylvia 's . her sleeve be pin back at the elbow , and her brown arm and hard - work hand lie cross in unwonted idleness on her check apron . her knitting be by her side ; and if she have be go through any accustomed calculation or consideration she would have have it busily clink in her finger . but she have something quite beyond common to think about , and , perhaps , to speak about ; and for the minute she be not equal to knitting . 

 ' Sylvie , ' she begin at length , ' do I e'er tell thee on Nancy Hartley as I know when I be a child ? I be think a deal on she to - night ; may - be it be because I have   be dream on yon old time . she be a bonny lass as ever be see , I have   heerd folk say ; but that be afore I know she . when I know she she be crazy , poor wench ; wi ' her black hair a - stream down her back , and her eye , as be a'most as black , allay cry out for pity , though never a word she speak but " he once be here . " just that o'er and o'er again , whether she be cold or hot , full or hungry , " he once be here , " be all her speech . she have be farm - servant to my mother 's brother James Hepburn , thy great - uncle as be ; she be a poor , friendless wench , a parish ' prentice , but honest and gaum - like , till a lad , as nobody know , come o'er the hill one sheep - shear fra ' whitehaven ; he have summat to do wi ' th ' sea , though not rightly to be call a sailor : and he make a deal on Nancy Hartley , just to beguile the time like ; and he go away and ne'er send a thought after she more . it be the way as lad have ; and there be no hold them when they be fellow as nobody know neither where they come fro ' , nor what they have   be do a ' their life , till they come athwart some poor wench like Nancy Hartley . she be but a softy after all : for she leave off do her work in a proper manner . I have   heerd my aunt say as she find out as summat be wrong wi ' Nancy as soon as th ' milk turn bingy , for there ne'er have be such a clean lass about her milk - can afore that ; and from bad it grow to bad , and she would sit and do nothing but play wi ' her finger fro ' morn till night , and if they ask she what ail she , she just say , " he once be here ; " and if they bid she go about her work , it be a ' the same . and when they scold she , and pretty sharp too , she would stand up and put her hair from her eye , and look about she like a crazy thing search for her wit , and ne'er find they , for all she could think on be just , " he once be here . " it be a caution to I again think a man t ' mean what he say when he be a - talk to a young woman . ' 

 ' but what become on poor Nancy ? ' ask Sylvia . 

 ' what should become on she or on any lass as give hersel ' up to think on a man who care nought for she ? ' reply her mother , a little severely . ' she be craze , and my aunt could not   keep she on , could she ? she do keep she a long weary time , think as she would , may - be , come to hersel ' , and , anyhow , she be a motherless wench . but at length she have for t ' go where she come fro ' back to Keswick workhouse : and when last I heerd on she she be chain to th ' great kitchen dresser I ' t ' workhouse ; they would beat she till she be teach to be silent and quiet I ' th ' daytime , but at night , when she be leave alone , she would take up th ' oud cry , till it wring their heart , so they have many a time to come down and beat she again to get any peace . it be a caution to I , as I say afore , to keep fro ' thinking on man as think nought on I . ' 

 ' poor crazy Nancy ! ' sigh Sylvia . the mother wonder if she have take the ' caution ' to herself , or be only full of pity for the mad girl , dead long before . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 the ENGAGEMENT 

 ' as the day lengthen so the cold strengthen . ' it be so that year ; the hard frost which begin on new year 's eve last on and on into late February , black and bitter , but welcome enough to the farmer , as it keep back the too early growth of autumn - sown wheat , and give they the opportunity of lead manure . but it do not suit invalid as well , and Bell Robson , though not get bad , do not make any progress towards amendment . Sylvia be keep very busy , notwithstanding that she have the assistance of a poor widow - woman in the neighbourhood on cleaning , or washing , or churn day . her life be quiet and monotonous , although hard - work ; and while her hand mechanically find and do their accustomed labour , the thought that rise in her head always centre on Charley Kinraid , his way , his word , his look , whether they all mean what she would fain believe they do , and whether , mean love at the time , such a feeling be likely to endure . her mother 's story of crazy Nancy have take hold of she ; but not as a ' caution , ' rather as a parallel case to her own . like Nancy , and borrow the poor girl 's own word , she would say softly to herself , ' he once be here ' ; but all along she believe in her heart he would come back again to she , though it touch she strangely to imagine the agony of forsaken love . 

 Philip know little of all this . he be very busy with fact and figure , doggedly fight through the necessary business , and only now and then allow himself the delicious relaxation of go to Haytersbank in an evening , to inquire after his aunt 's health , and to see Sylvia ; for the two Fosters be punctiliously anxious to make their shopman test all their statement ; insist on an examination of the stock , as if Hepburn and Coulson be stranger to the shop ; have the Monkshaven auctioneer in to appraise the fixture and necessary furniture ; go over the shop book for the last twenty year with their successor , an employment which take up evening after evening ; and not unfrequently take one of the young man on the long commercial journey which be tediously make in a gig . by degree both Hepburn and Coulson be introduce to distant manufacturer and wholesale dealer . they would have be willing to take the Fosters ' word for every statement the brother have make on new year 's day ; but this , it be evident , would not have satisfy their master , who be scrupulous in insist that whatever advantage there be should always fall on the side of the young man . 

 when Philip see Sylvia she be always quiet and gentle ; perhaps more silent than she have be a year ago , and she do not attend so briskly to what be pass around she . she be rather thin and pale ; but whatever change there be in she be always an improvement in Philip 's eye , so long as she speak graciously to he . he think she be suffer from long - continue anxiety about her mother , or that she have too much to do ; and either cause be enough to make he treat she with a grave regard and deference which have a repressed tenderness in it , of which she , otherwise occupy , be quite unaware . she like he well , too , than she have do a year or two before , because he do not show she any of the eager attention which tease she then , although its meaning be not fully understand . 

 thing be much in this state when the frost break , and milder weather succeed . this be the time so long look forward to by the invalid and her friend , as favour the doctor 's recommendation of change of air . her husband be to take she to spend a fortnight with a kindly neighbour , who live near the farm they have occupy , forty mile or so inland , before they come to Haytersbank . the widow - woman be to come and stay in the house , to keep Sylvia company , during her mother 's absence . Daniel , indeed , be to return home after convey his wife to her destination ; but there be so much to be do on the land at this time of the year , that Sylvia would have be alone all day have it not be for the arrangement just mention . 

 there be active stirring in Monkshaven harbour as well as on shore . the whaler be finish their fitting - out for the Greenland sea . it be a ' close ' season , that be to say , there would be difficulty in pass the barrier of ice which lie between the ship and the whaling - ground ; and yet these must be reach before June , or the year 's expedition would be of little avail . every blacksmith 's shop ring with the rhythmical clang of busy hammer , beat out old iron , such as horseshoe , nail or stub , into the great harpoon ; the quay be throng with busy and important sailor , rush hither and thither , conscious of the demand in which they be hold at this season of the year . it be war time , too . many captain unable to procure man in Monkshaven would have to complete their crew in the Shetlands . the shop in the town be equally busy ; store have to be purchase by the whaling - master , warm clothing of all sort to be provide . these be the large wholesale order ; but many a man , and woman , too , bring out their small hoard to purchase extra comfort , or precious keepsake for some beloved one . it be the time of the great half - yearly traffic of the place ; another impetus be give to business when the whaler return in the autumn , and the man be flush of money , and full of delight at once more see their home and their friend . 

 there be much to be do in Fosters ' shop , and later hour be keep than usual . some perplexity or other be occupy John and Jeremiah Foster ; their mind be not so much on the alert as usual , be engage on some weighty matter of which they have as yet speak to no one . but it thus happen that they do not give the prompt assistance they be accustom to render at such time ; and Coulson have be away on some of the new expedition devolving on he and Philip as future partner . one evening after the shop be closed , while they be examine the good , and compare the sale with the entry in the day - book , Coulson suddenly inquire 

 ' by the way , Hester , do thee know where the parcel of good bandana be go ? there be four left , as I be pretty sure , when I set off to Sandsend ; and to - day Mark Alderson come in , and would fain have have one , and I could find none nowhere . ' 

 ' I sell t ' last to - day , to yon sailor , the specksioneer , who fight the press - gang same time as poor Darley be kill . he take it , and three yard of yon pink ribbon wi ' t ' black and yellow cross on it , as Philip could never abide . Philip have get them I ' t ' book , if he will only look . ' 

 ' be he here again ? ' say Philip ; ' I do not   see he . what bring he here , where he be noan want ? ' 

 ' T ' shop be throng wi ' folk , ' say hester , ' and he know his own mind about the handkercher , and do not   tarry long . just as he be leave , his eye catch on t ' ribbon , and he come back for it . it be when yo ' be serve Mary Darby and there be a vast o ' folk about yo ' . ' 

 ' I wish I would see he , ' say Coulson . ' I would ha ' gi'en he a word and a look he would not ha ' forget in a hurry . ' 

 ' why , what be up ? ' say Philip , surprised at William 's unusual manner , and , at the same time , rather gratified to find a reflection of his own feeling about Kinraid . Coulson 's face be pale with anger , but for a moment or two he seem uncertain whether he would reply or not . 

 ' up ! ' say he at length . ' it be just this : he come after my sister for well nor two year ; and a well lass no , nor a pretty I ' my eye niver break bread . and then my master see another girl , that he like well ' William almost choke in his endeavour to keep down all appearance of violent anger , and then go on , ' and that he play t ' same game wi ' , as I have   heerd tell . ' 

 ' and how do thy sister take it ? ' ask Philip , eagerly . 

 ' she die in a six - month , ' say William ; ' she forgive he , but it be beyond I . I think it be he when I heerd of t ' work about Darley ; Kinraid and come fra ' Newcassel , where Annie live ' prentice and I make inquiry , and it be t ' same man . but I will say no more about he , for it stir t ' old Adam more nor I like , or be fitting . ' 

 out of respect to he , Philip ask no more question although there be many thing that he fain would have know . both Coulson and he go silently and grimly through the remainder of their day 's work . independent of any personal interest which either or both of they have or might have in Kinraid 's be a light o ' love , this fault of his be one with which the two grave , sedate young man have no sympathy . their heart be true and constant , whatever else might be their failing ; and it be no new thing to ' damn the fault we have no mind to . ' Philip wish that it be not so late , or that very evening he would have go to keep guard over Sylvia in her mother 's absence nay , perhaps he might have see reason to give she a warning of some kind . but , if he have do so , it would have be lock the stable - door after the steed be steal . Kinraid have turn his step towards Haytersbank Farm as soon as ever he have complete his purchase . he have only come that afternoon to Monkshaven , and for the sole purpose of see Sylvia once more before he go to fulfil his engagement as specksioneer in the Urania , a whaling - vessel that be to sail from North Shields on Thursday morning , and this be Monday . 

 Sylvia sit in the house - place , her back to the long low window , in order to have all the light the afternoon hour afford for her work . a basket of her father 's unmended stocking be on the little round table beside she , and one be on her left hand , which she suppose herself to be mend ; but from time to time she make long pause , and look in the fire ; and yet there be but little motion of flame or light in it out of which to conjure vision . it be ' redd up ' for the afternoon ; cover with a black mass of coal , over which the equally black kettle hang on the crook . in the back - kitchen Dolly Reid , Sylvia 's assistant during her mother 's absence , chant a lugubrious ditty , befit her condition as a widow , while she clean tin , and can , and milking - pail . perhaps these bustling sound prevent Sylvia from hear approach footstep come down the brow with swift advance ; at any rate , she start and suddenly stand up as some one enter the open door . it be strange she should be so much startle , for the person who enter have be in her thought all during those long pause . Charley Kinraid and the story of crazy Nancy have be the subject for her dream for many a day , and many a night . now he stand there , bright and handsome as ever , with just that much timidity in his face , that anxiety as to his welcome , which give his accost an add charm , could she but have perceive it . but she be so afraid of herself , so unwilling to show what she feel , and how much she have be think of he in his absence , that her reception seem cold and still . she do not come forward to meet he ; she go crimson to the very root of her hair ; but that , in the wan light , he could not see ; and she shake so that she feel as if she could hardly stand ; but the tremor be not visible to he . she wonder if he remember the kiss that have pass between they on new year 's eve the word that have be speak in the dairy on new year 's day ; the tone , the look , that have accompany those word . but all she say be 

 ' I do not   think to see yo ' . I think yo'd ha ' sail . ' 

 ' I tell yo ' I should come back , do not   I ? ' say he , still stand , with his hat in his hand , wait to be ask to sit down ; and she , in her bashfulness , forget to give the invitation , but , instead , pretend to be attentively mend the stocking she hold . neither could keep quiet and silent long . she feel his eye be upon she , watch every motion , and grow more and more confused in her expression and behaviour . he be a little take aback by the nature of his reception , and be not sure at first whether to take the great change in her manner , from what it have be when last he see she , as a favourable symptom or otherwise . by - and - by , luckily for he , in some turn of her arm to reach the scissor on the table , she catch the edge of her work - basket , and down it fall . she stoop to pick up the scatter stocking and ball of worsted , and so do he ; and when they rise up , he have fast hold of her hand , and her face be turn away , half ready to cry . 

 ' what ail yo ' at I ? ' say he , beseechingly . ' Yo ' might ha ' forget I ; and yet I think we make a bargain against forget each other . ' no answer . he go on : ' yo've   never be out o ' my thought , Sylvia Robson ; and I be come back to Monkshaven for nought but to see you once and again afore I go away to the northern sea . it be not two hour sin ' I land at Monkshaven , and I have   be near neither kith nor kin as yet ; and now I be here you will not   speak to I . ' 

 ' I do not   know what to say , ' say she , in a low , almost inaudible tone . then harden herself , and resolve to speak as if she do not understand his only half - express meaning , she lift up her head , and all but look at he while she wrench her hand out of his she say : ' Mother 's go to Middleham for a visit , and feyther be out I ' t ' plough - field wi ' Kester ; but he will be in afore long . ' 

 Charley do not speak for a minute or so . then he say 

 ' Yo're not so dull as to think I be come all this way for t ' see either your father or your mother . I have   a great respect for them both ; but I would hardly ha ' come all this way for to see them , and I bind to be back I ' shield , if I walk every step of the way , by Wednesday night . it be that yo ' will not   understand my meaning , Sylvia ; it be not that yo ' do not , or that yo ' can not . ' he make no effort to repossess himself of her hand . she be quite silent , but in spite of herself she draw long hard breath . ' I may go back to where I come from , ' he go on . ' I think to go to sea wi ' a blessed hope to cheer I up , and a knowledge o ' some one as love I as I would leave behind ; some one as love I half as much as I do she ; for th ' measure o ' my love toward she be so great and mighty , I would be content wi ' half as much from she , till I have teach she to love I more . but if she be a cold heart and can not care for a honest sailor , why , then , I would well go back at once . ' 

 he make for the door . he must have be pretty sure from some sign or other , or he would never have leave it to her womanly pride to give way , and for she to make the next advance . he have not take two step when she turn quickly towards he , and say something the echo of which , rather than the word themselves , reach he . 

 ' I do not   know yo ' care for I ; yo ' niver say so . ' in an instant he be back at her side , his arm round she in spite of her short struggle , and his eager passionate voice say , ' Yo ' never know I love you , Sylvia ? say it again , and look I ' my face while yo ' say it , if yo ' can . why , last winter I think yo'd be such a woman when yo'd come to be one as my een have never look upon , and this year , ever sin ' I see yo ' I ' the kitchen corner sit crouch behind my uncle , I as good as swore I would have yo ' for wife , or never we d at all . and it be not long ere yo ' know it , for all yo ' be so coy , and now yo ' have the face no , yo ' have not the face come , my darling , what be it ? ' for she be cry ; and on his turn her wet blushing face towards he the well to look at it , she suddenly hide it in his breast . he lull and soothe she in his arm , as if she have be a weep child and he her mother ; and then they sit down on the settle together , and when she be more composed they begin to talk . he ask she about her mother ; not sorry in his heart at Bell Robson 's absence . he have intend if necessary to acknowledge his wish and desire with regard to Sylvia to her parent ; but for various reason he be not sorry that circumstance have give he the chance of see she alone , and obtain her promise to marry he without be oblige to tell either her father or her mother at present . ' I ha ' spend my money pretty free , ' he say , ' and I have   ne'er a penny to the fore , and yo'r parent may look for something well for yo ' , my pretty : but when I come back fro ' this voyage I shall stand a chance of have a share I ' th ' Urania , and may - be I shall be mate as well as specksioneer ; and I can get a matter of from seventy to ninety pound a voyage , let alone th ' half - guineas for every whale I strike , and six shill a gallon on th ' oil ; and if I keep steady wi ' Forbes and Company , they will make I master I ' time , for I have   have good schooling , and can work a ship as well as any man ; an ' I leave yo ' wi ' yo'r parent , or take a cottage for yo ' nigh at hand ; but I would like to have something to the fore , and that I shall have , please God , when we come back I ' th ' autumn . I shall go to sea happy , now , think I have   yo'r word . Yo're not one to go back from it , I be sure , else it be a long time to leave such a pretty girl as yo ' , and ne'er a chance of a letter reach yo ' just to tell yo ' once again how I love yo ' , and to bid yo ' not forget yo'r true love . ' 

 ' there will be no need o ' that , ' murmur Sylvia . 

 she be too dizzy with happiness to have attend much to his detail of his worldly prospect , but at the sound of his tender word of love her eager heart be ready to listen . 

 ' I do not   know , ' say he , want to draw she out into more confession of her feeling . ' there be many a one ready to come after yo ' ; and yo'r mother be not o'er captivate wi ' I ; and there be yon tall fellow of a cousin as look black at I , for if I be not mista'en he be a notion of be sweet on yo ' hisself . ' 

 ' not he , ' say Sylvia , with some contempt in her tone . ' he be so full o ' business and t ' shop , and o ' makin ' money , and gettin ' wealth . ' 

 ' ay , ay ; but perhaps when he get a rich man he will come and ask my Sylvia to be his wife , and what will she say then ? ' 

 ' he will niver come ask such a foolish question , ' say she , a little impatiently ; ' he know what answer he would get if he do . ' 

 Kinraid say , almost as if to himself , ' Yo'r mother favour he though . ' but she , weary of a subject she care nothing about , and eager to identify herself with all his interest , ask he about his plan almost at the same time that he say these last word ; and they go on as lover do , intermix a great many tender expression with a very little conversation relate to fact . 

 dolly Reid come in , and go out softly , unheede by they . but Sylvia 's listen ear catch her father 's voice , as he and Kester return homeward from their day 's work in the plough - field ; and she start away , and flee upstairs in shy affright , leave Charley to explain his presence in the solitary kitchen to her father . 

 he come in , not see that any one be there at first ; for they have never think of light a candle . Kinraid step forward into the firelight ; his purpose of conceal what he have say to Sylvia quite melt away by the cordial welcome her father give he the instant that he recognize he . 

 ' bless thee , lad ! who would ha ' think o ' seein ' thee ? why , if iver a thought on thee at all , it be half way to Davis ' Straits . to be sure , t ' winter 's be a dree season , and thou'rt , may - be , I ' t ' reet on ' t to mak ' a late start . late start as iver I make be ninth o ' March , an ' we strike thirteen whale that year . ' 

 ' I have something to say to you , ' say Charley , in a hesitate voice , so different to his usual hearty way , that Daniel give he a keen look of attention before he begin to speak . and , perhaps , the eld man be not unprepared for the communication that follow . at any rate , it be not unwelcome . he like Kinraid , and have strong sympathy not merely with what he know of the young sailor 's character , but with the life he lead , and the business he follow . Robson listen to all he say with approve nod and wink , till Charley have tell he everything he have to say ; and then he turn and strike his broad horny palm into Kinraid 's as if conclude a bargain , while he express in word his hearty consent to their engagement . he wind up with a chuckle , as the thought strike he that this great piece of business , of dispose of their only child , have be conclude while his wife be away . 

 ' a'm noan so sure as t ' missus will like it , ' say he ; ' tho ' whativer she will ha ' to say again it , mischief only know . but she be noan keen on matterimony ; though a have make she as good a man as there be in a ' t ' Ridings . anyhow , a'm master , and that she know . but may - be , for t ' sake o ' peace an ' quietness tho ' she be niver a scold tongue , that a will say for her we'n good keep this matter to ourselves till thou come int ' port again . t ' lass upstairs will like nought well than t ' curl hersel ' round a secret , and purr o'er it , just as t ' oud cat do o'er her blind kitten . but thou'll be want to see t ' lass , a'll be bind . an oud man like I be not   as good company as a pretty lass . ' laugh a low rich laugh over his own wit , Daniel go to the bottom of the stair , and call , ' Sylvie , Sylvie ! come down , lass ! a 's reet ; come down ! ' 

 for a time there be no answer . then a door be unbolt , and Sylvia say , 

 ' I can not   come down again . I be noan comin ' down again to - night . ' 

 Daniel laugh the more at this , especially when he catch Charley 's look of disappointment . 

 ' Hearken how she be bolt her door . she will noane come near we this night . eh ! but she be a stiff little ' un ; she be be our only one , and we'n mostly let she have her own way . but we will have a pipe and a glass ; and that , to my thinking , be as good company as iver a woman in Yorkshire . ' 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 reject warning 

 the post arrive at Monkshaven three time in the week ; sometimes , indeed , there be not a dozen letter in the bag , which be bring thither by a man in a light mail - cart , who take the well part of a day to drive from York ; drop private bag here and there on the moor , at some squire 's lodge or roadside inn . of the number of letter that arrive in Monkshaven , the Fosters , shopkeeper and banker , have the large share . 

 the morning succeed the day on which Sylvia have engage herself to Kinraid , the Fosters seem unusually anxious to obtain their letter . several time Jeremiah come out of the parlour in which his brother John be sit in expectant silence , and , pass through the shop , look up and down the market - place in search of the old lame woman , who be charitably employ to deliver letter , and who must have be lamer than ever this morning , to judge from the lateness of she come . although none but the Fosters know the cause of their impatience for their letter , yet there be such tacit sympathy between they and those whom they employ , that Hepburn , Coulson , and hester be all much relieved when the old woman at length appear with her basket of letter . 

 one of these seem of especial consequence to the good brother . they each separately look at the direction , and then at one another ; and without a word they return with it unread into the parlour , shut the door , and draw the green silk curtain close , the well to read it in privacy . 

 both Coulson and Philip feel that something unusual be go on , and be , perhaps , as full of consideration as to the possible content of this London letter , as of attention to their more immediate business . but fortunately there be little do in the shop . Philip , indeed , be quite idle when John Foster open the parlour - door , and , half doubtfully , call he into the room . as the door of communication shut the three in , Coulson feel himself a little aggrieved . a minute ago Philip and he be on a level of ignorance , from which the former be evidently go to be raise . but he soon return to his usual state of acquiescence in thing as they be , which be partly constitutional , and partly the result of his Quaker training . 

 it be apparently by John Foster 's wish that Philip have be summon . Jeremiah , the less energetic and decide brother , be still discuss the propriety of the step when Philip enter . 

 ' no need for haste , John ; well not call the young man till we have far consider the matter . ' 

 but the young man be there in presence ; and John 's will carry the day . 

 it seem from his account to Philip   explanatory of what he , in advance of his brother 's slow judgment , think to be a necessary step , that the Fosters have for some time receive anonymous letter , warn they , with distinct meaning , though in ambiguous term , against a certain silk - manufacturer in Spitalfields , with whom they have have straightforward business dealing for many year ; but to whom they have latterly advanced money . the letter hint at the utter insolvency of this manufacturer . they have urge their correspondent to give they his name in confidence , and this morning 's letter have bring it ; but the name be totally unknown to they , though there seem no reason to doubt the reality of either it or the address , the latter of which be give in full . certain circumstance be mention regard the transaction between the Fosters and this manufacturer , which could be know only to those who be in the confidence of one or the other ; and to the Fosters the man be , as have be say , a perfect stranger . probably , they would have be unwilling to incur the risk they have do on this manufacturer Dickinson 's account , if it have not be that he belong to the same denomination as themselves , and be publicly distinguish for his excellent and philanthropic character ; but these letter be provocative of anxiety , especially since this morning 's post have bring out the writer 's full name , and various particular show his intimate knowledge of Dickinson 's affair . 

 after much perplexed consultation , John have hit upon the plan of send Hepburn to London to make secret inquiry respect the true character and commercial position of the man whose creditor , not a month ago , they have esteem it an honour to be . 

 even now Jeremiah be ashamed of their want of confidence in one so good ; he believe that the information they have receive would all prove a mistake , found on erroneous ground , if not a pure invention of an enemy ; and he have only be bring partially to consent to the sending of Hepburn , by his brother 's pledge himself that the real nature of Philip 's errand should be unknown to any human creature , save they three . 

 as all this be be reveal to Philip , he sit apparently unmoved and simply attentive . in fact , he be give all his mind to understand the probability of the case , leave his own feeling in the background till his intellect should have do its work . he say little ; but what he do say be to the point , and satisfy both brother . John perceive that his messenger would exercise penetration and act with energy ; while Jeremiah be soothe by Philip 's caution in not hastily admit the probability of any charge against Dickinson , and in give full weight to his previous good conduct and good character . 

 Philip have the satisfaction of feel himself employ on a mission which would call out his power , and yet not exceed they . in his own mind he forestall the instruction of his master , and be silently in advance of John Foster 's plan and arrangement , while he appear to listen to all that be say with quiet business - like attention . 

 it be settle that the next morning he be to make his way northward to Hartlepool , whence he could easily proceed either by land or sea to Newcastle , from which place smack be constantly sail to London . as to his personal conduct and behaviour there , the brother overwhelm he with direction and advice ; nor do they fail to draw out of the strong box in the thick wall of their counting - house a more than sufficient sum of money for all possible expense . Philip have never have so much in his hand before , and hesitate to take it , say it be more than he should require ; but they repeat , with fresh urgency , their warning about the terrible high price of London , till he could only resolve to keep a strict account , and bring back all that he do not expend , since nothing but his take the whole sum would satisfy his employer . 

 when he be once more behind the counter , he have leisure enough for consideration as far as Coulson could give it he . the latter be silent , brood over the confidence which Philip have apparently receive , but which be withhold from he . he do not yet know of the culminate point of Philip 's propose journey to London ; that great city of London , which , from its very inaccessibility fifty year ago , loom so magnificent through the mist of man 's imagination . it be not to be deny that Philip feel exultant at the mere fact of ' go to London . ' but then again , the thought of leave Sylvia ; of go out of possible daily reach of she ; of not see she for a week a fortnight ; nay , he might be away for a month , for no rash hurry be to mar his delicate negotiation , gnaw at his heart , and spoil any enjoyment he might have anticipate from gratified curiosity , or even from the consciousness of be trust by those whose trust and regard he value . the sense of what he be leave grow upon he the long he think on the subject ; he almost wish that he have tell his master early in the conversation of his unwillingness to leave Monkshaven for so long a time ; and then again he feel that the gratitude he owe they quite prohibit his decline any task they might impose , especially as they have more than once say that it would not do for they to appear in the affair , and yet that to no one else could they entrust so difficult and delicate a matter . several time that day , as he perceive Coulson 's jealous sullenness , he think in his heart that the consequence of the excessive confidence for which Coulson envy he be a burden from which he would be thankful to be relieve . 

 as they all sit at tea in Alice Rose 's house - place , Philip announce his intended journey ; a piece of intelligence he have not communicate early to Coulson because he have rather dread the increase of dissatisfaction it be sure to produce , and of which he know the expression would be restrain by the presence of Alice Rose and her daughter . 

 ' to Lunnon ! ' exclaim Alice . 

 hester say nothing . 

 ' well ! some folk have the luck ! ' say Coulson . 

 ' luck ! ' say Alice , turn sharp round on he . ' Niver let I hear such a vain word out o ' thy mouth , laddie , again . it be the Lord 's doing , and luck 's the devil 's way o ' put it . maybe it be to try Philip he be send there ; happen it may be a fiery furnace to he ; for I have   heerd tell it be full o ' temptation , and he may fall into sin and then where would be the " luck " on it ? but why art ta go ? and the morning , say'st thou ? why , thy good shirt be in t ' sud , and no time for t ' starch and iron it . whatten the great haste as should take thee to Lunnon wi'out thy ruffled shirt ? ' 

 ' it be none o ' my doing , ' say Philip ; ' there be business to be do , and John Foster say I be to do it ; and I be to start to - morrow . ' 

 ' I will not turn thee out wi'out thy ruffled shirt , if I sit up a ' neet , ' say Alice , resolutely . 

 ' Niver fret thyself , mother , about t ' shirt , ' say Philip . ' if I need a shirt , London 's not what I take it for if I can not   buy mysel ' one ready - make . ' 

 ' Hearken to he ! ' say Alice . ' he speak as if buy o ' ready - make shirt be nought to he , and he wi ' a good half - dozen as I make mysel ' . eh , lad ? but if that be the frame o ' mind thou'rt in , Lunnon be like for to be a sore place o ' temptation . there 's pitfall for man , and trap for money at ivery turn , as I have   heerd say . it would ha ' be well if John Foster have send an old man on his business , whativer it be . ' 

 ' they seem to make a deal o ' Philip all on a sudden , ' say Coulson . ' he be send for , and talk to I ' privacy , while hester and I be leave I ' t ' shop for t ' bear t ' brunt o ' t ' serve . ' 

 ' Philip know , ' say Hester , and then , somehow , her voice fail she and she stop . 

 Philip pay no attention to this half - utter sentence ; he be eager to tell Coulson , as far as he could do so without betray his master 's secret , how many drawback there be to his propose journey , in the responsibility which it involve , and his unwillingness to leave monkshaven : he say 

 ' Coulson , I would give a deal it be thou that be go , and not I . at least , there be many a time I would give a deal . I will not deny but at other time I be pleased at the thought on't . but , if I could I would change place wi ' thee at this moment . ' 

 ' it be fine talk , ' say Coulson , half mollify , and yet not care to show it . ' I make no doubt it be an even chance betwixt we two at first , which on we be to go ; but somehow thou get the start and thou'st stick to it till it be too late for aught but to say thou 's sorry . ' 

 ' Nay , William , ' say Philip , rise , ' it be an ill look - out for the future , if thee and I be to quarrel , like two silly wench , o'er each bit of pleasure , or what thou fancy to be pleasure , as fall in t ' way of either on we . I have   say truth to thee , and play thee fair , and I have   get to go to Haytersbank for to wish them good - by , so I will not stay long here to be misdoubte by thee . ' 

 he take his cap and be go , not heed Alice 's shrill inquiry as to his clothe and his ruffled shirt . Coulson sit still , penitent and ashame ; at length he steal a look at hester . she be play with her teaspoon , but he could see that she be choke down her tear ; he could not choose but force she to speak with an ill - timed question . 

 ' what be to do , hester ? ' say he . 

 she lift up those eye , usually so soft and serene ; now they be full of the light of indignation shin through tear . 

 ' to do ! ' she say ; ' Coulson , I would think well of thee , go and doubt and envy Philip , as niver do thee an ill turn , or say an ill word , or think an ill thought by thee ; and send he away out o ' t ' house this last night of all , may - be , wi ' thy envying and jealousy . ' 

 she hastily get up and leave the room . Alice be away , look up Philip 's thing for his journey . Coulson remain alone , feel like a guilty child , but dismay by Hester 's word , even more than by his own regret at what he have say . 

 Philip walk rapidly up the hill - road towards Haytersbank . he be chafe and excite by Coulson 's word , and the event of the day . he have mean to shape his life , and now it be , as it be , be shape for he , and yet he be reproach for the course it be take , as much as though he be an active agent ; accuse of take advantage over Coulson , his intimate companion for year ; he who esteem himself above take an unfair advantage over any man ! his feeling on the subject be akin to that of Hazael , ' be thy servant a dog that he should do this thing ? ' 

 his feeling , disturb on this one point , shake his judgment off its balance on another . the resolution he have deliberately form of not speak to Sylvia on the subject of his love till he could announce to her parent the fact of his succession to Fosters ' business , and till he have patiently , with long - continue and deep affection , work his way into her regard , be set aside during the present walk . he would speak to she of his passionate attachment , before he leave , for an uncertain length of time , and the certain distance of London . and all the modification on this point which his judgment could obtain from his impetuous and excited heart be , that he would watch her word and manner well when he announce his approach absence , and if in they he read the slight token of tender regretful feeling , he would pour out his love at her foot , not even urge the young girl to make any return , or to express the feeling of which he hop the germ be already bud in she . he would be patient with she ; he could not be patient himself . his heart beat , his busy mind rehearse the probable come scene , he turn into the field - path that lead to Haytersbank . come along it , and so meet he , advance Daniel Robson , in earnest talk with Charley Kinraid . Kinraid , then , have be at the farm : Kinraid have be see Sylvia , her mother away . the thought of poor dead Annie Coulson flash into Philip 's mind . could he be play the same game with Sylvia ? Philip set his tooth and tighten his lip at the thought of it . they have stop talk ; they have see he already , or his impulse would have be to dodge behind the wall and avoid they ; even though one of his purpose in go to Haytersbank have be to bid his uncle farewell . 

 Kinraid take he by surprise from the hearty greeting he give he , and which Philip would fain have avoid . but the specksioneer be full of kindliness towards all the world , especially towards all Sylvia 's friend , and , convince of her great love towards himself , have forget any previous jealousy of Philip . secure and exultant , his broad , handsome , weather - bronze face be as great a contrast to Philip 's long , thoughtful , sallow countenance , as his frank manner be to the other 's cold reserve . it be some minute before Hepburn could bring himself to tell the great event that be about to befall he before this third person whom he consider as an intrusive stranger . but as Kinraid seem to have no idea of go on , and as there really be no reason why he and all the world should not know of Philip 's intention , he tell his uncle that he be bind for London the next day on business connect with the Fosters . 

 Daniel be deeply strike with the fact that he be talk to a man set off for London at a day 's notice . 

 ' Thou'll niver tell I this have not   be brewin ' long nor twelve hour ; thou be a sly close chap , and we hannot see thee this se'nnight ; thou'll ha ' be thinkin ' on this , and cogitate it , may - be , a ' that time . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say Philip , ' I know nought about it last night ; it be none o ' my doing , go , for I would liefer ha ' stay where I be . ' 

 ' yo'll like it when once yo're there , ' say Kinraid , with a travelled air of superiority , as Philip fancy . 

 ' no , I shall not , ' he reply , shortly . ' like have nought to do with it . ' 

 ' ah ' yo ' know nought about it last neet , ' continue Daniel , musingly . ' well , life 's soon o'er ; else when I be a young fellow , folk make their will afore go to Lunnon . ' 

 ' yet I will be bind to say yo ' niver make a will before go to sea , ' say Philip , half smile . 

 ' na , na ; but that be quite another mak ' o ' thing ; go ' to sea come natteral to a man , but go to Lunnon , I be once there , and be near deafen wi ' t ' throng and t ' sound . I be but two hour I ' t ' place , though our ship lie a fortneet off Gravesend . ' 

 Kinraid now seem in a hurry ; but Philip be sting with curiosity to ascertain his movement , and suddenly address he : 

 ' I hear yo ' be I ' these part . be you for stay here long ? ' 

 there be a certain abruptness in Philip 's tone , if not in his word , which make kinraid look in his face with surprise , and answer with equal curtness . 

 ' I be off I ' th ' morning ; and sail for the north seas day after . ' 

 he turn away , and begin to whistle , as if he do not wish for any further conversation with his interrogator . Philip , indeed , have nothing more to say to he : he have learn all he want to know . 

 ' I would like to bid good - by to Sylvie . be she at home ? ' he ask of her father . 

 ' A'm thinking thou'll not find she . she will be off to Yesterbarrow t ' see if she would get a settin ' o ' their egg ; her grey speckle hen be cluckin ' , and nought will serve our Sylvia but their egg to set she upon . but , for a ' that , she may not   be go yet . well go on and see for thysel ' . ' 

 so they part ; but Philip have not go many step before his uncle call he back , Kinraid slowly loiter on meanwhile . Robson be fumble among some dirty paper he have in an old leather case , which he have produce out of his pocket . 

 ' fact be , Philip , t ' pleugh be in a bad way , gearin ' and a ' , an ' folk be talkin ' on a new kind o ' mak ' ; and if thou 's bind for York - ' 

 ' I be not go by York ; I be go by a Newcastle smack . ' 

 ' Newcassel Newcassel it be pretty much t ' same . here , lad , thou can read print easy ; it be a bit as be cut out on a papper ; there be Newcassel , and York , and Durham , and a vast more town name , wheere folk can learn a ' about t ' new mak ' o ' pleugh . ' 

 ' I see , ' say Philip : ' " Robinson , Side , Newcastle , can give all requisite information . " ' 

 ' ay , ay , ' say Robson ; ' thou 's hit t ' marrow on t ' matter . now , if thou'rt I ' newcassel , thou can learn all about it ; thou'rt little well nor a woman , for sure , bein ' mainly acquaint wi ' ribbon , but they will tell thee they will tell thee , lad ; and write down what they sayn , and what be to be t ' price , and look sharp as to what kind o ' folk they be as sell them , an ' write and let I know . Thou'll be I ' newcassel to - morrow , may - be ? well , then , I will reckon to hear fro ' thee in a week , or , mayhap , less , for t ' land be backward , and I would like to know about t ' pleugh . I would a month 's mind to write to Brunton , as married Molly Corney , but writin ' be more I ' thy way an ' t ' parson 's nor mine ; and if thou sell ribbon , Brunton sell cheese , and that be no well . ' 

 Philip promise to do his good , and to write word to Robson , who , satisfied with his willingness to undertake the commission , bid he go on and see if he could not find the lass . her father be right in say that she might not have set out for Yesterbarrow . she have talk about it to Kinraid and her father in order to cover her regret at her lover 's accompany her father to see some new kind of harpoon about which the latter have speak . but as soon as they have leave the house , and she have covertly watch they up the brow in the field , she sate down to meditate and dream about her great happiness in be belove by her hero , Charley Kinraid . no gloomy dread of his long summer 's absence ; no fear of the cold , glitter iceberg bear mercilessly down on the Urania , nor shudder anticipation of the dark wave of evil import , cross her mind . he love she , and that be enough . her eye look , trance - like , into a dim , glorious future of life ; her lip , still warm and redden by his kiss , be just part in a happy smile , when she be startle by the sound of an approach footstep a footstep quite familiar enough for she to recognize it , and which be unwelcome now , as disturb she in the one bless subject of thought in which alone she care to indulge . 

 ' well , Philip ! an ' what bring yo ' here ? ' be her rather ungracious greeting . 

 ' why , Sylvie , be yo ' sorry to see I ? ' ask Philip , reproachfully . but she turn it off with assumed lightness . 

 ' oh , yes , ' say she . ' I have   be want yo ' this week past wi ' t ' match to my blue ribbon yo ' say yo'd get and bring I next time yo ' come . ' 

 ' I have   forget it , Sylvie . it be clean go out of my mind , ' say Philip , with true regret . ' but I have   have a deal to think on , ' he continue , penitently , as if anxious to be forgive . Sylvia do not want his penitence , do not care for her ribbon , be trouble by his earnestness of manner but he know nothing of all that ; he only know that she whom he love have ask he to do something for she , and he have neglect it ; so , anxious to be excuse and forgive , he go on with the apology she care not to hear . 

 if she have be less occupy with her own affair , less engross with deep feeling , she would have reproach he , if only in jest , for his carelessness . as it be , she scarcely take in the sense of his word . 

 ' you see , Sylvie , I have   have a deal to think on ; before long I intend tell yo ' all about it ; just now I be not free to do it . and when a man 's mind be full o ' business , most particular when it be other folk 's as be trust to he , he seem to lose count on the very thing he would most care for at another time . ' he pause a little . 

 Sylvia 's gallop thought be pull suddenly up by his silence ; she feel that he want she to say something , but she could think of nothing besides an ambiguous 

 ' well ? ' 

 ' and I be off to London i ' t ' morning , ' add he , a little wistfully , almost as if beseech she to show or express some sorrow at a journey , the very destination of which show that he would be absent for some time . 

 ' to Lunnon ! ' say she , with some surprise . ' Yo're niver think o ' go to live theere , for sure ! ' 

 surprise , and curiosity , and wonder ; nothing more , as Philip 's instinct tell he . but he reason that first correct impression away with ingenious sophistry . 

 ' not to live there : only to stay for some time . I shall be back , I reckon , in a month or so . ' 

 ' oh ! that be nought of a go away , ' say she , rather petulantly . ' they as go to t ' Greenland sea have to bide away for six month and more , ' and she sigh . 

 suddenly a light shine down into Philip 's mind . his voice be change as he speak next . 

 ' I meet that good - for - nothing chap , Kinraid , wi ' yo'r father just now . he will ha ' be here , Sylvie ? ' 

 she stoop for something she have drop , and come up red as a rose . 

 ' to be sure ; what then ? ' and she eye he defiantly , though in her heart she tremble , she know not why . 

 ' what then ? and yo'r mother away . he be no company for such as thee , at no time , Sylvie . ' 

 ' Feyther and I choose our own company , without iver ask leave o ' yo ' , ' say Sylvia , hastily arrange the thing in the little wooden work - box that be on the table , preparatory to put it away . at the time , in his agitation , he see , but do not affix any meaning to it , that the half of some silver coin be among the content thus turn over before the box be lock . 

 ' but thy mother would not   like it , Sylvie ; he be play false wi ' other lass , he will be play thee false some o ' these day , if thou let he come about thee . he go on wi ' Annie Coulson , William 's sister , till he break her heart ; and sin then he be be on wi ' other . ' 

 ' I dunnot believe a word on ' t , ' say Sylvia , stand up , all aflame . 

 ' I niver tell a lie I ' my life , ' say Philip , almost choke with grief at her manner to he , and the regard for his rival which she betray . ' it be Willie Coulson as tell I , as solemn and serious as one man can speak to another ; and he say it be not   the first nor the last time as he have make his own game with young woman . ' 

 ' and how dare yo ' come here to I wi ' yo'r backbiting tale ? ' say Sylvia , shiver all over with passion . 

 Philip try to keep calm , and to explain . 

 ' it be yo'r own mother , Sylvia , as know yo ' have no brother , or any one to see after yo ' ; and yo ' so pretty , so pretty , Sylvia , ' he continue , shake his head , sadly , ' that man run after yo ' against their will , as one may say ; and yo'r mother bid I watch o'er ye and see what company yo ' kept , and who be follow after yo ' , and to warn yo ' , if need be . ' 

 ' my mother niver bade yo ' to come spy after I , and blame I for see a lad as my feyther think well on . an ' I do not   believe a word about Annie Coulson ; an ' I be not go to suffer yo ' to come wi ' yo'r tale to I ; say them out to his face , and hear what he will say to yo ' . ' 

 ' Sylvie , Sylvie , ' cry poor Philip , as his offend cousin rush past he , and upstairs to her little bedroom , where he hear the sound of the wooden bolt fly into its place . he could hear her foot pace quickly about through the unceiled rafter . he sate still in despair , his head bury in his two hand . he sate till it grow dusk , dark ; the wood fire , not gather together by careful hand , die out into gray ash . dolly Reid have do her work and go home . there be but Philip and Sylvia in the house . he know he ought to be go home , for he have much to do , and many arrangement to make . yet it seem as though he could not stir . at length he raise his stiffen body , and stand up , dizzy . up the little wooden stair he go , where he have never be before , to the small square landing , almost fill up with the great chest for oat - cake . he breathe hard for a minute , and then knock at the door of Sylvia 's room . 

 ' Sylvie ! I be go away ; say good - by . ' no answer . not a sound heard . ' Sylvie ! '   a little louder , and less hoarsely speak . there be no reply . ' Sylvie ! I shall be a long time away ; perhaps I may niver come back at all ' ; here he bitterly think of an unregarded death . ' say good - by . ' no answer . he wait patiently . can she be weary out , and go to sleep , he wonder . yet once again ' good - by , Sylvie , and God bless yo ' ! I be sorry I vex yo ' . ' 

 no reply . 

 with a heavy , heavy heart he creak down the stair , feel for his cap , and leave the house . 

 ' she be warn , any way , ' think he . just at that moment the little casement window of Sylvia 's room be open , and she say 

 ' good - by , Philip ! ' 

 the window be shut again as soon as the word be speak . Philip know the uselessness of remain ; the need for his departure ; and yet he stand still for a little time like one entrance , as if his will have lose all power to compel he to leave the place . those two word of her , which two hour before would have be so far beneath his aspiration , have now power to re - light hope , to quench reproach or blame . 

 ' she be but a young lassie , ' say he to himself ; ' an ' Kinraid have be play wi ' she , as such as he can not   help do , once they get among the woman . an ' I come down sudden on she about Annie Coulson , and touch her pride . maybe , too , it be ill advise to tell she how her mother be fear for she . I could not   ha ' leave the place to - morrow if he have be bid here ; but he be off for half a year or so , and I will be home again as soon as iver I can . in half a year such as he forget , if iver he be think serious about she ; but in a ' my lifetime , if I live to fourscore , I can niver forget . God bless she for say , " good - by , Philip . " ' he repeat the word aloud in fond mimicry of her tone : ' good - by , Philip . ' 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 EDDY in LOVE 's CURRENT 

 the next morning shine bright and clear , if ever a March morning do . the beguiling month be come in like a lamb , with whatever storm it might go rag out . it be long since Philip have taste the freshness of the early air on the shore , or in the country , as his employment at the shop detain he in Monkshaven till the evening . and as he turn down the quay   or staithe   on the north side of the river , towards the shore , and meet the fresh sea - breeze blow right in his face , it be impossible not to feel bright and elastic . with his knapsack sling over his shoulder , he be prepare for a good stretch towards Hartlepool , whence a coach would take he to Newcastle before night . for seven or eight mile the level sand be as short and far more agreeable a road than the up and down land - way . Philip walk on pretty briskly , unconsciously enjoy the sunny landscape before he ; the crisp curling wave rush almost up to his foot , on his right hand , and then swish back over the fine small pebble into the great swell sea . to his left be the cliff rise one behind another , have deep gully here and there between , with long green slope upward from the land , and then sudden fall of brown and red soil or rock deepening to a yet great richness of colour at their base towards the blue ocean before he . the loud , monotonous murmur of the advance and recede water lull he into dreaminess ; the sunny look of everything ting his day - dream with hope . so he trudge merrily over the first mile or so ; not an obstacle to his measured pace on the hard , level pavement ; not a creature to be see since he have leave the little gathering of bare - legged urchin dabble in the sea - pool near Monkshaven . the care of land be shut out by the glorious barrier of rock before he . there be some great mass that have be detach by the action of the weather , and lie half embed in the sand , draperie over by the heavy pendent olive - green seaweed . the wave be near at this point ; the advance sea come up with a mighty distant length of roar ; here and there the smooth swell be lash by the fret against unseen rock into white breaker ; but otherwise the wave come up from the German Ocean upon that English shore with a long steady roll that might have take its first impetus far away , in the haunt of the sea - serpent on the coast of ' norroway over the foam . ' the air be soft as May ; right overhead the sky be blue , but it deaden into gray near the sea line . flock of seagull hover about the edge of the wave , slowly rise and turn their white under - plumage to glimmer in the sunlight as Philip approach . the whole scene be so peaceful , so soothing , that it dispel the care and fear   too well found in fact   which have weigh down on his heart during the dark hour of the past night . 

 there be Haytersbank gully open down its green entrance among the warm brown basis of the cliff . below , in the sheltered brushwood , among the last year 's wither leaf , some primrose might be find . he half think of gather Sylvia a posy of they , and rush up to the farm to make a little farewell peace - offering . but on look at his watch , he put all thought of such an action out of his head ; it be above an hour later than he have suppose , and he must make all haste on to Hartlepool . just as he be approach this gully , a man come dash down , and run out some way upon the sand with the very force of his descent ; then he turn to the left and take the direction of Hartlepool a hundred yard or so in advance of Philip . he never stay to look round he , but go swiftly and steadily on his way . by the peculiar lurch in his walk by everything Philip know it be the specksioneer , Kinraid . 

 now the road up Haytersbank gully lead to the farm , and nowhere else . still any one wish to descend to the shore might do so by first go up to the Robsons ' house , and skirt the wall till they come to the little slender path down to the shore . but by the farm , by the very house - door they must of necessity pass . Philip slacken his pace , keep under the shadow of the rock . by - and - by Kinraid , walk on the sunlight open sand , turn round and look long and earnestly towards Haytersbank gully . Hepburn pause when he pause , but as intently as he look at some object above , so intently do Hepburn look at he . no need to ascertain by sight towards whom his look , his thought be direct . he take off his hat and wave it , touch one part of it as if with particular meaning . when he turn away at last , Hepburn heave a heavy sigh , and creep yet more into the cold dank shadow of the cliff . each step be now a heavy task , his sad heart tired and weary . after a while he climb up a few foot , so as to mingle his form yet more completely with the stone and rock around . stumble over the uneven and often jagged point , slip on the sea - weed , plunge into little pool of water leave by the ebb tide in some natural basin , he yet keep his eye fix as if in fascination on Kinraid , and make his way almost alongside of he . but the last hour have pinch Hepburn 's feature into something of the wan haggardness they would wear when he should first be lie still for ever . 

 and now the two man be draw near a creek , about eight mile from Monkshaven . the creek be form by a beck   or small stream   that come flow down from the moor , and take its way to the sea between the widen rock . the melting of the snow and run of the flooded water - spring above make this beck in the early spring - time both deep and wide . Hepburn know that here they both must take a path lead inland to a narrow foot - bridge about a quarter of a mile up the stream ; indeed from this point , owe to the jutting out of the rock , the land path be the short ; and this way lie by the water - side at an angle right below the cliff to which Hepburn 's step be lead he . he know that on this long level field path he might easily be see by any one follow ; nay , if he follow any one at a short distance , for it be full of turning ; and he resolve , late as he be , to sit down for a while till Kinraid be far enough in advance for he to escape be see . he come up to the last rock behind which he could be conceal ; seven or eight foot above the stream he stand , and look cautiously for the specksioneer . up by the rush stream he look , then right below . 

 ' it be God 's providence , ' he murmur . ' it be God 's providence . ' 

 he crouch down where he have be stand and cover his face with his hand . he try to deafen as well as to blind himself , that he might neither hear nor see anything of the come event of which he , an inhabitant of Monkshaven at that day , well understand the betoken sign . 

 Kinraid have take the large angle of the sand before turn up towards the bridge . he come along now near the rock . by this time he be sufficiently buoyant to whistle to himself . it steel Philip 's heart to what be come to hear his rival whistling , ' Weel may the keel row , ' so soon after part with Sylvia . 

 the instant Kinraid turn the corner of the cliff , the ambush be upon he . four man - of - war 's man spring on he and strove to pinion he . 

 ' in the king 's name ! ' cry they , with rough , triumphant jeer . 

 their boat be moor not a dozen yard above ; they be send by the tender of a frigate lie off Hartlepool for fresh water . the tender be at anchor just beyond the jutting rock in face . 

 they know that fisherman be in the habit of go to and from their net by the side of the creek ; but such a prize as this active , strong , and evidently superior sailor , be what they have not hop for , and their endeavour to secure he be in proportion to the value of the prize . 

 although take by surprise , and attack by so many , Kinraid do not lose his wit . he wrench himself free , cry out loud : 

 ' Avast , I be a protect whaler . I claim my protection . I have   my paper to show , I be bond specksioneer to the Urania whaler , Donkin captain , North Shields port . ' 

 as a protect whaler , the press - gang have , by the 17th section of Act 26 Geo . III . no legal right to seize he , unless he have fail to return to his ship by the 10th March follow the date of his bond . but of what use be the paper he hastily drag out of his breast ; of what use be law in those day of slow intercourse with such as be powerful enough to protect , and in the time of popular panic against a french invasion ? 

 ' d n your protection , ' cry the leader of the press - gang ; ' come and serve his Majesty , that be well than catch whale . ' 

 ' be it though ? ' say the specksioneer , with a motion of his hand , which the swift - eyed sailor oppose to he see and interpret rightly . 

 ' thou wilt , wilt thou ? close with he , Jack ; and ware the cutlass . ' 

 in a minute his cutlass be force from he , and it become a hand - to - hand struggle , of which , from the difference in number , it be not difficult to foretell the result . yet Kinraid make desperate effort to free himself ; he waste no breath in word , but fight , as the man say , ' like a very devil . ' 

 Hepburn hear loud pant of breath , great thud , the dull struggle of limb on the sand , the growling curse of those who think to have manage their affair more easily ; the sudden cry of some one wound , not Kinraid he know , Kinraid would have bear any pain in silence at such a moment ; another wrestling , swearing , infuriated strife , and then a strange silence . hepburn sicken at the heart ; be then his rival dead ? have he leave this bright world ? lose his life his love ? for an instant Hepburn feel guilty of his death ; he say to himself he have never wish he dead , and yet in the struggle he have keep aloof , and now it might be too late for ever . Philip could not bear the suspense ; he look stealthily round the corner of the rock behind which he have be hide , and see that they have overpower Kinraid , and , too exhausted to speak , be bind he hand and foot to carry he to their boat . 

 Kinraid lie as still as any hedgehog : he roll when they push he ; he suffer himself to be drag without any resistance , any motion ; the strong colour bring into his face while fighting be go now , his countenance be livid pale ; his lip be tightly hold together , as if it cost he more effort to be passive , wooden , and stiff in their hand than it have do to fight and struggle with all his might . his eye seem the only part about he that show cognizance of what be go on . they be watchful , vivid , fierce as those of a wild cat bring to bay , seek in its desperate quickened brain for some mode of escape not yet visible , and in all probability never to become visible to the hopeless creature in its supreme agony . 

 without a motion of his head , he be perceive and take in everything while he lie bind at the bottom of the boat . a sailor sit by his side , who have be hurt by a blow from he . the man hold his head in his hand , moaning ; but every now and then he revenge himself by a kick at the prostrate specksioneer , till even his comrade stop their cursing and swear at their prisoner for the trouble he have give they , to cry shame on their comrade . but Kinraid never speak , nor shrink from the outstretched foot . 

 one of his captor , with the successful insolence of victory , venture to jeer he on the suppose reason for his vehement and hopeless resistance . 

 he might have say yet more insolent thing ; the kick might have hit hard ; Kinraid do not hear or heed . his soul be beat itself against the bar of inflexible circumstance ; review in one terrible instant of time what have be , what might have be , what be . yet while these thought thus stab he , he be still mechanically look out for chance . he move his head a little , so as to turn towards Haytersbank , where Sylvia must be quickly , if sadly , go about her simple daily work ; and then his quick eye catch Hepburn 's face , blanch with excitement rather than fear , watch eagerly from behind the rock , where he have sit breathless during the affray and the impressment of his rival . 

 ' come here , lad ! ' shout the specksioneer as soon as he see Philip , heave and writhe his body the while with so much vigour that the sailor start away from the work they be engage in about the boat , and hold he down once more , as if afraid he should break the strong rope that hold he like withe of green flax . but the bound man have no such notion in his head . his mighty wish be to call Hepburn near that he might send some message by he to Sylvia . ' come here , Hepburn , ' he cry again , fall back this time so weak and exhausted that the man - of - war 's man become sympathetic . 

 ' come down , peep Tom , and do not   be afeare , ' they call out . 

 ' I be not afeared , ' say Philip ; ' I be no sailor for yo ' t ' impress I : nor have yo ' any right to take that fellow ; he be a Greenland specksioneer , under protection , as I know and can testify . ' 

 ' yo ' and yo'r testify go hang . make haste , man and hear what this gem'man , as be in a dirty blubbery whale - ship , and be now in his Majesty 's service , have get to say . I dare say , Jack , ' go on the speaker , ' it be some message to his sweetheart , ask she to come for to serve on board ship along with he , like Billy Taylor 's young woman . ' 

 Philip be come towards they slowly , not from want of activity , but because he be undecided what he should be call upon to do or to say by the man whom he hat and dread , yet whom just now he could not help admire . 

 Kinraid groan with impatience at see one , free to move with quick decision , so slow and dilatory . 

 ' come on then , ' cry the sailor , ' or we will take you too on board , and run you up and down the main - mast a few time . nothing like life aboard ship for quicken a land - lubber . ' 

 ' Yo'd well take he and leave I , ' say Kinraid , grimly . ' I have   be teach my lesson ; and seemingly he have his yet to learn . ' 

 ' his Majesty be not   a schoolmaster to need scholar ; but a jolly good captain to need man , ' reply the leader of the gang , eye Philip nevertheless , and question within himself how far , with only two other available man , they durst venture on his capture as well as the specksioneer 's . it might be do , he think , even though there be this powerful captive aboard , and the boat to manage too ; but , run his eye over Philip 's figure , he decide that the tall stoop fellow be never cut out for a sailor , and that he should get small thank if he capture he , to pay he for the possible risk of lose the other . or else the mere fact of be a landsman be of as little consequence to the press - gang , as the protect paper which Kinraid have vainly show . 

 ' yon fellow would not   have be worth his grog this many a day , and be d d to you , ' say he , catch Hepburn by the shoulder , and give he a push . Philip stumble over something in this , his forced run . he look down ; his foot have catch in Kinraid 's hat , which have drop off in the previous struggle . in the band that go round the low crown , a ribbon be knot ; a piece of that same ribbon which Philip have choose out , with such tender hope , to give to Sylvia for the Corneys ' party on new year 's eve . he know every delicate thread that make up the briar - rose pattern ; and a spasm of hatred towards Kinraid contract his heart . he have be almost relent into pity for the man capture before his eye ; now he abhor he . 

 Kinraid do not speak for a minute or two . the sailor , who have begin to take he into favour , be all agog with curiosity to hear the message to his sweetheart , which they believe he be go to send . Hepburn 's perception , quicken with his vehement agitation of soul , be aware of this feeling of theirs ; and it increase his rage against Kinraid , who have expose the idea of Sylvia to be the subject of ribald whisper . but the specksioneer care little what other say or think about the maiden , whom he yet see before his closed eyelid as she stand watch he , from the Haytersbank gully , wave her hand , her handkerchief , all in one passionate farewell . 

 ' what do yo ' want wi ' I ? ' ask Hepburn at last in a gloomy tone . if he could have help it , he would have keep silence till Kinraid speak first ; but he could no long endure the sailor ' nudge , and wink , and jest among themselves . 

 ' tell Sylvia , ' say Kinraid 

 ' there be a smart name for a sweetheart , ' exclaim one of the man ; but Kinraid go straight on , 

 ' what yo've   see ; how I have   be press by this cursed gang . ' 

 ' civil word , messmate , if you please . Sylvia can not   abide cursing and swearing , I be sure . we be gentleman serve his Majesty on board the Alcestis , and this proper young fellow shall be help on to more honour and glory than he would ever get bob for whale . tell Sylvia this , with my love ; Jack Carter 's love , if she be anxious about my name . ' 

 one of the sailor laugh at this rude humour ; another bade Carter hold his stupid tongue . Philip hat he in his heart . Kinraid hardly hear he . he be grow faint with the heavy blow he have receive , the stunning fall he have meet with , and the reaction from his dog self - control at first . 

 Philip do not speak nor move . 

 ' tell she , ' continue Kinraid , rouse himself for another effort , ' what yo've   see . tell she I will come back to she . bid she not forget the great oath we take together this morning ; she be as much my wife as if we have go to church ; I will come back and marry she afore long . ' 

 Philip say something inarticulately . 

 ' Hurra ! ' cry Carter , ' and I will be good man . tell she , too that I will have an eye on her sweetheart , and keep he from run after other girl . ' 

 ' Yo'll have yo'r hand full , then , ' mutter Philip , his passion boil over at the thought of have be choose out from among all man to convey such a message as Kinraid 's to Sylvia . 

 ' make an end of yo'r d d yarn , and be off , ' say the man who have be hurt by Kinraid , and who have sate apart and silent till now . 

 Philip turn away ; Kinraid raise himself and cry after he , 

 ' Hepburn , Hepburn ! tell she - ' what he add Philip could not hear , for the word be lose before they reach he in the outward noise of the regular splash of the oar and the rush of the wind down the gully , with which mingle the close sound that fill his ear of his own hurrying blood surge up into his brain . he be conscious that he have say something in reply to Kinraid 's adjuration that he would deliver his message to Sylvia , at the very time when Carter have sting he into fresh anger by the allusion to the possibility of the specksioneer 's ' run after other girl , ' for , for an instant , Hepburn have be touch by the contrast of circumstance . Kinraid an hour or two ago , Kinraid a banished man ; for in those day , an impressed sailor might linger out year on some foreign station , far from those he love , who all this time remain ignorant of his cruel fate . 

 but Hepburn begin to wonder what he himself have say how much of a promise he have make to deliver those last passionate word of Kinraid 's . he could not recollect how much , how little he have say ; he know he have speak hoarsely and low almost at the same time as Carter have utter his loud joke . but he doubt if Kinraid have catch his word . 

 and then the dread Inner Creature , who lurk in each of our heart , arise and say , ' it be as well : a promise give be a fetter to the giver . but a promise be not give when it have not be receive . ' 

 at a sudden impulse , he turn again towards the shore when he have cross the bridge , and almost run towards the verge of the land . then he throw himself down on the soft fine turf that grow on the margin of the cliff overhang the sea , and command an extent of view towards the north . his face support by his hand , he look down upon the blue rippling ocean , flash here and there , into the sunlight in long , glitter line . the boat be still in the distance , make her swift silent way with long regular bound to the tender that lie in the offing . 

 Hepburn feel insecure , as in a nightmare dream , so long as the boat do not reach her immediate destination . his contract eye could see four minute figure row with ceaseless motion , and a fifth sate at the helm . but he know there be a sixth , unseen , lying , bind and helpless , at the bottom of the boat ; and his fancy keep expect this man to start up and break his bond , and overcome all the other , and return to the shore free and triumphant . 

 it be by no fault of Hepburn 's that the boat speed well away ; that she be now alongside the tender , dance on the wave ; now empty of her crew ; now hoist up to her place . no fault of his ! and yet it take he some time before he could reason himself into the belief that his mad , feverish wish not an hour before his wild prayer to be rid of his rival , as he himself have scramble onward over the rock alongside of Kinraid 's path on the sand have not compel the event . 

 ' anyhow , ' think he , as he rise up , ' my prayer be grant . God be thank ! ' 

 once more he look out towards the ship . she have spread her beautiful great sail , and be stand out to sea in the glitter path of the descend sun . 

 he see that he have be delay on his road , and have linger long . he shake his stiffened limb , shoulder his knapsack , and prepare to walk on to Hartlepool as swiftly as he could . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 AN IMPORTANT MISSION 

 Philip be too late for the coach he have hop to go by , but there be another that leave at night , and which reach Newcastle in the forenoon , so that , by the loss of a night 's sleep , he might overtake his lose time . but , restless and miserable , he could not stop in Hartlepool long than to get some hasty food at the inn from which the coach start . he acquaint himself with the name of the town through which it would pass , and the inn at which it would stop , and leave word that the coachman be to be on the look - out for he and pick he up at some one of these place . 

 he be thoroughly wear out before this happen too much tired to gain any sleep in the coach . when he reach Newcastle , he go to engage his passage in the next London - bind smack , and then direct his step to Robinson 's , in the side , to make all the inquiry he could think of respect the plough his uncle want to know about . 

 so it be pretty late in the afternoon , indeed almost evening , before he arrive at the small inn on the quay - side , where he intend to sleep . it be but a rough kind of place , frequent principally by sailor ; he have be recommend to it by Daniel Robson , who have know it well in former day . the accommodation in it be , however , clean and homely , and the people keep it be respectable enough in their way . 

 still Hepburn be rather repel by the appearance of the sailor who sate drinking in the bar , and he ask , in a low voice , if there be not another room . the woman star in surprise , and only shake her head . Hepburn go to a separate table , away from the roar fire , which on this cold March evening be the great attraction , and call for food and drink . then see that the other man be eye he with the sociable idea of speak to he , he ask for pen and ink and paper , with the intention of defeat their purpose by pre - occupation on his part . but when the paper come , the new pen , the unused thicken ink , he hesitate long before he begin to write ; and at last he slowly put down the word , 

 ' DEAR and HONOURED UNCLE , ' 

 there be a pause ; his meal be bring and hastily swallow . even while he be eat it , he keep occasionally touch up the letter of these word . when he have drink a glass of ale he begin again to write : fluently this time , for he be give an account of the plough . then come another long stop ; he be weigh in his own mind what he should say about Kinraid . once he think for a second of writing to Sylvia herself , and tell she -how much ? she might treasure up her lover 's word like grain of gold , while they be light than dust in their meaning to Philip 's mind ; word which such as the specksioneer use as counter to beguile and lead astray silly woman . it be for he to prove his constancy by action ; and the chance of his give such proof be infinitesimal in Philip 's estimation . but should the latter mention the bare fact of Kinraid 's impressment to Robson ? that would have be the natural course of thing , remember that the last time Philip have see either , they be in each other 's company . twenty time he put his pen to the paper with the intention of relate briefly the event that have befall Kinraid ; and as often he stop , as though the first word would be irrevocable . while he thus sate pen in hand , think himself wise than conscience , and look on beyond the next step which she bid he take into an indefinite future , he catch some fragment of the sailor ' talk at the other end of the room , which make he listen to their word . they be speak of that very Kinraid , the thought of whom fill his own mind like an actual presence . in a rough , careless way they speak of the specksioneer , with admiration enough for his power as a sailor and harpooner ; and from that they pass on to jest mention of his power amongst woman , and one or two girl ' name be speak of in connection with he . Hepburn silently add Annie Coulson and Sylvia Robson to this list , and his cheek turn pale as he do so . long after they have do speak about Kinraid , after they have pay their shot , and go away , he sate in the same attitude , think bitter thought . 

 the people of the house prepare for bed . their silent guest take no heed of their mute sign . at length the landlord speak to he , and he start , gather his wit together with an effort , and prepare to retire with the rest . but before he do so , he sign and direct the letter to his uncle , leave it still open , however , in case some sudden feeling should prompt he to add a postscript . the landlord volunteer the information that the letter his guest have be write must be post early the next morning if it be go south ; as the mail in that direction only leave Newcastle every other day . 

 all night long Hepburn weary himself with passionate tossing , prompt by sting recollection . towards morning he fall into a dead sound sleep . he be rouse by a hasty knock at the door . it be broad full daylight ; he have overslept himself , and the smack be leave by the early tide . he be even now summon on board . he dress , wafere his letter , and rush with it to the neighbouring post - office ; and , without care to touch the breakfast for which he pay , he embark . once on board , he experience the relief which it always be to an undecided man , and generally be at first to any one who have be palter with duty , when circumstance decide for he . in the first case , it be pleasant to be relieve from the burden of decision ; in the second , the responsibility seem to be shift on to impersonal event . 

 and so Philip sail out of the mouth of the Tyne on to the great open sea . it would be a week before the smack reach London , even if she pursue a tolerably straight course , but she have to keep a sharp look - out after possible impressment of her crew ; and it be not until after many dodge and some adventure that , at the end of a fortnight from the time of his leave Monkshaven , Philip find himself safely house in London , and ready to begin the delicate piece of work which be give he to do . 

 he feel himself fully capable of unravel each clue to information , and decide on the value of the knowledge so gain . but during the leisure of the voyage he have wisely determine to communicate everything he learn about Dickinson , in short , every step he take in the matter , by letter to his employer . and thus his mind both in and out of his lodging might have appear to have be fully occupy with the concern of other . 

 but there be time when the miserable luxury of dwell upon his own affair be his when he lie down in his bed till he fall into restless sleep when the point to which his step tend in his walk be ascertain . then he give himself up to memory , and regret which often deepen into despair , and but seldom be cheer by hope . 

 he grow so impatient of the ignorance in which he be keep for in those day of heavy postage any correspondence he might have have on mere monkshaven intelligence be very limited as to the affair at Haytersbank , that he cut out an advertisement respect some new kind of plough , from a newspaper that lie in the chop - house where he usually din , and rise early the next morning he employ the time thus gain in go round to the shop where these new plough be sell . 

 that night he write another letter to Daniel Robson , with a long account of the merit of the implement he have that day see . with a sick heart and a hesitate hand , he wind up with a message of regard to his aunt and to Sylvia ; an expression of regard which he dare not make as warm as he wish , and which , consequently , fall below the usual mark attain by such message , and would have appear to any one who care to think about it as cold and formal . 

 when this letter be despatch , Hepburn begin to wonder what he have hop for in write it . he know that Daniel could write or rather that he could make strange hieroglyphic , the meaning of which puzzle other and often himself ; but these pen - and - ink sign be seldom employ by Robson , and never , so far as Philip know , for the purpose of letter - writing . but still he crave so for news of Sylvia even for a sight of paper which she have see , and perhaps touch that he think all his trouble about the plough   to say nothing of the one - and - twopence postage which he have prepay in order to make sure of his letter 's reception in the frugal household at Haytersbank   well lose for the mere chance of his uncle 's care enough for the intelligence to write in reply , or even to get some friend to write an answer ; for in such case , perhaps , Philip might see her name mention in some way , even though it be only that she send her duty to he . 

 but the post - office be dumb ; no letter come from Daniel Robson . Philip hear , it be true , from his employer pretty frequently on business ; and he feel sure they would have name it , if any ill have befall his uncle 's family , for they know of the relationship and of his intimacy there . they generally end their formal letter with as formal a summary of monkshaven news ; but there be never a mention of the Robsons , and that of itself be well , but it do not soothe Philip 's impatient curiosity . he have never confide his attachment to his cousin to any one , it be not his way ; but he sometimes think that if Coulson have not take his present appointment to a confidential piece of employment so ill , he would have write to he and ask he to go up to Haytersbank Farm , and let he know how they all be . 

 all this time he be transact the affair on which he have be send , with great skill ; and , indeed , in several way , he be quietly lay the foundation for enlarge the business in Monkshaven . naturally grave and quiet , and slow to speak , he impress those who see he with the idea of great age and experience than he really possess . indeed , those who encounter he in London , think he be absorb in the business of money - making . yet before the time come when he could wind up affair and return to Monkshaven , he would have give all he possess for a letter from his uncle , tell he something about Sylvia . for he still hop to hear from Robson , although he know that he hop against reason . but we often convince ourselves by good argument that what we wish for need never have be expect ; and then , at the end of our reasoning , find that we might have save ourselves the trouble , for that our wish be untouched , and be as strong enemy to our peace of mind as ever . Hepburn 's baulked hope be the Mordecai sit in Haman 's gate ; all his success in his errand to London , his well - do in worldly affair , be tasteless , and give he no pleasure , because of this blank and void of all intelligence concern Sylvia . 

 and yet he come back with a letter from the Fosters in his pocket , curt , yet expressive of deep gratitude for his discreet service in London ; and at another time in fact , if Philip 's life have be order differently to what it be it might have give this man a not unworthy pleasure to remember that , without a penny of his own , simply by diligence , honesty , and faithful quick - sightedness as to the interest of his master , he have rise to hold the promise of be their successor , and to be rank by they as a trusted friend . 

 as the Newcastle smack near the shore on her voyage home , Hepburn look wistfully out for the faint gray outline of Monkshaven Priory against the sky , and the well - know cliff ; as if the mass of inanimate stone could tell he any news of Sylvia . 

 in the street of Shields , just after land , he encounter a neighbour of the Robsons , and an acquaintance of his own . by this honest man , he be welcome as a great traveller be welcome on his return from a long voyage , with many hearty good shake of the hand , much repetition of kind wish , and offer to treat he to drink . yet , from some insurmountable feeling , Philip avoid all mention of the family who be the principal bond between the honest farmer and himself . he do not know why , but he could not bear the shock of first hear her name in the open street , or in the rough public - house . and thus he shrink from the intelligence he crave to hear . 

 thus he know no more about the Robsons when he return to Monkshaven , than he have do on the day when he have last see they ; and , of course , his first task there be to give a long viva voce account of all his London proceeding to the two brother Foster , who , consider that they have hear the result of everything by letter , seem to take an insatiable interest in detail . 

 he could hardly tell why , but even when release from the Fosters ' parlour , he be unwilling to go to Haytersbank Farm . it be late , it be true , but on a May evening even country people keep up till eight or nine o'clock . perhaps it be because Hepburn be still in his travel - stain dress ; have go straight to the shop on his arrival in Monkshaven . perhaps it be because , if he go this night for the short half - hour intervening before bed - time , he would have no excuse for pay a long visit on the following evening . at any rate , he proceed straight to Alice Rose 's , as soon as he have finish his interview with his employer . 

 both Hester and Coulson have give he their welcome home in the shop , which they have , however , leave an hour or two before he . 

 yet they give he a fresh greeting , almost one in which surprise be blend , when he come to his lodging . even Alice seem gratified by his spending this first evening with they , as if she have think it might have be otherwise . weary though he be , he exert himself to talk and to relate what he have do and see in London , as far as he could without break confidence with his employer . it be something to see the pleasure he give to his auditor , although there be several mixed feeling in their mind to produce the expression of it which gratify he . Coulson be sorry for his former ungenerous reception of the news that Philip be go to London ; Hester and her mother each secretly begin to feel as if this evening be like more happy evening of old , before the Robsons come to Haytersbank Farm ; and who know what faint delicious hop this resemblance may not have suggest ? 

 while Philip , restless and excited , feel that he could not sleep , be glad to pass away the wake hour that must intervene before to - morrow night , at time , he try to make they talk of what have happen in Monkshaven during his absence , but all have go on in an eventless manner , as far as he could gather ; if they know of anything affect the Robsons , they avoid speak of it to he ; and , indeed , how little likely be they ever to have hear their name while he be away ? 




 CHAPTER XX 

 LOVED and lose 

 Philip walk towards the Robsons ' farm like a man in a dream , who have everything around he accord to his wish , and yet be conscious of a secret mysterious inevitable drawback to his enjoyment . Hepburn do not care to think would not realize what this drawback , which need not have be mysterious in his case , be . 

 the May evening be glorious in light and shadow . the crimson sun warm up the chilly northern air to a semblance of pleasant heat . the spring sight and sound be all about ; the lamb be bleat out their gentle weariness before they sink to rest by the side of their mother ; the linnet be chirp in every bush of golden gorse that grow out of the stone wall ; the lark be sing her good - night in the cloudless sky , before she drop down to her nest in the tender green wheat ; all speak of brood peace but Philip 's heart be not at peace . 

 yet he be go to proclaim his good fortune . his master have that day publicly announce that Coulson and he be to be their successor , and he have now arrive at that long - for point in his business , when he have resolve to openly speak of his love to Sylvia , and might openly strive to gain her love . but , alas ! the fulfilment of that wish of his have lag sadly behind . he be place as far as he could , even in his most sanguine moment , have hop to be as regarded business , but Sylvia be as far from his attainment as ever nay , far . still the great obstacle be remove in Kinraid 's impressment . Philip take upon himself to decide that , with such a man as the specksioneer , absence be equivalent to faithless forgetfulness . he think that he have just ground for this decision in the account he have hear of Kinraid 's behaviour to Annie Coulson ; to the other nameless young girl , her successor in his fickle heart ; in the ribald talk of the sailor in the Newcastle public - house . it would be well for Sylvia if she could forget as quickly ; and , to promote this oblivion , the name of her lover should never be bring up , either in praise or blame . and Philip would be patient and enduring ; all the time watch over she , and labour to win her reluctant love . 

 there she be ! he see she as he stand at the top of the little hill - path lead down to the robson ' door . she be out of door , in the garden , which , at some distance from the house , slop up the bank on the opposite side of the gully ; much too far off to be speak to not too far off to be gaze at by eye that caress she every movement . how well Philip know that garden ; place long ago by some tenant of the farm on a southern slope ; wall in with rough moorland stone ; plant with berry - bush for use , and southernwood and sweet - briar for sweetness of smell . when the Robsons have first come to Haytersbank , and Sylvia be scarcely more than a pretty child , how well he remember help she with the arrangement of this garden ; lay out his few spare penny in hen - and - chicken daisy at one time , in flower - seed at another ; again in a rose - tree in a pot . he know how his unaccustomed hand have labour with the spade at form a little primitive bridge over the beck in the hollow before winter stream should make it too deep for fording ; how he have cut down branch of the mountain - ash and cover they over , yet deck with their scarlet berry , with sod of green turf , beyond which the brilliancy creep out ; but now it be month and year since he have be in that garden , which have lose its charm for Sylvia , as she find the bleak sea - wind come up and blight all endeavour at cultivate more than the most useful thing pot - herb , marigold , potato , onion , and such - like . why do she tarry there now , stand quite motionless up by the high bit of wall , look over the sea , with her hand shade her eye ? quite motionless ; as if she be a stone statue . he begin to wish she would move would look at he but any way that she would move , and not stand gaze thus over that great dreary sea . 

 he go down the path with an impatient step , and enter the house - place . there sit his aunt spinning , and apparently as well as ever . he could hear his uncle talk to Kester in the neighbouring shippen ; all be well in the household . why be Sylvia stand in the garden in that strange quiet way ? 

 ' why , lad ! thou'rt a sight for sair een ! ' say his aunt , as she stand up to welcome he back . ' an ' when didst ta come , eh ? but thy uncle will be glad to see thee , and to hear thee talk about yon pleugh ; he be think a deal o ' thy letter . I will go call he in . ' 

 ' not yet , ' say Philip , stop she in her progress towards the door . ' he be busy talk to Kester . I be in no haste to be go . I can stay a couple of hour . sit down , and tell I how you be yoursel ' and how iverything be . and I have   a deal to tell you . ' 

 ' to be sure to be sure . to think thou be be in Lunnon sin ' I see thee ! well to be sure ! there be a vast o ' come and go I ' this world . Thou'll mind yon specksioneer lad , he as be cousin to t ' Corneys Charley Kinraid ? ' 

 mind he ! as if he could forget he . 

 ' well ! he be dead and go . ' 

 ' dead ! who tell you ? I do not   understand , ' say Philip , in strange bewilderment . could Kinraid have try to escape after all , and be wound , kill in the attempt ? if not , how should they know he be dead ? miss he might be , though how this should be know be strange , as he be suppose to be sail to the Greenland sea . but dead ! what do they mean ? at Philip 's bad moment of hatred he have hardly dare to wish he dead . 

 ' Dunnot yo ' mention it afore our Sylvie ; we niver speak on he to she , for she take it a deal to heart , though I be thinkin ' it be a good thing for she ; for he would got a hold of she he have on Bessy Corney , too , as her mother tell I ; not that I iver let on to they as Sylvia fret after he , so keep a calm sough , my lad . it be a girl 's fancy just a kind o ' calf - love ; let it go by ; and it be well for she he be dead , though it be hard to say so on a drowned man . ' 

 ' drown ! ' say Philip . ' how do yo ' know ? ' half hop that the poor drench swollen body might have be find , and thus all question and dilemma solve . Kinraid might have struggle overboard with rope or handcuff on , and so have be drown . 

 ' eh , lad ! there be no misdoubtin ' it . he be think a deal on by t ' captain o ' t ' Urania ; and when he niver come back on t ' day when she ought for to have sail , he send to Kinraid 's people at Cullercoats , and they send to Brunton 's i ' Newcassel , and they know he have be here . T ' captain put off sailing for two or three day , that he might ha ' that much law ; but when he hear as Kinraid be not at Corneys ' , but have leave them a'most on to a week , he go off to they Northern seas wi ' t ' next good specksioneer he could find . for there be no use speak ill on t ' dead ; an ' though I could not   abear his come for iver about t ' house , he be a rare good specksioneer , as I have   be tell . ' 

 ' but how do you know he be drown ? ' say Philip , feel guiltily disappointed at his aunt 's story . 

 ' why , lad ! I be a'most ashamed to tell thee , I be sore put out mysel ' ; but Sylvia be so break - hearted like I could not   cast it up to she as I should ha ' like : th ' silly lass have go and gi'en he a bit o ' ribbon , as many a one knowed , for it have be a vast notice and admire that evenin ' at th ' Corneys ' new year 's eve I think it be and t ' poor vain peacock have tie it on his hat , so that when t ' tide hist ! there be Sylvie come in at t ' back - door ; never let on , ' and in a forced make - up voice she inquire aloud , for hitherto she have be speak almost in a whisper , 

 ' and didst ta see King George an ' Queen Charlotte ? ' 

 Philip could not answer do not hear . his soul have go out to meet Sylvia , who enter with quiet slowness quite unlike her former self . her face be wan and white ; her gray eye seem large , and full of dumb tearless sorrow ; she come up to Philip , as if his be there touch she with no surprise , and give he a gentle greeting as if he be a familiar indifferent person whom she have see but yesterday . Philip , who have recollect the quarrel they have have , and about Kinraid too , the very last time they have meet , have expect some trace of this remembrance to linger in her look and speech to he . but there be no such sign ; her great sorrow have wipe away all anger , almost all memory . her mother look at her anxiously , and then say in the same manner of force cheerfulness which she have use before , 

 ' here 's Philip , lass , a ' full o ' Lunnon ; call thy father in , an we will hear a ' about t ' new - fangle pleugh . it will be rare an ' nice a ' sit together again . ' 

 Sylvia , silent and docile , go out to the shippen to obey her mother 's wish . Bell Robson leant forward towards Philip , misinterpret the expression on his face , which be guilt as much as sympathy , and check the possible repentance which might have urge he on at that moment to tell all he know , by say , ' Lad ! it be a ' for t ' good . he be noane good enough for she ; and I misdoubt I he be only playin ' wi ' she as he have do by other . let she a - be , let she a - be ; she will come round to be thankful . ' 

 Robson bustle in with loud welcome ; all the loud and more talkative because he , like his wife , assume a cheerful manner before Sylvia . yet he , unlike his wife , have many a secret regret over Kinraid 's fate . at first , while merely the fact of his disappearance be know , Daniel Robson have hit on the truth , and have stick to his opinion that the cursed press - gang be at the bottom of it . he have back his word by many an oath , and all the more because he have not a single reason to give that apply to the present occasion . no one on the lonely coast have remark any sign of the presence of the man - of - war , or the tender that accompany they , for the purpose of impressment on the king 's ship . at Shields , and at the mouth of the Tyne , where they lay in greedy wait , the owner of the Urania have cause strict search to be make for their skilled and protect specksioneer , but with no success . all this positive evidence in contradiction to Daniel Robson 's opinion only make he cle to it the more ; until the day when the hat be find on the shore with Kinraid 's name write out large and fair in the inside , and the tell - tale bit of ribbon knot in the band . then Daniel , by a sudden revulsion , give up every hope ; it never enter his mind that it could have fall off by any accident . no ! now Kinraid be dead and drown , and it be a bad job , and the soon it could be forget the well for all party ; and it be well no one know how far it have go with Sylvia , especially now since Bessy Corney be cry her eye out as if he have be engage to she . so Daniel say nothing to his wife about the mischief that have go on in her absence , and never speak to Sylvia about the affair ; only he be more than usually tender to she in his rough way , and thought , morning , noon , and night , on what he could do to give her pleasure , and drive away all recollection of her ill - star love . 

 to - night he would have she sit by he while Philip tell his story , or heavily answer question put to he . Sylvia sit on a stool by her father 's knee , hold one of his hand in both of her ; and presently she lay down her head upon they , and Philip see her sad eye look into the flicker fire - light with long unwinking stare , show that her thought be far distant . he could hardly go on with his tale of what he have see , and what do , he be so full of pity for she . yet , for all his pity , he have now resolve never to soothe she with the knowledge of what he know , nor to deliver the message send by her false lover . he feel like a mother withhold something injurious from the foolish wish of her plaining child . 

 but he go away without breathe a word of his good fortune in business . the telling of such kind of good fortune seem out of place this night , when the thought of death and the loss of friend seem to brood over the household , and cast its shadow there , obscure for the time all worldly thing . 

 and so the great piece of news come out in the ordinary course of gossip , tell by some monkshaven friend to Robson the next market day . for month Philip have be look forward to the sensation which the intelligence would produce in the farm household , as a preliminary to lay his good fortune at Sylvia 's foot . and they hear of it , and he away , and all chance of his make use of it in the manner he have intend vanish for the present . 

 Daniel be always curious after other people 's affair , and now be more than ever bent on collect scrap of news which might possibly interest Sylvia , and rouse she out of the state of indifference as to everything into which she have fall . perhaps he think that he have not act altogether wisely in allow she to engage herself to Kinraid , for he be a man apt to judge by result ; and moreover he have have so much reason to repent of the encouragement which he have give to the lover whose untimely end have so deeply affect his only child , that he be more unwilling than ever that his wife should know of the length to which the affair have go during her absence . he even urge secrecy upon Sylvia as a personal favour ; unwilling to encounter the silent blame which he openly affect to despise . 

 ' we will noane fret thy mother by lettin ' on how oft he come and go . she will , may - be , be thinkin ' he be for speakin ' to thee , my poor lass ; an ' it would put she out a deal , for she be a woman of a stern mind towards matteremony . and she will be noane so strong till summer - weather come , and I would be loath to give her aught to worrit hersel ' about . so thee and I will keep our own counsel . ' 

 ' I wish mother have be here , then she would ha ' know all , without my tell she . ' 

 ' cheer up , lass ; it be well as it be . Thou'll get o'er it soon for havin' no one to let on to . a myself be noane go to speak on't   again . ' 

 no more he do ; but there be a strange tenderness in his tone when he speak to she ; a half - pathetic way of seek after she , if by any chance she be absent for a minute from the place where he expect to find she ; a consideration for she , about this time , in his way of bring back trifling present , or small piece of news that he think might interest she , which sink deep into her heart . 

 ' and what dun yo ' think a ' t ' folk be talkin ' on I ' monkshaven ? ' ask he , almost before he have take off his coat , on the day when he have hear of Philip 's promotion in the world . ' why , missus , thy nephew , Philip Hepburn , have get his name up I ' gold letter four inch long o'er Fosters ' door ! he and Coulson have set up shop together , and Fosters be go out ! ' 

 ' that 's t ' secret of his journey t ' Lunnon , ' say Bell , more gratified than she choose to show . 

 ' four inch long if they be theere at all ! I heerd on it at t ' Bay Horse first ; but I think yo'd niver be satisfied 'bout I seed it wi ' my own eye . they do say as Gregory Jones , t ' plumber , get it do I ' York , for that nought else would satisfy old Jeremiah . it will be a matter o ' some hundred a year I ' Philip 's pocket . ' 

 ' there will be Fosters I ' th ' background , as one may say , to take t ' big share on t ' profit , ' say Bell . 

 ' ay , ay , that be but as it should be , for I reckon they will ha ' to find t ' brass the first , my lass ! ' say he , turn to Sylvia . ' A'm fain to tak ' thee in to t ' town next market - day , just for thee t ' see ' t. A'll buy thee a bonny ribbon for thy hair out o ' t ' cousin 's own shop . ' 

 some thought of another ribbon which have once tie up her hair , and afterwards be cut in twain , must have cross Sylvia 's mind , for she answer , as if she shrink from her father 's word , 

 ' I can not go , I be noane wantin ' a ribbon ; I be much oblige , father , a ' t ' same . ' 

 her mother read her heart clearly , and suffer with she , but never speak a word of sympathy . but she go on rather more quickly than she would otherwise have do to question her husband as to all he know about this great rise of Philip 's . once or twice Sylvia join in with languid curiosity ; but presently she become tired and go to bed . for a few moment after she leave , her parent sate silent . then Daniel , in a tone as if he be justify his daughter , and comfort himself as well as his wife , observe that it be almost on for nine ; the evening be light so long now . Bell say nothing in reply , but gather up her wool , and begin to arrange the thing for night . 

 by - and - by Daniel break the silence by say , 

 ' a thowt at one time as Philip have a fancy for our Sylvie . ' 

 for a minute or two Bell do not speak . then , with deep insight into her daughter 's heart than her husband , in spite of his great knowledge of the event that have happen to affect it , she say , 

 ' if thou 's thinking on a match between them , it will be a long time afore th ' poor sad wench be fit t ' think on another man as sweetheart . ' 

 ' a say nought about sweetheart , ' reply he , as if his wife have reproach he in some way . ' Woman 's allay so full o ' sweetheart and matteremony . a only say as a'd thowt once as Philip have a fancy for our lass , and a think so still ; and he will be worth his two hunder a year afore long . but a niver say nought about sweetheart . ' 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 a reject suitor 

 there be many domestic arrangement to be make in connection with the new commercial one which affect Hepburn and Coulson . 

 the Fosters , with something of the busybodiness which be apt to mingle itself with kindly patronage , have plan in their own mind that the Rose household should be remove altogether to the house belong to the shop ; and that Alice , with the assistance of the capable servant , who , at present , manage all John 's domestic affair , should continue as mistress of the house , with Philip and Coulson for her lodger . 

 but arrangement without her consent do not suit Alice at any time , and she have very good reason for decline to accede to this . she be not go to be uproot at her time of life , she say , nor would she consent to enter upon a future which might be so uncertain . why , Hepburn and Coulson be both young man , she say , and they be as likely to marry as not ; and then the bride would be sure to wish to live in the good old - fashioned house at the back of the shop . 

 it be in vain she be tell by every one concern , that , in case of such an event , the first married partner should take a house of his own , leave she in undisputed possession . she reply , with apparent truth , that both might wish to marry , and surely the wife of one ought to take possession of the house belong to the business ; that she be not go to trust herself to the fancy of young man , who be always , the good of they , go and do the very thing that be most foolish in the way of marriage ; of which state , in fact , she speak with something of acrimonious contempt and dislike , as if young people always get mismatch , yet have not the sense to let old and wise people choose for they . 

 ' Thou'll not have be understand why Alice Rose speak as she do this morning , ' say Jeremiah Foster to Philip , on the afternoon succeed the final discussion of this plan . ' she be a - thinking of her youth , I reckon , when she be a well - favour young woman , and our John be full of the thought of marry she . as he could not have she , he have live a bachelor all his day . but if I be not a vast mistaken , all that he have will go to she and to hester , for all that hester be the child of another man . Thee and Coulson should have a try for Hester , Philip . I have tell Coulson this day of hester 's chance . I tell he first because he be my wife 's nephew ; but I tell thee now , Philip . it would be a good thing for the shop if one of ye be marry . ' 

 Philip redden . often as the idea of marriage have come into his mind , this be the first time it have be gravely suggest to he by another . but he reply quietly enough . 

 ' I do not   think hester Rose have any thought of matrimony . ' 

 ' to be sure not ; it be for thee , or for William Coulson , to make she think . she , may - be , remember enough of her mother 's life with her father to make she slow to think on such thing . but it be in she to think on matrimony ; it be in all of we . ' 

 ' Alice 's husband be dead before I know she , ' say Philip , rather evade the main subject . 

 ' it be a mercy when he be take . a mercy to they who be leave , I mean . Alice be a bonny young woman , with a smile for everybody , when he we d she a smile for every one except our John , who never could do enough to try and win one from she . but , no ! she would have none of he , but set her heart on Jack Rose , a sailor in a whale - ship . and so they be marry at last , though all her own folk be against it . and he be a profligate sinner , and go after other woman , and drank , and beat she . she turn as stiff and as grey as thou seest she now within a year of hester 's birth . I believe they would have perish for want and cold many a time if it have not be for John . if she ever guess where the money come from , it must have hurt her pride above a bit , for she be always a proud woman . but mother 's love be strong than pride . ' 

 Philip fall to thinking ; a generation ago something of the same kind have be go on as that which he be now live through , quick with hope and fear . a girl belove by two nay , those two so identical in occupation as he and Kinraid be Rose identical even in character with what he know of the specksioneer ; a girl choose the wrong lover , and suffering and sour all her life in consequence of her youth 's mistake ; be that to be Sylvia 's lot ? or , rather , be she not save from it by the event of the impressment , and by the course of silence he himself have resolve upon ? then he go on to wonder if the life of one generation be but a repetition of the life of those who have go before , with no variation but from the internal cause that some have great capacity for suffer than other . would those very circumstance which make the interest of his life now , return , in due cycle , when he be dead and Sylvia be forget ? 

 perplexed thought of this and a similar kind keep return into Philip 's mind whenever he have leisure to give himself up to consideration of anything but the immediate throng of business . and every time he dwell on this complication and succession of similar event , he emerge from his reverie more and more satisfied with the course he have take in withholding from Sylvia all knowledge of her lover 's fate . 

 it be settle at length that Philip be to remove to the house belong to the shop , Coulson remain with Alice and her daughter . but in the course of the summer the latter tell his partner that he have offer marriage to hester on the previous day , and be refuse . it be an awkward affair altogether , as he live in their house , and be in daily companionship with Hester , who , however , seem to preserve her gentle calmness , with only a tinge more of reserve in her manner to Coulson . 

 ' I wish yo ' could find out what she have again ' I , Philip , ' say Coulson , about a fortnight after he have make the proposal . the poor young man think that Hester 's composure of manner towards he since the event argue that he be not distasteful to she ; and as he be now on very happy term with Philip , he come constantly to he , as if the latter could interpret the meaning of all the little occurrence between he and his beloved . ' I be o ' right age , not two month betwixt we ; and there be few in Monkshaven as would think on her wi ' well prospect than I ; and she know my folk ; we be kind o ' cousin , in fact ; and I would be like a son to her mother ; and there be noane I ' monkshaven as can speak again ' my character . there be nought between yo ' and she , be there , Philip ? ' 

 ' I ha ' tell thee many a time that she and I be like brother and sister . she be no more thought on I nor I have for she . so be content wi't , for I'se not tell thee again . ' 

 ' do not   be vex , Philip ; if thou know what it be to be in love , thou'd be always fancy thing , just as I be . ' 

 ' I might be , ' say Philip ; ' but I dunnut think I should be always talk about my fancy . ' 

 ' I wunnot talk any more after this once , if thou'll just find out fra ' thysel ' , as it be , what it be she have again ' I . I would go to chapel for iver with she , if that be what she want . just ask she , Philip . ' 

 ' it be an awkward thing for I to be melle wi ' , ' say Hepburn , reluctantly . 

 ' but thou say thee and she be like brother and sister ; and a brother would ask a sister , and niver think twice about it . ' 

 ' well , well , ' reply Philip , ' I will see what I can do ; but , lad , I dunnot think she will have thee . she do not   fancy thee , and fancy be three part o ' love , if reason be t ' other fourth . ' 

 but somehow Philip could not begin on the subject with hester . he do not know why , except that , as he say , ' it be so awkward . ' but he really like Coulson so much as to be anxious to do what the latter wish , although he be almost convinced that it would be of no use . so he watch his opportunity , and find Alice alone and at leisure one Sunday evening . 

 she be sit by the window , read her Bible , when he go in . she give he a curt welcome , hearty enough for she , for she be always chary in her expression of pleasure or satisfaction . but she take off her horn spectacle and place they in the book to keep her place ; and then turn more fully round on her chair , so as to face he , she say , 

 ' well , lad ! and how do it go on ? though it be not a day for t ' ask about worldly thing . but I niver see thee now but on Sabbath day , and rarely then . still we munnot speak o ' such thing on t ' Lord 's day . so thee mun just say how t ' shop be do , and then we will leave such vain talk . ' 

 ' T ' shop be do main an ' well , thank ye , mother . but Coulson could tell yo ' o ' that any day . ' 

 ' I would a deal rayther hear fra ' thee , Philip . Coulson do not   know how t ' manage his own business , let alone half the business as it take John and Jeremiah 's head ay , and task them , too to manage . I have   no patience with Coulson . ' 

 ' why ? he be a decent young fellow as ever there be in Monkshaven . ' 

 ' he may be . he be noane cut his wisdom - teeth yet . but , for that matter , there be other folk as far fra ' sense as he be . ' 

 ' ay , and far . Coulson may not   be so bright at all time as he might be , but he be a steady - goer , and I would back he again ' any chap o ' his age I ' monkshaven . ' 

 ' I know who I would soon back in many a thing , Philip ! ' she say it with so much meaning that he could not fail to understand that he himself be mean , and he reply , ingenuously enough , 

 ' if yo ' mean I , mother , I will noane deny that in a thing or two I may be more knowledgeable than Coulson . I have   have a deal o ' time on my hand I ' my youth , and I would good schooling as long as father live . ' 

 ' Lad ! it be not school , nor knowledge , nor book - learning as carry a man through t ' world . it be mother - wit . and it be noane schooling , nor knowledge , nor book - learning as take a young woman . it be summat as can not be put into word . ' 

 ' that be just what I tell Coulson ! ' say Philip , quickly . ' he be sore put about because Hester have gi'en he the bucket , and come to I about it . ' 

 ' and what do thou say ? ' ask Alice , her deep eye gleam at he as if to read his face as well as his word . Philip , think he could now do what Coulson have beg of he in the neat manner , go on , 

 ' I tell he I would help he all as I could - ' 

 ' Thou do , do thou ? well , well , there be nought sa queer as folk , that a will say , ' muttered Alice , between her tooth . 

 ' but that fancy have three part to do wi ' love , ' continue Philip , ' and it would be hard , may - be , to get a reason for she not fancy he . yet I wish she would think twice about it ; he so set upon have she , I think he will do himself a mischief wi ' fretting , if it go on as it be . ' 

 ' it will noane go on as it be , ' say Alice , with gloomy oracularness . 

 ' how not ? ' ask Philip . then , receive no answer , he go on , ' he love she true , and he be within a month or two on her age , and his character will bear handle on a ' side ; and his share on t ' shop will be worth hundred a year afore long . ' 

 another pause . Alice be try to bring down her pride to say something , which she could not with all her effort . 

 ' maybe yo'll speak a word for he , mother , ' say Philip , annoy at her silence . 

 ' I will do no such thing . marriage be well make wi'out melling . how do I know but what she like some one well ? ' 

 ' our Hester 's not th ' lass to think on a young man unless he be be a - wooing on she . and yo ' know , mother , as well as I do and Coulson do too she be niver give any one a chance to woo she ; live half her time here , and t ' other half in t ' shop , and niver speak to no one by t ' way . ' 

 ' I wish thou would not   come here trouble I on a Sabbath day wi ' thy vanity and thy worldly talk . I would liefer by far be I ' that world wheere there be neither marry nor give in marriage , for it be all a moithere mess here . ' she turn to the closed Bible lie on the dresser , and open it with a bang . while she be adjust her spectacle on her nose , with hand tremble with passion , she hear Philip say , 

 ' I ask yo'r pardon , I be sure . I could not   well come any other day . ' 

 ' it be a ' t ' same I care not . but thou might as well tell truth . I will be bind thou be be at Haytersbank Farm some day this week ? ' 

 Philip redden ; in fact , he have forget how he have get to consider his frequent visit to the farm as a regular piece of occupation . he keep silence . 

 Alice look at he with a sharp intelligence that read his silence through . 

 ' I think so . next time thou think to thyself , ' I be more knowledgeable than Coulson , ' just remember Alice Rose 's word , and they be these : If Coulson 's too thick - sighted to see through a board , thou'rt too blind to see through a window . as for comin ' and speakin ' up for Coulson , why he will be married to some one else afore t ' year 's out , for all he think he be so set upon hester now . go thy way , and leave I to my scripture , and come no more on Sabbath day wi ' thy vain babbling . ' 

 so Philip return from his mission rather crestfallen , but quite as far as ever from ' see through a glass window . ' 

 before the year be out , Alice 's prophecy be fulfil . Coulson , who find the position of a reject lover in the same house with the girl who have refuse he , too uncomfortable to be endure , as soon as he be convince that his object be decidedly out of his reach , turn his attention to some one else . he do not love his new sweetheart as he have do hester : there be more of reason and less of fancy in his attachment . but it end successfully ; and before the first snow fall , Philip be good man at his partner 's wedding . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 deepen SHADOWS 

 but before Coulson be marry , many small event happen small event to all but Philip . to he they be as the sun and moon . the day when he go up to Haytersbank and Sylvia speak to he , the day when he go up and she have apparently no heart to speak to any one , but leave the room as soon as he come , or never enter it at all , although she must have know that he be there these be his alternation from happiness to sorrow . 

 from her parent he always have a welcome . oppress by their daughter 's depression of spirit , they hail the coming of any visitor as a change for she as well as for themselves . the former intimacy with the Corneys be in abeyance for all party , owe to Bessy Corney 's out - speak grief for the loss of her cousin , as if she have have reason to look upon he as her lover , whereas Sylvia 's parent feel this as a slur upon their daughter 's cause of grief . but although at this time the member of the two family cease to seek after each other 's society , nothing be say . the thread of friendship might be join afresh at any time , only just now it be break ; and Philip be glad of it . before go to Haytersbank he seek each time for some little present with which to make his come welcome . and now he wish even more than ever that Sylvia have care for learn ; if she have he could have take she many a pretty ballad , or story - book , such as be then in vogue . he do try she with the translation of the sorrow of Werther , so popular at the time that it have a place in all pedlar ' basket , with Law 's serious Call , the Pilgrim 's Progress , Klopstock 's Messiah , and Paradise Lost . but she could not read it for herself ; and after turn the leaf languidly over , and smile a little at the picture of Charlotte cut bread and butter in a left - handed manner , she put it aside on the shelf by the Complete Farrier ; and there Philip see it , upside down and untouched , the next time he come to the farm . 

 many a time during that summer do he turn to the few verse in Genesis in which Jacob 's twice seven year ' service for Rachel be relate , and try and take fresh heart from the reward which come to the patriarch 's constancy at last . after try book , nosegay , small present of pretty article of dress , such as suit the notion of those day , and find they all receive with the same languid gratitude , he set himself to endeavour to please she in some other way . it be time that he should change his tactic ; for the girl be become weary of the necessity for thank he , every time he come , for some little favour or other . she wish he would let she alone and not watch she continually with such sad eye . her father and mother hail her first sign of impatient petulance towards he as a return to the old state of thing before Kinraid have come to disturb the tenour of their life ; for even Daniel have turn against the specksioneer , irritate by the Corneys ' loud moan over the loss of the man to whom their daughter say that she be attach . if Daniel wish for he to be alive again , it be mainly that the Corneys might be convince that his last visit to the neighbourhood of Monkshaven be for the sake of the pale and silent Sylvia , and not for that of Bessy , who complain of Kinraid 's untimely death rather as if by it she have be cheat of a husband than for any overwhelming personal love towards the deceased . 

 ' if he be after she he be a big black scoundrel , that be what he be ; and a wish he be alive again to be hang . but a dunnot believe it ; they Corney lass be allay a - talkin ' an ' a - thinking on sweetheart , and niver a man cross t ' threshold but they try he on as a husband . an ' their mother be no well : Kinraid have speak civil to Bessy as become a lad to a lass , and she make an ado over he as if they have be to church together not a week sin ' . ' 

 ' I dunnot uphold t ' Corneys ; but Molly Corney as be Molly Brunton now use to speak on this dead man to our Sylvie as if he be her sweetheart in old day . now there be no smoke without fire , and I be think it be likely enough he be one of they fellow as be always after some lass or another , and , as often as not , two or three at a time . now look at Philip , what a different one he be ! he be niver think on a woman but our Sylvie , I will be bind . I wish he wern't   so old - fashioned and faint - hearted . ' 

 ' ay ! and t ' shop 's do a vast o ' business , I have   hear say . he be a deal well company , too , ' n or he use to be . he have a way o ' preach wi ' he as a could not   abide ; but now he tak be his glass , an ' hold his tongue , leavin ' room for wise man to say their say . ' 

 such be a conjugal colloquy about this time . Philip be gain ground with Daniel , and that be something towards win Sylvia 's heart ; for she be unaware of her father 's change of feeling towards Kinraid , and take all his tenderness towards herself as if they be mark of his regard for her lost lover and his sympathy in her loss , instead of which he be rather feel as if it might be a good thing after all that the fickle - hearted sailor be dead and drown . in fact , Daniel be very like a child in all the part of his character . he be strongly affect by whatever be present , and apt to forget the absent . he act on impulse , and too often have reason to be sorry for it ; but he hat his sorrow too much to let it teach he wisdom for the future . with all his many fault , however , he have something in he which make he be dearly love , both by the daughter whom he indulge , and the wife who be in fact superior to he , but whom he imagine that he rule with a wise and absolute sway . 

 love to Sylvia give Philip tact . he seem to find out that to please the woman of the household he must pay all possible attention to the man ; and though he care little in comparison for Daniel , yet this autumn he be continually think of how he could please he . when he have say or do anything to gratify or amuse her father , Sylvia smile and be kind . whatever he do be right with his aunt ; but even she be unusually glad when her husband be pleased . still his progress be slow towards his object ; and often he sigh himself to sleep with the word , ' seven year , and maybe seven year more ' . then in his dream he see Kinraid again , sometimes struggle , sometimes sail towards land , the only one on board a swift advance ship , alone on deck , stern and avenging ; till Philip awake in remorseful terror . 

 such and similar dream return with the great frequency when , in the November of that year , the coast between Hartlepool and Monkshaven be overshadow by the presence of guard - ship , drive south from their station at North Shields by the resolution which the sailor of that port have enter into to resist the press - gang , and the energy with which they have begin to carry out their determination . for on a certain Tuesday evening yet remember by old inhabitant of North Shields , the sailor in the merchant service meet together and overpower the press - gang , dismiss they from the town with the high contempt , and with their jacket reverse . a numerous mob go with they to Chirton Bar ; give they three cheer at parting , but vow to tear they limb from limb should they seek to re - enter North Shields . but a few day afterwards some fresh cause of irritation arise , and five hundred sailor , arm with such sword and pistol as they could collect , parade through the town in the most riotous manner , and at last attempt to seize the tender Eleanor , on some pretext of the ill - treatment of the impressed man aboard . this endeavour fail , however , owe to the energetic conduct of the officer in command . next day this body of sailor set off for Newcastle ; but learn , before they reach the town , that there be a strong military and civil force prepare to receive they there , they disperse for the time ; but not before the good citizen have receive a great fright , the drum of the North Yorkshire militia beat to arm , and the terrified people rush out into the street to learn the reason of the alarm , and some of they see the militia , under the command of the Earl of Fauconberg , march from the guard - house adjoining New Gate to the house of rendezvous for impressed seaman in the Broad Chase . 

 but a few week after , the impressment service take their revenge for the insult they have be subject to in North Shields . in the dead of night a cordon be form round that town by a regiment station at Tynemouth barrack ; the press - gang belong to armed vessel lie off Shields harbour be let loose ; no one within the circle could escape , and upwards of two hundred and fifty man , sailor , mechanic , labourer of every description , be force on board the armed ship . with that prize they set sail , and wisely leave the place , where deep passionate vengeance be swear against they . not all the dread of an invasion by the French could reconcile the people of these coast to the necessity of impressment . fear and confusion prevail after this to within many mile of the sea - shore . a Yorkshire gentleman of rank say that his labourer disperse like a covey of bird , because a press - gang be report to have establish itself so far inland as Tadcaster ; and they only return to work on the assurance from the steward of his master 's protection , but even then beg leave to sleep on straw in the stable or outhouse belong to their landlord , not dare to sleep at their own home . no fish be catch , for the fisherman dare not venture out to sea ; the market be desert , as the press - gang might come down on any gathering of man ; price be raise , and many be impoverish ; many other ruin . for in the great struggle in which England be then involve , the navy be esteem her safeguard ; and man must be have at any price of money , or suffering , or of injustice . Landsmen be kidnap and take to London ; there , in too many instance , to be discharge without redress and penniless , because they be discover to be useless for the purpose for which they have be take . 

 Autumn bring back the whaling - ship . but the period of their return be full of gloomy anxiety , instead of its be the annual time of rejoice and feasting ; of gladdened household , where brave steady husband or son return ; of unlimited and reckless expenditure , and boisterous joviality among those who think that they have earn unbounded licence on shore by their six month of compelled abstinence . in other year this have be the time for new and handsome winter clothing ; for cheerful if humble hospitality ; for the shopkeeper to display their gayest and good ; for the public - house to be crowd ; for the street to be full of blue jacket , roll along with merry word and open heart . in other year the boiling - house have be full of active worker , the staithe crowd with barrel , the ship - carpenter ' yard throng with seaman and captain ; now a few man , tempt by high wage , go stealthily by back lane to their work , cluster together , with sinister look , glance round corner , and fearful of every approach footstep , as if they be go on some unlawful business , instead of true honest work . Most of they keep their whaling - knife about they ready for bloody defence if they be attack . the shop be almost deserted ; there be no unnecessary expenditure by the man ; they dare not venture out to buy lavish present for the wife or sweetheart or little child . the public - house keep scout on the look - out ; while fierce man drank and swear deep oath of vengeance in the bar man who do not maunder in their cup , nor grow foolishly merry , but in whom liquor call forth all the desperate , bad passion of human nature . 

 indeed , all along the coast of Yorkshire , it seem as if a blight hang over the land and the people . man dodged about their daily business with hatred and suspicion in their eye , and many a curse go over the sea to the three fatal ship lie motionless at anchor three mile off monkshaven . when first Philip have hear in his shop that these three man - of - war might be see lie fall and still on the gray horizon , his heart sink , and he scarcely dare to ask their name . for if one should be the Alcestis ; if Kinraid should send word to Sylvia ; if he should say he be live , and loving , and faithful ; if it should come to pass that the fact of the undelivered message send by her lover through Philip should reach Sylvia 's ear : what would be the position of the latter , not merely in her love that , of course , would be hopeless but in her esteem ? all sophistry vanish ; the fear of detection awaken Philip to a sense of guilt ; and , besides , he find out , that , in spite of all idle talk and careless slander , he could not help believe that Kinraid be in terrible earnest when he utter those passionate word , and entreat that they might be bear to Sylvia . some instinct tell Philip that if the specksioneer have only flirt with too many , yet that for Sylvia Robson his love be true and vehement . then Philip try to convince himself that , from all that be say of his previous character , Kinraid be not capable of an endure constant attachment ; and with such poor opiate to his conscience as he could obtain from this notion Philip be oblige to remain content , until , a day or two after the first intelligence of the presence of those three ship , he learn , with some trouble and pain , that their name be the Megoera , the Bellerophon , and the Hanover . 

 then he begin to perceive how unlikely it be that the Alcestis should have be linger on this shore all these many month . she be , doubtless , go far away by this time ; she have , probably , join the fleet on the war station . who could tell what have become of she and her crew ? she might have be in battle before now , and if so - 

 so his previous fancy shrank to nothing , rebuke for their improbability , and with they vanish his self - reproach . yet there be time when the popular attention seem totally absorb by the dread of the press - gang ; when no other subject be talk about hardly , in fact , think about . at such flow of panic , Philip have his own private fear lest a flash of light should come upon Sylvia , and she should suddenly see that Kinraid 's absence might be account for in another way besides death . but when he reason , this seem unlikely . no man - of - war have be see off the coast , or , if see , have never be speak about , at the time of Kinraid 's disappearance . if he have vanish this winter time , every one would have be convince that the press - gang have seize upon he . Philip have never hear any one breathe the dreaded name of the Alcestis . besides , he go on to think , at the farm they be out of hearing of this one great weary subject of talk . but it be not so , as he become convinced one evening . his aunt catch he a little aside while Sylvia be in the dairy , and her husband talk in the shippen with Kester . 

 ' for good 's sake , Philip , dunnot thee bring we talk about t ' press - gang . it be a thing as have get hold on my measter , till thou'd think he possess . he be speak perpetual on it I ' such a way , that thou'd think he be itch to kill them a ' afore he taste bread again . he really tremble wi ' rage and passion ; an ' a ' night it be just as bad . he start up I ' his sleep , swear and cursing at them , till I be sometimes afeard he will mak ' an end o ' I by mistake . and what mun he do last night but open out on Charley Kinraid , and tell Sylvie he think m'appen t ' gang have get hold on he . it might make her cry a ' her saut tear o'er again . ' 

 Philip speak , by no wish of his own , but as if compel to speak . 

 ' An ' who know but what it be true ? ' 

 the instant these word have come out of his lip he could have bite his tongue off . and yet afterwards it be a sort of balm to his conscience that he have so speak . 

 ' what nonsense , Philip ! ' say his aunt ; ' why , these fearsome ship be far out o ' sight when he go away , good go wi ' he , and Sylvie just get o'er her trouble so nicely , and even my master go on for to say if they would getten hold on he , he be not a chap to stay wi ' them ; he would gi'en proof on his hatred to them , time on . he either ha ' make off an ' then sure enough we should ha ' heerd on he somehow they Corneys be full on he still and they have   a deal to wi ' his folk beyond Newcassel or , as my master say , he be just t ' chap to hang or drown hissel , soon nor do aught against his will . ' 

 ' what do Sylvie say ? ' ask Philip , in a hoarse low voice . 

 ' say ? why , a ' she could say be to burst out cry , and after a bit , she just repeat her feyther 's word , and say anyhow he be dead , for he would niver live to go to sea wi ' a press - gang . she know he too well for that . Thou see she think a deal on he for a spirited chap , as can do what he will . I belie ' I she first begin to think on he time o ' t ' fight aboard th ' Good Fortune , when Darley be kill , and he would seem tame - like to she if he could not   conquer press - gang , and man - o'-war . she be soon think on he drown , as she be ne'er to see he again . ' 

 ' it be good so , ' say Philip , and then , to calm his unusually excited aunt , he promise to avoid the subject of the press - gang as much as possible . 

 but it be a promise very difficult of performance , for Daniel Robson be , as his wife say , like one possess . he could hardly think of anything else , though he himself be occasionally weary of the same constantly recur idea , and would fain have banish it from his mind . he be too old a man to be likely to be take by they ; he have no son to become their victim ; but the terror of they , which he have brave and defy in his youth , seem to come back and take possession of he in his age ; and with the terror come impatient hatred . since his wife 's illness the previous winter he have be a more sober man until now . he be never exactly drunk , for he have a strong , well - season head ; but the craving to hear the last news of the action of the press - gang draw he into Monkshaven nearly every day at this dead agricultural season of the year ; and a public - house be generally the focus from which gossip radiate ; and probably the amount of drink thus consume weaken Robson 's power over his mind , and cause the concentration of thought on one subject . this may be a physiological explanation of what afterwards be speak of as a supernatural kind of possession , lead he to his doom . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 retaliation 

 the public - house that have be choose by the leader of the press - gang in Monkshaven at this time , for their rendezvous   or ' randyvowse ' , as it be generally pronounce , be an inn of poor repute , with a yard at the back which open on to the staithe or quay near to the open sea . a strong high stone wall bound this grass - grow mouldy yard on two side ; the house , and some unused out - building , form the other two . the choice of the place be good enough , both as to situation , which be sufficiently isolate , and yet near to the widening river ; and as to the character of the landlord , John Hobbs be a fail man , one who seem as if doom to be unfortunate in all his undertaking , and the consequence of all this be that he be envious of the more prosperous , and willing to do anything that might bring he in a little present success in life . his household consist of his wife , her niece , who act as servant , and an out - of - door man , a brother of Ned Simpson , the well - do butcher , who at one time have have a fancy for Sylvia . but the one brother be prosperous , the other have go on sink in life , like he who be now his master . neither Hobbs nor his man Simpson be absolutely bad man ; if thing have go well with they they might each have be as scrupulous and conscientious as their neighbour , and even now , suppose the gain in money to be equal , they would soon have do good than evil ; but a very small sum be enough to turn the balance . and in a great degree than in most case be the famous maxim of rochefoucault true with they ; for in the misfortune of their friend they seem to see some justification of their own . it be blind fate deal out event , not that the event themselves be the inevitable consequence of folly or misconduct . to such man as these the large sum offer by the lieutenant of the press - gang for the accommodation of the Mariners ' arm be simply and immediately irresistible . the good room in the dilapidated house be put at the service of the command officer of the impress service , and all other arrangement make at his desire , irrespective of all the former unprofitable source of custom and of business . if the relative both of Hobbs and of Simpson have not be so well known and so prosperous in the town , they themselves would have receive more mark of popular ill opinion than they do during the winter the event of which be now be record . as it be , people speak to they when they appear at kirk or at market , but hold no conversation with they ; no , not although they each appear well dressed than they have either of they do for year past , and although their whole manner show a change , inasmuch as they have be formerly snarl and misanthropic , and be now civil almost to deprecation . 

 every one who be capable of understand the state of feeling in Monkshaven at this time must have be aware that at any moment an explosion might take place ; and probably there be those who have judgment enough to be surprised that it do not take place soon than it do . for until February there be only occasional cry and growl of rage , as the press - gang make their capture first here , then there ; often , apparently , tranquil for day , then hear of at some distance along the coast , then carry off a seaman from the very heart of the town . they seem afraid of provoke any general hostility , such as that which have drive they from Shields , and would have conciliate the inhabitant if they could ; the officer on the service and on board the three man - of - war come often into the town , spend largely , talk to all with cheery friendliness , and make themselves very popular in such society as they could obtain access to at the house of the neighbouring magistrate or at the rectory . but this , however agreeable , do not forward the object the impress service have in view ; and , accordingly , a more decide step be take at a time when , although there be no apparent evidence as to the fact , the town be full of the Greenland mariner come quietly in to renew their yearly engagement , which , when do , would legally entitle they to protection from impressment . one night it be on a Saturday , February 23rd , when there be a bitter black frost , with a north - east wind sweep through the street , and man and woman be close shut in their house all be startle in their household content and warmth by the sound of the fire - bell busily swing , and peal out for help . the fire - bell be keep in the market - house where High Street and Bridge Street meet : every one know what it mean . some dwelling , or maybe a boiling - house be on fire , and neighbourly assistance be summon with all speed , in a town where no water be lay on , nor fire - engine keep in readiness . man snatch up their hat , and rush out , wife follow , some with the readiest wrap they could lay hand on , with which to clothe the over - hasty husband , other from that mixture of dread and curiosity which draw people to the scene of any disaster . those of the market people who be make the good of their way homeward , have wait in the town till the early darkness conceal their path , turn back at the sound of the ever - clang fire - bell , ring out fast and fast as if the danger become every instant more pressing . 

 as man run against or alongside of each other , their breathless question be ever , ' where be it ? ' and no one could tell ; so they press onwards into the market - place , sure of obtain the information desire there , where the fire - bell keep call out with its furious metal tongue . 

 the dull oil - lamp in the adjoining street only make darkness visible in the throng market - place , where the buzz of many man 's unanswered question be rise louder and louder . a strange feeling of dread creep over those near to the closed market - house . above they in the air the bell be still clang ; but before they be a door fast shut and lock ; no one to speak and tell they why they be summon where they ought to be . they be at the heart of the mystery , and it be a silent blank ! their unformed dread take shape at the cry from the outside of the crowd , from where man be still come down the eastern side of Bridge Street . ' the gang ! the gang ! ' shriek out some one . ' the gang be upon we ! help ! help ! ' then the fire - bell have be a decoy ; a sort of seethe the kid in its mother 's milk , lead man into a snare through their kindliest feeling . some dull sense of this add to utter dismay , and make they struggle and strain to get to all the outlet save that in which a fight be now go on ; the swish of heavy whip , the thud of bludgeon , the groan , the growl of wounded or infuriate man , come with terrible distinctness through the darkness to the quickened ear of fear . 

 a breathless group rush up the blackness of a narrow entry to stand still awhile , and recover strength for fresh running . for a time nothing but heavy pant and gasp be hear amongst they . no one know his neighbour , and their good feeling , so lately abuse and prey upon , make they full of suspicion . the first who speak be recognize by his voice . 

 ' be it thee , Daniel Robson ? ' ask his neighbour , in a low tone . 

 ' ay ! who else should it be ? ' 

 ' a dunno . ' 

 ' if a be to be any one else , I would like to be a chap of nobbut eight stun . A'm welly do for ! ' 

 ' it be as bloody a shame as iver I heerd on . who be to go t ' t ' next fire , a'd like to know ! ' 

 ' a tell yo ' what , lad , ' say Daniel , recover his breath , but speak in gasp . ' we be a pack o ' coward to let them carry off yon chap as easy as they do , a'm reckon ! ' 

 ' a think so , indeed , ' say another voice . 

 Daniel go on 

 ' we be two hunder , if we be a man ; an ' t ' gang have niver number above twelve . ' 

 ' but they be arm . a seen t ' glitter on their cutlass , ' speak out a fresh voice . 

 ' what then ! ' reply he who have late come , and who stand at the mouth of the entry . ' a have my whalin ' knife wi ' I I ' my pea - jacket as my missus throw at I , and a'd ha ' rip them up as soon as winkin ' , if a could ha ' think what be good to do wi ' that d d bell makin ' such a din reet above we . a man can but die onest , and we be ready to go int ' t ' fire for t ' save folk ' life , and yet we would none on we t ' wit to see as we might ha ' save yon poor chap as screech out for help . ' 

 ' they will ha ' getten them to t ' randyvowse by now , ' say some one . 

 ' they can not tak ' them aboard till morning ; t ' tide will not   serve , ' say the last speaker but one . 

 Daniel Robson speak out the thought that be surge up into the brain of every one there . 

 ' there be a chance for we a ' . how many be we ? ' by dint of touch each other the number be count . seven . ' Seven . but if we seven turn out and rouse t ' town , there will be many a score ready to gang t ' Mariners ' arm , and it will be easy work reskyin ' they chap as be press . Us seven , each man jack on we , go and seek up his friend , and get he as well as he can to t ' church step ; then , mebbe , there will be some theere as'll not be so soft as we be , lettin ' they poor chap be carry off from under our nose , just becase our ear be busy listenin ' to yon confound bell , whose clip - clappin ' tongue a'll tear out afore this week be out . ' 

 before Daniel have finish speak , those near to the entrance mutter their assent to his project , and have steal off , keep to the dark side of the street and lane , which they thread in different direction ; most of they go straight as sleuth - hound to the haunt of the wild and most desperate portion of the seafare population of Monkshaven . for , in the breast of many , revenge for the misery and alarm of the past winter take a deep and more ferocious form than Daniel have think of when he make his proposal of a rescue . to he it be an adventure like many he have be engage in in his young day ; indeed , the liquor he have drunk have give he a fictitious youth for the time ; and it be more in the light of a rough frolic of which he be to be the leader , that he limp along    always lame from old attack of rheumatism , chuckle to himself at the apparent stillness of the town , which give no warning to the press - gang at the rendezvous of anything in the wind . Daniel , too , have his friend to summon ; old hand like himself , but ' deep un ' , also , like himself , as he imagine . 

 it be nine o'clock when all who be summon meet at the church step ; and by nine o'clock , Monkshaven , in those day , be more quiet and asleep than many a town at present be at midnight . the church and churchyard above they be flood with silver light , for the moon be high in the heaven : the irregular step be here and there in pure white clearness , here and there in black shadow . but more than half way up to the top , man cluster like bee ; all press so as to be near enough to question those who stand near to the planning of the attack . here and there , a woman , with wild gesture and shrill voice , that no entreaty would hush down to the whisper pitch of the man , push her way through the crowd this one implore immediate action , that adjure those around she to smite and spare not those who have carry off her ' man ' , the father , the breadwinner . low down in the darken silent town be many whose heart go with the angry and excited crowd , and who would bless they and caress they for that night 's deed . Daniel soon find himself a laggard in planning , compare to some of those around he . but when , with the rush sound of many step and but few word , they have arrive at the blank , dark , shut - up Mariners ' arm , they pause in surprise at the uninhabited look of the whole house : it be Daniel once more who take the lead . 

 ' speak them fair , ' say he ; ' try good word first . Hobbs will mebbe let them out quiet , if we can catch a word wi ' he . a say , Hobbs , ' say he , raise his voice , ' be a ' shut up for t ' neet ; for a'd be glad of a glass . A'm Dannel Robson , thou know . ' 

 not one word in reply , any more than from the tomb ; but his speech have be hear nevertheless . the crowd behind he begin to jeer and to threaten ; there be no long any keeping down their voice , their rage , their terrible oath . if door and window have not of late be strengthen with bar of iron in anticipation of some such occasion , they would have be break in with the onset of the fierce and now yell crowd who rush against they with the force of a battering - ram , to recoil in baffled rage from the vain assault . no sign , no sound from within , in that breathless pause . 

 ' come away round here ! a've   find a way to t ' back o ' behint , where belike it be not so well fence , ' say Daniel , who have make way for young and more powerful man to conduct the assault , and have employ his time meanwhile in examine the back premise . the man rush after he , almost knock he down , as he make his way into the lane into which the door of the outbuilding belong to the inn open . Daniel have already break the fastening of that which open into a damp , mouldy - smell shippen , in one corner of which a poor lean cow shift herself on her leg , in an uneasy , restless manner , as her sleep - place be invade by as many man as could cram themselves into the dark hold . Daniel , at the end farth from the door , be almost smother before he could break down the rotten wooden shutter , that , when open , display the weedy yard of the old inn , the full clear light define the outline of each blade of grass by the delicate black shadow behind . 

 this hole , use to give air and light to what have once be a stable , in the day when horse traveller be in the habit of come to the Mariners ' arm , be large enough to admit the passage of a man ; and Daniel , in virtue of its discovery , be the first to get through . but he be large and heavy than he have be ; his lameness make he less agile , and the impatient crowd behind he give he a help push that send he down on the round stone with which the yard be pave , and for the time disable he so much that he could only just crawl out of the way of leap foot and heavy nail boot , which come through the opening till the yard be fill with man , who now set up a fierce , derisive shout , which , to their delight , be answer from within . no more silence , no more dead opposition : a live struggle , a glowing , rag fight ; and Daniel think he should be oblige to sit there still , lean against the wall , inactive , while the strife and the action be go on in which he have once be foremost . 

 he see the stone tear up ; he see they use with good effect on the unguarde back - door ; he cry out in useless warning as he see the upper window open , and aim take among the crowd ; but just then the door give way , and there be an involuntary forward motion in the throng , so that no one be so disabled by the shot as to prevent his force his way in with the rest . and now the sound come veil by the wall as of some rag ravening beast growl over his prey ; the noise come and go once utterly cease ; and Daniel raise himself with difficulty to ascertain the cause , when again the roar come clear and fresh , and man pour into the yard again , shout and rejoice over the rescue victim of the press - gang . Daniel hobble up , and shout , and rejoice , and shake hand with the rest , hardly care to understand that the lieutenant and his gang have quit the house by a front window , and that all have pour out in search of they ; the great part , however , return to liberate the prisoner , and then glut their vengeance on the house and its content . 

 from all the window , upper and low , furniture be now be throw into the yard . the smash of glass , the heavy crash of wood , the cry , the laughter , the oath , all excite Daniel to the utmost ; and , forget his bruise , he press forwards to lend a help hand . the wild , rough success of his scheme almost turn his head . he hurrae at every flagrant piece of destruction ; he shake hand with every one around he , and , at last , when the destroyer inside pause to take breath , he cry out , 

 ' if a be as young as one a be , a'd have t ' randyvowse down , and mak ' a bonfire on it . we would ring t ' fire - bell then t ' some purpose . ' 

 no soon say than do . their excitement be ready to take the slight hint of mischief ; old chair , broken table , odd drawer , smash chest , be rapidly and skilfully heap into a pyramid , and one , who at the first broaching of the idea have go for live coal the speedy to light up the fire , come now through the crowd with a large shovelful of red - hot cinder . the rioter stop to take breath and look on like child at the uncertain flickering blaze , which spring high one moment , and drop down the next only to creep along the base of the heap of wreck , and make secure of its future work . then the lurid blaze dart up wild , high , and irrepressible ; and the man around give a cry of fierce exultation , and in rough mirth begin to try and push each other in . in one of the pause of the rushing , roar noise of the flame , the moan low and groan of the poor alarmed cow fasten up in the shippen catch Daniel 's ear , and he understand her groan as well as if they have be word . he limp out of the yard through the now desert house , where man be busy at the mad work of destruction , and find his way back to the lane into which the shippen open . the cow be dance about at the roar , and dazzle , and heat of the fire ; but Daniel know how to soothe she , and in a few minute he have a rope round her neck , and lead she gently out from the scene of her alarm . he be still in the lane when Simpson , the man - of - all - work at the Mariners ' arm , creep out of some hiding - place in the deserted outbuilding , and stand suddenly face to face with Robson . 

 the man be white with fear and rage . 

 ' here , tak ' thy beast , and lead she wheere she will noane hear yon cry and shout . she be fairly moithered wi ' heat an ' noise . ' 

 ' they be brennin ' ivery rag I have I ' t ' world , ' gasp out Simpson : ' I niver have much , and now I be a beggar . ' 

 ' well ! thou should not   ha ' turn again ' thine own town - folk , and harbour t ' gang . sarve thee reet . A'd noane be here leadin ' beast if a be as young as a were ; a'd be in t ' thick on it . ' 

 ' it be thee set ' m on a heerd thee a see'd thee a helping on them t ' break in ; they would niver ha ' thought on attackin ' t ' house , and settin ' fire to yon thing , if thou have not   speak on it . ' Simpson be now fairly cry . but Daniel do not realize what the loss of all the small property he have in the world be to the poor fellow   rapscallion though he be , break down , unprosperous ne'er - do - weel !   in his pride at the good work he believe he have set on foot . 

 ' ay , ' say he ; ' it be a great thing for folk to have a chap for t ' lead them wi ' a head on his shouther . a misdoubt I if there be a felly theere as would ha ' think o ' routle out yon wasp ' nest ; it tak be a deal o ' mother - wit to be up to thing . but t ' gang'll niver harbour theere again , one while . a only wish we would cotche them . an ' a should like t ' ha ' gi'en Hobbs a bit o ' my mind . ' 

 ' he be have his sauce , ' say Simpson , dolefully . ' he and I be ruin . ' 

 ' tut , tut , thou 's get thy brother , he be rich enough . and Hobbs will do a deal well ; he be have his lesson now , and he will stick to his own side time to come . here , tak ' thy beast an ' look after she , for my bone be achin ' . an ' mak ' thysel ' scarce , for some o ' they felly have getten their blood up , an ' wunnot be for treat thee o'er well if they fall in wi ' thee . ' 

 ' Hobbs ought to be serve out ; it be he as make t ' bargain wi ' lieutenant ; and he be off safe wi ' his wife and his money bag , and a'm leave a beggar this neet I ' monkshaven street . my brother and I have have word , and he will do nought for I but curse I . a have three crown - piece , and a good pair o ' breech , and a shirt , and a dare say well nor two pair o ' stocking . a wish t ' gang , and thee , and Hobbs and they mad folk up yonder , be a ' down I ' hell , a do . ' 

 ' Coom , lad , ' say Daniel , noway offend at his companion 's wish on his behalf . ' a'm noane flush mysel ' , but here be half - a - crown and tuppence ; it be a ' a've   getten wi ' me , but it will keep thee and t ' beast I ' food and shelter to - neet , and get thee a glass o ' comfort , too . a have think o ' takin ' one mysel ' , but a shannot ha ' a penny left , so a'll just toddle whoam to my missus . ' 

 Daniel be not in the habit of feel any emotion at action not directly affect himself ; or else he might have despise the poor wretch who immediately clutch at the money , and overwhelm that man with slobbery thank whom he have not a minute before be curse . but all Simpson 's strong passion have be long ago use up ; now he only faintly like and dislike , where once he love and hat ; his only vehement feeling be for himself ; that care for , other man might wither or flourish as well suit they . 

 many of the door which have be close shut when the crowd go down the High Street , be partially open as Daniel slowly return ; and light stream from they on the otherwise dark road . the news of the successful attempt at rescue have reach those who have sate in mourning and in desolation an hour or two ago , and several of these press forwards as from their watch corner they recognize Daniel 's approach ; they press forward into the street to shake he by the hand , to thank he   for his name have be bruit abroad as one of those who have plan the affair , and at several place he be urge to have a dram urgency that he be loath for many reason to refuse , but his increase uneasiness and pain make he for once abstinent , and only anxious to get home and rest . but he could not help be both touch and flatter at the way in which those who form his ' world ' look upon he as a hero ; and be not insensible to the word of blessing which a wife , whose husband have be impress and rescue this night , pour down upon he as he pass . 

 ' theere , theere , dunnot crack thy throat wi ' blessin ' . Thy man would ha ' do as much for I , though mebbe he might not   ha ' show so much gumption and capability ; but they 's gift , and not to be proud on . ' 

 when Daniel reach the top of the hill on the road home , he turn to look round ; but he be lame and bruise , he have go along slowly , the fire have pretty nearly die out , only a red hue in the air about the house at the end of the long High Street , and a hot lurid mist against the hill - side beyond where the Mariners ' arm have stand , be still leave as sign and token of the deed of violence . 

 Daniel look and chuckle . ' that come o ' ringin ' t ' fire - bell , ' say he to himself ; ' it be shame for it to be tellin ' a lie , poor oud story - teller . ' 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 BRIEF REJOICING 

 Daniel 's unusually late absence from home disturb Bell and Sylvia not a little . he be generally at home between eight and nine on market day . they expect to see he the bad for liquor at such time ; but this do not shock they ; he be no bad than most of his neighbour , indeed well than several , who go off once or twice a year , or even oftener , on drink bout of two or three day ' duration , return pale , sodden , and somewhat shame - face , when all their money be go ; and , after the conjugal reception be well over , settle down into hard - work and decently sober man until the temptation again get power over they . but , on market day , every man drink more than usual ; every bargain or agreement be ratify by drink ; they come from great or less distance , either afoot or on horseback , and the ' good accommodation for man and beast '   as the old inn - sign express it   always include a considerable amount of liquor to be drunk by the man . 

 Daniel 's way of announce his intention of drink more than ordinary be always the same . he would say at the last moment , ' Missus , I have   a mind to get fuddle to - neet , ' and be off , disregard her look of remonstrance , and little heed the injunction she would call after he to beware of such and such companion , or to attend to his footstep on his road home . 

 but this night he have give no such warning . Bell and Sylvia put the candle on the low window - seat at the usual hour to guide he through the field it be a habit keep up even on moonlight night like this and sate on each side of the fire , at first scarcely care to listen , so secure be they of his return . Bell doze , and Sylvia sate gaze at the fire with abstracted eye , think of the past year and of the anniversary which be approach of the day when she have last see the lover whom she believe to be dead , lie somewhere fathom deep beneath the surface of that sunny sea on which she look day by day without ever see his upturned face through the depth , with whatsoever heart - sick longing for just one more sight she yearn and inwardly cry . if she could set her eye on his bright , handsome face , that face which be fade from her memory , overtaske in the too frequent effort to recall it ; if she could but see he once again , come over the water beneath which he lie with supernatural motion , await she at the stile , with the evening sun shin ruddy into his bonny eye , even though , after that one instant of vivid and visible life , he fade into mist ; if she could but see he now , sit in the faintly flicker fire - light in the old , happy , careless way , on a corner of the dresser , his leg dangle , his busy finger play with some of her woman 's work ; she wring her hand tight together as she implore some , any power , to let she see he just once again just once for one minute of passionate delight . never again would she forget that dear face , if but once more she might set her eye upon it . 

 her mother 's head fall with a sudden jerk , and she rouse herself up ; and Sylvia put by her thought of the dead , and her craving after his presence , into that receptacle of her heart where all such be keep closed and sacred from the light of common day . 

 ' Feyther 's late , ' say Bell . 

 ' it be go eight , ' reply Sylvia . 

 ' but our clock be well nor an hour forrard , ' answer Bell . 

 ' ay , but t ' wind bring monkshaven bell clear to - night . I heerd t ' eight o'clock bell ring not five minute ago . ' 

 it be the fire - bell , but she have not distinguish the sound . 

 there be another long silence ; both wide awake this time . 

 ' he will have his rheumatic again , ' say Bell . 

 ' it be cold for sartin , ' say Sylvia . ' March weather come afore its time . but I will make he a treacle - posset , it be a famous thing for keep off hoast . ' 

 the treacle - posset be entertainment enough for both while it be be make . but once place in a little basin in the oven , there be again time for wonder and anxiety . 

 ' he say nought about have a bout , do he , mother ? ' ask Sylvia at length . 

 ' no , ' say Bell , her face a little contracting . after a while she add , ' there be many a one as have husband that go off drink without iver say a word to their wife . my master be none o ' that mak ' . ' 

 ' mother , ' break in Sylvia again , ' I will just go and get t ' lantern out of t ' shippen , and go up t ' brow , and mebbe to t ' ash - field end . ' 

 ' do , lass , ' say her mother . ' I will get my wrap and go with thee . ' 

 ' thou shall do niver such a thing , ' say Sylvia . ' Thou 's too frail to go out I ' t ' night air such a night as this . ' 

 ' then call Kester up . ' 

 ' not i. I be noane afraid o ' t ' dark . ' 

 ' but of what thou mayst meet I ' t ' dark , lass ? ' 

 Sylvia shiver all over at the sudden thought , suggest by this speech of her mother 's , that the idea that have flash into her own mind of go to look for her father might be an answer to the invocation to the Powers which she have make not long ago , that she might indeed meet her dead lover at the ash - field stile ; but though she shiver as this superstitious fancy come into her head , her heart beat firm and regular ; not from darkness nor from the spirit of the dead be she go to shrink ; her great sorrow have take away all her girlish nervous fear . 

 she go ; and she come back . neither man nor spirit have she see ; the wind be blow on the height enough to sweep all creature before it ; but no one be come . 

 so they sate down again to keep watch . at length his step be hear close to the door ; and it startle they even in their state of expectation . 

 ' why , feyther ! ' cry Sylvia as he enter ; while his wife stand up tremble , but not say a word . 

 ' a'm a'most do up , ' say he , sit heavily down on the chair nearest the door . 

 ' poor old feyther ! ' say Sylvia , stoop to take off his heavy clogged shoe ; while Bell take the posset out of the oven . 

 ' what be this ? posset ? what creature woman be for slop , ' say he ; but he drink it all the same , while Sylvia fasten the door , and bring the flare candle from the window - seat . the fresh arrangement of light display his face blacken with smoke , and his clothe disarrange and tear . 

 ' who be be melle wi ' thee ? ' ask Bell . 

 ' no one have melle wi ' I ; but a've   be mellin ' wi ' t ' gang at last . ' 

 ' thee : they niver be for press thee ! ' exclaim both the woman at once . 

 ' no ! they know well . they'n getten their belly - full as it be . next time they try it on , a reckon they will ax if Daniel Robson be wi'in hearin ' . A've   lead a resky this neet , and save nine or ten honest chap as be press , and carry off to t ' randyvowse . I and some other do it . and Hobbs ' thing and t ' lieutenant 's be a ' burn ; and by this time a reckon t ' randyvowse be pretty nigh four wall , ready for a parish - pound . ' 

 ' Thou'rt niver for say thou burn it down wi ' t ' gang in it , for sure ? ' ask Bell . 

 ' na , na , not this time . T ' ' gang flee up t ' hill like coney ; and Hobbs and his folk carry off a bag o ' money ; but t ' oud tumbledown place be just a heap o ' brick and mortar ; an ' t ' furniture be smoulderin ' int ' ash ; and , good of a ' , t ' man be free , and will niver be cotche wi ' a fire - bell again . ' 

 and so he go on to tell of the ruse by which they have be entice into the market - place ; interrupt from time to time by their eager question , and interrupt himself every now and then with exclamation of weariness and pain , which make he at last say , 

 ' now a'm willing to tell yo ' a ' about it to - morrow , for it be not ivery day a man can do such great thing ; but to - neet a mun go to bed , even if King George be wantin ' for to know how a manage it a ' . ' 

 he go wearily upstairs , and wife and daughter both strove their good to ease his ache limb , and make he comfortable . the warming - pan , only use on state occasion , be take down and unpapere for his service ; and as he get between the warm sheet , he thank Sylvia and her mother in a sleepy voice , add , 

 ' it be a vast o ' comfort to think on yon poor lad as be sleepin ' I ' their own home this neet , ' and then slumber fall upon he , and he be hardly rouse by Bell 's softly kiss his weather - beat cheek , and say low , 

 ' God bless thee , my man ! Thou be allay for they that be down and put upon . ' 

 he murmur some monosyllabic reply , unheard by his wife , who steal away to undress herself noiselessly , and lay herself down on her side of the bed as gently as her stiffen limb would permit . 

 they be late in rise the next morning . Kester be long since up and at his work among the cattle before he see the house - door open to admit the fresh chill morning air ; and even then Sylvia brush softly , and go about almost on tip - toe . when the porridge be ready , Kester be call in to his breakfast , which he take sit at the dresser with the family . a large wooden platter stand in the middle ; and each have a bowl of the same material fill with milk . the way be for every one to dip his pewter spoon into the central dish , and convey as much or as little as he like at a time of the hot porridge into his pure fresh milk . but to - day Bell tell Kester to help himself all at once , and to take his bowl up to the master 's room and keep he company . for Daniel be in bed , rest from his weariness , and bemoan his painful bruise whenever he think of they . but his mind be still so much occupy with the affair of the previous night , that Bell judge rightly that a new listener would give ease to his body as well as to his mind , and her proposal of Kester 's carry up his breakfast have be receive by Daniel with satisfaction . 

 so Kester go up slowly , carry his over - full basin tenderly , and seat himself on the step lead down into the bed - room   for level have not be calculate when the old house be build   face his master , who , half sit up in the blue check bed , not unwillingly begin his relation again ; to which Kester listen so attentively , that his spoon be often arrest in its progress from the basin to his mouth , open ready to receive it , while he gaze with unwinke eye at Daniel narrate his exploit . 

 but after Daniel have fight his battle o'er again to every auditor within his reach , he find the seclusion of his chamber rather oppressive , without even the usual week - day ' noise below ; so after dinner , though far from well , he come down and wander about the stable and the field near to the house , consult with Kester as to crop and manure for the most part ; but every now and then break out into an episodical chuckle over some part of last night 's proceeding . Kester enjoy the day even more than his master , for he have no bruise to remind he that , although a hero , he be also flesh and blood . 

 when they return to the house they find Philip there , for it be already dusk . it be Kester 's usual Sunday plan to withdraw to bed at as early an hour as he could manage to sleep , often in winter before six ; but now he be too full of interest in what Philip might have to tell of Monkshaven news to forego his Sabbath privilege of spend the evening sit on the chair at the end of the dresser behind the door . 

 Philip be as close to Sylvia as he could possibly get without give her offence , when they come in . her manner be listless and civil ; she have lose all that active feeling towards he which make he positively distasteful , and have call out her girlish irritation and impertinence . she now be rather glad to see he than otherwise . he bring some change into the heavy monotony of her life monotony so peaceful until she have be stir by passion out of that content with the small daily event which have now become burdensome recurrence . insensibly to herself she be become dependent on his timid devotion , his constant attention ; and he , lover - like , once so attract , in spite of his judgment , by her liveliness and piquancy , now dot on her languor , and think her silence more sweet than word . 

 he have only just arrive when master and man come in . he have be to afternoon chapel ; none of they have think of go to the distant church ; worship with they be only an occasional duty , and this day their mind have be too full of the event of the night before . Daniel sate himself heavily down in his accustomed chair , the three - cornered arm - chair in the fireside corner , which no one think of anybody else ever occupy on any occasion whatever . in a minute or two he interrupt Philip 's word of greeting and inquiry by break out into the story of the rescue of last night . but to the mute surprise of Sylvia , the only one who notice it , Philip 's face , instead of express admiration and pleasant wonder , lengthen into dismay ; once or twice he begin to interrupt , but stop himself as if he would consider his word again . Kester be never tired of hear his master talk ; by long live together they understand every fold of each other 's mind , and small expression have much significance to they . Bell , too , sate thankful that her husband should have do such deed . only Sylvia be make uneasy by Philip 's face and manner . when Daniel have end there be a great silence , instead of the question and compliment he look to receive . he become testy , and turn to Bell , say , 

 ' my nephew look as though he be a - thinking more on t ' little profit he have make on his pin an ' bobs , than as if he be heed how honest man be save from be hale out to yon tender , an ' carry out o ' sight o ' wife and little ' uns for iver . wife an ' little ' uns may go t ' workhouse or clem for aught he care . 

 Philip go very red , and then more sallow than usual . he have not be think of Charley Kinraid , but of quite another thing , while Daniel have tell his story ; but this last speech of the old man 's bring up the remembrance that be always quick , do what he would to smother or strangle it . he do not speak for a moment or two , then he say , 

 ' to - day have not be like Sabbath in Monkshaven . t ' rioter , as folk call them , have be about all night . they want to give battle to t ' man - o'-war 's man ; and it be take up by th ' well end , and they have   send to my Lord Malton for t ' militia ; and they be come into t ' town , and they be hunt for a justice for t ' read th ' act ; folk do say there will be niver a shop open to - morrow . ' 

 this be rather a more serious account of the progress of the affair than any one have calculate upon . they look grave upon it awhile , then Daniel take heart and say , 

 ' a think we would do a'most enough last neet ; but man be not to be stop wi ' a straw when their blood be up ; still it be hard line to call out t ' sojer , even if they be but militia . so what we seven hatch in a dark entry have ta'en a lord to put a stop to ' t ! ' continue he , chuckle a little , but more faintly this time . 

 Philip go on , still graver than before , boldly continue to say what he know would be discordant to the family he love so well . 

 ' I should ha ' tell yo ' all about it ; I think on it just as a bit o ' news ; I would niver think on such a thing as uncle there have be in it , and I be main sorry to hear on it , I be . ' 

 ' why ? ' say Sylvia , breathlessly . 

 ' it be niver a thing to be sorry on . I be proud and glad , ' say Bell . 

 ' let - a - be , let - a - be , ' say Daniel , in much dudgeon . ' a be a fool to tell he o ' such - like doing , they be noane I ' his line ; we will talk on yard measure now . 

 Philip take no notice of this poor attempt at sarcasm : he seem as if lose in thought , then he say , 

 ' I be vex to plague yo ' , but I would well say all I have   get I ' my mind . there be a vast o ' folk at our chapel speak about it last night 's doing and this morning 's work and how they as set it afoot be assure o ' be clapt int ' prison and try for it ; and when I heere uncle say as he be one , it like run through I ; for they say as t ' justice will be all on t ' Government side , and mad for vengeance . ' 

 for an instant there be dead silence . the woman look at each other with blank eye , as if they be as yet unable to take in the new idea that the conduct which have seem to they a subject for such just pride could be regard by any one as deserve of punishment or retribution . Daniel speak before they have recover from their amazement . 

 ' A'm noane sorry for what a do , an ' a'd do it again to - neet , if need be . so theere be for thee . Thou may tell t ' justice fra ' I that a reckon a do righter nor they , as letten poor felly be carry off I ' t ' very midst o ' t ' town they be call justice for . ' 

 perhaps Philip have well have hold his tongue ; but he believe in the danger , which he be anxious to impress upon his uncle , in order that , know what be to be apprehend , the latter might take some pain to avert it . 

 he go on . 

 ' but they be make a coil about the Randyvowse be all destroy ! ' 

 Daniel have take down his pipe from the shelf in the chimney corner , and be stuff tobacco into the bowl . he go on pretend to do this a little while after it be fill ; for , to tell the truth , he be begin to feel uncomfortable at the new view of his conduct present to he . still he be not go to let this appear , so lift up his head with an indifferent air he light the pipe , blow into it , take it out and examine it as something be wrong about it , and until that be put to right he be unable to attend to anything else ; all the while the faithful three who hang upon his well - being , gaze , breathless , at his proceeding , and anxious for his reply . 

 ' randyvowse ! ' say he at length , ' it be a good job it be brenne down , for such a harbour for vermin a never seed : t ' rat run across t ' yard by hunder an ' thousand ; an ' it be no man 's property as a've   heerd tell , but belong to Chancery , up I ' Lunnon ; so wheere 's t ' harm do , my fine felly ? ' 

 Philip be silent . he do not care to brave any furth his uncle 's angry frown and contract eye . if he have only know of Daniel Robson 's part in the riot before he have leave the town , he would have take care to have have well authority for the reality of the danger which he have hear speak about , and in which he could not help believe . as it be , he could only keep quiet until he have ascertain what be the legal peril overhang the rioter , and how far his uncle have be recognize . 

 Daniel go on puff angrily . Kester sigh audibly , and then be sorry he have do so , and begin to whistle . Bell , full of her new fear , yet desirous to bring all present into some kind of harmony , say , 

 ' it will ha ' be a loss to John Hobbs all his thing burn , or trample on . Mebbe he desarve it all , but one be a kind o ' tender feeling to one 's table and chair , special if one 's have t ' bee - waxing on them . ' 

 ' a wish he have be burn on t ' top on them , a do , ' growl out Daniel , shake the ash out of his pipe . 

 ' do not   speak so ill o ' thysel ' , ' say his wife . ' Thou'd ha ' be t ' first t ' pluck he down if he have screech out . ' 

 ' an ' a'll warrant if they come about wi ' a paper ask for feyther 's name to make up for what Hobbs have lose by t ' fire , feyther will be for give he summut , ' say Sylvia . 

 ' Thou know nought about it , ' say Daniel . ' hold thy tongue next time till thou 's ax to speak , my wench . ' 

 his sharp irritated way of speak be so new to Sylvia , that the tear spring to her eye , and her lip quiver . Philip see it all , and yearn over she . he plunge headlong into some other subject to try and divert attention from she ; but Daniel be too ill at ease to talk much , and Bell be oblige to try and keep up the semblance of conversation , with an occasional word or two from Kester , who seem instinctively to fall into her way of thinking , and to endeavour to keep the dark thought in the background . 

 Sylvia steal off to bed ; more concerned at her father 's angry way of speak than at the idea of his be amenable to law for what he have do ; the one be a sharp present evil , the other something distant and unlikely . yet a dim terror of this latter evil hang over she , and once upstairs she throw herself on her bed and sob . Philip hear she where he sate near the bottom of the short steep staircase , and at every sob the cord of love round his heart seem tighten , and he feel as if he must there and then do something to console she . 

 but , instead , he sit on talk of nothing , a conversation in which Daniel join with somewhat of surliness , while Bell , grave and anxious , keep wistfully look from one to the other , desirous of glean some further information on the subject , which have begin to trouble her mind . she hop some chance would give she the opportunity of privately question Philip , but it seem to be equally her husband 's wish to thwart any such intention of her . he remain in the house - place , till after Philip have leave , although he be evidently so much fatigue as to give some very distinct , though unintentional , hint to his visitor to be go . 

 at length the house - door be lock on Philip , and then Daniel prepare to go to bed . Kester have leave for his loft above the shippen more than an hour before . Bell have still to rake the fire , and then she would follow her husband upstairs . 

 as she be scrap up the ash , she hear , intermix with the noise she be make , the sound of some one rap gently at the window . in she then frame of mind she start a little ; but on look round , she see Kester 's face press against the glass , and , reassure , she softly open the door . there he stand in the dusk outer air , distinct against the gray darkness beyond , and in his hand something which she presently perceive be a pitchfork . 

 ' Missus ! ' whisper he , ' a've   watch t ' maister t ' bed ; an ' now a'd be greatly beholden to yo ' if yo'd let I just lay I down I ' t ' house - place . A'd warrant niver a constable I ' a ' Monkshaven should get sight o ' t ' maister , an ' I below t ' keep ward . ' 

 Bell shiver a little . 

 ' Nay , Kester , ' she say , pat her hand kindly on his shoulder ; ' there be nought for t ' fear . Thy master be not one for t ' hurt nobody ; and I dunnot think they can harm he for set yon poor chap free , as t ' gang catch I ' their wicked trap . ' 

 Kester stand still ; then he shake his head slowly . 

 ' it be t ' work at t ' randyvowse as a'm afeare on . some folk think such a deal o ' a bonfire . then a may lay I down afore t ' fire , missus ? ' say he , beseechingly . 

 ' Nay , Kester ' she begin ; but suddenly change , she say , ' God bless thee , my man ; come in and lie thee down on t ' settle , and I will cover thee up wi ' my cloak as hang behind t ' door . we be not many on we that love he , an ' we will be all on we under one roof , an ' niver a stone wall or a lock betwixt we . ' 

 so Kester take up his rest in the house - place that night , and none know of it besides Bell . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 come trouble 

 the morning bring more peace if it do not entirely dissipate fear . Daniel seem to have get over his irritability , and be unusually kind and tender to wife and daughter , especially strive by silent little deed to make up for the sharp word he have say the night before to the latter . 

 as if by common consent , all allusion to the Saturday night 's proceeding be avoid . they speak of the day 's work before they ; of the crop to be sow ; of the cattle ; of the market ; but each one be conscious of a wish to know more distinctly what be the chance of the danger that , to judge from Philip 's word , hang over they , fall upon they and cut they off from all these place for the come day . 

 Bell long to send Kester down into Monkshaven as a sort of spy to see how the land lay ; but she dare not manifest her anxiety to her husband , and could not see Kester alone . she wish that she have tell he to go to the town , when she have have he to herself in the house - place the night before ; now it seem as though Daniel be resolve not to part from he , and as though both have forget that any peril have be anticipate . Sylvia and her mother , in like manner , clung together , not speak of their fear , yet each know that it be ever present in the other 's mind . 

 so thing go on till twelve o'clock dinner - time . if at any time that morning they have have the courage to speak together on the thought which be engross all their mind , it be possible that some mean might have be find to avert the calamity that be come towards they with swift foot . but among the uneducated the partially educate nay , even the weakly educate the feeling exist which prompt the futile experiment of the well - know ostrich . they imagine that , by close their own eye to apprehend evil , they avert it . the expression of fear be suppose to accelerate the coming of its cause . yet , on the other hand , they shrink from acknowledge the long continuance of any blessing , in the idea that when unusual happiness be speak about , it disappear . so , although perpetual complaint of past or present grievance and sorrow be most common among this class , they shrink from embody apprehension for the future in word , as if it then take shape and draw near . 

 they all four sate down to dinner , but not one of they be incline to eat . the food be scarcely touch on their plate , yet they be try to make talk among themselves as usual ; they seem as though they dare not let themselves be silent , when Sylvia , sit opposite to the window , see Philip at the top of the brow , run rapidly towards the farm . she have be so full of the anticipation of some kind of misfortune all the morning that she feel now as if this be the very precursive circumstance she have be expect ; she stand up , turn quite white , and , point with her finger , say , 

 ' there he be ! ' 

 every one at table stand up too . an instant afterwards , Philip , breathless , be in the room . 

 he gasp out , ' they be come ! the warrant be out . you must go . I hop you be go . ' 

 ' God help we ! ' say Bell , and sate suddenly down , as if she have receive a blow that make her collapse into helplessness ; but she get up again directly . 

 Sylvia fly for her father 's hat . he really seem the most unmoved of the party . 

 ' a'm noane afeare , ' say he . ' A'd do it o'er again , a would ; an ' a'll tell them so . it be a fine time o ' day when man be to be trap and carry off , an ' they as lay trap to set them free be to be put I ' t ' lock - up for it . ' 

 ' but there be rioting , beside the rescue ; t ' house be burn , ' continue eager , breathless Philip . 

 ' an ' a'm noane go t ' say a'm sorry for that , neyther ; tho ' , mebbe , a would not   do it again . ' 

 Sylvia have his hat on his head by this time ; and Bell , wan and stiff , tremble all over , have his over - coat , and his leather purse with the few coin she could muster , ready for he to put on . 

 he look at these preparation , at his wife and daughter , and his colour change from its ruddy brown . 

 ' A'd face lock - up , an ' a fair spell o ' jail , but for these , ' say he , hesitate . 

 ' oh ! ' say Philip , ' for God 's sake , lose no time , but be off . ' 

 ' where mun he go ? ' ask Bell , as if Philip must decide all . 

 ' anywhere , anywhere , out of this house say Haverstone . this evening , I will go and meet he there and plan far ; only be off now . ' Philip be so keenly eager , he hardly take note at the time of Sylvia 's one vivid look of unspoken thank , yet he remember it afterwards . 

 ' a'll dang them dead , ' say Kester , rush to the door , for he see what the other do not that all chance of escape be over ; the constable be already at the top of the little field - path not twenty yard off . 

 ' hide he , hide he , ' cry Bell , wring her hand in terror ; for she , indeed they all , know that flight would now be impossible . Daniel be heavy , rheumatic , and , moreover , have be pretty severely bruise on that unlucky night . 

 Philip , without another word , push Daniel before he upstairs , feel that his own presence at Haytersbank Farm at that hour of the day would be a betrayal . they have just time to shut themselves up in the large bed - room , before they hear a scuffle and the constable ' entry down - stair . 

 ' they be in , ' say Philip , as Daniel squeeze himself under the bed ; and then they hold quite still , Philip as much conceal by the scanty , blue - check curtain as he could manage to be . they hear a confusion of voice below , a hasty moving of chair , a banging of door , a further parley , and then a woman 's scream , shrill and pitiful ; then step on the stair . 

 ' that screech spoil all , ' sigh Philip . 

 in one instant the door be open , and each of the hider be conscious of the presence of the constable , although at first the latter stand motionless , survey the apparently empty room with disappointment . then in another moment they have rush at Philip 's leg , expose as these be . they draw he out with violence , and then let he go . 

 ' Measter Hepburn ! ' say one in amaze . but immediately they put two and two together ; for in so small a place as Monkshaven every one 's relationship and connexion , and even liking , be know ; and the motive of Philip 's come out to Haytersbank be perfectly clear to these man . 

 ' T ' other will not be far off , ' say the other constable . ' his plate be down - stair , full o ' victual ; a seed Measter Hepburn a - walk briskly before I as a left monkshaven . ' 

 ' here he be , here he be , ' call out the other man , drag Daniel out by his leg , ' we have   getten he . ' 

 Daniel kick violently , and come out from his hiding - place in a less ignominious way than by be pull out by his heel . 

 he shake himself , and then turn , face his captor . 

 ' a wish a'd niver hidden mysel ' ; it be his doing , ' jerk his thumb toward Philip : ' a'm ready to stand by what a've   do . Yo've   getten a warrant a'll be bind , for they justice be grand at writin ' when t ' fight be over . ' 

 he be try to carry it off with bravado , but Philip see that he have receive a shock , from his sudden look of wither colour and shrunken feature . 

 ' do not   handcuff he , ' say Philip , put money into the constable 's hand . ' you will be able to guard he well enough without they thing . ' 

 Daniel turn round sharp at this whisper . 

 ' let - a - be , let - a - be , my lad , ' he say . ' it will be summut to think on I ' t ' lock - up how two able - bodied felly be so afeared on t ' chap as reskye they honest sailor o ' Saturday neet , as they mun put he I ' gyve , and he sixty - two come Martinmas , and sore lay up wi ' t ' rheumatic . ' 

 but it be difficult to keep up this tone of bravado when he be lead a prisoner through his own house - place , and see his poor wife quiver and shake all over with her effort to keep back all sign of emotion until he be go ; and Sylvia stand by her mother , her arm round Bell 's waist and stroke the poor shrunken finger which work so perpetually and nervously in futile unconscious restlessness . Kester be in a corner of the room , sullenly stand . 

 Bell quake from head to foot as her husband come down - stair a prisoner . she open her lip several time with an uneasy motion , as if she would fain say something , but know not what . Sylvia 's passionate swollen lip and her beautiful defiant eye give her face quite a new aspect ; she look a helpless fury . 

 ' a may kiss my missus , a reckon , ' say Daniel , come to a standstill as he pass near she . 

 ' oh , Dannel , Dannel ! ' cry she , open her arm wide to receive he . ' Dannel , Dannel , my man ! ' and she shake with her crying , lay her head on his shoulder , as if he be all her stay and comfort . 

 ' come , missus ! come , missus ! ' say he , ' there could not   be more ado if a'd be guilty of murder , an ' yet a say again , as a said afore , a'm noane ashamed o ' my doing . here , Sylvie , lass , tak ' thy mother off I , for a can not do it mysel ' , it like set I off . ' his voice be quaver as he say this . but he cheer up a little and say , ' now , good - by , oud wench '   kiss she , ' and keep a good heart , and let I see thee lookin ' lusty and strong when a come back . good - by , my lass ; look well after mother , and ask Philip for guidance if it be need . ' 

 he be take out of his home , and then arise the shrill cry of the woman ; but in a minute or two they be check by the return of one of the constable , who , cap in hand at the sight of so much grief , say , 

 ' he want a word wi ' his daughter . ' 

 the party have come to a halt about ten yard from the house . Sylvia , hastily wipe her tear on her apron , run out and throw her arm round her father , as if to burst out afresh on his neck . 

 ' Nay , nay , my wench , it be thee as mun be a comfort to mother : nay , nay , or thou'll niver hear what a've   get to say . Sylvie , my lass , a'm main and sorry a be so short wi ' thee last neet ; a ax thy pardon , lass , a be cross to thee , and send thee to thy bed wi ' a sore heart . Thou munnot think on it again , but forgie I , now a'm leavin ' thee . ' 

 ' oh , feyther ! feyther ! ' be all Sylvia could say ; and at last they have to make as though they would have use force to separate she from their prisoner . Philip take her hand , and softly lead she back to her weeping mother . 

 for some time nothing be to be hear in the little farmhouse kitchen but the sobbing and wail of the woman . Philip stand by silent , thinking , as well as he could , for his keen sympathy with their grief , what have well be do next . Kester , after some growl at Sylvia for have hold back the uplifted arm which he think might have save Daniel by a well - consider blow on his captor as they enter the house , go back into his shippen his cell for meditation and consolation , where he might hope to soothe himself before go out to his afternoon 's work ; labour which his master have plan for he that very morning , with a strange foresight , as Kester think , for the job be one which would take he two or three day without need any further direction than those he have receive , and by the end of that time he think that his master would be at liberty again . so he so they all think in their ignorance and inexperience . 

 although Daniel himself be unreasoning , hasty , impulsive in a word , often think and act very foolishly yet , somehow , either from some quality in his character , or from the loyalty of nature in those with whom he have to deal in his every - day life , he have make his place and position clear as the arbiter and law - giver of his household . on his decision , as that of husband , father , master , perhaps superior nature wait . so now that he be go and have leave they in such strange new circumstance so suddenly , it seem as though neither Bell nor Sylvia know exactly what to do when their grief be spend , so much have every household action and plan be regulate by the thought of he . meanwhile Philip have slowly be arrive at the conclusion that he be more want at Monkshaven to look after Daniel 's interest , to learn what be the legal probability in consequence of the old man 's arrest , and to arrange for his family accordingly , than stand still and silent in the Haytersbank kitchen , too full of fellow - feeling and heavy foreboding to comfort , awkwardly unsympathetic in appearance from the very aching of his heart . 

 so when his aunt , with instinctive sense of regularity and propriety , begin to put away the scarcely taste dinner , and Sylvia , blind with crying , and convulsively sob , be yet try to help her mother , Philip take his hat , and brush it round and round with the sleeve of his coat , say , 

 ' I think I will just go back , and see how matter stand . ' he have a more distinct plan in his head than these word imply , but it depend on so many contingency of which he be ignorant that he say only these few word ; and with a silent resolution to see they again that day , but a dread of be compel to express his fear , so far beyond theirs , he go off without say anything more . then Sylvia lift up her voice with a great cry . somehow she have expect he to do something what , she do not know ; but he be go , and they be leave without stay or help . 

 ' hush thee , hush thee , ' say her mother , tremble all over herself ; ' it be for the good . the Lord know . ' 

 ' but I niver think he would leave we , ' moan Sylvia , half in her mother 's arm , and think of Philip . her mother take the word as apply to Daniel . 

 ' and he would niver ha ' leave we , my wench , if he could ha ' stay . ' 

 ' oh , mother , mother , it be Philip as have leave we , and he could ha ' stay . ' 

 ' he will come back , or mebbe send , I will be bind . leastway he will be go to see feyther , and he will need comfort most on all , in a fremd place in Bridewell and niver a morsel of victual or a piece o ' money . ' and now she sate down , and weep the dry hot tear that come with such difficulty to the eye of the aged . and so first one grieve , and then the other , and each drain her own heart of every possible hope by way of comfort , alternately try to cheer and console the February afternoon pass away ; the continuous rain close in the daylight even early than usual , and add to the dreariness , with the natural accompaniment of wail wind , come with long sweep over the moor , and make the sobbing at the window that always sound like the gasp of some one in great agony . meanwhile Philip have hasten back to Monkshaven . he have no umbrella , he have to face the drive rain for the great part of the way ; but he be thankful to the weather , for it keep man indoor , and he want to meet no one , but to have time to think and mature his plan . the town itself be , so to speak , in mourning . the rescue of the sailor be a distinctly popular movement ; the subsequent violence   which have , indeed , go much far than have be describe , after Daniel leave it   be , in general , consider as only a kind of due punishment inflict in wild justice on the press - gang and their abettor . the feeling of the monkshaven people be , therefore , in decide opposition to the vigorous step take by the county magistrate , who , in consequence of an appeal from the naval officer in charge of the impressment service , have call out the militia   from a distant and inland county   station within a few mile , and have thus summarily quench the riot that be continue on the Sunday morning after a somewhat languid fashion ; the great part of the destruction of property have be accomplish during the previous night . still there be little doubt but that the violence would have be renew as evening draw on , and the more desperate part of the population and the enrage sailor have have the Sabbath leisure to brood over their wrong , and to encourage each other in a passionate attempt at redress , or revenge . so the authority be quite justified in the decide step they have take , both in their own estimation then , and now , in ours , look back on the affair in cold blood . but at the time feeling run strongly against they ; and all mean of express itself in action be prevent , man brood sullenly in their own house . Philip , as the representative of the family , the head of which be now suffer for his deed in the popular cause , would have meet with more sympathy , ay , and more respect than he imagine , as he go along the street , glance from side to side , fearful of meet some who would shy he as the relation of one who have be ignominiously take to Bridewell a few hour before . but in spite of this wincing of Philip 's from observation and remark , he never dream of act otherwise than as become a brave true friend . and this he do , and would have do , from a natural faithfulness and constancy of disposition , without any special regard for Sylvia . 

 he know his service be need in the shop ; business which he have leave at a moment 's warning await he , unfinishe ; but at this time he could not bear the torture of give explanation , and allege reason to the languid intelligence and slow sympathy of Coulson . 

 he go to the office of Mr. Donkin , the old established and most respected attorney in Monkshaven he who have be employ to draw up the law paper and deed of partnership consequent on Hepburn and Coulson succeed to the shop of John and Jeremiah Foster , Brothers . 

 Mr. Donkin know Philip from this circumstance . but , indeed , nearly every one in Monkshaven know each other ; if not enough to speak to , at least enough to be acquaint with the personal appearance and reputation of most of those whom they meet in the street . it so happen that Mr. Donkin have a favourable opinion of Philip ; and perhaps for this reason the latter have a short time to wait before he obtain an interview with the head of the house , than many of the client who come for that purpose from town or country for many mile round . 

 Philip be usher in . Mr. Donkin sate with his spectacle push up on his forehead , ready to watch his countenance and listen to his word . 

 ' good afternoon , Mr. Hepburn ! ' 

 ' good afternoon , sir . ' Philip hesitate how to begin . Mr. Donkin become impatient , and tap with the finger of his left hand on his desk . Philip 's sensitive nerve feel and rightly interpret the action . 

 ' please , sir , I be come to speak to you about Daniel Robson , of Haytersbank Farm . ' 

 ' Daniel Robson ? ' say Mr. Donkin , after a short pause , to try and compel Philip into speed in his story . 

 ' yes , sir . he be be take up on account of this affair , sir , about the press - gang on Saturday night . ' 

 ' to be sure ! I think I know the name . ' and Mr. Donkin 's face become graver , and the expression more concentrated . look up suddenly at Philip , he say , ' you be aware that I be the clerk to the magistrate ? ' 

 ' no , sir , ' in a tone that indicate the unexpressed ' what then ? ' 

 ' well , but I be . and so of course , if you want my service or advice in favour of a prisoner whom they have commit , or be go to commit , you can not   have they , that be all . ' 

 ' I be very sorry very ! ' say Philip ; and then he be again silent for a period ; long enough to make the busy attorney impatient . 

 ' well , Mr. Hepburn , have you anything else to say to I ? ' 

 ' yes , sir . I have   a deal to ask of you ; for you see I do not   rightly understand what to do ; and yet I be all as Daniel 's wife and daughter have to look to ; and I have   their grief heavy on my heart . you could not tell I what be to be do with Daniel , could you , sir ? ' 

 ' he will be bring up before the magistrate to - morrow morning for final examination , along with the other , you know , before he be send to York Castle to take his trial at the spring assize . ' 

 ' to York Castle , sir ? ' 

 Mr. Donkin nod , as if word be too precious to waste . 

 ' and when will he go ? ' ask poor Philip , in dismay . 

 ' to - morrow : most probably as soon as the examination be over . the evidence be clear as to his be present , aid and abetting , indict on the 4th section of 1 George I. , statute 1 , chapter 5 . I be afraid it be a bad look - out . be he a friend of your , Mr. Hepburn ? ' 

 ' only an uncle , sir , ' say Philip , his heart get full ; more from Mr. Donkin 's manner than from his word . ' but what can they do to he , sir ? ' 

 ' do ? ' Mr. Donkin half smile at the ignorance display . ' why , hang he , to be sure ; if the judge be in a hang mood . he be be either a principal in the offence , or a principal in the second degree , and , as such , liable to the full punishment . I draw up the warrant myself this morning , though I leave the exact name to be fill up by my clerk . ' 

 ' oh , sir ! can you do nothing for I ? ' ask Philip , with sharp beseeching in his voice . he have never imagine that it be a capital offence ; and the thought of his aunt 's and Sylvia 's ignorance of the possible fate await he whom they so much love , be like a stab to his heart . 

 ' no , my good fellow . I be sorry ; but , you see , it be my duty to do all I can to bring criminal to justice . ' 

 ' my uncle think he be do such a fine deed . ' 

 ' demolish and pull down , destroy and burn dwelling - house and outhouse , ' say Mr. Donkin . ' he must have some peculiar notion . ' 

 ' the people be so mad with the press - gang , and Daniel have be at sea hisself ; and take it so to heart when he hear of mariner and seafare folk be carry off , and just cheat into do what be kind and helpful leastway , what would have be kind and helpful , if there have be a fire . I be against violence and riot myself , sir , I be sure ; but I can not help think as Daniel have a deal to justify he on Saturday night , sir . ' 

 ' well ; you must try and get a good lawyer to bring out all that side of the question . there be a good deal to be say on it ; but it be my duty to get up all the evidence to prove that he and other be present on the night in question ; so , as you will perceive , I can give you no help in defend he . ' 

 ' but who can , sir ? I come to you as a friend who , I think , would see I through it . and I do not   know any other lawyer ; leastway , to speak to . ' 

 Mr. Donkin be really more concerned for the misguided rioter than he be aware ; and he be aware of more interest than he care to express . so he soften his tone a little , and try to give the good advice in his power . 

 ' you would well go to Edward Dawson on the other side of the river ; he that be article clerk with I two year ago , you know . he be a clever fellow , and have not too much practice ; he will do the good he can for you . he will have to be at the court - house , tell he , to - morrow morning at ten , when the justice meet . he will watch the case for you ; and then he will give you his opinion , and tell you what to do . you can not   do well than follow his advice . I must do all I can to collect evidence for a conviction , you know . ' 

 Philip stand up , look at his hat , and then come forward and lay down six and eightpence on the desk in a blushing , awkward way . 

 ' Pooh ! pooh ! ' say Mr. Donkin , push the money away . ' do not   be a fool ; you will need it all before the trial be over . I have   do nothing , man . it would be a pretty thing for I to be feed by both party . ' 

 Philip take up the money , and leave the room . in an instant he come back again , glance furtively at Mr. Donkin 's face , and then , once more have recourse to brush his hat , he say , in a low voice 

 ' you will not be hard upon he , sir , I hope ? ' 

 ' I must do my duty , ' reply Mr. Donkin , a little sternly , ' without any question of hardness . ' 

 Philip , discomfited , leave the room ; an instant of thought and Mr Donkin have jump up , and hasten to the door he open it and call after Philip . 

 ' Hepburn Hepburn I say , he will be take to York as soon as may be to - morrow morning ; if any one want to see he before then , they would well look sharp about it . ' 

 Philip go quickly along the street towards Mr. Dawson 's , ponder upon the meaning of all that he have hear , and what he have well do . he have make his plan pretty clearly out by the time he arrive at Mr. Dawson 's smart door in one of the new street on the other side of the river . a clerk as smart as the door answer Philip 's hesitating knock , and reply to his inquiry as to whether Mr. Dawson be at home , in the negative , add , after a moment 's pause 

 ' he will be at home in less than an hour ; he be only go to make Mrs Dawson 's will Mrs. Dawson , of Collyton she be not expect to get well . ' 

 probably the clerk of an older - establish attorney would not have give so many particular as to the nature of his master 's employment ; but , as it happen it be of no consequence , the unnecessary information make no impression on Philip 's mind ; he think the matter over and then say 

 ' I will be back in an hour , then . it be go a quarter to four ; I will be back before five , tell Mr. Dawson . ' 

 he turn on his heel and go back to the High Street as fast as he could , with a far more prompt and decide step than before . he hasten through the street , empty by the bad weather , to the principal inn of the town , the George the sign of which be fasten to a piece of wood stretch across the narrow street ; and go up to the bar with some timidity   for the inn be frequent by the gentry of Monkshaven and the neighbourhood , and be consider as a touch above such customer as Philip , he ask if he could have a tax - cart make ready in a quarter of an hour , and send up to the door of his shop . 

 ' to be sure he could ; how far be it to go ? ' 

 Philip hesitate before he reply 

 ' up the Knotting Lane , to the stile lead down to Haytersbank Farm ; they will have to wait there for some as be come . ' 

 ' they must not wait long such an evening as this ; stand in such rain and wind as there will be up there , be enough to kill a horse . ' 

 ' they shall not   wait long , ' say Philip , decisively : ' in a quarter of an hour , mind . ' 

 he now go back to the shop , beat against the storm , which be increase as the tide come in and the night hour approach . 

 Coulson have no word for he , but he look reproachfully at his partner for his long , unexplained absence . hester be put away the ribbon and handkerchief , and bright - colour thing which have be use to deck the window ; for no more customer be likely to come this night through the bluster weather to a shop dimly light by two tallow candle and an inefficient oil - lamp . Philip come up to she , and stand look at she with unseee eye ; but the strange consciousness of his fix stare make she uncomfortable , and call the faint flush to her pale cheek , and at length compel she , as it be , to speak , and break the spell of the silence . so , curiously enough , all three speak at once . hester ask   without look at Philip  

 ' Yo're sadly wet , I be fear ? ' 

 Coulson say 

 ' Thou might have a bit o ' news to tell one after be on the gad all afternoon . ' 

 Philip whisper to hester 

 ' Wilt come into t ' parlour ? I want a word wi ' thee by oursel 's . ' 

 hester quietly finish roll up the ribbon she have in her hand when he speak , and then follow he into the room behind the shop before speak of . 

 Philip set down on the table the candle which he have bring out of the shop , and turn round to hester , take her trembling hand into both of his , and grip it nervously , say 

 ' oh ! hester , thou must help I thou will , will not thou ? ' 

 hester gulp down something that seem to rise in her throat and choke she , before she answer . 

 ' anything , thou know , Philip . ' 

 ' yes , yes , I know . Thou see the matter be this : Daniel Robson he who marry my aunt be take up for yon riot on Saturday night at t ' Mariners ' arm ' 

 ' they speak on it this afternoon ; they say the warrant be out , ' say Hester , fill up the sentence as Philip hesitate , lose for an instant in his own thought . 

 ' ay ! the warrant be out , and he be in t ' lock - up , and will be carry to York Castle to - morrow morn ; and I be afeared it will go bad with he ; and they at Haytersbank be not prepare , and they must see he again before he go . now , Hester , will thou go in a tax - cart as will be here in less than ten minute from t ' George , and bring they back here , and they must stay all night for to be ready to see he to - morrow before he go ? it be dree weather for they , but they will not mind that . ' 

 he have use word as if he be make a request to hester ; but he do not seem to await her answer , so sure be he that she would go . she notice this , and notice also that the rain be speak of in reference to they , not to she . a cold shadow pass over her heart , though it be nothing more than she already know that Sylvia be the one centre of his thought and his love . 

 ' I will go put on my thing at once , ' say she , gently . 

 Philip press her hand tenderly , a glow of gratitude overspread he . 

 ' Thou be a real good one , God bless thee ! ' say he . ' Thou must take care of thyself , too , ' continue he ; ' there be wrap and plenty I ' th ' house , and if there be not , there be those I ' the shop as will be none the bad for once wear at such a time as this ; and wrap thee well up , and take shawl and cloak for they , and mind as they put them on . Thou'll have to get out at a stile , I will tell t ' driver where ; and thou must get over t ' stile and follow t ' path down two field , and th ' house be right before ye , and bid them make haste and lock up th ' house , for they mun stay all night here . Kester will look after thing . ' 

 all this time hester be hastily put on her hat and cloak , which she have fetch from the closet where they usually hang through the day ; now she stand listen , as it be , for final direction . 

 ' but suppose they will not come , ' say she ; ' they dunnot know I , and may not   believe my word . ' 

 ' they must , ' say he , impatiently . ' they do not   know what await them , ' he continue . ' I will tell thee , because thou will not let out , and it seem as if I mun tell some one it be such a shock he be to be try for 's life . they know not it be so serious ; and , Hester , ' say he , go on in his search after sympathy , ' she be like as if she be bind up in her father . ' 

 his lip quiver as he look wistfully into Hester 's face at these word . no need to tell she who be she . no need to put into word the fact , tell plainer than word could have speak it , that his heart be bind up in Sylvia . 

 hester 's face , instead of respond to his look , contract a little , and , for the life of she , she could not have help say , 

 ' why do not   yo ' go yourself , Philip ? ' 

 ' I can not , I can not , ' say he , impatiently . ' I would give the world to go , for I might be able to comfort she ; but there be lawyer to see , and iver so much to do , and they have   niver a man friend but I to do it all . you will tell she , ' say Philip , insinuatingly , as if a fresh thought have strike he , ' as how I would ha ' come . I would fain ha ' come for them , myself , but I could not , because of th ' lawyer , mind yo ' say because of th ' lawyer . I would be loath for she to think I be mind any business of my own at this time ; and , whatever yo ' do , speak hopeful , and , for t ' life of yo ' , do not   speak of th ' hanging , it be likely it be a mistake o ' Donkin 's ; and anyhow there be t ' cart anyhow I should perhaps not ha ' tell thee , but it be a comfort to make a clean breast to a friend at time . God bless thee , Hester . I do not   know what I should ha ' do without thee , ' say he , as he wrap she well up in the cart , and place the bundle of cloak and thing by her side . 

 along the street , in the jolting cart , as long as hester could see the misty light stream out of the shop door , so long be Philip standing bareheade in the rain look after she . but she know that it be not her own poor self that attract his linger gaze . it be the thought of the person she be bind to . 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 a dreary VIGIL 

 through the dark rain , against the cold wind , shake over the rough stone , go hester in the little tax - cart . her heart keep rise against her fate ; the hot tear come unbidden to her eye . but rebellious heart be soothe , and hot tear be send back to their source before the time come for she alight . 

 the driver turn his horse in the narrow lane , and shout after she an injunction to make haste as , with her head bent low , she struggle down to the path to Haytersbank Farm . she see the light in the window from the top of the brow , and involuntarily she slacken her pace . she have never see Bell Robson , and would Sylvia recollect she ? if she do not how awkward it would be to give the explanation of who she be , and what her errand be , and why she be send . nevertheless , it must be do ; so on she go , and stand within the little porch , she knock faintly at the door ; but in the bluster of the element the sound be lose . again she knock , and now the murmur of woman 's voice inside be hush , and some one come quickly to the door , and open it sharply . 

 it be Sylvia . although her face be completely in shadow , of course hester know she well ; but she , if indeed she would have recognize Hester less disguised , do not know in the least who the woman , muffle up in a great cloak , with her hat tie down with a silk handkerchief , stand in the porch at this time of night , could be . nor , indeed , be she in a mood to care or to inquire . she say hastily , in a voice render hoarse and arid with grief : 

 ' go away . this be no house for stranger to come to . we have   enough on our own to think on ; ' and she hastily shut the door in Hester 's face , before the latter could put together the right word in which to explain her errand . hester stand outside in the dark , wet porch discomfit , and wonder how next to obtain a hearing through the shut and bolt door . not long do she stand , however ; some one be again at the door , talk in a voice of distress and remonstrance , and slowly unbar the bolt . a tall , thin figure of an elderly woman be see against the warm fire - light inside as soon as the door be open ; a hand be put out , like that which take the dove into the ark , and Hester be draw into the warmth and the light , while Bell 's voice go on speak to Sylvia before address the dripping stranger 

 ' it be not a night to turn a dog fra ' t ' door ; it be ill let our grief harden our heart . but oh ! missus   to Hester , yo ' mun forgive we , for a great sorrow have fall upon we this day , an ' we be like beside ourselves wi ' cry an ' plaining . ' 

 Bell sate down , and throw her apron over her poor worn face , as if decently to shield the sign of her misery from a stranger 's gaze . Sylvia , all tear - swollen , and look askance and almost fiercely at the stranger who have make good her intrusion , be draw , as it be , to her mother 's side , and , kneel down by she , put her arm round her waist , and almost lie across her lap , still gaze at hester with cold , distrustful eye , the expression of which repel and daunt that poor , unwilling messenger , and make she silent for a minute or so after her entrance . Bell suddenly put down her apron . 

 ' yo're cold and drench , ' say she . ' come near to t ' fire and warm yo'rsel ' ; yo ' mun pardon we if we dunnot think on everything at onest . ' 

 ' yo're very kind , very kind indeed , ' say hester , touch by the poor woman 's evident effort to forget her own grief in the duty of hospitality , and love Bell from that moment . 

 ' I be hester Rose , ' she continue , half address Sylvia , who she think might remember the name , ' and Philip Hepburn have send I in a tax - cart to t ' stile yonder , to fetch both on yo ' back to Monkshaven . ' Sylvia raise her head and look intently at hester . Bell clasp her hand tight together and leant forwards . 

 ' it be my master as want we ? ' say she , in an eager , question tone . 

 ' it be for to see yo'r master , ' say hester . ' Philip say he will be send to York to - morrow , and yo'll be fain to see he before he go ; and if yo'll come down to Monkshaven to - night , yo'll be on t ' spot again ' the time come when t ' justice will let ye . ' 

 Bell be up and about , make for the place where she keep she out - go thing , almost before Hester have begin to speak . she hardly understand about her husband 's be send to York , in the possession of the idea that she might go and see he . she do not understand or care how , in this wild night , she be to get to monkshaven ; all she think of be , that she might go and see her husband . but Sylvia take in more point than her mother , and , almost suspiciously , begin to question hester . 

 ' why be they send he to York ? what make Philip leave we ? why do not   he come hissel ' ? ' 

 ' he could not   come hissel ' , he bid I say ; because he be bind to be at the lawyer 's at five , about yo'r father 's business . I think yo ' might ha ' know he would ha ' come for any business of his own ; and , about York , it be Philip as tell I , and I never ask why . I never think on yo'r ask I so many question . I think yo'd be ready to fly on any chance o ' see your father . ' hester speak out the sad reproach that run from her heart to her lip . to distrust Philip ! to linger when she might hasten ! 

 ' oh ! ' say Sylvia , break out into a wild cry , that carry with it more conviction of agony than much weeping could have do . ' I may be rude and hard , and I may ask strange question , as if I care for t ' answer yo ' may gi ' I ; an ' , in my heart o ' heart , I care for nought but to have father back wi ' us , as love he so dear . I can hardly tell what I say , much less why I say it . mother be so patient , it put I past mysel ' , for I could fight wi ' t ' very wall , I be so mad wi ' grieving . sure , they will let he come back wi ' us to - morrow , when they hear from his own sel ' why he do it ? ' 

 she look eagerly at hester for an answer to this last question , which she have put in a soft , entreat tone , as if with Hester herself the decision rest . hester shake her head . Sylvia come up to she and take her hand , almost fondle they . 

 ' Yo ' dunnot think they will be hard wi ' he when they hear all about it , do yo ' ? why , York Castle 's t ' place they send a ' t ' thief and robber to , not honest man like feyther . ' 

 hester put her hand on Sylvia 's shoulder with a soft , caress gesture . 

 ' Philip will know , ' she say , use Philip 's name as a kind of spell it would have be so to she . ' come away to Philip , ' say she again , urge Sylvia , by her look and manner , to prepare for the little journey . Sylvia move away for this purpose , say to herself , 

 ' it be go to see feyther : he will tell I all . ' 

 Poor Mrs. Robson be collect a few clothe for her husband with an eager , tremble hand , so tremble that article after article fall to the floor , and it be hester who pick they up ; and at last , after many vain attempt by the grief - shake woman , it be hester who tie the bundle , and arrange the cloak , and fasten down the hood ; Sylvia stand by , not unobservant , though apparently absorb in her own thought . 

 at length , all be arrange , and the key give over to Kester . as they pass out into the storm , Sylvia say to Hester , 

 ' Thou be a real good wench . Thou 's fitter to be about mother than I . I be but a cross - patch at well , an ' now it be like as if I be no good to nobody . ' 

 Sylvia begin to cry , but hester have no time to attend to she , even have she the inclination : all her care be need to help the hasty , totter step of the wife who be feebly speed up the wet and slippery brow to her husband . all Bell think of be that ' he ' be at the end of her toil . she hardly understand when she be to see he ; her weary heart and brain have only receive one idea that each step she be now take be lead she to he . tired and exhaust with her quick walk up hill , battle all the way with wind and rain , she could hardly have hold up another minute when they reach the tax - cart in the lane , and Hester have almost to lift she on to the front seat by the driver . she cover and wrap up the poor old woman , and afterwards place herself in the straw at the back of the cart , pack up close by the shivering , weep Sylvia . neither of they speak a word at first ; but hester 's tender conscience smite she for her silence before they have reach Monkshaven . she want to say some kind word to Sylvia , and yet know not how to begin . somehow , without know why , or reasoning upon it , she hit upon Philip 's message as the good comfort in her power to give . she have deliver it before , but it have be apparently little heed . 

 ' Philip bade I say it be business as keep he from fetchin ' yo ' hissel ' business wi ' the lawyer , about about yo'r father . ' 

 ' what do they say ? ' say Sylvia , suddenly , lift her bow head , as though she would read her companion 's face in the dim light . 

 ' I dunnot know , ' say Hester , sadly . they be now jolt over the paved street , and not a word could be speak . they be now at Philip 's door , which be open to receive they even before they arrive , as if some one have be watch and listen . the old servant , Phoebe , the fixture in the house , who have belong to it and to the shop for the last twenty year , come out , hold a candle and shelter it in her hand from the weather , while Philip help the tottering step of Mrs. Robson as she descend behind . as Hester have get in last , so she have now to be the first to move . just as she be move , Sylvia 's cold little hand be lay on her arm . 

 ' I be main and thankful to yo ' . I ask yo'r pardon for speak cross , but , indeed , my heart 's a'most break wi ' fear about feyther . ' 

 the voice be so plaintive , so full of tear , that hester could not but yearn towards the speaker . she bent over and kiss she cheek , and then clamber unaided down by the wheel on the dark side of the cart . Wistfully she long for one word of thank or recognition from Philip , in whose service she have perform this hard task ; but he be otherwise occupy , and on cast a further glance back as she turn the corner of the street , she see Philip lift Sylvia carefully down in his arm from her footing on the top of the wheel , and then they all go into the light and the warmth , the door be shut , the lightened cart drive briskly away , and Hester , in rain , and cold , and darkness , go homeward with her tired sad heart . 

 Philip have do all he could , since his return from lawyer Dawson 's , to make his house bright and warm for the reception of his beloved . he have a strong apprehension of the probable fate of poor Daniel Robson ; he have a warm sympathy with the miserable distress of the wife and daughter ; but still at the back of his mind his spirit dance as if this be to they a festal occasion . he have even take unconscious pleasure in Phoebe 's suspicious look and tone , as he have hurry and superintend she in her operation . a fire blaze cheerily in the parlour , almost dazzle to the traveller bring in from the darkness and the rain ; candle burn two candle , much to Phoebe 's discontent . poor Bell Robson have to sit down almost as soon as she enter the room , so wear out be she with fatigue and excitement ; yet she grudge every moment which separate she , as she think , from her husband . 

 ' I be ready now , ' say she , stand up , and rather repulse Sylvia 's care ; ' I be ready now , ' say she , look eagerly at Philip , as if for he to lead the way . 

 ' it be not to - night , ' reply he , almost apologetically . ' you can not   see he to - night ; it be to - morrow morning before he go to York ; it be well for yo ' to be down here in town ready ; and beside I do not   know when I send for ye that he be lock up for the night . ' 

 ' well - a - day , well - a - day , ' say Bell , rock herself backwards and forwards , and try to soothe herself with these word . suddenly she say , 

 ' but I have   bring his comforter wi ' I his red woollen comforter as he be allay sleep in this twelvemonth past ; he will get his rheumatiz again ; oh , Philip , can not I get it to he ? ' 

 ' I will send it by Phoebe , ' say Philip , who be busy make tea , hospitable and awkward . 

 ' can not I take it mysel ' ? ' repeat Bell . ' I could make surer nor anybody else ; they would maybe not mind yon woman Phoebe d'ye call she ? ' 

 ' nay , mother , ' say Sylvia , ' thou be not fit to go . ' 

 ' shall I go ? ' ask Philip , hop she would say ' no ' , and be content with Phoebe , and leave he where he be . 

 ' oh , Philip , would yo ' ? ' say Sylvia , turn round . 

 ' ay , ' say Bell , ' if thou would take it they would be mind yo ' . ' 

 so there be nothing for it but for he to go , in the first flush of his delightful rite of hospitality . 

 ' it be not far , ' say he , console himself rather than they . ' I will be back in ten minute , the tea be maskit , and Phoebe will take yo'r wet thing and dry them by t ' kitchen fire ; and here be the stair , ' open a door in the corner of the room , from which the stair immediately ascend . ' there be two room at the top ; that to t ' left be all make ready , t ' other be mine , ' say he , redden a little as he speak . Bell be busy undo her bundle with tremble finger . 

 ' here , ' say she ; ' and oh , lad , here be a bit o ' peppermint cake ; he be main and fond on it , and I catch sight on it by good luck just t ' last minute . ' 

 Philip be go , and the excitement of Bell and Sylvia flag once more , and sink into wonder despondency . Sylvia , however , rouse herself enough to take off her mother 's wet clothe , and she take they timidly into the kitchen and arrange they before Phoebe 's fire . 

 Phoebe open her lip once or twice to speak in remonstrance , and then , with an effort , gulp her word down ; for her sympathy , like that of all the rest of the monkshaven world , be in favour of Daniel Robson ; and his daughter might place her dripping cloak this night wherever she would , for Phoebe . 

 Sylvia find her mother still sit on the chair next the door , where she have first place herself on enter the room . 

 ' I will gi'e you some tea , mother , ' say she , strike with the shrunken look of Bell 's face . 

 ' no , no ' say her mother . ' it be not manner for t ' help oursel 's . ' 

 ' I be sure Philip would ha ' wish yo ' for to take it , ' say Sylvia , pour out a cup . 

 just then he return , and something in his look , some dumb expression of delight at her occupation , make her blush and hesitate for an instant ; but then she go on , and make a cup of tea ready , say something a little incoherent all the time about her mother 's need of it . after tea Bell Robson 's weariness become so extreme , that Philip and Sylvia urge she to go to bed . she resist a little , partly out of ' manner , ' and partly because she keep fancy , poor woman , that somehow or other her husband might send for she . but about seven o'clock Sylvia persuade she to come upstairs . Sylvia , too , bade Philip good - night , and his look follow the last wave of her dress as she disappear up the stair ; then lean his chin on his hand , he gaze at vacancy and think deeply for how long he know not , so intent be his mind on the chance of futurity . 

 he be arouse by Sylvia 's come down - stair into the sitting - room again . he start up . 

 ' Mother be so shivery , ' say she . ' may I go in there , ' indicate the kitchen , ' and make she a drop of gruel ? ' 

 ' phoebe shall make it , not you , ' say Philip , eagerly prevent she , by go to the kitchen door and give his order . when he turn round again , Sylvia be stand over the fire , lean her head against the stone mantel - piece for the comparative coolness . she do not speak at first , or take any notice of he . he watch she furtively , and see that she be cry , the tear run down her cheek , and she too much absorb in her thought to wipe they away with her apron . 

 while he be turn over in his mind what he could well say to comfort her   his heart , like her , be almost too full for word , she suddenly look he full in the face , say , 

 ' Philip ! will not   they soon let he go ? what can they do to he ? ' her open lip tremble while await his answer , the tear come up and fill her eye . it be just the question he have most dread ; it lead to the terror that possess his own mind , but which he have hop to keep out of her . he hesitate . ' speak , lad ! ' say she , impatiently , with a little passionate gesture . ' I can see thou know ! ' 

 he have only make it bad by consideration ; he rush blindfold at a reply . 

 ' he be ta'en up for felony . ' 

 ' felony , ' say she . ' there thou're out ; he be in for let yon man out ; thou may call it rioting if thou be a mind to set folk again ' he , but it be too bad to cast such hard word at he as yon felony , ' she repeat , in a half - offend tone . 

 ' it be what the lawyer call it , ' say Philip , sadly ; ' it be no word o ' mine . ' 

 ' lawyer be allay for make the bad o ' thing , ' say she , a little pacified , ' but folk should not   allay believe they . ' 

 ' it be lawyer as have to judge I ' t ' long run . ' 

 ' can not the justice , Mr. Harter and they as be no lawyer , give he a sentence to - morrow , wi'out send he to York ? ' 

 ' no ! ' say Philip , shake his head . he go to the kitchen door and ask if the gruel be not ready , so anxious be he to stop the conversation at this point ; but Phoebe , who hold her young master in but little respect , scold he for a stupid man , who think , like all his sex , that gruel be to be make in a minute , whatever the fire be , and bid he come and make it for himself if he be in such a hurry . 

 he have to return discomfited to Sylvia , who meanwhile have arrange her thought ready to return to the charge . 

 ' and say he be send to York , and say he be try theere , what be t ' bad they can do again ' he ? ' ask she , keep down her agitation to look at Philip the more sharply . her eye never slacken their penetrate gaze at his countenance , until he reply , with the utmost unwillingness , and most apparent confusion , 

 ' they may send he to Botany Bay . ' 

 he know that he hold back a bad contingency , and he be mortally afraid that she would perceive this reserve . but what he do say be so much beyond her utmost apprehension , which have only reach to various term of imprisonment , that she do not imagine the dark shadow lurk behind . what he have say be too much for she . her eye dilate , her lip blanch , her pale cheek grow yet pale . after a minute 's look into his face , as if fascinate by some horror , she stumble backwards into the chair in the chimney comer , and cover her face with her hand , moan out some inarticulate word . 

 Philip be on his knee by she , dumb from excess of sympathy , kiss her dress , all unfelt by she ; he murmur half - word , he begin passionate sentence that die away upon his lip ; and she she think of nothing but her father , and be possess and rapt out of herself by the dread of lose he to that fearful country which be almost like the grave to she , so all but impassable be the gulf . but Philip know that it be possible that the separation impend might be that of the dark , mysterious grave that the gulf between the father and child might indeed be that which no living , breathing , warm human creature can ever cross . 

 ' Sylvie , Sylvie ! ' say he , and all their conversation have to be carry on in low tone and whisper , for fear of the listen ear above , ' do not , do not , thou'rt rend my heart . oh , Sylvie , hearken . there be not a thing I will not do ; there be not a penny I have   get , th ' last drop of blood that be in I , I will give up my life for his . ' 

 ' life , ' say she , put down her hand , and look at he as if her look could pierce his soul ; ' who talk o ' touch his life ? thou're go crazy , Philip , I think ; ' but she do not think so , although she would fain have believe it . in her keen agony she read his thought as though they be an open page ; she sate there , upright and stony , the conviction creep over her face like the grey shadow of death . no more tear , no more trembling , almost no more breathing . he could not bear to see she , and yet she hold his eye , and he fear to make the effort necessary to move or to turn away , lest the shun motion should carry conviction to her heart . alas ! conviction of the probable danger to her father 's life be already there : it be that that be calm she down , tighten her muscle , brace her nerve . in that hour she lose all her early youth . 

 ' then he may be hung , ' say she , low and solemnly , after a long pause . Philip turn away his face , and do not utter a word . again deep silence , break only by some homely sound in the kitchen . ' mother must not know on it , ' say Sylvia , in the same tone in which she have speak before . 

 ' it be t ' bad as can happen to he , ' say Philip . ' more likely he will be transport : maybe he will be bring in innocent after all . ' 

 ' no , ' say Sylvia , heavily , as one without hope as if she be read some dreadful doom in the tablet of the awful future . ' they will hang he . oh , feyther ! feyther ! ' she choke out , almost stuff her apron into her mouth to deaden the sound , and catch at Philip 's hand , and wring it with convulsive force , till the pain that he love be nearly more than he could bear . no word of his could touch such agony ; but irrepressibly , and as he would have do it to a wound child , he bend over she , and kiss she with a tender , tremble kiss . she do not repulse it , probably she do not even perceive it . 

 at that moment Phoebe come in with the gruel . Philip see she , and know , in an instant , what the old woman 's conclusion must need be ; but Sylvia have to be shake by the now stand Philip , before she could be bring back to the least consciousness of the present time . she lift up her white face to understand his word , then she rise up like one who slowly come to the use of her limb . 

 ' I suppose I mun go , ' she say ; ' but I would soon face the dead . if she ask I , Philip , what mun I say ? ' 

 ' she will not ask yo ' , ' say he , ' if yo ' go about as common . she be never ask yo ' all this time , an ' if she do , put she on to I . I will keep it from she as long as I can ; I will manage well nor I have   do wi ' thee , Sylvie , ' say he , with a sad , faint smile , look with fond penitence at her altered countenance . 

 ' Thou must not   blame thysel ' , ' say Sylvia , see his regret . ' I bring it on I mysel ' ; I think I would ha ' t ' truth , whativer come on it , and now I be not strong enough to stand it , God help I ! ' she continue , piteously . 

 ' oh , Sylvie , let I help yo ' ! I can not do what God can , I be not mean that , but I can do next to he of any man . I have love yo ' for year an ' year , in a way it be terrible to think on , if my love can do nought now to comfort yo ' in your sore distress . ' 

 ' Cousin Philip , ' she reply , in the same measure tone in which she have always speak since she have learn the extent of her father 's danger , and the slow stillness of her word be in harmony with the stony look of her face , ' thou be a comfort to I , I could not   bide my life without thee ; but I can not take in the thought o ' love , it seem beside I quite ; I can think on nought but they that be quick and they that be dead . ' 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 GLOOMY day 

 Philip have money in the Fosters ' bank , not so much as it might have be if he have not have to pay for the furniture in his house . much of this furniture be old , and have belong to the brother Foster , and they have let Philip have it at a very reasonable rate ; but still the purchase of it have diminish the amount of his saving . but on the sum which he possess he draw largely he draw all nay , he overdraw his account somewhat , to his former master ' dismay , although the kindness of their heart overrule the hard argument of their head . 

 all be want to defend Daniel Robson at the approach York assize . his wife have hand over to Philip all the money or money 's worth she could lay her hand upon . Daniel himself be not one to be much beforehand with the world ; but to Bell 's thrifty imagination the round golden guineas , tie up in the old stocking - foot against rent - day , seem a mint of money on which Philip might draw infinitely . as yet she do not comprehend the extent of her husband 's danger . Sylvia go about like one in a dream , keep back the hot tear that might interfere with the course of life she have prescribe for herself in that terrible hour when she first learn all . every penny of money either she or her mother could save go to Philip . Kester 's hoard , too , be place in Hepburn 's hand at Sylvia 's earnest entreaty ; for Kester have no great opinion of Philip 's judgment , and would rather have take his money straight himself to Mr. Dawson , and beg he to use it for his master 's behoof . 

 indeed , if anything , the noiseless breach between Kester and Philip have widen of late . it be seed - time , and Philip , in his great anxiety for every possible interest that might affect Sylvia , and also as some distraction from his extreme anxiety about her father , have take to study agriculture of an evening in some old book which he have borrow the Farmer 's Complete Guide , and such like ; and from time to time he come down upon the practical dog Kester with direction gather from the theory in his book . of course the two fall out , but without many word . Kester persevere in his old way , make light of Philip and his book in manner and action , till at length Philip withdraw from the contest . ' many a man may lead a horse to water , but there be few can make he drink , ' and Philip certainly be not one of those few . Kester , indeed , look upon he with jealous eye on many account . he have favour Charley Kinraid as a lover of Sylvia 's ; and though he have no idea of the truth though he believe in the drowning of the specksioneer as much as any one yet the year which have elapse since Kinraid 's suppose death be but a very short while to the middle - aged man , who forget how slowly time pass with the young ; and he could often have scold Sylvia , if the poor girl have be a whit less heavy at heart than she be , for let Philip come so much about she come , though it be on her father 's business . for the darkness of their common dread draw they together , occasionally to the comparative exclusion of Bell and Kester , which the latter perceive and resent . Kester even allow himself to go so far as to wonder what Philip could want with all the money , which to he seem unaccountable ; and once or twice the ugly thought cross his mind , that shop conduct by young man be often not so profitable as when guide by old head , and that some of the coin pour into Philip 's keeping might have another destination than the defence of his master . Poor Philip ! and he be spend all his own , and more than all his own money , and no one ever know it , as he have bind down his friendly banker to secrecy . 

 once only Kester venture to speak to Sylvia on the subject of Philip . she have follow her cousin to the field just in front of their house , just outside the porch , to ask he some question she dare not put in her mother 's presence   Bell , indeed , in her anxiety , usually absorb all the question when Philip come   and stand , after Philip have bid her good - by , hardly think about he at all , but look unconsciously after he as he ascend the brow ; and at the top he have turn to take a last glance at the place his love inhabit , and , see she , he have wave his hat in gratified farewell . she , meanwhile , be rouse from far other thought than of he , and of his now acknowledge love , by the motion against the sky , and be turn back into the house when she hear Kester 's low hoarse call , and see he stand at the shippen door . 

 ' come hither , wench , ' say he , indignantly ; ' be this a time for courtin ' ? ' 

 ' court ? ' say she , draw up her head , and look back at he with proud defiance . 

 ' ay , courtin ' ! what other mak ' o ' thing is't when thou 's gazin ' after yon meddlesome chap , as if thou'd send thy eye after he , and he make marlock back at thee ? it be what we ca'ed courtin ' I ' my young day anyhow . and it be noane a time for a wench to go courtin ' when her feyther 's i ' prison , ' say he , with a consciousness as he utter these last word that he be cruel and unjust and go too far , yet carry on to say they by his hot jealousy against Philip . 

 Sylvia continue look at he without speak : she be too much offend for expression . 

 ' Thou may glower an ' thou may look , lass , ' say he , ' but a'd think well on thee . it be like last week thy last sweetheart be drown ; but thou be not one to waste time I ' rememberin ' they as be go if , indeed , thou iver care a button for yon Kinraid if it be not   a make - believe . ' 

 her lip be contract and draw up , show her small glitter tooth , which be scarcely apart as she breathe out 

 ' Thou think so , do thou , that I have   forgetten he ? thou'd well have a care o ' thy tongue . ' 

 then , as if fearful that her self - command might give way , she turn into the house ; and go through the kitchen like a blind person , she go up to she now unused chamber , and throw herself , face downward , flat on her bed , almost smother herself . 

 ever since Daniel 's committal , the decay that have imperceptibly begin in his wife 's bodily and mental strength during her illness of the previous winter , have be make quick progress . she lose her reticence of speech , and often talk to herself . she have not so much forethought as of old ; slight difference , it be true , but which , with some other of the same description , give foundation for the homely expression which some now apply to Bell , ' she will never be t ' same woman again . 

 this afternoon she have cry herself to sleep in her chair after Philip 's departure . she have not hear Sylvia 's sweeping passage through the kitchen ; but half an hour afterwards she be startle up by Kester 's abrupt entry . 

 ' where be Sylvie ? ' ask he . 

 ' I do not   know , ' say Bell , look scared , and as if she be ready to cry . ' it be no news about he ? ' say she , stand up , and support herself on the stick she be now accustomed to use . 

 ' bless yo ' , no , dunnot be afeare , missus ; it be only as a speak hasty to t ' wench , an ' a want t ' tell she as a'm sorry , ' say Kester , advance into the kitchen , and look round for Sylvia . 

 ' Sylvie , Sylvie ! ' shout he ; ' she mun be I ' t ' house . ' 

 Sylvia come slowly down the stair , and stand before he . her face be pale , her mouth set and determine ; the light of her eye veil in gloom . Kester shrink from her look , and even more from her silence . 

 ' A'm come to ax pardon , ' say he , after a little pause . 

 she be still silent . 

 ' A'm noane above ax pardon , though a'm fifty and more , and thee be but a silly wench , as a've   nurse I ' my arm . a'll say before thy mother as a ought niver to ha ' use they word , and as how a'm sorry for ' t. ' 

 ' I do not   understand it all , ' say Bell , in a hurried and perplexed tone . ' what have Kester be say , my lass ? ' she add , turn to Sylvia . 

 Sylvia go a step or two nearer to her mother , and take hold of her hand as if to quieten she ; then face once more round , she say deliberately to Kester , 

 ' if thou be not   Kester , I would niver forgive thee . Niver , ' she add , with bitterness , as the word he have use recur to her mind . ' it be in I to hate thee now , for say what thou do ; but thou're dear old Kester after all , and I can not   help mysel ' , I mun need forgive thee , ' and she go towards he . he take her little head between his horny hand and kiss it . she look up with tear in her eye , say softly , 

 ' niver say thing like they again . Niver speak on ' 

 ' a'll bite my tongue off first , ' he interrupt . 

 he keep his word . 

 in all Philip 's coming and going to and from Haytersbank Farm at this time , he never speak again of his love . in look , word , manner , he be like a thoughtful , tender brother ; nothing more . he could be nothing more in the presence of the great dread which loom large upon he after every conversation with the lawyer . 

 for Mr. Donkin have be right in his prognostication . government take up the attack on the Rendezvous with a high and heavy hand . it be necessary to assert authority which have be of late too often brave . an example must be make , to strike dismay into those who oppose and defy the press - gang ; and all the minor authority who hold their power from Government be in a similar manner severe and relentless in the execution of their duty . so the attorney , who go over to see the prisoner in York Castle , tell Philip . he add that Daniel still retain his pride in his achievement , and could not be bring to understand the dangerous position in which he be place ; that when press and question as to circumstance that might possibly be use in his defence , he always wander off to account of previous outrage commit by the press - gang , or to passionate abuse of the trick by which man have be lure from their home on the night in question to assist in put out an imaginary fire , and then seize and carry off . some of this very natural indignation might possibly have some effect on the jury ; and this seem the only ground of hope , and be indeed a slight one , as the judge be likely to warn the jury against allow their natural sympathy in such a case to divert their mind from the real question . 

 such be the substance of what Philip hear , and hear repeatedly , during his many visit to Mr. Dawson . and now the time of trial draw near ; for the York assize open on March the twelfth ; not much above three week since the offence be commit which take Daniel from his home and place he in peril of death . 

 Philip be glad that , the extremity of his danger never have be hint to Bell , and travel some forty mile be a most unusual exertion at that time to person of her class , the idea of go to see her husband at York have never suggest itself to Bell 's mind . her increase feebleness make this seem a step only to be take in case of the fatal extreme necessity ; such be the conclusion that both Sylvia and he have come to ; and it be the knowledge of this that make Sylvia strangle her own daily longing to see her father . not but that her hope be strong than her fear . Philip never tell she the cause for despondency ; she be young , and she , like her father , could not understand how fearful sometimes be the necessity for prompt and severe punishment of rebellion against authority . 

 Philip be to be in York during the time of the assize ; and it be understand , almost without word , that if the terrible bad occur , the wife and daughter be to come to York as soon as might be . for this end Philip silently make all the necessary arrangement before leave monkshaven . the sympathy of all man be with he ; it be too large an occasion for Coulson to be anything but magnanimous . he urge Philip to take all the time requisite ; to leave all business care to he . and as Philip go about pale and sad , there be another cheek that grow paler still , another eye that fill with quiet tear as his heaviness of heart become more and more apparent . the day for open the assize come on . Philip be in York Minster , watch the solemn antique procession in which the high authority in the county accompany the judge to the House of the Lord , to be there admonish as to the nature of their duty . as Philip listen to the sermon with a strained and beat heart , his hope rise high than his fear for the first time , and that evening he write his first letter to Sylvia . 


 ' DEAR SYLVIA , 

 ' it will be long first than I think for . Mr. Dawson say Tuesday in next week . but keep up your heart . I have be hear the sermon to - day which be preach to the judge ; and the clergyman say so much in it about mercy and forgiveness , I think they can not fail to be lenient this assize . I have see uncle , who look but thin , but be in good heart : only he will keep say he would do it over again if he have the chance , which neither Mr. Dawson nor I think be wise in he , in especial as the gaoler be by and hear every word as be say . he be very fain of hear all about home ; and want you to rear Daisy 's calf , as he think she will prove a good one . he bid I give his good love to you and my aunt , and his kind duty to Kester . 

 ' Sylvia , will you try and forget how I use to scold you about your writing and spelling , and just write I two or three line . I think I would rather have they badly spelt than not , because then I shall be sure they be your . and never mind about capital ; I be a fool to say such a deal about they , for a man do just as well without they . a letter from you would do a vast to keep I patient all these day till Tuesday . direct 

 ' Mr. Philip Hepburn , 

 ' care of Mr. Fraser , Draper , 
 ' Micklegate , York . 
 ' my affectionate duty to my aunt . 
 ' your respectful cousin and servant , 
 ' PHILIP HEPBURN . 
 ' P.S. the sermon be grand . the text be Zechariah vii . 9 , " execute true judgment and show mercy . " God grant it may have put mercy into the judge 's heart as be to try my uncle . ' 


 heavily the day pass over . on Sunday Bell and Sylvia go to church , with a strange , half - superstitious feeling , as if they could propitiate the most high to order the event in their favour by pay he the compliment of attend to duty in their time of sorrow which they have too often neglect in their prosperous day . 

 but he ' who knoweth our frame , and remembereth that we be dust , ' take pity upon his child , and send some of his blessed peace into their heart , else they could scarce have endure the agony of suspense of those next hour . for as they come slowly and wearily home from church , Sylvia could no long bear her secret , but tell her mother of the peril in which Daniel stand . cold as the March wind blow , they have not feel it , and have sate down on a hedge bank for Bell to rest . and then Sylvia speak , tremble and sick for fear , yet utterly unable to keep silence any long . Bell heave up her hand , and let they fall down on her knee before she reply . 

 ' the Lord be above we , ' say she , solemnly . ' he have send a fear o ' this into my heart afore now . I niver breathe it to thee , my lass ' 

 ' and I niver speak on it to thee , mother , because ' 

 Sylvia choke with crying , and lay her head on her mother 's lap , feel that she be no long the strong one , and the protector , but the protect . Bell go on , stroke her head , 

 ' the Lord be like a tender nurse as wean a child to look on and to like what it lothe once . he have send I dream as have prepare I for this , if so be it come to pass . 

 ' Philip be hopeful , ' say Sylvia , raise her head and look through her tear at her mother . 

 ' ay , he be . and I can not tell , but I think it be not for nought as the Lord have ta'en away all fear o ' death out o ' my heart . I think he mean as Daniel and I be to go hand - in - hand through the valley like as we walk up to our wedding in Crosthwaite Church . I could never guide th ' house without Daniel , and I should be fear he would take a deal more nor be good for he without I . ' 

 ' but I , mother , thou 's forget I , ' moan out Sylvia . ' oh , mother , mother , think on I ! ' 

 ' Nay , my lass , I be noane forget yo ' . I have a sore heart a ' last winter a - thinking on thee , when that chap Kinraid be hang about thee . I will noane speak ill on the dead , but I be uneasylike . but sin ' Philip and thee seem to ha ' make it up ' 

 Sylvia shiver , and open her mouth to speak , but do not say a word . 

 ' and sin ' the Lord have be comfort I , and talk to I many a time when thou 's think I be asleep , thing have seem to redd theirselve up , and if Daniel go , I be ready to follow . I could niver stand live to hear folk say he have be hang ; it seem so unnatural and shameful . ' 

 ' but , mother , he will not ! he shall not   be hang ! ' say Sylvia , spring to her foot . ' Philip say he will not . ' 

 Bell shake her head . they walk on , Sylvia both dishearten and almost irritated at her mother 's despondency . but before they go to bed at night Bell say thing which seem as though the morning 's feeling have be but temporary , and as if she be refer every decision to the period of her husband 's return . ' when father come home , ' seem a sort of burden at the beginning or end of every sentence , and this reliance on his certain come back to they be almost as great a trial to Sylvia as the absence of all hope have be in the morning . but that instinct tell she that her mother be become incapable of argument , she would have ask she why her view be so essentially change in so few hour . this inability of reason in poor Bell make Sylvia feel very desolate . 

 Monday pass over how , neither of they know , for neither speak of what be fill the thought of both . before it be light on Tuesday morning , Bell be astir . 

 ' it be very early , mother , ' say weary , sleepy Sylvia , dread return consciousness . 

 ' ay , lass ! ' say Bell , in a brisk , cheerful tone ; ' but he will , maybe , be home to - night , and i'se bind to have all thing ready for he . ' 

 ' anyhow , ' say Sylvia , sit up in bed , ' he could not   come home to - night . ' 

 ' Tut , lass ! thou do not   know how quick a man come home to wife and child . I will be a ' ready at any rate . ' 

 she hurry about in a way which Sylvia wonder to see ; till at length she fancy that perhaps her mother do so to drive away thought . every place be clean ; there be scarce time allow for breakfast ; till at last , long before mid - day , all the work be do , and the two sit down to their spinning - wheel . Sylvia 's spirit sink lower and low at each speech of her mother 's , from whose mind all fear seem to have disappear , leave only a strange restless kind of excitement . 

 ' it be time for t ' potato , ' say Bell , after her wool have snap many a time from her uneven tread . 

 ' Mother , ' say Sylvia , ' it be but just go ten ! ' 

 ' put them on , ' say Bell , without attend to the full meaning of her daughter 's word . ' it will , maybe , hasten t ' day on if we get dinner do betime . ' 

 ' but Kester be in t ' Far Acre field , and he will not be home till noon . ' 

 this seem to settle matter for a while ; but then Bell push her wheel away , and begin search for her hood and cloak . Sylvia find they for she , and then ask sadly 

 ' what do ta want them for , mother ? ' 

 ' I will go up t ' brow and through t ' field , and just have a look down t ' lane . ' 

 ' I will go wi ' thee , ' say Sylvia , feel all the time the uselessness of any looking for intelligence from York so early in the day . very patiently do she wait by her mother 's side during the long half - hour which Bell spend in gaze down the road for those who never come . 

 when they get home Sylvia put the potato on to boil ; but when dinner be ready and the three be seat at the dresser , Bell push her plate away from she , say it be so long after dinner time that she be past eat . Kester would have say something about its be only half - past twelve , but Sylvia give he a look beseech silence , and he go on with his dinner without a word , only brush away the tear from his eye with the back of his hand from time to time . 

 ' A'll noane go far fra ' home t ' rest o ' t ' day , ' say he , in a whisper to Sylvia , as he go out . 

 ' will this day niver come to an end ? ' cry Bell , plaintively . 

 ' oh , mother ! it will come to an end some time , never fear . I have   heerd say " be the day weary or be the day long , at length it ringeth to even - song . " ' 

 ' to even - song to even - song , ' repeat Bell . ' D'ye think now that even - song mean death , Sylvie ? ' 

 ' I can not tell I can not bear it . mother , ' say Sylvia , in despair , ' I will make some clap - bread : that be a heavy job , and will while away t ' afternoon . ' 

 ' ay , do ! ' reply the mother . ' he will like it fresh he will like it fresh . ' 

 Murmuring and talk to herself , she fall into a doze , from which Sylvia be careful not to disturb she . 

 the day be now get long , although as cold as ever ; and at Haytersbank Farm the light linger , as there be no near horizon to bring on early darkness . Sylvia have all ready for her mother 's tea against she waken ; but she sleep on and on , the peaceful sleep of a child , and Sylvia do not care to waken she . just after the sun have set , she see Kester outside the window make sign to she to come out . she steal out on tip - toe by the back - kitchen , the door of which be stand open . she almost run against Philip , who do not perceive she , as he be await she come the other way round the corner of the house , and who turn upon she a face whose import she read in an instant . ' Philip ! ' be all she say , and then she faint at his foot , come down with a heavy bang on the round pave stone of the yard . 

 ' Kester ! Kester ! ' he cry , for she look like one dead , and with all his strength the weary man could not lift she and carry she into the house . 

 with Kester 's help she be bear into the back - kitchen , and Kester rush to the pump for some cold water to throw over she . 

 while Philip , kneeling at her head , be partly support she in his arm , and heedless of any sight or sound , the shadow of some one fall upon he . he look up and see his aunt ; the old dignified , sensible expression on her face , exactly like her former self , compose , strong , and calm . 

 ' my lass , ' say she , sit down by Philip , and gently take she out of his arm into her own . ' lass , bear up ! we mun bear up , and be agait on our way to he , he will be need we now . bear up , my lass ! the Lord will give we strength . we mun go to he ; ay , time 's precious ; thou mun cry thy cry at after ! ' 

 Sylvia open her dim eye , and hear her mother 's voice ; the idea come slowly into her mind , and slowly she rise up , stand still , like one who have be stun , to regain her strength ; and then , take hold of her mother 's arm , she say , in a soft , strange voice 

 ' let us go . I be ready . ' 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 the ordeal 

 it be the afternoon of an April day in that same year , and the sky be blue above , with little sailing white cloud catch the pleasant sunlight . the earth in that northern country have scarcely yet put on her robe of green . the few tree grow near brooks run down from the moor and the high ground . the air be full of pleasant sound prophesy of the come summer . the rush , and murmur , and tinkle of the hidden watercourse ; the song of the lark poise high up in the sunny air ; the bleat of the lamb call to their mother everything inanimate be full of hope and gladness . 

 for the first time for a mournful month the front door of Haytersbank Farm be open ; the warm spring air might enter , and displace the sad dark gloom , if it could . there be a newly - light fire in the unused grate ; and Kester be in the kitchen , with his clog off his foot , so as not to dirty the spotless floor , stir here and there , and try in his awkward way to make thing look home - like and cheerful . he have bring in some wild daffodil which he have be to seek in the dawn , and he place they in a jug on the dresser . dolly Reid , the woman who have come to help Sylvia during her mother 's illness a year ago , be attend to something in the back - kitchen , make a noise among the milk - can , and sing a ballad to herself as she work ; yet every now and then she check herself in her singing , as if a sudden recollection come upon she that this be neither the time nor the place for song . once or twice she take up the funeral psalm which be sing by the bearer of the body in that country 

 our God , our help in age past . 

 but it be of no use : the pleasant April weather out of door , and perhaps the natural spring in the body , dispose her nature to cheerfulness , and insensibly she return to her old ditty . 

 Kester be turn over many thing in his rude honest mind as he stand there , give his finishing touch every now and then to the aspect of the house - place , in preparation for the return of the widow and daughter of his old master . 

 it be a month and more since they have leave home ; more than a fortnight since Kester , with three halfpence in his pocket , have set out after his day 's work to go to York to walk all night long , and to wish Daniel Robson his last farewell . 

 Daniel have try to keep up and have bring out one or two familiar , thread - bare , well - wear joke , such as he have make Kester chuckle over many a time and oft , when the two have be together afield or in the shippen at the home which he should never more see . but no ' Old Grouse in the gunroom ' could make Kester smile , or do anything except groan in but a heart - break sort of fashion , and presently the talk have become more suitable to the occasion , Daniel be up to the last the more composed of the two ; for Kester , when turn out of the condemn cell , fairly break down into the heavy sobbing he have never think to sob again on earth . he have leave Bell and Sylvia in their lodging at York , under Philip 's care ; he dare not go to see they ; he could not trust himself ; he have send they his duty , and bade Philip tell Sylvia that the game - hen have bring out fifteen chicken at a hatch . 

 yet although Kester send this message through Philip although he see and recognize all that Philip be do in their behalf , in the behalf of Daniel Robson , the condemn felon , his honoured master he like Hepburn not a whit well than he have do before all this sorrow have come upon they . 

 Philip have , perhaps , show a want of tact in his conduct to Kester . Acute with passionate keenness in one direction , he have a sort of dull straightforwardness in all other . for instance , he have return Kester the money which the latter have so gladly advanced towards the expense incur in defend Daniel . now the money which Philip give he back be part of an advance which Foster Brothers have make on Philip 's own account . Philip have think that it be hard on Kester to lose his saving in a hopeless cause , and have make a point of repay the old man ; but Kester would far rather have feel that the earning of the sweat of his brow have go in the attempt to save his master 's life than have have twice ten time as many golden guineas . 

 moreover , it seem to take his action in lend his hoard out of the sphere of love , and make it but a leaden common loan , when it be Philip who bring he the sum , not Sylvia , into whose hand he have give it . 

 with these feeling Kester feel his heart shut up as he see the long - watch - for two come down the little path with a third person ; with Philip hold up the fail step of poor Bell Robson , as , load with her heavy mourning , and feeble from the illness which have detain she in York ever since the day of her husband 's execution , she come falter back to her desolate home . Sylvia be also occupy in attend to her mother ; one or twice , when they pause a little , she and Philip speak , in the familiar way in which there be no coyness nor reserve . Kester catch up his clog , and go quickly out through the back - kitchen into the farm - yard , not stay to greet they , as he have mean to do ; and yet it be dull - sighted of he not to have perceive that whatever might be the relation between Philip and Sylvia , he be sure to have accompany they home ; for , alas ! he be the only male protector of their blood remain in the world . poor Kester , who would fain have take that office upon himself , choose to esteem himself cast off , and go heavily about the farmyard , know that he ought to go in and bid such poor welcome as he have to offer , yet feel too much to like to show himself before Philip . 

 it be long , too , before any one have leisure to come and seek he . Bell 's mind have flash up for a time , till the fatal day , only to be reduce by her subsequent illness into complete and hopeless childishness . it be all Philip and Sylvia could do to manage she in the first excitement of return home ; her restless inquiry for he who would never more be present in the familiar scene , her feverish weariness and uneasiness , all require tender soothing and most patient endurance of her refusal to be satisfied with what they say or do . 

 at length she take some food , and , refresh by it , and warm by the fire , she sink asleep in her chair . then Philip would fain have speak with Sylvia before the hour come at which he must return to Monkshaven , but she elude he , and go in search of Kester , whose presence she have miss . 

 she have guess some of the cause which keep he from greet they on their first return . but it be not as if she have shape these cause into the definite form of word . it be astonishing to look back and find how differently constitute be the mind of most people fifty or sixty year ago ; they feel , they understand , without go through reasoning or analytic process , and if this be the case among the more educated people , of course it be still more so in the class to which Sylvia belong . she know by some sort of intuition that if Philip accompany they home   as , indeed , under the circumstance , be so natural as to be almost unavoidable , the old servant and friend of the family would absent himself ; and so she slip away at the first possible moment to go in search of he . there he be in the farm - yard , lean over the gate that open into the home - field , apparently watch the poultry that scratch and peck at the new - spring grass with the utmost relish . a little far off be the ewe with their new - drop lamb , beyond that the great old thorn - tree with its round fresh cluster of bud , again beyond that there be a glimpse of the vast sunny rippling sea ; but Sylvia know well that Kester be look at none of these thing . she go up to he and touch his arm . he start from his reverie , and turn round upon she with his dim eye full of unshed tear . when he see her black dress , her deep mourning , he have hard work to keep from break out , but by dint of a good brush of his eye with the back of his hand , and a moment 's pause , he could look at she again with tolerable calmness . 

 ' why , Kester : why didst niver come to speak to we ? ' say Sylvia , find it necessary to be cheerful if she could . 

 ' a dun know ; niver ax I . a say , they'n gi'en Dick Simpson '   whose evidence have be all material against poor Daniel Robson at the trial   ' a ' t ' rotten egg and fou ' thing they could o ' Saturday , they do , ' continue he , in a tone of satisfaction ; ' ay , and they niver stop t ' see whether t ' egg be rotten or fresh when their blood be up nor whether stone be hard or soft , ' he add , in a low tone , and chuckle a little . 

 Sylvia be silent . he look at she now , chuckle still . her face be white , her lip tighten , her eye a - flame . she draw a long breath . 

 ' I wish I would be theere ! I wish I could do he an ill turn , ' sigh she , with some kind of expression on her face that make Kester quail a little . 

 ' Nay , lass ! he will get it fra ' other . niver fret thysel ' about sich rubbish . A'n do ill to speak on he . ' 

 ' no ! thou have not . then as be friend o ' father 's I will love for iver and iver ; they as help for t ' hang he '   she shudder from head to foot a sharp irrepressible shudder !   ' I will niver forgive niver ! ' 

 ' Niver be a long word , ' say Kester , musingly . ' a could horsewhip he , or cast stone at he , or duck he mysel ' ; but , lass ! niver be a long word ! ' 

 ' well ! niver heed if it be it be I as say it , and I be turn savage late day . come in , Kester , and see poor mother . ' 

 ' a can not , ' say he , turn his wrinkle pucker face away , that she might not see the twitching of emotion on it . ' there be kine to be fetch up , and what not , and he be theere , be not   he , Sylvie ? ' face round upon she with inquisitiveness . under his peer eye she redden a little . 

 ' yes , if it be Philip thou mean ; he be be all we have   have to look to sin ' . ' again the shudder . 

 ' well , now he will be seein ' after his shop , a reckon ? ' 

 Sylvia be call to the old mare nibble tuft of early - spring grass here and there , and half unconsciously coax the creature to come up to the gate to be stroke . but she hear Kester 's word well enough , and so he see , although she make this excuse not to reply . but Kester be not to be put off . 

 ' folk be talkin ' about thee and he ; thou'll ha ' to mind lest thee and he get yo'r name couple together . ' 

 ' it be right down cruel on folk , then , ' say she , crimson from some emotion . ' as if any man as be a man would not   do all he could for two lone woman at such a time and he a cousin , too ! tell I who say so , ' continue she , fire round at Kester , ' and I will niver forgive them that be all . ' 

 ' hoot ! ' say Kester , a little conscious that he himself be the principal representative of that name of multitude folk . ' here be a pretty lass ; she be ' get " a'll niver forgi'e " at her tongue 's end wi ' a vengeance . ' 

 Sylvia be a little confused . 

 ' oh , Kester , man , ' say she , ' my heart be sore again ' every one , for feyther 's sake . ' 

 and at length the natural relief of plentiful tear come ; and Kester , with instinctive wisdom , let she weep undisturbed ; indeed , he cry not a little himself . they be interrupt by Philip 's voice from the back - door . 

 ' Sylvie , your mother 's awake , and want you ! ' 

 ' come , Kester , come , ' and take hold of he she draw he with she into the house . 

 Bell rise as they come in , hold by the arm of the chair . at first she receive Kester as though he have be a stranger . 

 ' I be glad to see yo ' , sir ; t ' master 's out , but he will be in afore long . it will be about t ' lamb yo're come , mebbe ? ' 

 ' mother ! ' say Sylvia , ' dunnot yo ' see ? it be Kester , Kester , wi ' his Sunday clothe on . ' 

 ' Kester ! ay , sure it be ; my eye have getten so sore and dim of late ; just as if I have be greet . I be sure , lad , I be glad to see thee ! it be a long time I have   be away , but it be not pleasure - seeking as take I , it be business o ' some mak ' tell he , Sylvie , what it be , for my head 's clean gone . I only know I would not   ha ' leave home if I could ha ' help it ; for I think I should ha ' keep my health well if I have bid at home wi ' my master . I wonder as he be not come in for t ' bid I welcome ? be he far afield , think ye , Kester ? ' 

 Kester look at Sylvia , mutely implore she to help he out in the dilemma of answering , but she be do all she could to help cry . Philip come to the rescue . 

 ' Aunt , ' say he , ' the clock have stop ; can you tell I where t ' find t ' key , and I will wind it up . ' 

 ' t ' key , ' say she , hurriedly , ' t ' key , it be behind th ' big Bible on yon shelf . but I would rayther thou would not   touch it , lad ; it be t ' master 's work , and he distrust folk meddle wi ' it . ' 

 Day after day there be this constant reference to her dead husband . in one sense it be a blessing ; all the circumstance attendant on his sad and untimely end be sweep out of her mind along with the recollection of the fact itself . she refer to he as absent , and have always some plausible way of account for it , which satisfy her own mind ; and , accordingly they fall into the habit of humour she , and speak of he as go to Monkshaven , or afield , or weary out , and take a nap upstairs , as her fancy lead she to believe for the moment . but this forgetfulness , though happy for herself , be terrible for her child . it be a constant renewing of Sylvia 's grief , while her mother could give she no sympathy , no help , or strength in any circumstance that arise out of this grief . she be drive more and more upon Philip ; his advice and his affection become daily more necessary to she . 

 Kester see what would be the end of all this more clearly than Sylvia do herself ; and , impotent to hinder what he fear and dislike , he grow more and more surly every day . yet he try to labour hard and well for the interest of the family , as if they be bind up in his good management of the cattle and land . he be out and about by the early dawn , work all day long with might and main . he buy himself a pair of new spectacle , which might , he fancy , enable he to read the Farmer 's Complete Guide , his dead master 's vade - mecum . but he have never learn more than his capital letter , and have forget many of they ; so the spectacle do he but little good . then he would take the book to Sylvia , and ask she to read to he the instruction he need ; instruction , be it note , that he would formerly have despise as mere book - learning : but his present sense of responsibility have make he humble . 

 Sylvia would find the place with all deliberation : and put her finger under the line to keep the exact place of the word she be read , she would strive in good earnest to read out the direction give ; but when every fourth word have to be spell , it be rather hopeless work , especially as all these word be unintelligible to the open - mouthed listener , however intent he might be . he have generally to fall back on his own experience ; and , guide by that , thing be not do badly in his estimation , when , one day , Sylvia say to he , as they be in the hay - field , heap up the hay into cock with Dolly Reid 's assistance 

 ' Kester I do not   tell thee there be a letter from Measter Hall , Lord Malton 's steward , that come last night and that Philip read I . ' 

 she stop for a moment . 

 ' ay , lass ! Philip read it thee , and whatten might it say ? ' 

 ' only that he have an offer for Haytersbank Farm , and would set mother free to go as soon as t ' crop be off t ' ground . ' 

 she sigh a little as she say this . 

 " ' only ! " sayst ta ? Whatten business have he for to go an ' offer to let t ' farm afore iver he be tell as yo ' wish to leave it ? ' observe Kester , in high dudgeon . 

 ' oh ! ' reply Sylvia , throw down her rake , as if weary of life . ' what could we do wi ' t ' farm and land ? if it be all dairy I might ha ' do , but wi ' so much on it arable . ' 

 ' and if ' tis arable be not I allay to t ' fore ? ' 

 ' oh , man , dunnot find fault wi ' I ! I be just fain to lie down and die , if it be not for mother . ' 

 ' ay ! thy mother will be sore unsettled if thou be for quit Haytersbank , ' say merciless Kester . 

 ' I can not help it ; I can not help it ! what can I do ? it would take two pair o ' man 's hand to keep t ' land up as Measter Hall like it ; and beside ' 

 ' beside what ? ' say Kester , look up at she with his sudden odd look , one eye shut , the other open : there she stand , her two hand clasp tight together , her eye fill with tear , her face pale and sad . ' beside what ? ' he ask again , sharply . 

 ' T ' answer 's send to Measter Hall Philip write it last night ; so there be no use planning and fret , it be do for t ' good , and mun be do . ' she stoop and pick up her rake , and begin toss the hay with energy , the tear stream down her cheek unheeded . it be Kester 's turn to throw down his rake . she take no notice , he do not feel sure that she have observe his action . he begin to walk towards the field - gate ; this movement do catch her eye , for in a minute her hand be on his arm , and she be stoop forward to look into his face . it be work and twitch with emotion . ' Kester ! oh , man ! speak out , but dunnot leave I a this - ns . what could I ha ' do ? mother be go dateless wi ' sorrow , and I be but a young lass , I ' year I mean ; for I be old enough wi ' weeping . ' 

 ' I would ha ' put up for t ' farm mysel ' , soon than have thee turn out , ' say Kester , in a low voice ; then work himself up into a passion , as a new suspicion cross his mind , he add , ' An ' what for do not   yo ' tell I on t ' letter ? Yo ' be in a mighty hurry to settle it a ' , and get rid on t ' oud place . ' 

 ' Measter Hall have send a notice to quit on Midsummer day ; but Philip have answer it hisself . Thou know I be not good at read writing , ' special when a letter 's full o ' long word , and Philip have ta'en it in hand to answer . ' 

 ' wi'out ask thee ? ' 

 Sylvia go on without mind the interruption . 

 ' and Measter Hall make a good offer , for t ' man as be go to come in will take t ' stock and a ' t ' implement ; and if mother if we if I like , th ' furniture and a ' ' 

 ' furniture ! ' say Kester , in grim surprise . ' what be to come o ' t ' missus and thee , that yo'll not need a bed to lie on , or a pot to boil yo'r vittel in ? ' 

 Sylvia redden , but keep silence . 

 ' can not yo ' speak ? ' 

 ' oh , Kester , I do not   think thou'd turn again ' I , and I so friendless . it be as if I have be do something wrong , and I have so striven to act as be good ; there be mother as well as I to be think on . ' 

 ' can not yo ' answer a question ? ' say Kester , once more . ' Whatten be up that t ' missus and yo'll not need bed and table , pot and pan ? ' 

 ' I think I be go to marry Philip , ' say Sylvia , in so low a tone , that if Kester have not suspect what her answer be to be , he could not have understand it . 

 after a moment 's pause he recommence his walk towards the field - gate . but she go after he and hold he tight by the arm , speak rapidly . 

 ' Kester , what could I do ? what can I do ? he be my cousin , and mother know he , and like he ; and he be be so good to we in a ' this time o ' trouble and heavy grief , and he will keep mother in comfort all t ' rest of her day . ' 

 ' ay , and thee in comfort . there be a deal in a well - fill purse in a wench 's eye , or one would ha ' think it be not   so easy forgettin ' yon lad as love thee as t ' apple on his eye . ' 

 ' Kester , Kester , ' she cry , ' I have   niver forget Charley ; I think on he , I see he ivery night lie drown at t ' bottom o ' t ' sea . forgetten he ! man ! it be easy talk ! ' she be like a wild creature that see its young , but be unable to reach it without a deadly spring , and yet be prepare to take that fatal leap . Kester himself be almost startled , and yet it be as if he must go on torture she . 

 ' An ' who tell thee so sure and certain as he be drown ? he might ha ' be carry off by t ' press - gang as well as other man . ' 

 ' oh ! if I be but dead that I might know all ! ' cry she , fling herself down on the hay . 

 Kester keep silence . then she spring up again , and look with eager wistfulness into his face , she say , 

 ' tell I t ' chance . tell I quick ! Philip 's very good , and kind , and he say he shall die if I will not marry he , and there be no home for mother and I , no home for she , for as for I I dunnot care what become on I ; but if Charley 's alive I can not marry Philip no , not if he die for want o ' I and as for mother , poor mother , Kester , it be an awful strait ; only first tell I if there be a chance , just one in a thousand , only one in a hundred thousand , as Charley be ta'en by t ' gang ? ' she be breathless by this time , what with her hurried word , and what with the beating of her heart . Kester take time to answer . he have speak before too hastily , this time he weigh his word . 

 ' Kinraid go away from this here place t ' join his ship . an ' he niver join it no more ; an ' t ' captain an ' all his friend at Newcassel as iver be , make search for he , on board t ' king 's ship . that be more nor fifteen month ago , an ' nought have iver be heerd on he by any man . that be what be to be say on one side o ' t ' matter . then on t ' other there be this as be know . his hat be cast up by t ' sea wi ' a ribbon in it , as there be reason t ' think as he would not ha ' part wi ' so quick if he have have his own will . ' 

 ' but yo ' say as he might ha ' be carry off by t ' gang yo ' do , Kester , tho ' now yo're a ' for t ' other side . ' 

 ' my lass , a'd fain have he alive , an ' a dunnot fancy Philip for thy husband ; but it be a serious judgment as thou 's put I on , an ' a'm try it fair . there be allay one chance I ' a thousand as he be alive , for no man iver see he dead . but t ' gang be noane about Monkshaven then : there be niver a tender on t ' coast nearer than Shields , an ' those theere be search . ' 

 he do not say any more , but turn back into the field , and take up his hay - making again . 

 Sylvia stand quite still , think , and wistfully long for some kind of certainty . 

 Kester come up to she . 

 ' Sylvie , thou know Philip pay I back my money , and it be eight pound fifteen and three - pence ; and t ' hay and stock will sell for summat above t ' rent ; and a've   a sister as be a decent widow - woman , tho ' but badly off , livin ' at Dale End ; and if thee and thy mother will go live wi ' she , a'll give thee well on to all a can earn , and it will be a matter o ' five shilling a week . but dunnot go and marry a man as thou 's noane take wi ' , and another as be most like for t ' be dead , but who , mebbe , be alive , havin' a pull on thy heart . ' 

 Sylvia begin to cry as if her heart be break . she have promise herself more fully to Philip the night before than she have tell Kester ; and , with some pain and much patience , her cousin , her lover , alas ! her future husband , have make the fact clear to the bewildered mind of her poor mother , who have all day long show that her mind and heart be full of the subject , and that the contemplation of it be give she as much peace as she could ever know . and now Kester 's word come to call up echo in the poor girl 's heart . just as she be in this miserable state , wish that the grave lie open before she , and that she could lie down , and be cover up by the soft green turf from all the bitter sorrow and cark care and weary bewilderment of this life ; wish that her father be alive , that Charley be once more here ; that she have not repeat the solemn word by which she have promise herself to Philip only the very evening before , she hear a soft , low whistle , and , look round unconsciously , there be her lover and affiance husband , lean on the gate , and gaze into the field with passionate eye , devour the fair face and figure of she , his future wife . 

 ' oh , Kester , ' say she once more , ' what mun I do ? I be pledge to he as strong as word can make it , and mother bless we both wi ' more sense than she be have for week . Kester , man , speak ! shall I go and break it all off ? say . ' 

 ' Nay , it be noane for I t ' say ; m'appen thou be go too far . they above only know what be good . ' 

 again that long , coo whistle . ' Sylvie ! ' 

 ' he be be very kind to we all , ' say Sylvia , lay her rake down with slow care , ' and I will try t ' make he happy . ' 




 CHAPTER xxix 

 wedding RAIMENT 

 Philip and Sylvia be engage . it be not so happy a state of thing as Philip have imagine . he have already find that out , although it be not twenty - four hour since Sylvia have promise to be his . he could not have define why he be dissatisfy ; if he have be compel to account for his feeling , he would probably have allege as a reason that Sylvia 's manner be so unchanged by her new position towards he . she be quiet and gentle ; but no shyer , no bright , no coyer , no happy , than she have be for month before . when she join he at the field - gate , his heart be beat fast , his eye be beam out love at her approach . she neither blush nor smile , but seem absorb in thought of some kind . but she resist his silent effort to draw she away from the path lead to the house , and turn her face steadily homeward . he murmur soft word , which she scarcely hear . right in their way be the stone trough for the fresh bubble water , that , issue from a roadside spring , serve for all the household purpose of Haytersbank Farm . by it be the milk - can , glitter and clean . Sylvia know she should have to stop for these , and carry they back home in readiness for the evening 's milking ; and at this time , during this action , she resolve to say what be on her mind . 

 they be there . Sylvia speak . 

 ' Philip , Kester have be say as how it might ha ' be ' 

 ' well ! ' say Philip . 

 Sylvia sate down on the edge of the trough , and dip her hot little hand in the water . then she go on quickly , and lift her beautiful eye to Philip 's face , with a look of inquiry ' he think as Charley Kinraid may ha ' be take by t ' press - gang . ' 

 it be the first time she have name the name of her former lover to her present one since the day , long ago now , when they have quarrel about he ; and the rosy colour flush she all over ; but her sweet , trustful eye never flinch from their steady , unconscious gaze . 

 Philip 's heart stop beat ; literally , as if he have come to a sudden precipice , while he have think himself securely walk on sunny greensward . he go purple all over from dismay ; he dare not take his eye away from that sad , earnest look of her , but he be thankful that a mist come before they and draw a veil before his brain . he hear his own voice say word he do not seem to have frame in his own mind . 

 ' Kester 's a d d fool , ' he growl . 

 ' he say there 's mebbe but one chance I ' a hundred , ' say Sylvia , plead , as it be , for Kester ; ' but oh ! Philip , think yo ' there be just that one chance ? ' 

 ' ay , there be a chance , sure enough , ' say Philip , in a kind of fierce despair that make he reckless what he say or do . ' there be a chance , I suppose , for iverythe I ' life as we have not see with our own eye as it may not ha ' happen . Kester may say next as there be a chance as your father be not dead , because we none on we see he ' 

 ' Hung , ' he be go to have say , but a touch of humanity come back into his stony heart . Sylvia send up a little sharp cry at his word . he long at the sound to take she in his arm and hush she up , as a mother hush her weeping child . but the very longing , have to be repress , only make he more beside himself with guilt , anxiety , and rage . they be quite still now . Sylvia look sadly down into the bubble , merry , flow water : Philip glare at she , wish that the next word be speak , though it might stab he to the heart . but she do not speak . 

 at length , unable to bear it any long , he say , ' thou set a deal o ' store on that man , Sylvie . ' 

 if ' that man ' have be there at the moment , Philip would have grapple with he , and not let go his hold till one or the other be dead . Sylvia catch some of the passionate meaning of the gloomy , miserable tone of Philip 's voice as he say these word . she look up at he . 

 ' I think yo ' know that I care a deal for he . ' 

 there be something so plead and innocent in her pale , troubled face , so pathetic in her tone , that Philip 's anger , which have be excited against she , as well as against all the rest of the world , melt away into love ; and once more he feel that have she for his own he must , at any cost . he sate down by she , and speak to she in quite a different manner to that which he have use before , with a ready tact and art which some strange instinct or tempter ' close at his ear ' supply . 

 ' yes , darling , I know yo ' care for he . I will not say ill of he that be dead ay , dead and drown whativer Kester may say before now ; but if I choose I could tell tale . ' 

 ' no ! tell no tale ; I will not hear they , ' say she , wrench herself out of Philip 's clasping arm . ' they may misca ' he for iver , and I will not believe them . ' 

 ' I will niver miscall one who be dead , ' say Philip ; each new unconscious sign of the strength of Sylvia 's love for her former lover only make he the more anxious to convince she that he be dead , only render he more keen at deceive his own conscience by repeat to it the lie that long ere this Kinraid be in all probability dead kill by either the chance of war or tempestuous sea ; that , even if not , he be as good as dead to she ; so that the word ' dead ' might be use in all honest certainty , as in one of its meaning Kinraid be dead for sure . 

 ' think yo ' that if he be not dead he would not   ha ' write ere this to some one of his kin , if not to thee ? yet none of his folk newcassel - way but believe he dead . ' 

 ' so Kester say , ' sigh Sylvia . 

 Philip take heart . he put his arm softly round she again , and murmur 

 ' my lassie , try not to think on they as be go , as be dead , but t ' think a bit more on he as love yo ' wi ' heart , and soul , and might , and have do iver sin ' he first set eye on yo ' . oh , Sylvie , my love for thee be just terrible . ' 

 at this moment dolly Reid be see at the back - door of the farmhouse , and catch sight of Sylvia , she call out 

 ' Sylvia , thy mother be ax for thee , and I can not make her mind easy . ' 

 in a moment Sylvia have spring up from her seat , and be run in to soothe and comfort her mother 's troubled fancy . 

 Philip sate on by the well - side , his face bury in his two hand . presently he lift himself up , drink some water eagerly out of his hollowed palm , sigh , and shake himself , and follow his cousin into the house . sometimes he come unexpectedly to the limit of his influence over she . in general she obey his express wish with gentle indifference , as if she have no preference of her own ; once or twice he find that she be do what he desire out of the spirit of obedience , which , as her mother 's daughter , she believe to be her duty towards her affiance husband . and this last motive for action depress her lover more than anything . he want the old Sylvia back again ; captious , capricious , wilful , haughty , merry , charming . alas ! that Sylvia be go for ever . 

 but once especially his power , arise from whatever cause , be stop entirely short be utterly of no avail . 

 it be on the occasion of Dick Simpson 's mortal illness . Sylvia and her mother keep aloof from every one . they have never be intimate with any family but the Corneys , and even this friendship have considerably cool since Molly 's marriage , and most especially since Kinraid 's suppose death , when Bessy Corney and Sylvia have be , as it be , rival mourner . but many people , both in Monkshaven and the country round about , hold the Robson family in great respect , although Mrs. Robson herself be account ' high ' and ' distant ; ' and poor little Sylvia , in her heyday of beautiful youth and high spirit , have be speak of as ' a bit flighty , ' and ' a set - up lassie . ' still , when their great sorrow fall upon they , there be plenty of friend to sympathize deeply with they ; and , as Daniel have suffer in a popular cause , there be even more who , scarcely know they personally , be ready to give they all the mark of respect and friendly feeling in their power . but neither Bell nor Sylvia be aware of this . the former have lose all perception of what be not immediately before she ; the latter shrank from all encounter of any kind with a sore heart , and sensitive avoidance of everything that could make she a subject of remark . so the poor afflict people at Haytersbank know little of monkshaven news . what little do come to their ear come through Dolly Reid , when she return from sell the farm produce of the week ; and often , indeed , even then she find Sylvia too much absorb in other care or thought to listen to her gossip . so no one have ever name that Simpson be suppose to be die till Philip begin on the subject one evening . Sylvia 's face suddenly flash into glow and life . 

 ' he be die , be he ? t ' earth be well rid on such a fellow ! ' 

 ' Eh , Sylvie , that be a hard speech o ' thine ! ' say Philip ; ' it give I but poor heart to ask a favour of thee ! ' 

 ' if it be aught about Simpson , ' reply she , and then she interrupt herself . ' but say on ; it be ill - mannered in I for t ' interrupt yo ' . ' 

 ' Thou would be sorry to see he , I think , Sylvie . he can not get over the way , t ' folk meet he , and pelt he when he come back fra ' York , and he be weak and faint , and beside himself at time ; and he will lie a dreaming , and a - fancy they be all at he again , hoot , and yelling , and pelt he . ' 

 ' I be glad on ' t , ' say Sylvia ; ' it be t ' good news I have   heere for many a day , he , to turn again ' feyther , who give he money fo t ' get a lodging that night , when he have no place to go to . it be his evidence as hung feyther ; and he be rightly punish for it now . ' 

 ' for a ' that , and he be do a vast o ' wrong beside , he be die now , Sylvie ! ' 

 ' well ! let he die it be t ' good thing he could do ! ' 

 ' but he be lie I ' such dree poverty , and niver a friend to go near he , niver a person to speak a kind word t ' he . ' 

 ' it seem as yo've   be speak wi ' he , at any rate , ' say Sylvia , turn round on Philip . 

 ' ay . he send for I by Nell Manning , th ' old beggar - woman , who sometimes go in and make his bed for he , poor wretch , he be lie in t ' ruin of th ' cow - house of th ' Mariners ' Arms , Sylvie . ' 

 ' well ! ' say she , in the same hard , dry tone . 

 ' and I go and fetch th ' parish doctor , for I think he would ha ' die before my face , he be so wan , and ashen - grey , so thin , too , his eye seem push out of his bony face . ' 

 ' that last time feyther 's eye be start , wild - like , and as if he could not   meet ours , or bear the sight on our weeping . ' 

 it be a bad look - out for Philip 's purpose ; but after a pause he go bravely on . 

 ' he be a poor die creature , anyhow . T ' doctor say so , and tell he he have not   many hour , let alone day , to live . ' 

 ' and he would shrink fra ' die wi ' a ' his sin on his head ? ' say Sylvia , almost exultingly . 

 Philip shake his head . ' he say this world have be too strong for he , and man too hard upon he ; he could niver do any good here , and he think he should , maybe , find folk I ' t ' next place more merciful . ' 

 ' he will meet feyther theere , ' say Sylvia , still hard and bitter . 

 ' he be a poor ignorant creature , and do not   seem to know rightly who he be like to meet ; only he seem glad to get away fra ' monkshaven folk ; he be really hurt , I be afeare , that night , Sylvie , and he speak as if he have have hard time of it ever since he be a child , and he talk as if he be really grieve for t ' part t ' lawyer make he take at th ' trial , they make he speak , against his will , he say . ' 

 ' could not   he ha ' bite his tongue out ? ' ask Sylvia . ' it be fine talk o ' sorrow when the thing be do ! ' 

 ' well , anyhow he be sorry now ; and he be not long for to live . and , Sylvie , he bid I ask thee , if , for the sake of all that be dear to thee both here , and I ' th ' world to come , thou'd go wi ' me , and just say to he that thou forgive he his part that day . ' 

 ' he send thee on that errand , do he ? and thou could come and ask I ? I have   a mind to break it off for iver wi ' thee , Philip . ' she keep gasp , as if she could not say any more . Philip watch and wait till her breath come , his own half choke . 

 ' Thee and I be niver mean to go together . it be not in I to forgive , I sometimes think it be not in I to forget . I wonder , Philip , if thy feyther have do a kind deed and a right deed and a merciful deed and some one as he have be good to , even I ' t ' midst of his just anger , have go and let on about he to th ' judge , as be try to hang he , and have getten he hang , hang dead , so that his wife be a widow , and his child fatherless for ivermore , I wonder if thy vein would run milk and water , so that thou could go and make friend , and speak soft wi ' he as have cause thy feyther 's death ? ' 

 ' it be say in t ' Bible , Sylvie , that we be to forgive . ' 

 ' ay , there be some thing as I know I niver forgive ; and there be other as I can not   and I will not , either . ' 

 ' but , Sylvie , yo ' pray to be forgive your trespass , as you forgive they as trespass against you . ' 

 ' well , if I be to be take at my word , I will noane pray at all , that be all . it be well enough for they as have but little to forgive to use they word ; and I do not   reckon it be kind , or pretty behave in yo ' , Philip , to bring up scripture again ' I . Thou may go about thy business . ' 

 ' Thou'rt vex with I , Sylvie ; and I be not mean but that it would go hard with thee to forgive he ; but I think it would be right and Christian - like I ' thee , and that thou'd find thy comfort in think on it after . if thou'd only go , and see his wistful eye I think they would plead wi ' thee more than his word , or mine either . ' 

 ' I tell thee my flesh and blood be not   make for forgiving and forget . once for all , thou must take my word . when I love I love , and when I hate I hate ; and he as have do hard to I , or to mine , I may keep fra ' striking or murdering , but I will niver forgive . I should be just a monster , fit to be show at a fair , if I could forgive he as get feyther hang . ' 

 Philip be silent , think what more he could urge . 

 ' Yo'd well be off , ' say Sylvia , in a minute or two . ' Yo ' and I have get wrong , and it will take a night 's sleep to set we right . Yo've   say all yo ' can for he ; and perhaps it be not yo ' as be to blame , but yo'r nature . but I be put out wi ' thee , and want thee out o ' my sight for awhile . ' 

 one or two more speech of this kind convince he that it would be wise in he to take she at her word . he go back to Simpson , and find he , though still alive , past the understanding of any word of human forgiveness . Philip have almost wish he have not trouble or irritated Sylvia by urge the die man 's request : the performance of this duty seem now to have be such a useless office . 

 after all , the performance of a duty be never a useless office , though we may not see the consequence , or they may be quite different to what we expect or calculate on . in the pause of active work , when daylight be do , and the evening shade come on , Sylvia have time to think ; and her heart grow sad and soft , in comparison to what it have be when Philip 's urgency have call out all her angry opposition . she think of her father his sharp passion , his frequent forgiveness , or rather his forgetfulness that he have even be injure . all Sylvia 's persistent or endure quality be derive from her mother , her impulse from her father . it be her dead father whose example fill her mind this evening in the soft and tender twilight . she do not say to herself that she would go and tell Simpson that she forgive he ; but she think that if Philip ask she again that she should do so . 

 but when she see Philip again he tell she that Simpson be dead ; and pass on from what he have reason to think would be an unpleasant subject to she . thus he never learn how her conduct might have be more gentle and relent than her word word which come up into his memory at a future time , with full measure of miserable significance . 

 in general , Sylvia be gentle and good enough ; but Philip want she to be shy and tender with he , and this she be not . she speak to he , her pretty eye look straight and composedly at he . she consult he like the family friend that he be : she meet he quietly in all the arrangement for the time of their marriage , which she look upon more as a change of home , as the leaving of Haytersbank , as it would affect her mother , than in any more directly personal way . Philip be begin to feel , though not as yet to acknowledge , that the fruit he have so inordinately long for be but of the nature of an apple of Sodom . 

 long ago , lodge in widow Rose 's garret , he have be in the habit of watch some pigeon that be keep by a neighbour ; the flock disport themselves on the steep tile roof just opposite to the attic window , and insensibly Philip grow to know their way , and one pretty , soft little dove be somehow perpetually associate in his mind with his idea of his cousin Sylvia . the pigeon would sit in one particular place , sun herself , and puff out her feather breast , with all the blue and rose - colour light gleam in the morning ray , coo softly to herself as she dress her plumage . Philip fancy that he see the same colour in a certain piece of shot silk now in the shop ; and none other seem to he so suitable for his darling 's wedding - dress . he carry enough to make a gown , and give it to her one evening , as she sate on the grass just outside the house , half attend to her mother , half engage in knitting stocking for her scanty marriage outfit . he be glad that the sun be not go down , thus allow he to display the change colour in full light . Sylvia admire it duly ; even Mrs. Robson be pleased and attract by the soft yet brilliant hue . Philip whisper to Sylvia   he take delight in whisper , she , on the contrary , always speak to he in her usual tone of voice  

 ' thou'lt look so pretty in it , sweetheart , o ' Thursday fortnight ! ' 

 ' Thursday fortnight . on the fourth yo're think on . but I can not wear it then , I shall be I ' black . ' 

 ' not on that day , sure ! ' say Philip . 

 ' why not ? there 's nought t ' happen on that day for t ' make I forget feyther . I could not   put off my black , Philip , no , not to save my life ! yon silk be just lovely , far too good for the like of I , and I be sure I be much beholden to yo ' ; and I will have it make up first of any gown after last April come two year , but , oh , Philip , I can not put off my mourning ! ' 

 ' not for our wedding - day ! ' say Philip , sadly . 

 ' no , lad , I really can not . I be just sorry about it , for I see thou'rt set upon it ; and thou'rt so kind and good , I sometimes think I can niver be thankful enough to thee . when I think on what would ha ' become of mother and I if we have not   have thee for a friend I ' need , I be noane ungrateful , Philip ; tho ' I sometimes fancy thou'rt thinking I be . ' 

 ' I do not   want yo ' to be grateful , Sylvie , ' say poor Philip , dissatisfied , yet unable to explain what he do want ; only know that there be something he lack , yet fain would have have . 

 as the marriage - day draw near , all Sylvia 's care seem to be for her mother ; all her anxiety be regard the appurtenance of the home she be leave . in vain Philip try to interest she in detail of his improvement or contrivance in the new home to which he be go to take she . she do not tell he ; but the idea of the house behind the shop be associate in her mind with two time of discomfort and misery . the first time she have go into the parlour about which Philip speak so much be at the time of the press - gang riot , when she have faint from terror and excitement ; the second be on that night of misery when she and her mother have go in to Monkshaven , to bid her father farewell before he be take to York ; in that room , on that night , she have first learn something of the fatal peril in which he stand . she could not show the bright shy curiosity about her future dwelling that be common enough with girl who be go to be marry . all she could do be to restrain herself from sigh , and listen patiently , when he talk on the subject . in time he see that she shrink from it ; so he hold his peace , and plan and work for she in silence , smile to himself as he look on each complete arrangement for her pleasure or comfort ; and know well that her happiness be involve in what fragment of peace and material comfort might remain to her mother . 

 the wedding - day draw near apace . it be Philip 's plan that after they have be marry in Kirk Moorside church , he and his Sylvia , his cousin , his love , his wife , should go for the day to Robin Hood 's Bay , return in the evening to the house behind the shop in the market - place . there they be to find Bell Robson instal in her future home ; for Haytersbank Farm be to be give up to the new tenant on the very day of the wedding . Sylvia would not be marry any soon ; she say that she must stay there till the very last ; and have say it with such determination that Philip have desist from all urgency at once . 

 he have tell she that all should be settle for her mother 's comfort during their few hour ' absence ; otherwise Sylvia would not have go at all . he tell she he should ask Hester , who be always so good and kind who never yet have say he nay , to go to church with they as bridesmaid for Sylvia would give no thought or care to anything but her mother and that they would leave she at Haytersbank as they return from church ; she would manage Mrs Robson 's removal she would do this do that do everything . such friendly confidence have Philip in Hester 's willingness and tender skill . Sylvia acquiesce at length , and Philip take upon himself to speak to hester on the subject . 

 ' hester , ' say he , one day when he be prepare to go home after the shop be close ; ' would yo ' mind stop a bit ? I should like to show yo ' the place now it be do up ; and I have   a favour to ask on yo ' besides . ' he be so happy he do not see her shiver all over . she hesitate just a moment before she answer , 

 ' I will stay , if thou wish it , Philip . but I be no judge o ' fashion and such like . ' 

 ' Thou'rt a judge o ' comfort , and that be what I have   be aim at . I be niver so comfortable in a ' my life as when I be a lodger at thy house , ' say he , with brotherly tenderness in his tone . ' if my mind have be at ease I could ha ' say I niver be happy in all my day than under thy roof ; and I know it be thy do for the most part . so come along , Hester , and tell I if there be aught more I can put in for Sylvie . ' 

 it might not have be a very appropriate text , but such as it be the word , ' from he that would ask of thee turn not thou away , ' seem the only source of strength that could have enable she to go patiently through the next half - hour . as it be , she unselfishly bring all her mind to bear upon the subject ; admire this , thought and decide upon that , as one by one Philip show she all his alteration and improvement . never be such a quiet little bit of unconscious and unrecognized heroism . she really end by such a conquest of self that she could absolutely sympathize with the proud expectant lover , and have quench all envy of the beloved , in sympathy with the delight she imagine Sylvia must experience when she discover all these proof of Philip 's fond consideration and care . but it be a great strain on the heart , that source of life ; and when Hester return into the parlour , after her deliberate survey of the house , she feel as weary and depressed in bodily strength as if she have go through an illness of many day . she sate down on the near chair , and feel as though she never could rise again . Philip , joyous and content , stand near her talk . 

 ' and , Hester , ' say he , ' Sylvie have give I a message for thee she say thou must be she bridesmaid she will have none other . ' 

 ' I can not , ' say Hester , with sudden sharpness . 

 ' oh , yes , but yo ' must . it would not   be like my wedding if thou be not   there : why I have   look upon thee as a sister iver since I come to lodge with thy mother . ' 

 hester shake her head . do her duty require she not to turn away from this asking , too ? Philip see her reluctance , and , by intuition rather than reason , he know that what she would not do for gaiety or pleasure she would consent to , if by so do she could render any service to another . so he go on . 

 ' besides , Sylvie and I have plan to go for our wedding jaunt to Robin Hood 's Bay . I ha ' be to engage a shandry this very morn , before t ' shop be open ; and there be no one to leave wi ' my aunt . th ' poor old body be sore crush with sorrow ; and be , as one may say , childish at time ; she be to come down here , that we may find she when we come back at night ; and there be niver a one she will come with so willing and so happy as with thee , hester . Sylvie and I have both say so . ' 

 hester look up in his face with her grave honest eye . 

 ' I can not go to church wi ' thee , Philip ; and thou must not ask I any far . but I will go betime to Haytersbank Farm , and I will do my good to make the old lady happy , and to follow out thy direction in bring she here before nightfall . ' 

 Philip be on the point of urge her afresh to go with they to church ; but something in her eye bring a thought across his mind , as transitory as a breath pass over a look - glass , and he desist from his entreaty , and put away his thought as a piece of vain coxcombry , insult to hester . he pass rapidly on to all the careful direction render necessary by her compliance with the latter part of his request , couple Sylvia 's name with his perpetually ; so that hester look upon she as a happy girl , as eager in plan all the detail of her marriage as though no heavy shameful sorrow have pass over her head not many month ago . 

 hester do not see Sylvia 's white , dreamy , resolute face , that answer the solemn question of the marriage service in a voice that do not seem her own . hester be not with they to notice the heavy abstraction that make the bride as if unconscious of her husband 's love word , and then start and smile , and reply with a sad gentleness of tone . no ! hester 's duty lie in convey the poor widow and mother down from Haytersbank to the new home in Monkshaven ; and for all hester 's assistance and thoughtfulness , it be a dreary , painful piece of work the poor old woman cry like a child , with bewilderment at the confused bustle which , in spite of all Sylvia 's careful forethought , could not be avoid on this final day , when her mother have to be carry away from the homestead over which she have so long preside . but all this be as nothing to the distress which overwhelm poor Bell Robson when she enter Philip 's house ; the parlour the whole place so associate with the keen agony she have undergo there , that the stab of memory penetrate through her deaden sens , and bring she back to misery . in vain hester try to console she by tell she the fact of Sylvia 's marriage with Philip in every form of word that occur to she . Bell only remember her husband 's fate , which fill up her poor wandering mind , and colour everything ; insomuch that Sylvia not be at hand to reply to her mother 's cry for she , the latter imagine that her child , as well as her husband , be in danger of trial and death , and refuse to be comfort by any endeavour of the patient sympathize hester . in a pause of Mrs Robson 's sob , Hester hear the welcome sound of the wheel of the return shandry , bear the bride and bridegroom home . it stop at the door an instant , and Sylvia , white as a sheet at the sound of her mother 's wailing , which she have catch while yet at a distance , with the quick ear of love , come run in ; her mother feebly rise and totter towards she , and fall into her arm , say , ' oh ! Sylvie , Sylvie , take I home , and away from this cruel place ! ' 

 hester could not but be touch with the young girl 's manner to her mother as tender , as protect as if their relation to each other have be reverse , and she be lulling and tenderly soothe a wayward , frightened child . she have neither eye nor ear for any one till her mother be sit in tremble peace , hold her daughter 's hand tight in both of her , as if afraid of lose sight of she : then Sylvia turn to hester , and , with the sweet grace which be a natural gift to some happy people , thank she ; in common word enough she thank she , but in that nameless manner , and with that strange , rare charm which make Hester feel as if she have never be thank in all her life before ; and from that time forth she understand , if she do not always yield to , the unconscious fascination which Sylvia could exercise over other at time . 

 do it enter into Philip 's heart to perceive that he have wed his long - seek bride in mourning raiment , and that the first sound which greet they as they approach their home be those of weeping and wail ? 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 HAPPY day 

 and now Philip seem as prosperous as his heart could desire . the business flourish , and money beyond his moderate want come in . as for himself he require very little ; but he have always look forward to place his idol in a befit shrine ; and mean for this be now furnish to he . the dress , the comfort , the position he have desire for Sylvia be all her . she do not need to do a stroke of household work if she prefer to ' sit in her parlour and sew up a seam ' . indeed Phoebe resent any interference in the domestic labour , which she have perform so long , that she look upon the kitchen as a private empire of her own . ' Mrs Hepburn '   as Sylvia be now term   have a good dark silk gown - piece in her drawer , as well as the poor dove - colour , against the day when she choose to leave off mourning ; and stuff for either gray or scarlet cloak be her at her bidding . 

 what she care for far more be the comfort with which it be in her power to surround her mother . in this Philip vie with she ; for besides his old love , and new pity for his aunt Bell , he never forget how she have welcome he to Haytersbank , and favour his love to Sylvia , in the yearn day when he little hop he should ever win his cousin to be his wife . but even if he have not have these grateful and affectionate feeling towards the poor woman , he would have do much for she if only to gain the sweet , rare smile which his wife never bestow upon he so freely as when she see he attend to ' mother , ' for so both of they now call Bell . for her creature comfort , her silk gown , and her humble luxury , Sylvia do not care ; Philip be almost annoyed at the indifference she often manifest to all his effort to surround she with such thing . it be even a hardship to she to leave off her country dress , her uncovered hair , her linsey petticoat , and loose bed - gown , and to don a stiff and stately gown for her morning dress . sit in the dark parlour at the back of the shop , and do ' white work , ' be much more wearying to she than run out into the field to bring up the cow , or spin wool , or make up butter . she sometimes think to herself that it be a strange kind of life where there be no out - door animal to look after ; the ' ox and the ass ' have hitherto come into all her idea of humanity ; and her care and gentleness have make the dumb creature round her father 's home into mute friend with love eye , look at she as if wistful to speak in word the grateful regard that she could read without the poor expression of language . 

 she miss the free open air , the great dome of sky above the field ; she rebel against the necessity of ' dress '   as she call it   to go out , although she acknowledge that it be a necessity where the first step beyond the threshold must be into a populous street . 

 it be possible that Philip be right at one time when he have think to win she by material advantage ; but the old vanity have be burn out of she by the hot iron of acute suffering . a great deal of passionate feeling still exist , conceal and latent ; but at this period it appear as though she be indifferent to most thing , and have lose the power of either hop or fear much . she be stun into a sort of temporary numbness on most point ; those on which she be sensitive be such as refer to the injustice and oppression of her father 's death , or anything that concern her mother . 

 she be quiet even to passiveness in all her dealing with Philip ; he would have give not a little for some of the old burst of impatience , the old pettishness , which , naughty as they be , have go to form his idea of the former Sylvia . once or twice he be almost vex with she for her docility ; he want she so much to have a will of her own , if only that he might know how to rouse she to pleasure by gratify it . indeed he seldom fall asleep at night without his last thought be devoted to some little plan for the morrow , that he fancy she would like ; and when he waken in the early dawn he look to see if she be indeed sleep by his side , or whether it be not all a dream that he call Sylvia ' wife . ' 

 he be aware that her affection for he be not to be speak of in the same way as his for she , but he find much happiness in only be allow to love and cherish she ; and with the patient perseverance that be one remarkable feature in his character , he go on strive to deepen and increase her love when most other man would have give up the endeavour , make themselves content with half a heart , and turn to some other object of attainment . all this time Philip be trouble by a dream that recur whenever he be over - fatigue , or otherwise not in perfect health . over and over again in this first year of married life he dream this dream ; perhaps as many as eight or nine time , and it never vary . it be always of Kinraid 's return ; Kinraid be full of life in Philip 's dream , though in his wake hour he could and do convince himself by all the law of probability that his rival be dead . he never remember the exact sequence of event in that terrible dream after he have rouse himself , with a fight and a struggle , from his feverish slumber . he be generally sit up in bed when he find himself conscious , his heart beat wildly , with a conviction of Kinraid 's living presence somewhere near he in the darkness . occasionally Sylvia be disturb by his agitation , and would question he about his dream , have , like most of her class at that time , great faith in their prophetic interpretation ; but Philip never give she any truth in his reply . 

 after all , and though he do not acknowledge it even to himself , the long - desire happiness be not so delicious and perfect as he have anticipate . many have feel the same in their first year of married life ; but the faithful , patient nature that still work on , strive to gain love , and capable itself of steady love all the while , be a gift not give to all . 

 for many week after their wedding , Kester never come near they : a chance word or two from Sylvia show Philip that she have notice this and regret it ; and , accordingly , he make it his business at the next leisure opportunity to go to Haytersbank   never say a word to his wife of his purpose , and seek out Kester . 

 all the whole place be alter ! it be new white - wash , new thatch : the patch of colour in the surround ground be change with altered tillage ; the great geranium be go from the window , and instead , be a smart knit blind . child play before the house - door ; a dog lie on the step fly at Philip ; all be so strange , that it be even the strange thing of all for Kester to appear where everything else be so alter ! 

 Philip have to put up with a good deal of crab behaviour on the part of the latter before he could induce Kester to promise to come down into the town and see Sylvia in her new home . 

 somehow , the visit when pay be but a failure ; at least , it seem so at the time , though probably it break the ice of restraint which be form over the familiar intercourse between Kester and Sylvia . the old servant be daunt by see Sylvia in a strange place , and stand , sleek his hair down , and furtively look about he , instead of seat himself on the chair Sylvia have so eagerly bring forward for he . 

 then his sense of the estrangement cause by their new position infect she , and she begin to cry pitifully , say , 

 ' oh , Kester ! Kester ! tell I about Haytersbank ! be it just as it use to be in feyther 's day ? ' 

 ' well , a can not say as it be , ' say Kester , thankful to have a subject start . ' they'n pleughe up t ' oud pasture - field , and be settin ' it for ' tater . they be not for much cattle , be not   Higginses . they will be for corn in t ' next year , a reckon , and they will just ha ' their pain for their payment . but they be allay so pig - head , be folk fra ' a distance . ' 

 so they go on discourse on Haytersbank and the old day , till Bell Robson , have finish her afternoon nap , come slowly down - stair to join they ; and after that the conversation become so broken up , from the desire of the other two to attend and reply as good they could to her fragmentary and disjoint talk , that Kester take his leave before long ; fall , as he do so , into the formal and unnaturally respectful manner which he have adopt on first come in . 

 but Sylvia run after he , and bring he back from the door . 

 ' to think of thy go away , Kester , without either bit or drink ; nay , come back wi ' thee , and taste wine and cake . ' 

 Kester stand at the door , half shy , half please , while Sylvia , in all the glow and hurry of a young housekeeper 's hospitality , seek for the decanter of wine , and a wine - glass in the corner cupboard , and hastily cut an immense wedge of cake , which she cram into his hand in spite of his remonstrance ; and then she pour he out an overflowing glass of wine , which Kester would far rather have go without , as he know manner too well to suppose that he might taste it without have go through the preliminary ceremony of wish the donor health and happiness . he stand red and half smile , with his cake in one hand , his wine in the other , and then begin , 

 ' long may ye live , 
 Happy may ye he , 
 and blest with a num'rous 
 pro - ge - ny . ' 
 ' Theere , that be po'try for yo ' as I larnt I ' my youth . but there be a deal to be say as can not be put int ' po'try , an ' yet a can not say it , somehow . it would tax a parson t ' say a ' as a've   getten I ' my mind . it be like a heap o ' woo ' just after shearin ' time ; it be worth a deal , but it tak be a vast o ' combin ' , an ' cardin ' , an ' spinnin ' afore it can be make use on . if a be up to t ' use o ' word , a could say a mighty deal ; but somehow a'm tongue - teed when a come to want my word most , so a'll only just mak ' bold t ' say as a think yo've   do pretty well for yo'rsel ' , getten a house - full o ' furniture '   look around he as he say this , ' an ' vittle an ' clothin ' for t ' ax , belike , an ' a home for t ' missus in her time o ' need ; an ' mebbe not such a bad husband as a once think yon man ' ud mak ' ; a'm not above sayin ' as he be , mebbe , well nor a take he for ; so here be to ye both , and wishin ' ye health and happiness , ay , and money to buy yo ' another , as country folk say . ' 

 have end his oration , much to his own satisfaction , Kester toss off his glass of wine , smack his lip , wipe his mouth with the back of his hand , pocket his cake , and make off . 

 that night Sylvia speak of his visit to her husband . Philip never say how he himself have bring it to pass , nor do he name the fact that he have hear the old man come in just as he himself have intend go into the parlour for tea , but have keep away , as he think Sylvia and Kester would most enjoy their interview undisturbed . and Sylvia feel as if her husband 's silence be unsympathize , and shut up the feeling that be just begin to expand towards he . she sink again into the listless state of indifference from which nothing but some reference to former day , or present consideration for her mother , could rouse she . 

 hester be almost surprised at Sylvia 's evident liking for she . by slow degree hester be learn to love the woman , whose position as Philip 's wife she would have envy so keenly have she not be so truly good and pious . but Sylvia seem as though she have give hester her whole affection all at once . hester could not understand this , while she be touch and melt by the trust it imply . for one thing Sylvia remember and regret her harsh treatment of Hester the rainy , stormy night on which the latter have come to Haytersbank to seek she and her mother , and bring they into Monkshaven to see the imprisoned father and husband . Sylvia have be strike with Hester 's patient endurance of her rudeness , a rudeness which she be conscious that she herself should have immediately and vehemently resent . Sylvia do not understand how a totally different character from hers might immediately forgive the anger she could not forget ; and because Hester have be so meek at the time , Sylvia , who know how passing and transitory be her own anger , think that all be forget ; while Hester believe that the word , which she herself could not have utter except under deep provocation , mean much more than they do , and admire and wonder at Sylvia for have so entirely conquer her anger against she . 

 again , the two different woman be divergently affect by the extreme fondness which Bell have show towards hester ever since Sylvia 's wedding - day . Sylvia , who have always receive more love from other than she know what to do with , have the most entire faith in her own supremacy in her mother 's heart , though at time hester would do certain thing more to the poor old woman 's satisfaction . hester , who have crave for the affection which have be withhold from she , and have from that one circumstance become distrustful of her own power of inspire regard , while she exaggerate the delight of be belove , fear lest Sylvia should become jealous of her mother 's open display of great attachment and occasional preference for hester . but such a thought never enter Sylvia 's mind . she be more thankful than she know how to express towards any one who make her mother happy ; as have be already say , the contributing to Bell Robson 's pleasure earn Philip more of his wife 's smile than anything else . and Sylvia throw her whole heart into the word and caress she lavish on Hester whenever poor Mrs. Robson speak of the goodness and kindness of the latter . hester attribute more virtue to these sweet word and deed of gratitude than they deserve ; they do not imply in Sylvia any victory over evil temptation , as they would have do in Hester . 

 it seem to be Sylvia 's fate to captivate more people than she care to like back again . she turn the head of John and Jeremiah Foster , who could hardly congratulate Philip enough on his choice of a wife . 

 they have be prepare to be critical on one who have interfere with their favourite project of a marriage between Philip and Hester ; and , though full of compassion for the cruelty of Daniel Robson 's fate , they be too completely man of business not to have some apprehension that the connection of Philip Hepburn with the daughter of a man who be hang , might injure the shop over which both his and their name appear . but all the possible propriety demand that they should pay attention to the bride of their former shopman and present successor ; and the very first visitor whom Sylvia have receive after her marriage have be John and Jeremiah Foster , in their sabbath - day clothe . they find she in the parlour   so familiar to both of they !   clear - starch her mother 's cap , which have to be get up in some particular fashion that Sylvia be afraid of dictate to Phoebe . 

 she be a little disturbed at her visitor discover she at this employment ; but she be on her own ground , and that give her self - possession ; and she welcome the two old man so sweetly and modestly , and look so pretty and feminine , and , besides , so notable in her handiwork , that she conquer all their prejudice at one blow ; and their first thought on leave the shop be how to do she honour , by invite she to a supper party at Jeremiah Foster 's house . 

 Sylvia be dismay when she be bid to this wedding feast , and Philip have to use all his authority , though tenderly , to make her consent to go at all . she have be to merry country party like the Corneys ' , and to bright haymake romp in the open air ; but never to a set stately party at a friend 's house . 

 she would fain have make attendance on her mother an excuse ; but Philip know he must not listen to any such plea , and apply to hester in the dilemma , ask she to remain with Mrs. Robson while he and Sylvia go out visit ; and Hester have willingly , nay , eagerly consent it be much more to her taste than go out . 

 so Philip and Sylvia set out , arm - in - arm , down Bridge Street , across the bridge , and then clamber up the hill . on the way he give she the direction she ask for about her behaviour as bride and most honoured guest ; and altogether succeed , against his intention and will , in frighten she so completely as to the grandeur and importance of the occasion , and the necessity of remember certain set rule , and make certain set speech and attend to they when the right time come , that , if any one so naturally graceful could have be awkward , Sylvia would have be so that night . 

 as it be , she sate , pale and weary - look , on the very edge of her chair ; she utter the formal word which Philip have tell she be appropriate to the occasion , and she heartily wish herself safe at home and in bed . yet she leave but one unanimous impression on the company when she go away , namely , that she be the prettiest and well - behave woman they have ever see , and that Philip Hepburn have do well in choose she , felon 's daughter though she might be . 

 both the host have follow she into the lobby to help Philip in cloak she , and put on her patten . they be full of old - fashioned compliment and good wish ; one speech of theirs come up to her memory in future year : 

 ' now , Sylvia Hepburn , ' say Jeremiah , ' I have   know thy husband long , and I do not   say but what thou hast do well in choose he ; but if he ever neglect or ill - use thee , come to I , and I will give he a sound lecture on his conduct . mind , I be thy friend from this day forrard , and ready to take thy part against he ! ' 

 Philip smile as if the day would never come when he should neglect or ill - use his darling ; Sylvia smile a little , without much attend to , or care for , the word that be detain she , tired as she be ; John and Jeremiah chuckle over the joke ; but the word come up again in after day , as word idly speak sometimes do . 

 before the end of that first year , Philip have learn to be jealous of his wife 's new love for hester . to the latter , Sylvia give the free confidence on many thing which Philip fancy she withhold from he . a suspicion cross his mind , from time to time , that Sylvia might speak of her former lover to hester . it would be not unnatural , he think , if she do so , believe he to be dead ; but the idea irritate he . 

 he be entirely mistaken , however ; Sylvia , with all her apparent frankness , keep she deep sorrow to herself . she never mention her father 's name , though he be continually present to her mind . nor do she speak of Kinraid to human being , though , for his sake , her voice soften when , by chance , she speak to a pass sailor ; and for his sake her eye linger on such man long than on other , try to discover in they something of the old familiar gait ; and partly for his dead sake , and partly because of the freedom of the outlook and the freshness of the air , she be glad occasionally to escape from the comfortable imprisonment of her ' parlour ' , and the close street around the market - place , and to mount the cliff and sit on the turf , gaze abroad over the wide still expanse of the open sea ; for , at that height , even break wave only look like broken line of white foam on the blue watery plain . 

 she do not want any companion on these ramble , which have somewhat of the delight of steal pleasure ; for all the other respectable matron and town - dweller whom she know be content to have always a business object for their walk , or else to stop at home in their own household ; and Sylvia be rather ashamed of her own yearning for solitude and open air , and the sight and sound of the mother - like sea . she use to take off her hat , and sit there , her hand clasp her knee , the salt air lift her bright curl , gaze at the distant horizon over the sea , in a sad dreaminess of thought ; if she have be ask on what she meditate , she could not have tell you . 

 but , by - and - by , the time come when she be a prisoner in the house ; a prisoner in her room , lie in bed with a little baby by her side her child , Philip 's child . his pride , his delight know no bound ; this be a new fast tie between they ; this would reconcile she to the kind of life that , with all its respectability and comfort , be so different from what she have live before , and which Philip have often perceive that she feel to be dull and restrain . he already begin to trace in the little girl , only a few day old , the lovely curve that he know so well by heart in the mother 's face . Sylvia , too , pale , still , and weak , be very happy ; yes , really happy for the first time since her irrevocable marriage . for its irrevocableness have weigh much upon she with a sense of dull hopelessness ; she feel all Philip 's kindness , she be grateful to he for his tender regard towards her mother , she be learn to love he as well as to like and respect he . she do not know what else she could have do but marry so true a friend , and she and her mother so friendless ; but , at the same time , it be like lead on her morning spirit when she awake and remember that the decision be make , the dead be do , the choice take which come to most people but once in their life . now the little baby come in upon this state of mind like a ray of sunlight into a gloomy room . 

 even her mother be rejoice and proud ; even with her craze brain and broken heart , the sight of sweet , peaceful infancy bring light to she . all the old way of hold a baby , of hush it to sleep , of tenderly guard its little limb from injury , come back , like the habit of her youth , to Bell ; and she be never so happy or so easy in her mind , or so sensible and connect in her idea , as when she have Sylvia 's baby in her arm . 

 it be a pretty sight to see , however familiar to all of we such thing may be the pale , wear old woman , in her quaint , old - fashioned country dress , hold the little infant on her knee , look at its open , unspeculative eye , and talk the little language to it as though it could understand ; the father on his knee , keep prisoner by a small , small finger curl round his strong and sinewy one , and gaze at the tiny creature with wonder idolatry ; the young mother , fair , pale , and smile , prop up on pillow in order that she , too , might see the wonderful babe ; it be astonish how the doctor could come and go without be draw into the admire vortex , and look at this baby just as if baby come into the world every day . 

 ' Philip , ' say Sylvia , one night , as he sate as still as a mouse in her room , imagine she to be asleep . he be by her bed - side in a moment . 

 ' I have   be think what she be to be call . Isabella , after mother ; and what be yo'r mother 's name ? ' 

 ' Margaret , ' say he . 

 ' Margaret Isabella ; Isabella Margaret . Mother 's call Bell . she might be call Bella . ' 

 ' I could ha ' wish she to be call after thee . ' 

 she make a little impatient movement . 

 ' Nay ; Sylvia be not a lucky name . well be call after thy mother and mine . and I want for to ask Hester to be godmother . ' 

 ' anything thou like , sweetheart . shall we call she Rose , after Hester Rose ? ' 

 ' no , no ! ' say Sylvia ; ' she mun be call after my mother , or thine , or both . I should like she to be call Bella , after mother , because she be so fond of baby . ' 

 ' anything to please thee , darling . ' 

 ' do not   say that as if it do not   signify ; there be a deal in have a pretty name , ' say Sylvia , a little annoyed . ' I ha ' allay hat be call Sylvia . it be after father 's mother , Sylvia Steele . ' 

 ' I niver think any name in a ' the world so sweet and pretty as Sylvia , ' say Philip , fondly ; but she be too much absorb in her own thought to notice either his manner or his word . 

 ' there , yo'll not mind if it be Bella , because yo ' see my mother be alive to be pleased by its be name after she , and hester may be godmother , and I will ha ' t ' dove - colour silk as yo ' give I afore we be marry make up into a cloak for it to go to church in . ' 

 ' I get it for thee , ' say Philip , a little disappointed . ' it will be too good for the baby . ' 

 ' eh ! but I be so careless , I should be spill something on it ? but if thou get it for I I can not find I ' my heart for t ' wear it on baby , and I will have it make into a christening gown for mysel ' . but I will niver feel at my ease in it , for fear of spoil it . ' 

 ' well ! an ' if thou do spoil it , love , I will get thee another . I make account of rich only for thee ; that I may be able to get thee whativer thou be a fancy for , for either thysel ' , or thy mother . ' 

 she lift her pale face from her pillow , and put up her lip to kiss he for these word . 

 perhaps on that day Philip reach the zenith of his life 's happiness . 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 evil OMENS 

 the first step in Philip 's declension happen in this way . Sylvia have make rapid progress in her recovery ; but now she seem at a stationary point of weakness ; wakeful night succeed to languid day . occasionally she catch a little sleep in the afternoon , but she usually awake startled and feverish . 

 one afternoon Philip have steal upstairs to look at she and his child ; but the effort he make at careful noiselessness make the door creak on its hinge as he open it . the woman employ to nurse she have take the baby into another room that no sound might rouse she from her slumber ; and Philip would probably have be warn against enter the chamber where his wife lie sleep have he be perceive by the nurse . as it be , he open the door , make a noise , and Sylvia start up , her face all one flush , her eye wild and uncertain ; she look about she as if she do not know where she be ; push the hair off her hot forehead ; all which action Philip see , dismayed and regretful . but he keep still , hop that she would lie down and compose herself . instead she stretch out her arm imploringly , and say , in a voice full of yearning and tear , 

 ' oh ! Charley ! come to I come to I ! ' and then as she more fully become aware of the place where she be , her actual situation , she sink back and feebly begin to cry . Philip 's heart boil within he ; any man 's would under the circumstance , but he have the sense of guilty concealment to aggravate the intensity of his feeling . her weak cry after another man , too , irritate he , partly through his anxious love , which make he wise to know how much physical harm she be do herself . at this moment he stir , or unintentionally make some sound : she start up afresh , and call out , 

 ' oh , who be theere ? do , for God 's sake , tell I who yo ' be ! ' 

 ' it be I , ' say Philip , come forwards , strive to keep down the miserable complication of love and jealousy , and remorse and anger , that make his heart beat so wildly , and almost take he out of himself . indeed , he must have be quite beside himself for the time , or he could never have go on to utter the unwise , cruel word he do . but she speak first , in a distressed and plaintive tone of voice . 

 ' oh , Philip , I have   be asleep , and yet I think I be awake ! and I see Charley Kinraid as plain as iver I see thee now , and he be not   drown at all . I be sure he be alive somewheere ; he be so clear and life - like . oh ! what shall I do ? what shall I do ? ' 

 she wring her hand in feverish distress . urge by passionate feeling of various kind , and also by his desire to quench the agitation which be do her harm , Philip speak , hardly know what he say . 

 ' Kinraid 's dead , I tell yo ' , Sylvie ! and what kind of a woman be yo ' to go dream of another man I ' this way , and take on so about he , when yo're a wed wife , with a child as yo've   bear to another man ? ' 

 in a moment he could have bite out his tongue . she look at he with the mute reproach which some of we see   God help we !   in the eye of the dead , as they come before our sad memory in the night - season ; look at he with such a solemn , search look , never say a word of reply or defence . then she lie down , motionless and silent . he have be instantly sting with remorse for his speech ; the word be not beyond his lip when an agony have enter his heart ; but her steady , dilate eye have keep he dumb and motionless as if by a spell . 

 now he rush to the bed on which she lay , and half knelt , half throw himself upon it , implore she to forgive he ; regardless for the time of any evil consequence to she , it seem as if he must have she pardon her relent at any price , even if they both die in the act of reconciliation . but she lie speechless , and , as far as she could be , motionless , the bed tremble under she with the quivering she could not still . 

 Philip 's wild tone catch the nurse 's ear , and she enter full of the dignified indignation of wisdom . 

 ' be yo ' for kill yo'r wife , measter ? ' she ask . ' she be noane so strong as she can bear flytin ' and scoldin ' , nor will she be for many a week to come . go down wi ' ye , and leave she I ' peace if yo're a man as can be call a man ! ' 

 her anger be rise as she catch sight of Sylvia 's avert face . it be flush crimson , her eye full of intense emotion of some kind , her lip compress ; but an involuntary twitching overmaster her resolute stillness from time to time . Philip , who do not see the avert face , nor understand the real danger in which he be place his wife , feel as though he must have one word , one responsive touch of the hand which lie passive in his , which be not even draw away from the kiss with which he cover it , any more than if it have be an impassive stone . the nurse have fairly to take he by the shoulder , and turn he out of the room . 

 in half an hour the doctor have to be summon . of course , the nurse give he her version of the event of the afternoon , with much animus against Philip ; and the doctor think it his duty to have some very serious conversation with he . 

 ' I do assure you , Mr. Hepburn , that , in the state your wife have be in for some day , it be little less than madness on your part to speak to she about anything that could give rise to strong emotion . ' 

 ' it be madness , sir ! ' reply Philip , in a low , miserable tone of voice . the doctor 's heart be touch , in spite of the nurse 's accusation against the scold husband . yet the danger be now too serious for he to mince matter . 

 ' I must tell you that I can not answer for her life , unless the great precaution be take on your part , and unless the measure I shall use have the effect I wish for in the next twenty - four hour . she be on the verge of a brain fever . any allusion to the subject which have be the final cause of the state in which she now be must be most cautiously avoid , even to a chance word which may bring it to her memory . ' 

 and so on ; but Philip seem to hear only this : then he might not express contrition , or sue for pardon , he must go on unforgiven through all this stress of anxiety ; and even if she recover the doctor warn he of the undesirableness of recur to what have pass ! 

 heavy miserable time of endurance and waiting have to be pass through by all during the course of their life ; and Philip have have his share of such season , when the heart , and the will , and the speech , and the limb , must be bind down with strong resolution to patience . 

 for many day , nay , for week , he be forbid to see Sylvia , as the very sound of his footstep bring on a recurrence of the fever and convulsive movement . yet she seem , from question she feebly ask the nurse , to have forget all that have happen on the day of her attack from the time when she drop off to sleep . but how much she remember of after occurrence no one could ascertain . she be quiet enough when , at length , Philip be allow to see she . but he be half jealous of his child , when he watch how she could smile at it , while she never change a muscle of her face at all he could do or say . 

 and of a piece with this extreme quietude and reserve be her behaviour to he when at length she have fully recover , and be able to go about the house again . Philip think many a time of the word she have use long before before their marriage . ominous word they be . 

 ' it be not in I to forgive ; I sometimes think it be not in I to forget . ' 

 Philip be tender even to humility in his conduct towards she . but nothing stir she from her fortress of reserve . and he know she be so different ; he know how loving , nay , passionate , be her nature vehement , demonstrative oh ! how could he stir she once more into expression , even if the first show or speech she make be of anger ? then he try be angry with she himself ; he be sometimes unjust to she consciously and of a purpose , in order to provoke she into defend herself , and appeal against his unkindness . he only seem to drive her love away still more . 

 if any one have know all that be pass in that household , while yet the story of it be not end , nor , indeed , come to its crisis , their heart would have be sorry for the man who linger long at the door of the room in which his wife sate cooing and talk to her baby , and sometimes laugh back to it , or who be soothe the querulousness of fail age with every possible patience of love ; sorry for the poor listener who be hunger for the profusion of tenderness thus scatter on the senseless air , yet only by stealth catch the echo of what ought to have be his . 

 it be so difficult to complain , too ; impossible , in fact . everything that a wife could do from duty she do ; but the love seem to have flee , and , in such case , no reproach or complaint can avail to bring it back . so reason outsider , and be convince of the result before the experiment be make . but Philip could not reason , or could not yield to reason ; and so he complain and reproach . she do not much answer he ; but he think that her eye express the old word , 

 ' it be not in I to forgive ; I sometimes think it be not in I to forget . ' 

 however , it be an old story , an ascertained fact , that , even in the most tender and stable masculine nature , at the supreme season of their life , there be room for other thought and passion than such as be connect with love . even with the most domestic and affectionate man , their emotion seem to be keep in a cell distinct and away from their actual life . Philip have other thought and other occupation than those connect with his wife during all this time . 

 an uncle of his mother 's , a Cumberland ' statesman ' , of whose existence he be barely conscious , die about this time , leave to his unknown great - nephew four or five hundred pound , which put he at once in a different position with regard to his business . henceforward his ambition be rouse , such humble ambition as befit a shop - keeper in a country town sixty or seventy year ago . to be respect by the man around he have always be an object with he , and be , perhaps , become more so than ever now , as a sort of refuge from his deep , sorrowful mortification in other direction . he be greatly pleased at be make a sidesman ; and , in preparation for the further honour of be churchwarden , he go regularly twice a day to church on Sundays . there be enough religious feeling in he to make he disguise the worldly reason for such conduct from himself . he believe that he go because he think it right to attend public worship in the parish church whenever it be offer up ; but it may be question of he , as of many other , how far he would have be as regular in attendance in a place where he be not know . with this , however , we have nothing to do . the fact be that he go regularly to church , and he wish his wife to accompany he to the pew , newly paint , with his name on the door , where he sate in full sight of the clergyman and congregation . 

 Sylvia have never be in the habit of such regular church - going , and she feel it as a hardship , and slip out of the duty as often as ever she could . in her unmarried day , she and her parent have go annually to the mother - church of the parish in which Haytersbank be situate : on the Monday succeed the Sunday next after the Romish Saint 's day , to whom the church be dedicate , there be a great feast or wake hold ; and , on the Sunday , all the parishioner come to church from far and near . frequently , too , in the course of the year , Sylvia would accompany one or other of her parent to Scarby Moorside afternoon service , when the hay be get in , and the corn not ready for cutting , or the cow be dry and there be no afternoon milking . many clergyman be languid in those day , and do not too curiously inquire into the reason which give they such small congregation in country parish . 

 now she be marry , this weekly church - go which Philip seem to expect from she , become a tie and a small hardship , which connect itself with her life of respectability and prosperity . ' a crust of bread and liberty ' be much more accordant to Sylvia 's nature than plenty of creature comfort and many restraint . another wish of Philip 's , against which she say no word , but constantly rebel in thought and deed , be his desire that the servant he have engage during the time of her illness to take charge of the baby , should always carry it whenever it be take out for a walk . Sylvia often feel , now she be strong , as if she would far rather have be without the responsibility of have this nursemaid , of whom she be , in reality , rather afraid . the good side of it be that it set she at liberty to attend to her mother at time when she would have be otherwise occupy with her baby ; but Bell require very little from any one : she be easily pleased , unexacting , and methodical even in her dotage ; preserve the quiet , undemonstrative habit of her early life now that the faculty of reason , which have be at the basis of the formation of such habit , be go . she take great delight in watch the baby , and be pleased to have it in her care for a short time ; but she doze so much that it prevent she have any strong wish on the subject . 

 so Sylvia contrive to get her baby as much as possible to herself , in spite of the nursemaid ; and , above all , she would carry it out , softly cradle in her arm , warm pillow on her breast , and bear it to the freedom and solitude of the sea - shore on the west side of the town where the cliff be not so high , and there be a good space of sand and shingle at all low tide . 

 once here , she be as happy as she ever expect to be in this world . the fresh sea - breeze restore something of the colour of former day to her cheek , the old buoyancy to her spirit ; here she might talk her heart - full of love nonsense to her baby ; here it be all her own ; no father to share in it , no nursemaid to dispute the wisdom of anything she do with it . she sing to it , she toss it ; it crow and it laugh back again , till both be weary ; and then she would sit down on a broken piece of rock , and fall to gaze on the advance wave catch the sunlight on their crest , advance , recede , for ever and for ever , as they have do all her life long as they do when she have walk with they that once by the side of Kinraid ; those cruel wave that , forgetful of the happy lover ' talk by the side of their water , have carry one away , and drown he deep till he be dead . every time she sate down to look at the sea , this process of thought be go through up to this point ; the next step would , she know , bring she to the question she dare not , must not ask . he be dead ; he must be dead ; for be she not Philip 's wife ? then come up the recollection of Philip 's speech , never forget , only bury out of sight : ' what kind of a woman be yo ' to go on dream of another man , and yo ' a wed wife ? ' she use to shudder as if cold steel have be plunge into her warm , live body as she remember these word ; cruel word , harmlessly provoke . they be too much associate with physical pain to be dwell upon ; only their memory be always there . she pay for these happy ramble with her baby by the depression which await she on her re - entrance into the dark , confine house that be her home ; its very fulness of comfort be an oppression . then , when her husband see her pale and fatigue , he be annoy , and sometimes upbraid she for do what be so unnecessary as to load herself with her child . she know full well it be not that that cause her weariness . by - and - by , when he inquire and discover that all these walk be take in one direction , out towards the sea , he grow jealous of her love for the inanimate ocean . be it connect in her mind with the thought of Kinraid ? why do she so perseveringly , in wind or cold , go out to the sea - shore ; the western side , too , where , if she go but far enough , she would come upon the mouth of the Haytersbank gully , the point at which she have last see Kinraid ? such fancy haunt Philip 's mind for hour after she have acknowledge the direction of her walk . but he never say a word that could distinctly tell she he dislike she go to the sea , otherwise she would have obey he in this , as in everything else ; for absolute obedience to her husband seem to be her rule of life at this period obedience to he who would so gladly have obey her small wish have she but express it ! she never know that Philip have any painful association with the particular point on the sea - shore that she instinctively avoid , both from a consciousness of wifely duty , and also because the sight of it bring up so much sharp pain . 

 Philip use to wonder if the dream that precede her illness be the suggestive cause that draw she so often to the shore . her illness consequent upon that dream have fill his mind , so that for many month he himself have have no haunt vision of Kinraid to disturb his slumber . but now the old dream of Kinraid 's actual presence by Philip 's bedside begin to return with fearful vividness . night after night it recur ; each time with some new touch of reality , and close approach ; till it be as if the fate that overtake all man be then , even then , knock at his door . 

 in his business Philip prosper . man praise he because he do well to himself . he have the perseverance , the capability for head - work and calculation , the steadiness and general forethought which might have make he a great merchant if he have live in a large city . without any effort of his own , almost , too , without Coulson 's be aware of it , Philip be now in the position of superior partner ; the one to suggest and arrange , while Coulson only carry out the plan that emanate from Philip . the whole work of life be suit to the man : he do not aspire to any different position , only to the full development of the capability of that which he already hold . he have originate several fresh scheme with regard to the traffic of the shop ; and his old master , with all their love of try way , and distrust of everything new , have be candid enough to confess that their successor ' plan have result in success . ' their successor . ' Philip be content with have the power when the exercise of it be require , and never name his own important share in the new improvement . possibly , if he have , Coulson 's vanity might have take the alarm , and he might not have be so acquiescent for the future . as it be , he forget his own subordinate share , and always use the imperial ' we ' , ' we think ' , ' it strike we , '   c. 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 rescued from the wave 

 Meanwhile Hester come and go as usual ; in so quiet and methodical a way , with so even and undisturbe a temper , that she be almost forget when everything go well in the shop or household . she be a star , the brightness of which be only recognize in time of darkness . she herself be almost surprised at her own increase regard for Sylvia . she have not think she should ever be able to love the woman who have be such a laggard in acknowledge Philip 's merit ; and from all she have ever hear of Sylvia before she come to know she , from the angry word with which Sylvia have receive she when she have first go to Haytersbank Farm , Hester have intend to remain on friendly term , but to avoid intimacy . but her kindness to Bell Robson have win both the mother 's and daughter 's heart ; and in spite of herself , certainly against her own mother 's advice , she have become the familiar friend and welcome guest of the household . 

 now the very change in Sylvia 's whole manner and way , which grieve and vex Philip , make his wife the more attractive to hester . bring up among Quakers , although not one herself , she admire and respect the staidness and outward peacefulness common amongst the young woman of that sect . Sylvia , whom she have expect to find volatile , talkative , vain , and wilful , be quiet and still , as if she have be bear a friend : she seem to have no will of her own ; she serve her mother and child for love ; she obey her husband in all thing , and never appear to pine after gaiety or pleasure . and yet at time hester thought , or rather a flash come across her mind , as if all thing be not as right as they seem . Philip look old , more care - worn ; nay , even Hester be oblige to allow to herself that she have hear he speak to his wife in sharp , aggrieved tone . innocent Hester ! she could not understand how the very quality she so admire in Sylvia be just what be so foreign to her nature that the husband , who have know she from a child , feel what an unnatural restraint she be put upon herself , and would have hail petulant word or wilful action with an unspeakable thankfulness for relief . 

 one day it be in the spring of 1798 hester be engage to stay to tea with the Hepburns , in order that after that early meal she might set to again in help Philip and Coulson to pack away the winter cloth and flannel , for which there be no long any use . the tea - time be half - past four ; about four o'clock a heavy April shower come on , the hail patter against the window - pane so as to awaken Mrs. Robson from her afternoon 's nap . she come down the corkscrew stair , and find Phoebe in the parlour arrange the tea - thing . 

 Phoebe and Mrs. Robson be well friend than Phoebe and her young mistress ; and so they begin to talk a little together in a comfortable , familiar way . once or twice Philip look in , as if he would be glad to see the tea - table in readiness ; and then Phoebe would put on a spurt of busy bustle , which cease almost as soon as his back be turn , so eager be she to obtain Mrs. Robson 's sympathy in some little dispute that have occur between she and the nurse - maid . the latter have misappropriate some hot water , prepare and require by Phoebe , to the washing of the baby 's clothe ; it be a long story , and would have tire the patience of any one in full possession of their sens ; but the detail be just within poor Bell 's comprehension , and she be listen with the great sympathy . both the woman be unaware of the lapse of time ; but it be of consequence to Philip , as the extra labour be not to be begin until after tea , and the daylight hour be precious . 

 at a quarter to five hester and he come in , and then Phoebe begin to hurry . hester go up to sit by Bell and talk to she . Philip speak to Phoebe in the familiar word of country - folk . indeed , until his marriage , Phoebe have always call he by his christian name , and have find it very difficult to change it into ' master . ' 

 ' where be Sylvie ? ' say he . 

 ' go out wi ' t ' babby , ' reply Phoebe . 

 ' why can not   Nancy carry it out ? ' ask Philip . 

 it be touch on the old grievance : he be tired , and he speak with sharp annoyance . Phoebe might easily have tell he the real state of the case ; Nancy be busy at her washing , which would have be reason enough . but the nursemaid have vex she , and she do not like Philip 's sharpness , so she only say , 

 ' it be noane o ' my business ; it be yo ' t ' look after yo'r own wife and child ; but yo'r but a lad after a ' . ' 

 this be not conciliatory speech , and just put the last stroke to Philip 's fit of ill - temper . 

 ' I be not for my tea to - night , ' say he , to Hester , when all be ready . ' Sylvie be not here , and nothing be nice , or as it should be . I will go and set to on t ' stock - taking . do not   yo ' hurry , Hester ; stop and chat a bit with th ' old lady . ' 

 ' Nay , Philip , ' say hester , ' thou 's sadly tired ; just take this cup o ' tea ; Sylvia will be grieve if yo ' have not   something . ' 

 ' Sylvia do not   care whether I be full or fast , ' reply he , impatiently put aside the cup . ' if she do she would ha ' take care to be in , and ha ' see to thing be as I like they . ' 

 now in general Philip be the least particular of man about meal ; and to do Sylvia justice , she be scrupulously attentive to every household duty in which old Phoebe would allow she to meddle , and always careful to see after her husband 's comfort . but Philip be too vexed at her absence to perceive the injustice of what he be say , nor be he aware how Bell Robson have be attend to what he say . but she be sadly discomfit by it , understand just enough of the grievance in hand to think that her daughter be neglectful of those duty which she herself have always regard as paramount to all other ; nor could hester convince she that Philip have not mean what he say ; neither could she turn the poor old woman 's thought from the word which have cause her distress . 

 presently Sylvia come in , bright and cheerful , although breathless with hurry . 

 ' oh , ' say she , take off her wet shawl , ' we have   have to shelter from such a storm of rain , baby and I but see ! she be none the bad for it , as bonny as iver , bless she . ' 

 hester begin some speech of admiration for the child in order to prevent Bell from deliver the lecture she feel sure be come down on the unsuspecting Sylvia ; but all in vain . 

 ' Philip 's be complain on thee , Sylvie , ' say Bell , in the way in which she have speak to her daughter when she be a little child ; grave and severe in tone and look , more than in word . ' I forget justly what about , but he speak on thy neglect he continual . it be not right , my lass , it be not right ; a woman should but my head 's very tired , and all I can think on to say be , it be not right . ' 

 ' Philip be complain of I , and to mother ! ' say Sylvia , ready to burst into tear , so grieved and angry be she . 

 ' no ! ' say hester , ' thy mother have take it a little too strong ; he be vex like at his tea not be ready . ' 

 Sylvia say no more , but the bright colour fade from her cheek , and the contraction of care return to her brow . she occupy herself with take off her baby 's walk thing . hester linger , anxious to soothe and make peace ; she be look sorrowfully at Sylvia , when she see tear drop on the baby 's cloak , and then it seem as if she must speak a word of comfort before go to the shop - work , where she know she be expect by both Philip and Coulson . she pour out a cup of tea , and come close up to Sylvia , and kneel down by she , she whisper , 

 ' just take he this into t ' ware - room ; it will put all to right if thou'll take it to he wi ' thy own hand . ' 

 Sylvia look up , and hester then more fully see how she have be cry . she whisper in reply , for fear of disturb her mother , 

 ' I do not   mind anything but his speak ill on I to mother . I know I be for iver try and try to be a good wife to he , an ' it be very dull work ; hard than yo ' think on , Hester , an ' I would ha ' be home for tea to - night only I be afeare of baby get wet wi ' t ' storm o ' hail as we have down on t ' shore ; and we shelter under a rock . it be a weary come home to this dark place , and to find my own mother set against I . ' 

 ' take he his tea , like a good lassie . I will answer for it he will be all right . a man take it hardly when he come in tired , a - think his wife will be there to cheer he up a bit , to find she off , and niver know nought of t ' reason why . ' 

 ' I be glad enough I have   getten a baby , ' say Sylvia , ' but for aught else I wish I would niver be marry , I do ! ' 

 ' hush thee , lass ! ' say Hester , rise up indignant ; ' now that be a sin . eh ! if thou only know the lot o ' some folk . but let us talk no more on that , that can not be help ; go , take he his tea , for it be a sad thing to think on he fast all this time . ' 

 hester 's voice be raise by the simple fact of her change of position ; and the word fast catch Mrs. Robson 's ear , as she sate at her knitting by the chimney - corner . 

 ' fast ? he say thou do not   care if he be full or fast . Lassie ! it be not right in thee , I say ; go , take he his tea at once . ' 

 Sylvia rise , and give up the baby , which she have be suckle , to Nancy , who have do her washing , have come for her charge , to put it to bed . Sylvia kiss it fondly , make a little moan of sad , passionate tenderness as she do so . then she take the cup of tea ; but she say , rather defiantly , to hester , 

 ' I will go to he with it , because mother bid I , and it will ease her mind . ' 

 then loud to her mother , she add , 

 ' Mother , I will take he his tea , though I could not   help the be out . ' 

 if the act itself be conciliatory , the spirit in which she be go to do it be the reverse . hester follow she slowly into the ware - room , with intentional delay , think that her presence might be an obstacle to their mutually understand one another . Sylvia hold the cup and plate of bread and butter out to Philip , but avoid meet his eye , and say not a word of explanation , or regret , or self - justification . if she have speak , though ever so crossly , Philip would have be relieve , and would have prefer it to her silence . he want to provoke she to speech , but do not know how to begin . 

 ' Thou be be out again wander on that sea - shore ! ' say he . she do not answer he . ' I can not think what be always take thee there , when one would ha ' think a walk up to Esdale would be far more sheltered , both for thee and baby in such weather as this . Thou'll be have that baby ill some of these day . ' 

 at this , she look up at he , and her lip move as though she be go to say something . oh , how he wish she would , that they might come to a wholesome quarrel , and a make friend again , and a tender kissing , in which he might whisper penitence for all his hasty word , or unreasonable vexation . but she have come resolve not to speak , for fear of show too much passion , too much emotion . only as she be go away she turn and say , 

 ' Philip , mother have not   many more year to live ; dunnot grieve she , and set she again ' I by find fault wi ' I afore she . our be we d be a great mistake ; but before t ' poor old widow woman let we make as if we be happy . ' 

 ' Sylvie ! Sylvie ! ' he call after she . she must have hear , but she do not turn . he go after she , and seize she by the arm rather roughly ; she have sting he to the heart with her calm word , which seem to reveal a long - form conviction . 

 ' Sylvie ! ' say he , almost fiercely , ' what do yo ' mean by what you have   say ? speak ! I will have an answer . ' 

 he almost shake she : she be half frighten by his vehemence of behaviour , which she take for pure anger , while it be the outburst of agonized and unrequited love . 

 ' let I go ! oh , Philip , yo ' hurt I ! ' 

 just at this moment hester come up ; Philip be ashamed of his passionate way in her serene presence , and loosen his grasp of his wife , and she run away ; run into her mother 's empty room , as to a solitary place , and there burst into that sobbing , miserable cry which we instinctively know be too surely lessen the length of our day on earth to be indulge in often . 

 when she have exhaust that first burst and lie weak and quiet for a time , she listen in dread expectation of the sound of his footstep come in search of she to make friend . but he be detain below on business , and never come . instead , her mother come clamber up the stair ; she be now in the habit of go to bed between seven and eight , and to - night she be retire at even an early hour . 

 Sylvia spring up and draw down the window - blind , and make her face and manner as compose as possible , in order to soothe and comfort her mother 's last wake hour . she help she to bed with gentle patience ; the restraint impose upon she by her tender filial love be good for she , though all the time she be long to be alone to have another wild outburst . when her mother be go off to sleep , Sylvia go to look at her baby , also in a soft sleep . then she gaze out at the evening sky , high above the tile roof of the opposite house , and the longing to be out under the peaceful heaven take possession of she once more . 

 ' it be my only comfort , ' say she to herself ; ' and there be no earthly harm in it . I would ha ' be at home to his tea , if I could ; but when he do not   want I , and mother do not   want I , and baby be either in my arm or asleep ; why , I will go any cry my fill out under yon great quiet sky . I can not stay in t ' house to be choke up wi ' my tear , nor yet to have he come about I either for scolding or peace - making . ' 

 so she put on her thing and go out again ; this time along the High Street , and up the long flight of step towards the parish church , and there she stand and think that here she have first meet Kinraid , at Darley 's burying , and she try to recall the very look of all the sad , earnest face round the open grave the whole scene , in fact ; and let herself give way to the miserable regret she have so often try to control . then she walk on , cry bitterly , almost unawares to herself ; on through the high , bleak field at the summit of the cliff ; field bound by loose stone fence , and far from all sight of the habitation of man . but , below , the sea rise and rag ; it be high water at the high tide , and the wind blow gustily from the land , vainly combat the great wave that come invincibly up with a roar and an impotent furious dash against the base of the cliff below . 

 Sylvia hear the sound of the passionate rush and rebound of many water , like the shock of mighty gun , whenever the other sound of the bluster gusty wind be lull for an instant . she be more quiet by this tempest of the element than she would have be have all nature seem as still as she have imagine it to be while she be yet in - door and only see a part of the serene sky . 

 she fix on a certain point , in her own mind , which she would reach , and then turn back again . it be where the outline of the land curve inward , dip into a little bay . here the field - path she have hitherto follow descend somewhat abruptly to a cluster of fisherman 's cottage , hardly large enough to be call a village ; and then the narrow roadway wind up the rise ground till it again reach the summit of the cliff that stretch along the coast for many and many a mile . 

 Sylvia say to herself that she would turn homeward when she come within sight of this cove , Headlington Cove , they call it . all the way along she have meet no one since she have leave the town , but just as she have get over the last stile , or ladder of stepping - stone , into the field from which the path descend , she come upon a number of people quite a crowd , in fact ; man move forward in a steady line , haul at a rope , a chain , or something of that kind ; boy , child , and woman hold baby in their arm , as if all be fain to come out and partake in some general interest . 

 they keep within a certain distance from the edge of the cliff , and Sylvia , advance a little , now see the reason why . the great cable the man hold be attach to some part of a smack , which could now be see by she in the water below , half dismantle , and all but a wreck , yet with her deck cover with live man , as far as the wan light would allow she to see . the vessel strain to get free of the strong guide cable ; the tide be turn , the wind be blow off shore , and Sylvia know without be tell , that almost parallel to this be a line of sink rock that have be fatal to many a ship before now , if she have try to take the inner channel instead of keep out to sea for mile , and then steer in straight for Monkshaven port . and the ship that have be thus lose have be in good plight and order compare to this vessel , which seem nothing but a hull without mast or sail . 

 by this time , the crowd the fisherman from the hamlet down below , with their wife and child all have come but the bedridden have reach the place where Sylvia stand . the woman , in a state of wild excitement , rush on , encourage their husband and son by word , even while they hinder they by action ; and , from time to time , one of they would run to the edge of the cliff and shout out some brave word of hope in her shrill voice to the crew on the deck below . whether these latter hear it or not , no one could tell ; but it seem as if all human voice must be lose in the tempestuous stun and tumult of wind and wave . it be generally a woman with a child in her arm who so employ herself . as the strain upon the cable become great , and the ground on which they strove more uneven , every hand be need to hold and push , and all those woman who be unencumbered hold by the dear rope on which so many life be depend . on they come , a long line of human being , black against the ruddy sunset sky . as they come near Sylvia , a woman cry out , 

 ' Dunnot stand idle , lass , but houd on wi ' us ; there be many a bonny life at stake , and many a mother 's heart a - hangin ' on this bit o ' hemp . tak ' houd , lass , and give a firm grip , and God remember thee I ' thy need . ' 

 Sylvia need no second word ; a place be make for she , and in an instant more the rope be pull against her hand till it seem as though she be hold fire in her bare palm . never a one of they think of let go for an instant , though when all be over many of their hand be raw and bleeding . some strong , experienced fisherman pass a word along the line from time to time , give direction as to how it should be hold accord to vary occasion ; but few among the rest have breath or strength enough to speak . the woman and child that accompany they run on before , break down the loose stone fence , so as to obviate delay or hindrance ; they talk continually , exhort , encouraging , explain . from their many word and fragmentary sentence , Sylvia learn that the vessel be suppose to be a Newcastle smack sailing from London , that have take the dangerous inner channel to save time , and have be catch in the storm , which she be too crazy to withstand ; and that if by some daring contrivance of the fisherman who have first see she the cable have not be get ashore , she would have be cast upon the rock before this , and ' all on board perish ' . 

 ' it be dayleet then , ' quoth one woman ; ' a could see their face , they be so near . they be as pale as dead man , an ' one be prayin ' down on his knee . there be a king 's officer aboard , for I see t ' gowd about he . ' 

 ' he would maybe come from these hom'ard part , and be comin ' to see his own folk ; else it be no common for king 's officer to sail in aught but king 's ship . ' 

 ' eh ! but it be gettin ' dark ! see there be t ' leeght in t ' house in t ' New Town ! T ' grass be crispin ' wi ' t ' white frost under out foot . it will be a hard tug round t ' point , and then she will be gettin ' into still water . ' 

 one more great push and mighty strain , and the danger be past ; the vessel or what remain of she be in the harbour , among the light and cheerful sound of safety . the fisherman spring down the cliff to the quay - side , anxious to see the man whose life they have save ; the woman , weary and over - excite , begin to cry . not Sylvia , however ; her fount of tear have be exhaust early in the day : her principal feeling be of gladness and high rejoicing that they be save who have be so near to death not half an hour before . 

 she would have like to have see the man , and shake hand with they all round . but instead she must go home , and well would it be with she if she be in time for her husband 's supper , and escape any notice of her absence . so she separate herself from the group of woman who sate on the grass in the churchyard , await the return of such of their husband as could resist the fascination of the monkshaven public house . as Sylvia go down the church step , she come upon one of the fisherman who have help to tow the vessel into port . 

 ' there be seventeen man and boy aboard she , and a navy - lieutenant as have come as passenger . it be a good job as we could manage she . good - neet to thee , thou'll sleep all t ' sounder for havin' lend a hand . ' 

 the street air feel hot and close after the sharp keen atmosphere of the height above ; the decent shop and house have all their shutter put up , and be prepare for their early bed - time . already light shine here and there in the upper chamber , and Sylvia scarcely meet any one . 

 she go round up the passage from the quay - side , and in by the private door . all be still ; the basin of bread and milk that she and her husband be in the habit of have for supper stand in the fender before the fire , each with a plate upon they . Nancy have go to bed , Phoebe doze in the kitchen ; Philip be still in the ware - room , arrange good and take stock along with Coulson , for hester have go home to her mother . 

 Sylvia be not willing to go and seek out Philip , after the manner in which they have part . all the despondency of her life become present to she again as she sate down within her home . she have forget it in her interest and excitement , but now it come back again . 

 still she be hungry , and youthful , and tired . she take her basin up , and be eat her supper when she hear a cry of her baby upstairs , and run away to attend to it . when it have be feed and hush away to sleep , she go in to see her mother , attract by some unusual noise in her room . 

 she find Mrs. Robson awake , and restless , and ailing ; dwell much on what Philip have say in his anger against Sylvia . it be really necessary for her daughter to remain with she ; so Sylvia steal out , and go quickly down - stair to Philip now sit tired and wear out , and eat his supper with little or no appetite and tell he she mean to pass the night with her mother . 

 his answer of acquiescence be so short and careless , or so it seem to she , that she do not tell he any more of what she have do or see that evening , or even dwell upon any detail of her mother 's indisposition . 

 as soon as she have leave the room , Philip set down his half - finished basin of bread and milk , and sate long , his face hide in his fold arm . the wick of the candle grow long and black , and fall , and sputter , and gutter ; he sate on , unheede either it or the pale gray fire that be die out dead at last . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 an APPARITION 

 Mrs. Robson be very poorly all night long . uneasy thought seem to haunt and perplex her brain , and she neither sleep nor wake , but be restless and uneasy in her talk and movement . 

 Sylvia lie down by she , but get so little sleep , that at length she prefer sit in the easy - chair by the bedside . here she drop off to slumber in spite of herself ; the scene of the evening before seem to be repeat ; the cry of the many people , the heavy roar and dash of the threaten wave , be repeat in her ear ; and something be say to she through all the conflict noise , what it be she could not catch , though she strain to hear the hoarse murmur that , in her dream , she believe to convey a meaning of the utmost importance to she . 

 this dream , that mysterious , only half - intelligible sound , recur whenever she doze , and her inability to hear the word utter distress she so much , that at length she sate bolt upright , resolve to sleep no more . her mother be talk in a half - conscious way ; Philip 's speech of the evening before be evidently run in her mind . 

 ' Sylvie , if thou're not a good wife to he , it will just break my heart outright . a woman should obey her husband , and not go her own gait . I never leave the house wi'out tell father , and get his leave . ' 

 and then she begin to cry pitifully , and to say unconnected thing , till Sylvia , to soothe she , take her hand , and promise never to leave the house without ask her husband 's permission , though in make this promise , she feel as if she be sacrifice her last pleasure to her mother 's wish ; for she know well enough that Philip would always raise objection to the ramble which remind she of her old free open - air life . 

 but to comfort and cherish her mother she would have do anything ; yet this very morning that be dawn , she must go and ask his permission for a simple errand , or break her word . 

 she know from experience that nothing quiet her mother so well as balm - tea ; it might be that the herb really possess some sedative power ; it might be only early faith , and often repeat experience , but it have always have a tranquillizing effect ; and more than once , during the restless hour of the night , Mrs. Robson have ask for it ; but Sylvia 's stock of last year 's dead leaf be exhaust . still she know where a plant of balm grow in the sheltered corner of Haytersbank Farm garden ; she know that the tenant who have succeed they in the occupation of the farm have have to leave it in consequence of a death , and that the place be unoccupied ; and in the darkness she have plan that if she could leave her mother after the dawn come , and she have attend to her baby , she would walk quickly to the old garden , and gather the tender sprig which she be sure to find there . 

 now she must go and ask Philip ; and till she hold her baby to her breast , she bitterly wish that she be free from the duty and chain of matrimony . but the touch of its waxen finger , the hold of its little mouth , make she relax into docility and gentleness . she give it back to Nancy to be dress , and softly open the door of Philip 's bed - room . 

 ' Philip ! ' say she , gently . ' Philip ! ' 

 he start up from dream of she ; of she , angry . he see she there , rather pale with her night 's watch and anxiety , but look meek , and a little beseech . 

 ' Mother have have such a bad night ! she fancy once as some balm - tea would do she good it allay use to : but my dried balm be all go , and I think there would be sure to be some in t ' old garden at Haytersbank . Feyther plant a bush just for mother , wheere it allay come up early , nigh t ' old elder - tree ; and if yo'd not mind , I could run theere while she sleep , and be back again in an hour , and it be not seven now . ' 

 ' Thou be not wear thyself out with run , Sylvie , ' say Philip , eagerly ; ' I will get up and go myself , or , perhaps , ' continue he , catch the shadow that be come over her face , ' thou'd rather go thyself : it be only that I be so afraid of thy tire thyself . ' 

 ' it will not tire I , ' say Sylvia . ' afore I be marry , I be out often far far than that , afield to fetch up t ' kine , before my breakfast . ' 

 ' well , go if thou will , ' say Philip . ' but get somewhat to eat first , and do not   hurry ; there be no need for that . ' 

 she have get her hat and shawl , and be off before he have finish his last word . 

 the long High Street be almost empty of people at that early hour ; one side be entirely cover by the cool morning shadow which lie on the pavement , and creep up the opposite house till only the topmost story catch the rosy sunlight . up the hill - road , through the gap in the stone wall , across the dewy field , Sylvia go by the very short path she know . 

 she have only once be at Haytersbank since her wedding - day . on that occasion the place have seem strangely and dissonantly change by the numerous child who be divert themselves before the open door , and whose plaything and clothe strew the house - place , and make it one busy scene of confusion and untidiness , more like the Corneys ' kitchen in former time , than her mother 's orderly and quiet abode . those little child be fatherless now ; and the house be shut up , await the entry of some new tenant . there be no shutter to shut ; the long low window be blink in the ray of the morning sun ; the house and cow - house door be closed , and no poultry wander about the field in search of stray grain of corn , or early worm . it be a strange and unfamiliar silence , and strike solemnly on Sylvia 's mind . only a thrush in the old orchard down in the hollow , out of sight , whistle and gurgle with continual shrill melody . 

 Sylvia go slowly past the house and down the path lead to the wild , desert bit of garden . she see that the last tenant have have a pump sink for they , and resent the innovation , as though the well she be pass could feel the insult . over it grow two hawthorn tree ; on the bent trunk of one of they she use to sit , long ago : the charm of the position be enhance by the possible danger of fall into the well and be drown . the rusty unused chain be wind round the windlass ; the bucket be fall to piece from dryness . a lean cat come from some outhouse , and mew pitifully with hunger ; accompany Sylvia to the garden , as if glad of some human companionship , yet refuse to allow itself to be touch . primrose grow in the sheltered place , just as they formerly do ; and make the uncultivated ground seem less deserted than the garden , where the last year 's weed be rot away , and cumber the ground . 

 Sylvia force her way through the berry bush to the herb - plot , and pluck the tender leaf she have come to seek ; sigh a little all the time . then she retrace her step ; pause softly before the house - door , and enter the porch and kiss the senseless wood . 

 she try to tempt the poor gaunt cat into her arm , mean to carry it home and befriend it ; but it be scar by her endeavour and run back to its home in the outhouse , make a green path across the white dew of the meadow . then Sylvia begin to hasten home , thinking , and remember at the stile that lead into the road she be bring short up . 

 some one stand in the lane just on the other side of the gap ; his back be to the morning sun ; all she see at first be the uniform of a naval officer , so well know in Monkshaven in those day . 

 Sylvia go hurry past he , not look again , although her clothe almost brush his , as he stand there still . she have not go a yard no , not half a yard when her heart leap up and fall again dead within she , as if she have be shoot . 

 ' Sylvia ! ' he say , in a voice tremulous with joy and passionate love . ' Sylvia ! ' 

 she look round ; he have turn a little , so that the light fall straight on his face . it be bronze , and the line be strengthen ; but it be the same face she have last see in Haytersbank Gully three long year ago , and have never think to see in life again . 

 he be close to she and hold out his fond arm ; she go flutter towards their embrace , as if draw by the old fascination ; but when she feel they close round she , she start away , and cry out with a great pitiful shriek , and put her hand up to her forehead as if try to clear away some bewilder mist . 

 then she look at he once more , a terrible story in her eye , if he could but have read it . 

 twice she open her stiff lip to speak , and twice the word be overwhelm by the surge of her misery , which bear they back into the depth of her heart . 

 he think that he have come upon she too suddenly , and he attempt to soothe she with soft murmur of love , and to woo she to his outstretched hungry arm once more . but when she see this motion of his , she make a gesture as though push he away ; and with an inarticulate moan of agony she put her hand to her head once more , and turn away begin to run blindly towards the town for protection . 

 for a minute or so he be stun with surprise at her behaviour ; and then he think it account for by the shock of his accost , and that she need time to understand the unexpected joy . so he follow she swiftly , ever keep she in view , but not try to overtake she too speedily . 

 ' I have frighten my poor love , ' he keep think . and by this thought he try to repress his impatience and check the speed he long to use ; yet he be always so near behind that her quickened sense hear his well - know footstep follow , and a mad notion flash across her brain that she would go to the wide full river , and end the hopeless misery she feel enshroud she . there be a sure hiding - place from all human reproach and heavy mortal woe beneath the rushing water bear landward by the morning tide . 

 no one can tell what change her course ; perhaps the thought of her suck child ; perhaps her mother ; perhaps an angel of God ; no one on earth know , but as she run along the quay - side she all at once turn up an entry , and through an open door . 

 he , follow all the time , come into a quiet dark parlour , with a cloth and tea - thing on the table ready for breakfast ; the change from the bright sunny air out of door to the deep shadow of this room make he think for the first moment that she have pass on , and that no one be there , and he stand for an instant baffle , and hear no sound but the beating of his own heart ; but an irrepressible sob gasp make he look round , and there he see she cower behind the door , her face cover tight up , and sharp shudder go through her whole frame . 

 ' my love , my darling ! ' say he , go up to she , and try to raise she , and to loosen her hand away from her face . ' I have   be too sudden for thee : it be thoughtless in I ; but I have so look forward to this time , and see thee come along the field , and go past I , but I should ha ' be more tender and careful of thee . Nay ! let I have another look of thy sweet face . ' 

 all this he whisper in the old tone of manoeuvre love , in that voice she have yearn and hunger to hear in life , and have not hear , for all her longing , save in her dream . 

 she try to crouch more and more into the corner , into the hidden shadow to sink into the ground out of sight . 

 once more he speak , beseech she to lift up her face , to let he hear her speak . 

 but she only moan . 

 ' Sylvia ! ' say he , think he could change his tactic , and pique she into speak , that he would make a pretence of suspicion and offence . 

 ' Sylvia ! one would think you be not   glad to see I back again at length . I only come in late last night , and my first thought on waken be of you ; it have be ever since I leave you . ' 

 Sylvia take her hand away from her face ; it be gray as the face of death ; her awful eye be passionless in her despair . 

 ' where have yo ' be ? ' she ask , in slow , hoarse tone , as if her voice be half strangle within she . 

 ' be ! ' say he , a red light come into his eye , as he bend his look upon she ; now , indeed , a true and not an assumed suspicion enter his mind . 

 ' be ! ' he repeat ; then , come a step near to she , and take her hand , not tenderly this time , but with a resolution to be satisfied . 

 ' do not your cousin Hepburn , I mean do not he tell you ? he see the press - gang seize I , I give he a message to you I bid you keep true to I as I would be to you . ' 

 between every clause of this speech he pause and gasp for her answer ; but none come . her eye dilate and hold his steady gaze prisoner as with a magical charm neither could look away from the other 's wild , search gaze . when he have end , she be silent for a moment , then she cry out , shrill and fierce , 

 ' Philip ! ' no answer . 

 Wilder and shriller still , ' Philip ! ' she cry . 

 he be in the distant ware - room complete the last night 's work before the regular shop hour begin ; before breakfast , also , that his wife might not find he wait and impatient . 

 he hear she cry ; it cut through door , and still air , and great bale of woollen stuff ; he think that she have hurt herself , that her mother be bad , that her baby be ill , and he hasten to the spot whence the cry proceed . 

 on open the door that separate the shop from the sitting - room , he see the back of a naval officer , and his wife on the ground , huddle up in a heap ; when she perceive he come in , she drag herself up by mean of a chair , grope like a blind person , and come and stand face he . 

 the officer turn fiercely round , and would have come towards Philip , who be so bewildered by the scene that even yet he do not understand who the stranger be , do not perceive for an instant that he see the realization of his great dread . 

 but Sylvia lay her hand on Kinraid 's arm , and assume to herself the right of speech . Philip do not know her voice , it be so change . 

 ' Philip , ' she say , ' this be Kinraid come back again to we d I . he be alive ; he have niver be dead , only take by t ' press - gang . and he say yo ' see it , and know it all t ' time . Speak , be it so ? ' 

 Philip know not what to say , whither to turn , under what refuge of word or act to shelter . 

 Sylvia 's influence be keep kinraid silent , but he be rapidly pass beyond it . 

 ' speak ! ' he cry , loosen himself from Sylvia 's light grasp , and come towards Philip , with a threatening gesture . ' do I not bid you tell she how it be ? do I not bid you say how I would be faithful to she , and she be to be faithful to I ? oh ! you damn scoundrel ! have you keep it from she all that time , and let she think I dead , or false ? take that ! ' 

 his closed fist be up to strike the man , who hang his head with bitter shame and miserable self - reproach ; but Sylvia come swift between the blow and its victim . 

 ' Charley , thou shall not   strike he , ' she say . ' he be a damned scoundrel '   this be say in the hard , quiet tone   ' but he be my husband . ' 

 ' oh ! thou false heart ! ' exclaim Kinraid , turn sharp on she . ' if ever I trust woman , I trust you , Sylvia Robson . ' 

 he make as though throw she from he , with a gesture of contempt that sting she to life . 

 ' oh , Charley ! ' she cry , spring to he , ' dunnot cut I to the quick ; have pity on I , though he have none . I do so love thee ; it be my very heart - string as give way when they tell I thou be drown feyther , and th ' Corneys , and all , iverybody . thy hat and t ' bit o ' ribbon I give thee be find drench and dripping wi ' sea - water ; and I go mourn for thee all the day long dunnot turn away from I ; only hearken this once , and then kill I dead , and I will bless yo ' , and have niver be mysel ' since ; niver cease to feel t ' sun grow dark and th ' air chill and dreary when I think on t ' time when thou be alive . I do , my Charley , my own love ! and I think thou be dead for iver , and I wish I be lie beside thee . oh , Charley ! Philip , theere , where he stand , could tell yo ' this be true . Philip , be not   it so ? ' 

 ' would God I be dead ! ' moan forth the unhappy , guilty man . but she have turn to Kinraid , and be speak again to he , and neither of they hear or heed he they be draw close and close together she , with her cheek and eye aflame , talk eagerly . 

 ' and feyther be take up , and all for set some free as t ' press - gang have get by a foul trick ; and he be put I ' York prison , and try , and hung ! hung ! Charley ! good kind feyther be hang on a gallow ; and mother lose her sense and grow silly in grief , and we be like to be turn out on t ' wide world , and poor mother dateless and I think yo ' be dead oh ! I think yo ' be dead , I do oh , Charley , Charley ! ' 

 by this time they be in each other 's arm , she with her head on his shoulder , cry as if her heart would break . 

 Philip come forwards and take hold of she to pull she away ; but Charley hold she tight , mutely defy Philip . unconsciously she be Philip 's protection , in that hour of danger , from a blow which might have be his death if strong will could have aid it to kill . 

 ' Sylvie ! ' say he , grasp she tight . ' listen to I . he do not   love yo ' as I do . he have love other woman . I , yo ' yo ' alone . he love other girl before yo ' , and have leave off love them . I I wish God would free my heart from the pang ; but it will go on till I die , whether yo ' love I or not . and then where be I ? oh ! that very night that he be take , I be a - thinking on yo ' and on he ; and I might ha ' give yo ' his message , but I hear they speak of he as know he well ; talk of his false fickle way . how be I to know he would keep true to thee ? it might be a sin in I , I can not say ; my heart and my sense be go dead within I . I know this , I have   love yo ' as no man but I ever love before . have some pity and forgiveness on I , if it be only because I have   be so tormented with my love . ' 

 he look at she with feverish eager wistfulness ; it fade away into despair as she make no sign of have even hear his word . he let go his hold of she , and his arm fall loosely by his side . 

 ' I may die , ' he say , ' for my life be end ! ' 

 ' Sylvia ! ' speak out Kinraid , bold and fervent , ' your marriage be no marriage . you be trick into it . you be my wife , not his . I be your husband ; we plight each other our troth . see ! here be my half of the sixpence . ' 

 he pull it out from his bosom , tie by a black ribbon round his neck . 

 ' when they strip I and search I in th ' french prison , I manage to keep this . no lie can break the oath we swear to each other . I can get your pretence of a marriage set aside . I be in favour with my admiral , and he will do a deal for I , and back I out . come with I ; your marriage shall be set aside , and we will be marry again , all square and above - board . come away . leave that damn fellow to repent of the trick he play an honest sailor ; we will be true , whatever have come and go . Come , Sylvia . ' 

 his arm be round her waist , and he be draw she towards the door , his face all crimson with eagerness and hope . just then the baby cry . 

 ' Hark ! ' say she , start away from Kinraid , ' baby 's cry for I . his child yes , it be his child I would forget that forget all . I will make my vow now , lest I lose mysel ' again . I will never forgive yon man , nor live with he as his wife again . all that be do and end . he be spoil my life , he be spoil it for as long as iver I live on this earth ; but neither yo ' nor he shall spoil my soul . it go hard wi ' me , Charley , it do indeed . I will just give yo ' one kiss one little kiss and then , so help I God , I will niver see nor hear till no , not that , not that be need I will niver see sure that be enough I will never see yo ' again on this side heaven , so help I God ! I be bind and tie , but I have   swear my oath to he as well as yo ' : there be thing I will do , and there be thing I will not . kiss I once more . God help I , he be go ! ' 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 a reckless RECRUIT 

 she lie across a chair , her arm helplessly stretch out , her face unseen . every now and then a thrill run through her body : she be talk to herself all the time with incessant low incontinence of word . 

 Philip stand near she , motionless : he do not know whether she be conscious of his presence ; in fact , he know nothing but that he and she be sunder for ever ; he could only take in that one idea , and it numb all other thought . 

 once more her baby cry for the comfort she alone could give . 

 she rise to her foot , but stagger when she try to walk ; her glaze eye fall upon Philip as he instinctively make a step to hold she steady . no light come into her eye any more than if she have look upon a perfect stranger ; not even be there the contraction of dislike . some other figure fill her mind , and she see he no more than she see the inanimate table . that way of look at he wither he up more than any sign of aversion would have do . 

 he watch she laboriously climb the stair , and vanish out of sight ; and sit down with a sudden feeling of extreme bodily weakness . 

 the door of communication between the parlour and the shop be open . that be the first event of which Philip take note ; but Phoebe have come in unaware to he , with the intention of remove the breakfast thing on her return from market , and see they unused , and know that Sylvia have sate up all night with her mother , she have go back to the kitchen . Philip have neither see nor hear she . 

 now Coulson come in , amazed at Hepburn 's non - appearance in the shop . 

 ' why ! Philip , what be ado ? how ill yo ' look , man ! ' exclaim he , thoroughly alarm by Philip 's ghastly appearance . ' what be the matter ? ' 

 ' I ! ' say Philip , slowly gather his thought . ' why should there be anything the matter ? ' 

 his instinct , quick to act than his reason , make he shrink from his misery be notice , much more make any subject for explanation or sympathy . 

 ' there may be nothing the matter wi ' thee , ' say Coulson , ' but thou be the look of a corpse on thy face . I be afeare something be wrong , for it be half - past nine , and thee so punctual ! ' 

 he almost guard Philip into the shop , and keep furtively watch he , and perplex himself with Philip 's odd , strange way . 

 hester , too , observe the heavy break - down expression on Philip 's ashen face , and her heart ache for he ; but after that first glance , which tell she so much , she avoid all appearance of notice or watch . only a shadow brood over her sweet , calm face , and once or twice she sigh to herself . 

 it be market - day , and people come in and out , bring their store of gossip from the country , or the town from the farm or the quay - side . 

 among the piece of news , the rescue of the smack the night before furnish a large topic ; and by - and - by Philip hear a name that startle he into attention . 

 the landlady of a small public - house much frequent by sailor be talk to Coulson . 

 ' there be a sailor aboard of she as know Kinraid by sight , in Shields , year ago ; and he call he by his name afore they be well out o ' t ' river . and Kinraid be no way set up , for all his lieutenant 's uniform   and eh ! but they say he look handsome in it ! ; but he tell ' m all about it how he be press aboard a man - o'-war , an ' for his good conduct be make a warrant officer , boatswain , or something ! ' 

 all the people in the shop be listen now ; Philip alone seem engross in fold up a piece of cloth , so as to leave no possible chance of crease in it ; yet he lose not a syllable of the good woman 's narration . 

 she , pleased with the enlarged audience her tale have attract , go on with fresh vigour . 

 ' An ' there be a gallant captain , one Sir Sidney Smith , and he have a notion o ' go smack into a french port , an ' carryin ' off a vessel from right under their very nose ; an ' say he , " which of yo ' british sailor will go along with I to death or glory ? " so Kinraid stand up like a man , an ' " I will go with yo ' , captain , " he say . so they , an ' some other as brave , go off , an ' do their work , an ' choose whativer it be , they do it famously ; but they get catch by they French , an ' be clap into prison I ' France for iver so long ; but at last one Philip Philip something   he be a Frenchman , I know   help them to escape , in a fishin'-boat . but they be welcome by th ' whole british squadron as be i ' t ' Channel for t ' piece of dare they would do I ' cuttin ' out t ' ship from a french port ; an ' Captain Sir Sidney Smith be make an admiral , an ' he as we use t ' call Charley Kinraid , the specksioneer , be make a lieutenant , an ' a commission officer I ' t ' King 's service ; and be come to great glory , and slep in my house this very blessed night as be just past ! ' 

 a murmur of applause and interest and rejoice buzz all around Philip . all this be publicly know about Kinraid , and how much more ? all Monkshaven might hear tomorrow nay , to - day of Philip 's treachery to the hero of the hour ; how he have conceal his fate , and supplant he in his love . 

 Philip shrink from the burst of popular indignation which he know must follow . any wrong do to one who stand on the pinnacle of the people 's favour be resent by each individual as a personal injury ; and among a primitive set of country - folk , who recognize the wild passion in love , as it exist untame by the trammel of reason and self - restraint , any story of baulked affection , or treachery in such matter , spread like wildfire . 

 Philip know this quite well ; his doom of disgrace lie plain before he , if only Kinraid speak the word . his head be bent down while he thus listen and reflect . he half resolve on do something ; he lift up his head , catch the reflection of his face in the little strip of glass on the opposite side , in which the woman might look at themselves in their contemplated purchase , and quite resolve . 

 the sight he see in the mirror be his own long , sad , pale face , make plainer and grayer by the heavy pressure of the morning 's event . he see his stoop figure , his rounded shoulder , with something like a feeling of disgust at his personal appearance as he remember the square , upright build of Kinraid ; his fine uniform , with epaulette and sword - belt ; his handsome brown face ; his dark eye , splendid with the fire of passion and indignation ; his white tooth , gleam out with the terrible smile of scorn . 

 the comparison drive Philip from passive hopelessness to active despair . 

 he go abruptly from the crowded shop into the empty parlour , and on into the kitchen , where he take up a piece of bread , and heedless of Phoebe 's look and word , begin to eat it before he even leave the place ; for he need the strength that food would give ; he need it to carry he out of the sight and the knowledge of all who might hear what he have do , and point their finger at he . 

 he pause a moment in the parlour , and then , set his tooth tight together , he go upstairs . 

 first of all he go into the bit of a room opening out of theirs , in which his baby sleep . he dearly love the child , and many a time would run in and play a while with it ; and in such gambol he and Sylvia have pass their happy moment of wed life . 

 the little Bella be have her morning slumber ; Nancy use to tell long afterwards how he kneel down by the side of her cot , and be so strange she think he must have pray , for all it be nigh upon eleven o'clock , and folk in their sens only say their prayer when they get up , and when they go to bed . 

 then he rise , and stoop over , and give the child a long , lingering , soft , fond kiss . and on tip - toe he pass away into the room where his aunt lay ; his aunt who have be so true a friend to he ! he be thankful to know that in her present state she be safe from the knowledge of what be past , safe from the sound of the shame to come . 

 he have not mean to see Sylvia again ; he dread the look of her hatred , her scorn , but there , outside her mother 's bed , she lay , apparently asleep . Mrs. Robson , too , be sleep , her face towards the wall . Philip could not help it ; he go to have one last look at his wife . she be turn towards her mother , her face avert from he ; he could see the tear - stain , the swollen eyelid , the lip yet quiver : he stoop down , and bent to kiss the little hand that lie listless by her side . as his hot breath near that hand it be twitch away , and a shiver run through the whole prostrate body . and then he know that she be not asleep , only wear out by her misery , misery that he have cause . 

 he sigh heavily ; but he go away , down - stair , and away for ever . only as he enter the parlour his eye catch on two silhouette , one of himself , one of Sylvia , do in the first month of their marriage , by some wandering artist , if so he could be call . they be hang against the wall in little oval wooden frame ; black profile , with the light do in gold ; about as poor semblance of humanity as could be conceive ; but Philip go up , and after look for a minute or so at Sylvia 's , he take it down , and button his waistcoat over it . 

 it be the only thing he take away from his home . 

 he go down the entry on to the quay . the river be there , and water , they say , have a luring power , and a weird promise of rest in their perpetual monotony of sound . but many people be there , if such a temptation present itself to Philip 's mind ; the sight of his fellow - townsman , perhaps of his acquaintance , drive he up another entry the town be burrow with such back into the High Street , which he straightway cross into a well - know court , out of which rough step lead to the summit of the hill , and on to the fell and moor beyond . 

 he plunge and pant up this rough ascent . from the top he could look down on the whole town lie below , sever by the bright shin river into two part . to the right lie the sea , shimmering and heaving ; there be the cluster of mast rise out of the little port ; the irregular roof of the house ; which of they , think he , as he carry his eye along the quay - side to the market - place , which of they be his ? and he single it out in its unfamiliar aspect , and see the thin blue smoke rise from the kitchen chimney , where even now Phoebe be cook the household meal that he never more must share . 

 up at that thought and away , he know not nor care not whither . he go through the plough field where the corn be newly springing ; he come down upon the vast sunny sea , and turn his back upon it with loathing ; he make his way inland to the high green pasture ; the short upland turf above which the lark hang poise ' at heaven 's gate ' . he stride along , so straight and heedless of briar and bush , that the wild black cattle cease from graze , and look after he with their great blank puzzled eye . 

 he have pass all enclosure and stone fence now , and be fairly on the desolate brown moor ; through the wither last year 's ling and fern , through the prickly gorse , he tramp , crush down the tender shoot of this year 's growth , and heedless of the startled plover 's cry , goad by the fury . his only relief from thought , from the remembrance of Sylvia 's look and word , be in violent bodily action . 

 so he go on till evening shadow and ruddy evening light come out upon the wild fell . 

 he have cross road and lane , with a bitter avoidance of man 's track ; but now the strong instinct of self - preservation come out , and his ache limb , his weary heart , give great pant and beat for a time , and then cease altogether till a mist swam and quiver before his ache eye , warn he that he must find some shelter and food , or lie down to die . he fall down now , often ; stumble over the slight obstacle . he have pass the cattle pasture ; he be among the black - face sheep ; and they , too , cease nibbling , and look after he , and somehow , in his poor wandering imagination , their silly face turn to likeness of monkshaven people people who ought to be far , far away . 

 ' Thou'll be belate on these fell , if thou do not   tak ' heed , ' shout some one . 

 Philip look abroad to see whence the voice proceed . 

 an old stiff - legged shepherd , in a smock - frock , be within a couple of hundred yard . Philip do not answer , but stagger and stumble towards he . 

 ' good lork ! ' say the man , ' wheere hast ta be ? Thou 's see Oud Harry , I think , thou look so scared . ' 

 Philip rally himself , and try to speak up to the old standard of respectability ; but the effort be pitiful to see , have any one be by , who could have understand the pain it cause to restrain cry of bodily and mental agony . 

 ' I have   lose my way , that be all . ' 

 " twould ha ' be enough , too , I be thinkin ' , if I have not   come out after t ' ewe . there 's t ' Three Griffins near at hand : a sup o ' holland will set thee to reeght . ' 

 Philip follow faintly . he could not see before he , and be guide by the sound of footstep rather than by the sight of the figure move onwards . he keep stumble ; and he know that the old shepherd swear at he ; but he also know such curse proceed from no ill - will , only from annoyance at the delay in go and ' seem ' after t ' ewe . ' but have the man 's word convey the utmost expression of hatred , Philip would neither have wonder at they , nor resent they . 

 they come into a wild mountain road , unfence from the fell . a hundred yard off , and there be a small public - house , with a broad ruddy oblong of firelight shin across the tract . 

 ' theere ! ' say the old man . ' thee can not well miss that . a dunno tho ' , thee bee sich a gawby . ' 

 so he go on , and deliver Philip safely up to the landlord . 

 ' here be a felly as a fund on t ' fell side , just as one as if he be drunk ; but he be sober enough , a reckon , only summat 's wrong I ' his head , a'm thinkin ' . ' 

 ' no ! ' say Philip , sit down on the first chair he come to . ' I be right enough ; just fairly weary out : lose my way , ' and he faint . 

 there be a recruiting sergeant of marine sit in the house - place , drinking . he , too , like Philip , have lose his way ; but be turn his blunder to account by tell all manner of wonderful story to two or three rustic who have come in ready to drink on any pretence ; especially if they could get good liquor without pay for it . 

 the sergeant rise as Philip fall back , and bring up his own mug of beer , into which a noggin of gin have be put   call in Yorkshire ' dog's - nose ' . he partly pour and partly spill some of this beverage on Philip 's face ; some drop go through the pale and part lip , and with a start the wear - out man revive . 

 ' bring he some victual , landlord , ' call out the recruiting sergeant . ' I will stand shot . ' 

 they bring some cold bacon and coarse oat - cake . the sergeant ask for pepper and salt ; mince the food fine and make it savoury , and keep administer it by teaspoonful ; urge Philip to drink from time to time from his own cup of dog's - nose . 

 a burn thirst , which need no stimulant from either pepper or salt , take possession of Philip , and he drink freely , scarcely recognize what he drink . it take effect on one so habitually sober ; and he be soon in that state when the imagination work wildly and freely . 

 he see the sergeant before he , handsome , and bright , and active , in his gay red uniform , without a care , as it seem to Philip , take life lightly ; admire and respect everywhere because of his cloth . 

 if Philip be gay , and brisk , well - dressed like he , return with martial glory to Monkshaven , would not Sylvia love he once more ? could not he win her heart ? he be brave by nature , and the prospect of danger do not daunt he , if ever it present itself to his imagination . 

 he think he be cautious in enter on the subject of enlistment with his new friend , the sergeant ; but the latter be twenty time as cunning as he , and know by experience how to bait his hook . 

 Philip be old by some year than the regulation age ; but , at that time of great demand for man , the question of age be lightly entertain . the sergeant be profuse in statement of the advantage present to a man of education in his branch of the service ; how such a one be sure to rise ; in fact , it would have seem from the sergeant 's account , as though the difficulty consist in remain in the rank . 

 Philip 's dizzy head think the subject over and over again , each time with fail power of reason . 

 at length , almost , as it would seem , by some sleight of hand , he find the fatal shilling in his palm , and have promise to go before the near magistrate to be swear in as one of his Majesty 's marine the next morning . and after that he remember nothing more . 

 he waken up in a little truckle - bed in the same room as the sergeant , who lie sleep the sleep of full contentment ; while gradually , drop by drop , the bitter recollection of the day before came , fill up Philip 's cup of agony . 

 he know that he have receive the bounty - money ; and though he be aware that he have be partly trick into it , and have no hope , no care , indeed , for any of the advantage so liberally promise he the night before , yet he be resign , with utterly despondent passiveness , to the fate to which he have pledge himself . anything be welcome that sever he from his former life , that could make he forget it , if that be possible ; and also welcome anything which increase the chance of death without the sinfulness of his own participation in the act . he find in the dark recess of his mind the dead body of his fancy of the previous night ; that he might come home , handsome and glorious , to win the love that have never be his . 

 but he only sigh over it , and put it aside out of his sight so full of despair be he . he could eat no breakfast , though the sergeant order of the good . the latter keep watch his new recruit out of the corner of his eye , expect a remonstrance , or dread a sudden bolt . 

 but Philip walk with he the two or three mile in the most submissive silence , never utter a syllable of regret or repentance ; and before Justice Cholmley , of Holm - Fell Hall , he be swear into his Majesty 's service , under the name of Stephen Freeman . with a new name , he begin a new life . alas ! the old life live for ever ! 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 thing unutterable 

 after Philip have pass out of the room , Sylvia lie perfectly still , from very exhaustion . her mother sleep on , happily unconscious of all the turmoil that have take place ; yes , happily , though the heavy sleep be to end in death . but of this her daughter know nothing , imagine that it be refreshing slumber , instead of an ebbing of life . both mother and daughter lie motionless till Phoebe enter the room to tell Sylvia that dinner be on the table . 

 then Sylvia sate up , and put back her hair , bewildered and uncertain as to what be to be do next ; how she should meet the husband to whom she have discard all allegiance , repudiate the solemn promise of love and obedience which she have vow . 

 Phoebe come into the room , with natural interest in the invalid , scarcely old than herself . 

 ' how be t ' old lady ? ' ask she , in a low voice . 

 Sylvia turn her head round to look ; her mother have never move , but be breathe in a loud uncomfortable manner , that make her stoop over she to see the avert face more nearly . 

 ' Phoebe ! ' she cry , ' come here ! she look strange and odd ; her eye be open , but do not   see I . Phoebe ! Phoebe ! ' 

 ' sure enough , she be in a bad way ! ' say Phoebe , climbing stiffly on to the bed to have a near view . ' hold her head a little up t ' ease her breathin ' while I go for master ; he will be for sendin ' for t ' doctor , I will be bind . ' 

 Sylvia take her mother 's head and lay it fondly on her breast , speak to she and try to rouse she ; but it be of no avail : the hard , stertorous breathing grow bad and bad . 

 Sylvia cry out for help ; Nancy come , the baby in her arm . they have be in several time before that morning ; and the child come smile and crow at its mother , who be support her own die parent . 

 ' oh , Nancy ! ' say Sylvia ; ' what be the matter with mother ? yo ' can see her face ; tell I quick ! ' 

 Nancy set the baby on the bed for all reply , and run out of the room , cry out , 

 ' Master ! master ! come quick ! t ' old missus be a - dying ! ' 

 this appear to be no news to Sylvia , and yet the word come on she with a great shock , but for all that she could not cry ; she be surprise herself at her own deadness of feeling . 

 her baby crawl to she , and she have to hold and guard both her mother and her child . it seem a long , long time before any one come , and then she hear muffled voice , and a heavy tramp : it be Phoebe lead the doctor upstairs , and Nancy creep in behind to hear his opinion . 

 he do not ask many question , and Phoebe reply more frequently to his inquiry than do Sylvia , who look into his face with a blank , tearless , speechless despair , that give he more pain than the sight of her die mother . 

 the long decay of Mrs. Robson 's faculty and health , of which he be well aware , have in a certain manner prepare he for some such sudden termination of the life whose duration be hardly desirable , although he give several direction as to her treatment ; but the white , pinch face , the great dilate eye , the slow comprehension of the young woman , strike he with alarm ; and he go on ask for various particular , more with a view of rouse Sylvia , if even it be to tear , than for any other purpose that the information thus obtain could answer . 

 ' you have well have pillow prop up behind she it will not be for long ; she do not know that you be hold she , and it be only tire you to no purpose ! ' 

 Sylvia 's terrible stare continue : he put his advice into action , and gently try to loosen her clasp , and tender hold . this she resist ; lay her cheek against her poor mother 's unconscious face . 

 ' where be hepburn ? ' say he . ' he ought to be here ! ' 

 Phoebe look at Nancy , Nancy at Phoebe . it be the latter who reply , 

 ' he be neither I ' t ' house nor I ' t ' shop . a seed he go past t ' kitchen window well nor an hour ago ; but neither William Coulson or Hester Rose know where he be go to . 

 Dr Morgan 's lip be pucker up into a whistle , but he make no sound . 

 ' give I baby ! ' he say , suddenly . Nancy have take she up off the bed where she have be sit , encircle by her mother 's arm . the nursemaid give she to the doctor . he watch the mother 's eye , it follow her child , and he be rejoice . he give a little pinch to the baby 's soft flesh , and she cry out piteously ; again the same action , the same result . Sylvia lay her mother down , and stretch out her arm for her child , hush it , and moan over it . 

 ' so far so good ! ' say Dr Morgan to himself . ' but where be the husband ? he ought to be here . ' he go down - stair to make inquiry for Philip ; that poor young creature , about whose health he have never feel thoroughly satisfied since the fever after her confinement , be in an anxious condition , and with an inevitable shock await she . her husband ought to be with she , and support she to bear it . 

 Dr Morgan go into the shop . hester alone be there . Coulson have go to his comfortable dinner at his well - order house , with his common - place wife . if he have feel anxious about Philip 's look and strange disappearance , he have also manage to account for they in some indifferent way . 

 hester be alone with the shop - boy ; few people come in during the universal monkshaven dinner - hour . she be rest her head on her hand , and puzzle and distress about many thing all that be imply by the proceeding of the evening before between Philip and Sylvia ; and that be confirm by Philip 's miserable look and strange abstract way to - day . oh ! how easy hester would have find it to make he happy ! not merely how easy , but what happiness it would have be to she to merge she every wish into the one great object of fulfil his will . to she , an on - looker , the course of married life , which should lead to perfect happiness , seem to plain ! alas ! it be often so ! and the resist force which make all such harmony and delight impossible be not recognize by the bystander , hardly by the actor . but if these resist force be only superficial , or constitutional , they be but the necessary discipline here , and do not radically affect the love which will make all thing right in heaven . 

 some glimmering of this latter comfort truth shed its light on Hester 's troubled thought from time to time . but again , how easy would it have be to she to tread the maze that lead to Philip 's happiness ; and how difficult it seem to the wife he have choose ! 

 she be arouse by Dr Morgan 's voice . 

 ' so both Coulson and Hepburn have leave the shop to your care , hester . I want Hepburn , though ; his wife be in a very anxious state . where be he ? can you tell I ? ' 

 ' Sylvia in an anxious state ! I have   not see she to - day , but last night she look as well as could be . ' 

 ' ay , ay ; but many a thing happen in four - and - twenty hour . her mother be die , may be dead by this time ; and her husband should be there with she . can not   you send for he ? ' 

 ' I do not   know where he be , ' say hester . ' he go off from here all on a sudden , when there be all the market - folk in t ' shop ; I think he would maybe go to John Foster 's about th ' money , for they be pay a deal in . I will send there and inquire . ' 

 no ! the messenger bring back word that he have not be see at their bank all morning . further inquiry be make by the anxious hester , by the doctor , by Coulson ; all they could learn be that Phoebe have see he pass the kitchen window about eleven o'clock , when she be peel the potato for dinner ; and two lad play on the quay - side thought they have see he among a group of sailor ; but these latter , as far as they could be identify , have no knowledge of his appearance among they . 

 before night the whole town be excited about his disappearance . before night Bell Robson have go to her long home . and Sylvia still lie quiet and tearless , apparently more unmoved than any other creature by the event of the day , and the strange vanishing of her husband . 

 the only thing she seem to care for be her baby ; she hold it tight in her arm , and Dr Morgan bid they leave it there , its touch might draw the desire tear into her weary , sleepless eye , and charm the aching pain out of they . 

 they be afraid lest she should inquire for her husband , whose non - appearance at such a time of sorrow to his wife must   they think   seem strange to she . and night draw on while they be all in this state . she have go back to her own room without a word when they have desire she to do so ; caress her child in her arm , and sit down on the first chair she come to , with a heavy sigh , as if even this slight bodily exertion have be too much for she . they see her eye turn towards the door every time it be open , and they think it be with anxious expectation of one who could not be find , though many be seek for he in all probable place . 

 when night come some one have to tell she of her husband 's disappearance ; and Dr Morgan be the person who undertake this . 

 he come into her room about nine o'clock ; her baby be sleep in her arm ; she herself pale as death , still silent and tearless , though strangely watchful of gesture and sound , and probably cognizant of more than they imagine . 

 ' well , Mrs. Hepburn , ' say he , as cheerfully as he could , ' I should advise your go to bed early ; for I fancy your husband will not   come home to - night . some journey or other , that perhaps Coulson can explain well than I can , will most likely keep he away till to - morrow . it be very unfortunate that he should be away at such a sad time as this , as I be sure he will feel when he return ; but we must make the good of it . ' 

 he watch she to see the effect of his word . 

 she sigh , that be all . he still remain a little while . she lift her head up a little and ask , 

 ' how long do yo ' think she be unconscious , doctor ? could she hear thing , think yo ' , afore she fall into that strange kind o ' slumber ? ' 

 ' I can not tell , ' say he , shake his head . ' be she breathe in that hard snore kind of way when you leave she this morning ? ' 

 ' yes , I think so ; I can not tell , so much have happen . ' 

 ' when you come back to she , after your breakfast , I think you say she be in much the same position ? ' 

 ' yes , and yet I may be tell yo ' lie ; if I could but think : but it be my head as be ache so ; doctor , I wish yo'd go , for I need be alone , I be so mazed . ' 

 ' good - night , then , for you be a wise woman , I see , and mean to go to bed , and have a good night with baby there . ' 

 but he go down to Phoebe , and tell she to go in from time to time , and see how her mistress be . 

 he find Hester Rose and the old servant together ; both have be cry , both be evidently in great trouble about the death and the mystery of the day . 

 hester ask if she might go up and see Sylvia , and the doctor give his leave , talk meanwhile with Phoebe over the kitchen fire . hester come down again without see Sylvia . the door of the room be bolt , and everything quiet inside . 

 ' do she know where her husband be , think you ? ' ask the doctor at this account of hester 's . ' she be not anxious about he at any rate : or else the shock of her mother 's death have be too much for she . we must hope for some change in the morning ; a good fit of crying , or a fidget about her husband , would be more natural . good - night to you both , ' and off he go . 

 Phoebe and Hester avoid look at each other at these word . both be conscious of the probability of something have go seriously wrong between the husband and wife . hester have the recollection of the previous night , Phoebe the untasted breakfast of to - day to go upon . 

 she speak first . 

 ' a just wish he would come home to still folk ' tongue . it need niver ha ' be know if t ' old lady have not   die this day of all other . it be such a thing for t ' shop t ' have one o ' t ' partner missin ' , an ' no one for t ' know what be come on he . it niver happen I ' foster ' day , that be a ' I know . ' 

 ' he will maybe come back yet , ' say hester . ' it be not so very late . ' 

 ' it be market day , and a ' , ' continue Phoebe , ' just as if iverythe mun go wrong together ; an ' a ' t ' country customers'll go back wi ' fine tale I ' their mouth , as Measter Hepburn be stray an ' missin ' just like a beast o ' some kind . ' 

 ' Hark ! be not   that a step ? ' say hester suddenly , as a footfall sound in the now quiet street ; but it pass the door , and the hope that have arise on its approach fall as the sound die away . 

 ' he will noane come to - night , ' say Phoebe , who have be as eager a listener as hester , however . ' thou'd good go thy way home ; a shall stay up , for it be not seemly for we a ' t ' go to our bed , an ' a corpse in t ' house ; an ' Nancy , as might ha ' watch , be go to her bed this hour past , like a lazy boot as she be . a can hear , too , if t ' measter do come home ; tho ' a'll be bind he wunnot ; choose wheere he be , he will be I ' bed by now , for it be well on to eleven . I will let thee out by t ' shop - door , and stand by it till thou 's close at home , for it be ill for a young woman to be I ' t ' street so late . ' 

 so she hold the door open , and shade the candle from the flicker outer air , while Hester go to her home with a heavy heart . 

 heavily and hopelessly do they all meet in the morning . no news of Philip , no change in Sylvia ; an unceasing flow of angling and conjecture and gossip radiating from the shop into the town . 

 hester could have entreat Coulson on her knee to cease from repeat the detail of a story of which every word touch on a raw place in her sensitive heart ; moreover , when they talk together so eagerly , she could not hear the come footstep on the pavement without . 

 once some one hit very near the truth in a chance remark . 

 ' it seem strange , ' she say , ' how as one man turn up , another just disappear . why , it be but upo ' Tuesday as Kinraid come back , as all his own folk have think to be dead ; and next day here be Measter Hepburn as be go no one know wheere ! ' 

 ' that be t ' way I ' this world , ' reply Coulson , a little sententiously . ' this life be full o ' change o ' one kind or another ; they that be dead be alive ; and as for poor Philip , though he be alive , he look fitter to be dead when he come into t ' shop o ' Wednesday morning . ' 

 ' and how do she take it ? ' nod to where Sylvia be suppose to be . 

 ' oh ! she be not herself , so to say . she be just stun by find her mother be die in her very arm when she think as she be only sleep ; yet she be never be able to cry a drop ; so that t ' sorrow 's go inward on her brain , and from all I can hear , she do not   rightly understand as her husband be miss . T ' doctor say if she could but cry , she would come to a juster comprehension of thing . ' 

 ' and what do John and Jeremiah Foster say to it all ? ' 

 ' they be down here many a time in t ' day to ask if he be come back , or how she be ; for they make a deal on them both . they be go t ' attend t ' funeral to - morrow , and have give order as t ' shop be to be shut up in t ' morning . ' 

 to the surprise of every one , Sylvia , who have never leave her room since the night of her mother 's death , and be suppose to be almost unconscious of all that be go on in the house , declare her intention of follow her mother to the grave . no one could do more than remonstrate : no one have sufficient authority to interfere with she . Dr Morgan even think that she might possibly be rouse to tear by the occasion ; only he beg Hester to go with she , that she might have the solace of some woman 's company . 

 she go through the great part of the ceremony in the same hard , unmove manner in which she have receive everything for day past . 

 but on look up once , as they form round the open grave , she see Kester , in his Sunday clothe , with a bit of new crape round his hat , cry as if his heart would break over the coffin of his good , kind mistress . 

 his evident distress , the unexpected sight , suddenly loose the fountain of Sylvia 's tear , and her sob grow so terrible that hester fear she would not be able to remain until the end of the funeral . but she struggle hard to stay till the last , and then she make an effort to go round by the place where Kester stand . 

 ' come and see I , ' be all she could say for crying : and Kester only nod his head he could not speak a word . 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 MYSTERIOUS tiding 

 that very evening Kester come , humbly knock at the kitchen - door . Phoebe open it . he ask to see Sylvia . 

 ' a know not if she will see thee , ' say Phoebe . ' there be no makin ' she out ; sometimes she be for one thing , sometimes she be for another . ' 

 ' she bid I come and see she , ' say Kester . ' only this mornin ' , at missus ' buryin ' , she tell I to come . ' 

 so Phoebe go off to inform Sylvia that Kester be there ; and return with the desire that he would walk into the parlour . an instant after he be go , Phoebe hear he return , and carefully shut the two door of communication between the kitchen and sitting - room . 

 Sylvia be in the latter when Kester come in , hold her baby close to she ; indeed , she seldom let it go now - a - day to any one else , make Nancy 's place quite a sinecure , much to Phoebe 's indignation . 

 Sylvia 's face be shrink , and white , and thin ; her lovely eye alone retain the youthful , almost childlike , expression . she go up to Kester , and shake his horny hand , she herself tremble all over . 

 ' do not   talk to I of she , ' she say hastily . ' I can not stand it . it be a blessing for she to be go , but , oh ' 

 she begin to cry , and then cheer herself up , and swallow down her sob . 

 ' Kester , ' she go on , hastily , ' Charley Kinraid be not   dead ; dost ta know ? he be alive , and he be here o ' Tuesday no , Monday , be it ? I can not tell but he be here ! ' 

 ' a know as he be not   dead . every one be a - speak on it . but a do not   know as thee'd ha ' see he . a take comfort I ' thinkin ' as thou'd ha ' be wi ' thy mother a ' t ' time as he be I ' t ' place . ' 

 ' then he be go ? ' say Sylvia . 

 ' go ; ay , day past . as far as a know , he but stop a ' neet . a thought to mysel '   but yo ' may be sure a say nought to nobody , he be heerd as our Sylvia be marry , and have put it in his pipe , and ta'en hissel ' off to smoke it . ' 

 ' Kester ! ' say Sylvia , lean forwards , and whispering . ' I see he . he be here . Philip see he . Philip have know as he be not   dead a ' this time ! ' 

 Kester stand up suddenly . 

 ' by goom , that chap have a deal t ' answer for . ' 

 a bright red spot be on each of Sylvia 's white cheek ; and for a minute or so neither of they speak . 

 then she go on , still whisper out her word . 

 ' Kester , I be more afeared than I dare tell any one : can they ha ' meet , think yo ' ? T ' very thought turn I sick . I tell Philip my mind , and take a vow again ' he but it would be awful to think on harm happen to he through Kinraid . yet he go out that morning , and have niver be see or hear on sin ' ; and Kinraid be just fall again ' he , and as for that matter , so be I ; but ' 

 the red spot vanish as she face her own imagination . 

 Kester speak . 

 ' it be a thing as can be easy look into . what day an ' time be it when Philip leave this house ? ' 

 ' Tuesday the day she die . I see he in her room that morning between breakfast and dinner ; I could a'most swear to it be be close after eleven . I mind count t ' clock . it be that very morn as Kinraid be here . ' 

 ' a'll go an ' have a pint o ' beer at t ' King 's arm , down on t ' quay - side ; it be theere he put up at . an ' a'm pretty sure as he only stop one night , and leave I ' t ' morning betime . but a'll go see . ' 

 ' do , ' say Sylvia , ' and go out through t ' shop ; they be all watch and watch I to see how I take thing ; and dare not   let on about t ' fire as be burn up my heart . Coulson be I ' t ' shop , but he will not notice thee like Phoebe . ' 

 by - and - by Kester come back . it seem as though Sylvia have never stir ; she look eagerly at he , but do not speak . 

 ' he go away I ' Rob Mason 's mail - cart , he as tak 's t ' letter to Hartlepool . T ' lieutenant   as they can ' he down at t ' King 's arm ; they be as proud on his uniform as if it have be a new - paint sign to swing o'er their door , t ' lieutenant have reckon upo ' stayin ' long wi ' them ; but he go out betime o ' Tuesday morn ' , an ' come back a ' ruffle up , an pay his bill pay for his breakfast , though he touch noane on it an ' go off I ' Rob postman 's mail - cart , as start reg'lar at ten o'clock . Corneys have be theere askin ' for he , an ' makin ' a piece o ' work , as he niver go near em ; and they be cousin . niver a one among them know as he be here as far as a could mak ' out . ' 

 ' thank yo ' , Kester , ' say Sylvia , fall back in her chair , as if all the energy that have keep she stiff and upright be go now that her anxiety be relieve . 

 she be silent for a long time ; her eye shut , her cheek lay on her child 's head . Kester speak next . 

 ' a think it be pretty clear as they'n niver meet . but it be a ' t ' more wonder where thy husband 's go to . Thee and he have word about it , and thou tell he thy mind , thou say ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Sylvia , not move . ' I be afeared lest mother know what I say to he , there , where she be go to I am- ' the tear fill her shut eye , and come softly overflow down her cheek ; ' and yet it be true , what I say , I can not forgive he ; he be just spoil my life , and I be not one - and - twenty yet , and he know how wretched , how very wretched , I be . a word fra ' he would ha ' mend it a ' ; and Charley have bid he speak the word , and give I his faithful love , and Philip see my heart ache day after day , and niver let on as he I be mourn for be alive , and have send I word as he would keep true to I , as I be to do to he . ' 

 ' a wish a'd be theere ; a'd ha ' fell he to t ' ground , ' say Kester , clench his stiff , hard hand with indignation . 

 Sylvia be silent again : pale and weary she sate , her eye still shut . 

 then she say , 

 ' yet he be so good to mother ; and mother love he so . oh , Kester ! ' lift herself up , open her great wistful eye , ' it be well for folk as can die ; they be spar a deal o ' misery . ' 

 ' ay ! ' say he . ' but there be folk as one ' ud like to keep fra ' shirkin ' their misery . think yo ' now as Philip be livin ' ? ' 

 Sylvia shiver all over , and hesitate before she reply . 

 ' I dunnot know . I say such thing ; he deserve them all ' 

 ' well , well , lass ! ' say Kester , sorry that he have ask the question which be produce so much emotion of one kind or another . ' neither thee nor I can tell ; we can neither help nor hinder , seein ' as he be ta'en hissel ' off out on our sight , we would well not think on he . A'll try an ' tell thee some news , if a can think on it wi ' my mind so full . Thou know Haytersbank folk ha ' flitted , and t ' oud place be empty ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Sylvia , with the indifference of one weary out with feeling . 

 ' a only tell yo ' t ' account like for I bein ' at a loose end I ' monkshaven . my sister , she as live at Dale End an ' be a widow , have come int ' town to live ; an ' a'm lodge wi ' her , an ' jobbin ' about . A'm gettin ' pretty well to do , an ' a'm noane far t ' seek , an ' a'm go now : only first a just want for t ' say as a'm thy old friend , a reckon , and if a can do a turn for thee , or go an errand , like as a've   do to - day , or if it be any comfort to talk a bit to one who be know thy life from a babby , why yo've   only t ' send for I , an ' a'd come if it be twenty mile . A'm lodgin ' at Peggy Dawson 's , t ' lath and plaster cottage at t ' right hand o ' t ' bridge , a ' among t ' new house , as they be thinkin ' o ' buildin ' near t ' sea : no one can miss it . ' 

 he stand up and shake hand with she . as he do so , he look at her sleep baby . 

 ' she be liker yo ' than he . a think a'll say , God bless she . ' 

 with the heavy sound of his out - go footstep , baby awake . she ought before this time to have be asleep in her bed , and the disturbance make her cry fretfully . 

 ' hush thee , darling , hush thee ! ' murmur her mother ; ' there be no one leave to love I but thee , and I can not stand thy weeping , my pretty one . hush thee , my babe , hush thee ! ' 

 she whisper soft in the little one 's ear as she take she upstairs to bed . 

 about three week after the miserable date of Bell Robson 's death and Philip 's disappearance , Hester Rose receive a letter from he . she know the writing on the address well ; and it make her tremble so much that it be many minute before she dare to open it , and make herself acquainted with the fact it might disclose . 

 but she need not have fear ; there be no fact tell , unless the vague date of ' London ' might be something to learn . even that much might have be find out by the post - mark , only she have be too much take by surprise to examine it . 

 it run as follow : 


 ' dear hester , 

 ' tell those whom it may concern , that I have leave Monkshaven for ever . no one need trouble themselves about I ; I be provide for . please to make my humble apology to my kind friend , the Messrs Foster , and to my partner , William Coulson . please to accept of my love , and to join the same to your mother . please to give my particular and respectful duty and kind love to my aunt Isabella Robson . her daughter Sylvia know what I have always feel , and shall always feel , for she well than I can ever put into language , so I send she no message ; God bless and keep my child . you must all look on I as one dead ; as I be to you , and maybe shall soon be in reality . 

 ' your affectionate and obedient friend to command , 

 ' PHILIP HEPBURN . 

 ' P.S. oh , Hester ! for God 's sake and mine , look after   ' my wife , ' scratch out   Sylvia and my child . I think Jeremiah Foster will help you to be a friend to they . this be the last solemn request of P. H. she be but very young . ' 


 hester read this letter again and again , till her heart catch the echo of its hopelessness , and sink within she . she put it in her pocket , and reflect upon it all the day long as she serve in the shop . 

 the customer find she as gentle , but far more inattentive than usual . she think that in the evening she would go across the bridge , and consult with the two good old brother Foster . but something occur to put off the fulfilment of this plan . 

 that same morning Sylvia have precede she , with no one to consult , because consultation would have require previous confidence , and confidence would have necessitate such a confession about Kinraid as it be most difficult for Sylvia to make . the poor young wife yet feel that some step must be take by she ; and what it be to be she could not imagine . 

 she have no home to go to ; for as Philip be go away , she remain where she be only on sufferance ; she do not know what mean of livelihood she have ; she be willing to work , nay , would be thankful to take up her old life of country labour ; but with her baby , what could she do ? 

 in this dilemma , the recollection of the old man 's kindly speech and offer of assistance , make , it be true , half in joke , at the end of her wedding visit , come into her mind ; and she resolve to go and ask for some of the friendly counsel and assistance then offer . 

 it would be the first time of she go out since her mother 's funeral , and she dread the effort on that account . more even than on that account do she shrink from go into the street again . she could not get over the impression that Kinraid must be linger near ; and she distrust herself so much that it be a positive terror to think of meet he again . she feel as though , if she but catch a sight of he , the glitter of his uniform , or hear his well - know voice in only a distant syllable of talk , her heart would stop , and she should die from very fright of what would come next . or rather so she feel , and so she think before she take her baby in her arm , as Nancy give it to she after put on its out - of - door attire . 

 with it in her arm she be protect , and the whole current of her thought be change . the infant be wail and suffer with its teething , and the mother 's heart be so occupy in soothe and console her moaning child , that the dangerous quay - side and the bridge be pass almost before she be aware ; nor do she notice the eager curiosity and respectful attention of those she meet who recognize she even through the heavy veil which form part of the draping mourning provide for she by Hester and Coulson , in the first unconscious day after her mother 's death . 

 though public opinion as yet reserve its verdict upon Philip 's disappearance warn possibly by Kinraid 's story against hasty decision and judgment in such time as those of war and general disturbance yet every one agree that no more pitiful fate could have befall Philip 's wife . 

 mark out by her strike beauty as an object of admire interest even in those day when she sate in girlhood 's smile peace by her mother at the Market Cross her father have lose his life in a popular cause , and ignominious as the manner of his death might be , he be look upon as a martyr to his zeal in avenge the wrong of his townsman ; Sylvia have marry amongst they too , and her quiet daily life be well known to they ; and now her husband have be carry off from her side just on the very day when she need his comfort most . 

 for the general opinion be that Philip have be ' carry off ' in seaport town such occurrence be not uncommon in those day either by land - crimp or water - crimps . 

 so Sylvia be treat with silent reverence , as one sorely afflict , by all the unheeded people she meet in her faltering walk to Jeremiah Foster 's . 

 she have calculate her time so as to fall in with he at his dinner hour , even though it oblige she to go to his own house rather than to the bank where he and his brother spend all the business hour of the day . 

 Sylvia be so nearly exhausted by the length of her walk and the weight of her baby , that all she could do when the door be open be to totter into the near seat , sit down , and begin to cry . 

 in an instant kind hand be about she , loosen her heavy cloak , offer to relieve she of her child , who cling to she all the more firmly , and some one be press a glass of wine against her lip . 

 ' no , sir , I can not take it ! wine allay give I th ' headache ; if I might have just a drink o ' water . thank you , ma'am '   to the respectable - looking old servant , ' I be well enough now ; and perhaps , sir , I might speak a word with yo ' , for it be that I have   come for . ' 

 ' it be a pity , Sylvia Hepburn , as thee didst not come to I at the bank , for it be be a long toil for thee all this way in the heat , with thy child . but if there be aught I can do or say for thee , thou hast but to name it , I be sure . Martha ! wilt thou relieve she of her child while she come with I into the parlour ? ' 

 but the wilful little Bella stoutly refuse to go to any one , and Sylvia be not willing to part with she , tired though she be . 

 so the baby be carry into the parlour , and much of her after - life depend on this trivial fact . 

 once instal in the easy - chair , and face to face with Jeremiah , Sylvia do not know how to begin . 

 Jeremiah see this , and kindly give her time to recover herself , by pull out his great gold watch , and let the seal dangle before the child 's eye , almost within reach of the child 's eager little finger . 

 ' she favour you a deal , ' say he , at last . ' More than her father , ' he go on , purposely introduce Philip 's name , so as to break the ice ; for he rightly conjecture she have come to speak to he about something connect with her husband . 

 still Sylvia say nothing ; she be choke down tear and shyness , and unwillingness to take as confidant a man of whom she know so little , on such slight ground   as she now feel it to be   as the little kindly speech with which she have be dismiss from that house the last time that she enter it . 

 ' it be no use keep yo ' , sir , ' she break out at last . ' it be about Philip as I come to speak . do yo ' know any thing whatsomever about he ? he niver have a chance o ' say anything , I know ; but maybe he be write ? ' 

 ' not a line , my poor young woman ! ' say Jeremiah , hastily put an end to that vain idea . 

 ' then he be either dead or go away for iver , ' she whisper . ' I mun be both feyther and mother to my child . ' 

 ' oh ! thee must not give it up , ' reply he . ' many a one be carry off to the war , or to the tender o ' man - o'-war ; and then they turn out to be unfit for service , and be send home . Philip will come back before the year 's out ; thee'll see that . ' 

 ' no ; he will niver come back . and I be not sure as I should iver wish he t ' come back , if I could but know what be go wi ' he . Yo ' see , sir , though I be sore set again ' he , I should not   like harm to happen he . ' 

 ' there be something behind all this that I do not understand . can thee tell I what it be ? ' 

 ' I must , sir , if yo're to help I wi ' your counsel ; and I come up here to ask for it . ' 

 another long pause , during which Jeremiah make a feint of play with the child , who dance and shout with tantalized impatience at not be able to obtain possession of the seal , and at length stretch out her soft round little arm to go to the owner of the coveted possession . surprise at this action rouse Sylvia , and she make some comment upon it . 

 ' I niver know her t ' go to any one afore . I hope she will not be troublesome to yo ' , sir ? ' 

 the old man , who have often long for a child of his own in day go by , be highly pleased by this mark of baby 's confidence , and almost forget , in try to strengthen her regard by all the win wile in his power , how her poor mother be still linger over some painful story which she could not bring herself to tell . 

 ' I be afeared of speak wrong again ' any one , sir . and mother be so fond o ' Philip ; but he keep something from I as would ha ' make I a different woman , and some one else , happen , a different man . I be troth - plight wi ' Kinraid the specksioneer , he as be cousin to th ' Corneys o ' Moss Brow , and come back lieutenant I ' t ' navy last Tuesday three week , after ivery one have think he dead and go these three year . ' 

 she pause . 

 ' well ? ' say Jeremiah , with interest ; although his attention appear to be divide between the mother 's story and the eager playfulness of the baby on his knee . 

 ' Philip know he be alive ; he would see he take by t ' press - gang , and Charley have send a message to I by Philip . ' 

 her white face be redden , her eye flash at this point of her story . 

 ' and he niver tell I a word on it , not when he see I like to break my heart in think as Kinraid be dead ; he keep it a ' to hissel ' ; and watch I cry , and niver say a word to comfort I wi ' t ' truth . it would ha ' be a great comfort , sir , only t ' have have his message if I would niver ha ' be to see he again . but Philip niver let on to any one , as I iver heared on , that he have see Charley that morning as t ' press - gang take he . Yo ' know about feyther 's death , and how friendless mother and I be leave ? and so I marry he ; for he be a good friend to we then , and I be daze like wi ' sorrow , and could see naught else to do for mother . he be allay very tender and good to she , for sure . ' 

 again a long pause of silent recollection , break by one or two deep sigh . 

 ' if I go on , sir , now , I mun ask yo ' to promise as yo'll niver tell . I do so need some one to tell I what I ought to do , and I be lead here , like , else I would ha ' die wi ' it all within my tooth . Yo'll promise , sir ? ' 

 Jeremiah Foster look in her face , and see the wistful , eager look , he be touch almost against his judgment into give the promise require ; she go on . 

 ' upon a Tuesday morning , three week ago , I think , tho ' for t ' matter o ' time it might ha ' be three year , Kinraid come home ; come back for t ' claim I as his wife , and I be we d to Philip ! I meet he I ' t ' road at first ; and I could not   tell he theere . he follow I into t ' house Philip 's house , sir , behind t ' shop and somehow I tell he all , how I be a wed wife to another . then he up and say I have a false heart I false , sir , as have eat my daily bread in bitterness , and have weep t ' night through , all for sorrow and mourn for his death ! then he say as Philip know all t ' time he be alive and come back for I ; and I could not   believe it , and I call Philip , and he come , and a ' that Charley have say be true ; and yet I be Philip 's wife ! so I take a mighty oath , and I say as I would niver hold Philip to be my lawful husband again , nor iver forgive he for t ' evil he would wrought we , but hold he as a stranger and one as have do I a heavy wrong . ' 

 she stop speak ; her story seem to she to end there . but her listener say , after a pause , 

 ' it be a cruel wrong , I grant thee that ; but thy oath be a sin , and thy word be evil , my poor lass . what happen next ? ' 

 ' I do not   justly remember , ' she say , wearily . ' Kinraid go away , and mother cry out ; and I go to she . she be asleep , I think , so I lie down by she , to wish I be dead , and to think on what would come on my child if I die ; and Philip come in softly , and I make as if I be asleep ; and that be t ' very last as I have   iver see or heared of he . ' 

 Jeremiah Foster groan as she end her story . then he pull himself up , and say , in a cheerful tone of voice , 

 ' he will come back , Sylvia Hepburn . he will think well of it : never fear ! ' 

 ' I fear his come back ! ' say she . ' that be what I be fear on ; I would wish as I know on his well - do I ' some other place ; but he and I can niver live together again . ' 

 ' Nay , ' plead Jeremiah . ' thee art sorry what thee say ; thee be sore put about , or thee would not   have say it . ' 

 he be try to be a peace - maker , and to heal over conjugal difference ; but he do not go deep enough . 

 ' I be not sorry , ' say she , slowly . ' I be too deeply wrong to be " put about " ; that would go off wi ' a night 's sleep . it be only the thought of mother   she be dead and happy , and know nought of all this , I trust   that come between I and hat Philip . I be not sorry for what I say . ' 

 Jeremiah have never meet with any one so frank and undisguise in expression of wrong feeling , and he scarcely know what to say . 

 he look extremely grieve , and not a little shocked . so pretty and delicate a young creature to use such strong relentless language ! 

 she seem to read his thought , for she make answer to they . 

 ' I dare say you think I be very wicked , sir , not to be sorry . perhaps I be . I can not   think o ' that for remember how I have   suffer ; and he know how miserable I be , and might ha ' clear my misery away wi ' a word ; and he hold his peace , and now it be too late ! I be sick o ' man and their cruel , deceitful way . I wish I be dead . ' 

 she be cry before she have end this speech , and see her tear , the child begin to cry too , stretch out its little arm to go back to its mother . the hard stony look on her face melt away into the soft , tender love as she clasp the little one to she , and try to soothe its frightened sob . 

 a bright thought come into the old man 's mind . 

 he have be take a complete dislike to she till her pretty way with her baby show he that she have a heart of flesh within she . 

 ' poor little one ! ' say he , ' thy mother have need love thee , for she be deprive thee of thy father 's love . Thou'rt half - way to be an orphan ; yet I can not call thee one of the fatherless to whom God will be a father . Thou'rt a desolate babe , thou may'st well cry ; thine earthly parent have forsake thee , and I know not if the Lord will take thee up . ' 

 Sylvia look up at he affright ; hold her baby tight to she , she exclaim . 

 ' do not   speak so , sir ! it be cursing , sir ! I have not   forsake she ! oh , sir ! those be awful saying . ' 

 ' Thee hast swear never to forgive thy husband , nor to live with he again . dost thee know that by the law of the land , he may claim his child ; and then thou wilt have to forsake it , or to be forswear ? poor little maiden ! ' continue he , once more lure the baby to he with the temptation of the watch and chain . 

 Sylvia think for a while before speak . then she say , 

 ' I can not tell what way to take . while I think my head be craze . it be a cruel turn he do I ! ' 

 ' it be . I could not   have think he guilty of such baseness . ' 

 this acquiescence , which be perfectly honest on Jeremiah 's part , almost take Sylvia by surprise . why might she not hate one who have be both cruel and base in his treatment of she ? and yet she recoil from the application of such hard term by another to Philip , by a cool - judging and indifferent person , as she esteem Jeremiah to be . from some inscrutable turn in her thought , she begin to defend he , or at least to palliate the harsh judgment which she herself have be the first to pronounce . 

 ' he be so tender to mother ; she be dearly fond on he ; he niver spar aught he could do for she , else I would niver ha ' married he . ' 

 ' he be a good and kind - hearted lad from the time he be fifteen . and I never find he out in any falsehood , no more do my brother . ' 

 ' but it be all the same as a lie , ' say Sylvia , swiftly change her ground , ' to leave I to think as Charley be dead , when he know all t ' time he be alive . ' 

 ' it be . it be a self - seek lie ; put thee to pain to get his own end . and the end of it have be that he be drive forth like Cain . ' 

 ' I niver tell he to go , sir . ' 

 ' but thy word send he forth , Sylvia . ' 

 ' I can not unsay they , sir ; and I believe as I should say they again . ' 

 but she say this as one who rather hop for a contradiction . 

 all Jeremiah reply , however , be , ' poor wee child ! ' in a pitiful tone , address to the baby . 

 Sylvia 's eye fill with tear . 

 ' oh , sir , I will do anything as iver yo ' can tell I for she . that be what I come for t ' ask yo ' . I know I mun not stay theere , and Philip go away ; and I dunnot know what to do : and I will do aught , only I must keep her wi ' I . Whativer can I do , sir ? ' 

 Jeremiah think it over for a minute or two . then he reply , 

 ' I must have time to think . I must talk it over with brother John . ' 

 ' but you have   give I yo'r word , sir ! ' exclaim she . 

 ' I have give thee my word never to tell any one of what have pass between thee and thy husband , but I must take counsel with my brother as to what be to be do with thee and thy child , now that thy husband have leave the shop . ' 

 this be say so gravely as almost to be a reproach , and he get up , as a sign that the interview be end . 

 he give the baby back to its mother ; but not without a solemn blessing , so solemn that , to Sylvia 's superstitious and excited mind , it undo the terror of what she have esteem to be a curse . 

 ' the Lord bless thee and keep thee ! the Lord make his face to shine upon thee ! ' 

 all the way down the hill - side , Sylvia keep kiss the child , and whisper to its unconscious ear , 

 ' I will love thee for both , my treasure , I will . I will hap thee round wi ' my love , so as thou shall niver need a feyther 's . ' 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 BEREAVEMENT 

 hester have be prevent by her mother 's indisposition from take Philip 's letter to the Fosters , to hold a consultation with they over its content . 

 Alice Rose be slowly fail , and the long day which she have to spend alone tell much upon her spirit , and consequently upon her health . 

 all this come out in the conversation which ensue after read Hepburn 's letter in the little parlour at the bank on the day after Sylvia have have her confidential interview with Jeremiah Foster . 

 he be a true man of honour , and never so much as allude to her visit to he ; but what she have then tell he influence he very much in the formation of the project which he propose to his brother and hester . 

 he recommend she remain where she be , live still in the house behind the shop ; for he think within himself that she might have exaggerate the effect of her word upon Philip ; that , after all , it might have be some cause totally disconnected with they , which have blot out her husband 's place among the man of Monkshaven ; and that it would be so much easy for both to resume their natural relation , both towards each other and towards the world , if Sylvia remain where her husband have leave she in an expectant attitude , so to speak . 

 Jeremiah Foster question Hester straitly about her letter : whether she have make known its content to any one . no , not to any one . neither to her mother nor to William Coulson ? no , to neither . 

 she look at he as she reply to his inquiry , and he look at she , each wonder if the other could be in the least aware that a conjugal quarrel might be at the root of the dilemma in which they be place by Hepburn 's disappearance . 

 but neither Hester , who have witness the misunderstanding between the husband and wife on the evening , before the morning on which Philip go away , nor Jeremiah Foster , who have learn from Sylvia the true reason of her husband 's disappearance , give the slight reason to the other to think that they each suppose they have a clue to the reason of Hepburn 's sudden departure . 

 what Jeremiah Foster , after a night 's consideration , have to propose be this ; that Hester and her mother should come and occupy the house in the market - place , conjointly with Sylvia and her child . hester 's interest in the shop be by this time acknowledge . Jeremiah have make over to she so much of his share in the business , that she have a right to be consider as a kind of partner ; and she have long be the superintendent of that department of good which be exclusively devoted to woman . so her daily presence be requisite for more reason than one . 

 yet her mother 's health and spirit be such as to render it unadvisable that the old woman should be too much leave alone ; and Sylvia 's devotion to her own mother seem to point she out as the very person who could be a gentle and tender companion to Alice Rose during those hour when her own daughter would necessarily be engage in the shop . 

 many desirable object seem to be gain by this removal of Alice : an occupation be provide for Sylvia , which would detain she in the place where her husband have leave she , and where   Jeremiah Foster fairly expect in spite of his letter   he be likely to come back to find she ; and Alice Rose , the early love of one of the brother , the old friend of the other , would be well care for , and under her daughter 's immediate supervision during the whole of the time that she be occupy in the shop . 

 Philip 's share of the business , augment by the money which he have put in from the legacy of his old Cumberland uncle , would bring in profit enough to support Sylvia and her child in ease and comfort until that time , which they all anticipate , when he should return from his mysterious wander mysterious , whether his go forth have be voluntary or involuntary . 

 thus far be settle ; and Jeremiah Foster go to tell Sylvia of the plan . 

 she be too much a child , too entirely unaccustomed to any independence of action , to do anything but leave herself in his hand . her very confession , make to he the day before , when she seek his counsel , seem to place she at his disposal . otherwise , she have have notion of the possibility of a free country life once more how provide for and arrange she hardly know ; but Haytersbank be to let , and Kester disengage , and it have just seem possible that she might have to return to her early home , and to her old life . she know that it would take much money to stock the farm again , and that her hand be tie from much useful activity by the love and care she owe to her baby . but still , somehow , she hop and she fancy , till Jeremiah Foster 's measure word and carefully - arrange plan make she silently relinquish her green , breezy vision . 

 Hester , too , have her own private rebellion hush into submission by her gentle piety . if Sylvia have be able to make Philip happy , Hester could have feel lovingly and almost gratefully towards she ; but Sylvia have fail in this . 

 Philip have be make unhappy , and be drive forth a wanderer into the wide world never to come back ! and his last word to Hester , the postscript of his letter , contain the very pith of it , be to ask she to take charge and care of the wife whose want of love towards he have uproot he from the place where he be value and honour . 

 it cost Hester many a struggle and many a self - reproach before she could make herself feel what she see all along that in everything Philip treat she like a sister . but even a sister might well be indignant if she see her brother 's love disregard and slight , and his life embitter by the thoughtless conduct of a wife ! still hester fight against herself , and for Philip 's sake she seek to see the good in Sylvia , and she strove to love she as well as to take care of she . 

 with the baby , of course , the case be different . without thought or struggle , or reason , every one love the little girl . Coulson and his buxom wife , who be childless , be never weary of make much of she . hester 's happy hour be spend with that little child . Jeremiah Foster almost look upon she as his own from the day when she honour he by yield to the temptation of the chain and seal , and come to his knee ; not a customer to the shop but know the smile child 's sad history , and many a country - woman would save a rosy - cheeked apple from out her store that autumn to bring it on next market - day for ' Philip Hepburn 's baby , as have lose its father , bless it . ' 

 even stern Alice Rose be graciously inclined towards the little Bella ; and though her idea of the number of the elect be grow narrower and narrower every day , she would have be loth to exclude the innocent little child , that stroke she wrinkle cheek so softly every night in return for her blessing , from the few that should be save . Nay , for the child 's sake , she relent towards the mother ; and strove to have Sylvia rescue from the many castaway with fervent prayer , or , as she phrase it , ' wrestle with the Lord ' . 

 Alice have a sort of instinct that the little child , so tenderly love by , so fondly love , the mother whose ewe - lamb she be , could not be even in heaven without yearn for the creature she have love well on earth ; and the old woman believe that this be the principal reason for her prayer for Sylvia ; but unconsciously to herself , Alice Rose be touch by the filial attention she constantly receive from the young mother , whom she believe to be foredoom to condemnation . 

 Sylvia rarely go to church or chapel , nor do she read she Bible ; for though she speak little of her ignorance , and would fain , for her child 's sake , have remedie it now it be too late , she have lose what little fluency of read she have ever have , and could only make out her word with much spelling and difficulty . so the take her Bible in hand would have be a mere form ; though of this Alice Rose know nothing . 

 no one know much of what be pass in Sylvia ; she do not know herself . sometimes in the night she would waken , cry , with a terrible sense of desolation ; every one who love she , or whom she have love , have vanish out of her life ; every one but her child , who lie in her arm , warm and soft . 

 but then Jeremiah Foster 's word come upon she ; word that she have take for cursing at the time ; and she would so gladly have have some clue by which to penetrate the darkness of the unknown region from whence both blessing and cursing come , and to know if she have indeed do something which should cause her sin to be visit on that soft , sweet , innocent darling . 

 if any one would teach she to read ! if any one would explain to she the hard word she hear in church or chapel , so that she might find out the meaning of sin and godliness ! word that have only pass over the surface of her mind till now ! for her child 's sake she should like to do the will of God , if she only know what that be , and how to be work out in her daily life . 

 but there be no one she dare confess her ignorance to and ask information from . Jeremiah Foster have speak as if her child , sweet little merry Bella , with a love word and a kiss for every one , be to suffer heavily for the just and true word she wronged and indignant mother have speak . Alice always speak as if there be no hope for she ; and blame she , nevertheless , for not use the mean of grace that it be not in her power to avail herself of . 

 and Hester , that Sylvia would fain have love for her uniform gentleness and patience with all around she , seem so cold in her unruffled and undemonstrative behaviour ; and moreover , Sylvia feel that hester blame her perpetual silence regard Philip 's absence without know how bitter a cause Sylvia have for cast he off . 

 the only person who seem to have pity upon she be Kester ; and his pity be show in look rather than word ; for when he come to see she , which he do from time to time , by a kind of mutual tacit consent , they speak but little of former day . 

 he be still lodge with his sister , widow Dobson , work at odd job , some of which take he into the country for week at a time . but on his return to monkshaven he be sure to come and see she and the little Bella ; indeed , when his employment be in the immediate neighbourhood of the town , he never allow a week to pass away without a visit . 

 there be not much conversation between he and Sylvia at such time . they skim over the surface of the small event in which both take an interest ; only now and then a sudden glance , a checked speech , tell each that there be deep not forget , although they be never mention . 

 twice Sylvia below her breath have ask Kester , just as she be hold the door open for his departure , if anything have ever be hear of Kinraid since his one night 's visit to monkshaven : each time   and there be an interval of some month between the inquiry   the answer have be simply , no . 

 to no one else would Sylvia ever have name his name . but indeed she have not the chance , have she wish it ever so much , of ask any question about he from any one likely to know . the Corneys have leave Moss Brow at Martinmas , and go many mile away towards Horncastle . Bessy Corney , it be true be marry and leave behind in the neighbourhood ; but with her Sylvia have never be intimate ; and what girlish friendship there might have be between they have cool very much at the time of Kinraid 's suppose death three year before . 

 one day before Christmas in this year , 1798 , Sylvia be call into the shop by Coulson , who , with his assistant , be busy undo the bale of winter good supply to they from the West Riding , and other place . he be look at a fine irish poplin dress - piece when Sylvia answer to his call . 

 ' here ! do you know this again ? ' ask he , in the cheerful tone of one sure of give pleasure . 

 ' no ! have I iver see it afore ? ' 

 ' not this , but one for all t ' world like it . ' 

 she do not rouse up to much interest , but look at it as if try to recollect where she could have see its like . 

 ' my missus have one on at th ' party at John Foster 's last March , and yo ' admire it a deal . and Philip , he think o ' nothing but how he could get yo ' just such another , and he set a vast o ' folk agait for to meet wi ' its marrow ; and what he do just the very day afore he go away so mysterious be to write through Dawson Brothers , o ' Wakefield , to Dublin , and order that one should be weave for yo ' . Jemima have to cut a bit off her for to give he t ' exact colour . ' 

 Sylvia do not say anything but that it be very pretty , in a low voice , and then she quickly leave the shop , much to Coulson 's displeasure . 

 all the afternoon she be unusually quiet and depressed . 

 Alice Rose , sit helpless in her chair , watch she with keen eye . 

 at length , after one of Sylvia 's deep , unconscious sigh , the old woman speak : 

 ' it be religion as must comfort thee , child , as it be do many a one afore thee . ' 

 ' how ? ' say Sylvia , look up , startle to find herself an object of notice . 

 ' how ? '   the answer be not quite so ready as the precept have be .   ' read thy Bible , and thou wilt learn . ' 

 ' but I can not read , ' say Sylvia , too desperate any long to conceal her ignorance . 

 ' not read ! and thee Philip 's wife as be such a great scholar ! of a surety the way o ' this life be crook ! there be our hester , as can read as well as any minister , and Philip pass over she to go and choose a young lass as can not read her Bible . ' 

 ' be Philip and Hester ' 

 Sylvia pause , for though a new curiosity have dawn upon she , she do not know how to word her question . 

 ' many a time and oft have I see hester take comfort in her Bible when Philip be follow after thee . she know where to go for consolation . ' 

 ' I would fain read , ' say Sylvia , humbly , ' if anybody would learn I ; for perhaps it might do I good ; I be noane so happy . ' 

 her eye , as she look up at Alice 's stern countenance , be full of tear . 

 the old woman see it , and be touch , although she do not immediately show her sympathy . but she take her own time , and make no reply . 

 the next day , however , she bid Sylvia come to she , and then and there , as if her pupil have be a little child , she begin to teach Sylvia to read the first chapter of Genesis ; for all other reading but the scripture be as vanity to she , and she would not condescend to the weakness of other book . Sylvia be now , as ever , slow at book - learning ; but she be meek and desirous to be teach , and her willingness in this respect please Alice , and draw she singularly towards one who , from be a pupil , might become a convert . 

 all this time Sylvia never lose the curiosity that have be excite by the few word Alice have let drop about Hester and Philip , and by degree she approach the subject again , and have the idea then start confirm by Alice , who have no scruple in use the past experience of her own , of her daughter 's , or of any one 's life , as an instrument to prove the vanity of set the heart on anything earthly . 

 this knowledge , unsuspecte before , sink deep into Sylvia 's thought , and give she a strange interest in Hester poor hester , whose life she have so cross and blight , even by the very blighting of her own . she give Hester her own former passionate feeling for Kinraid , and wonder how she herself should have feel towards any one who have come between she and he , and wile his love away . when she remember hester 's unfailing sweetness and kindness towards herself from the very first , she could well bear the comparative coldness of her present behaviour . 

 she try , indeed , hard to win back the favour she have lose ; but the very mean she take be blunder , and only make it seem to she as if she could never again do right in hester 's eye . 

 for instance , she beg she to accept and wear the pretty poplin gown which have be Philip 's especial choice ; feel within herself as if she should never wish to put it on , and as if the good thing she could do with it be to offer it to hester . but Hester reject the proffered gift with as much hardness of manner as she be capable of assume ; and Sylvia have to carry it upstairs and lie it by for the little daughter , who , Hester say , might perhaps learn to value thing that her father have give especial thought to . 

 yet Sylvia go on try to win hester to like she once more ; it be one of her great labour , and learn to read from Hester 's mother be another . 

 Alice , indeed , in her solemn way , be become quite fond of Sylvia ; if she could not read or write , she have a deftness and gentleness of motion , a capacity for the household matter which fall into her department , that have a great effect on the old woman , and for her dear mother 's sake Sylvia have a stock of patient love ready in her heart for all the aged and infirm that fall in her way . she never think of seek they out , as she know that hester do ; but then she look up to hester as some one very remarkable for her goodness . if only she could have like she ! 

 hester try to do all she could for Sylvia ; Philip have tell she to take care of his wife and child ; but she have the conviction that Sylvia have so materially fail in her duty as to have make her husband an exile from his home a penniless wanderer , wifeless and childless , in some strange country , whose very aspect be friendless , while the cause of all live on in the comfortable home where he have place she , want for nothing an object of interest and regard to many friend with a lovely little child to give her joy for the present , and hope for the future ; while he , the poor outcast , might even lie dead by the wayside . how could Hester love Sylvia ? 

 yet they be frequent companion that ensue spring . hester be not well ; and the doctor say that the constant occupation in the shop be too much for she , and that she must , for a time at least , take daily walk into the country . 

 Sylvia use to beg to accompany she ; she and the little girl often go with hester up the valley of the river to some of the nestling farm that be hide in the more sheltered nook for hester be bid to drink milk warm from the cow ; and to go into the familiar haunt about a farm be one of the few thing in which Sylvia seem to take much pleasure . she would let little Bella toddle about while hester sate and rest : and she herself would beg to milk the cow destine to give the invalid her draught . 

 one May evening the three have be out on some such expedition ; the country side still look gray and bare , though the leaf be show on the willow and blackthorn and sloe , and by the tinkle runnel , make hidden music along the copse side , the pale delicate primrose bud be show amid their fresh , green , crinkle leaf . the lark have be sing all the afternoon , but be now drop down into their nest in the pasture field ; the air have just the sharpness in it which go along with a cloudless evening sky at that time of the year . 

 but Hester walk homeward slowly and languidly , speak no word . Sylvia notice this at first without venture to speak , for hester be one who dislike have her ailment notice . but after a while hester stand still in a sort of weary dreamy abstraction ; and Sylvia say to she , 

 ' I be afeare yo're sadly tired . maybe we have   be too far . ' 

 hester almost start . 

 ' no ! ' say she , ' it be only my headache which be bad to - night . it have be bad all day ; but since I come out it have feel just as if there be great gun booming , till I could almost pray them to be quiet . I be so weary o ' th ' sound . ' 

 she step out quickly towards home after she have say this , as if she wish for neither pity nor comment on what she have say . 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 the RECOGNITION 

 far away , over sea and land , over sunny sea again , great gun be boom on that 7th of May , 1799 . 

 the Mediterranean come up with a long roar on a beach glitter white with snowy sand , and the fragment of innumerable sea - shell , delicate and shin as porcelain . look at that shore from the sea , a long ridge of upland ground , begin from an inland depth , stretch far away into the ocean on the right , till it end in a great mountainous bluff , crown with the white building of a convent slop rapidly down into the blue water at its base . 

 in the clear eastern air , the different character of the foliage that clothe the side of that sea - wash mountain might be discern from a long distance by the naked eye ; the silver gray of the olive - tree near its summit ; the heavy green and bossy form of the sycamore lower down ; break here and there by a solitary terebinth or ilex tree , of a deep green and a wide spread ; till the eye fall below on the maritime plain , edge with the white seaboard and the sandy hillock ; with here and there feathery palm - tree , either isolated or in group motionless and distinct against the hot purple air . 

 look again ; a little to the left on the sea - shore there be the white wall of a fortified town , glitter in sunlight , or black in shadow . 

 the fortification themselves run out into the sea , form a port and a haven against the wild Levantine storm ; and a lighthouse rise out of the wave to guide mariner into safety . 

 beyond this walled city , and far away to the left still , there be the same wide plain shut in by the distant rise ground , till the upland circuit come close in to the north , and the great white rock meet the deep tideless ocean with its intensity of blue colour . 

 above , the sky be literally purple with heat ; and the pitiless light smite the gazer 's weary eye as it come back from the white shore . nor do the plain country in that land offer the refuge and rest of our own soft green . the limestone rock underlie the vegetation , and give a glittering , ashen hue to all the bare patch , and even to the cultivate part which be burn up early in the year . in spring - time alone do the country look rich and fruitful ; then the corn - field of the plain show their capability of bear , ' some fifty , some an hundred fold ' ; down by the brook Kishon , flow not far from the base of the mountainous promontory to the south , there grow the broad green fig - tree , cool and fresh to look upon ; the orchard be full of glossy - leave cherry - tree ; the tall amarylli put forth crimson and yellow glory in the field , rival the pomp of King Solomon ; the daisy and the hyacinth spread their myriad flower ; the anemone , scarlet as blood , run hither and thither over the ground like dazzle flame of fire . 

 a spicy odour linger in the heated air ; it come from the multitude of aromatic flower that blossom in the early spring . later on they will have wither and fade , and the corn will have be gather , and the deep green of the eastern foliage will have assume a kind of gray - bleach tint . 

 even now in May , the hot sparkle of the everlasting sea , the terribly clear outline of all object , whether near or distant , the fierce sun right overhead , the dazzle air around , be inexpressibly weary to the english eye that keep their skilled watch , day and night , on the strongly - fortify coast - town that lie out a little to the northward of where the british ship be anchor . 

 they have keep up a flanking fire for many day in aid of those besiege in St Jean d'Acre ; and at interval have listen , impatient , to the sound of the heavy siege gun , or the sharp rattle of the french musketry . 

 in the morning , on the 7th of May , a man at the masthead of the Tigre sing out that he see ship in the offing ; and in reply to the signal that be hastily run up , he see the distant vessel hoist friendly flag . that May morning be a busy time . the besiege Turks take heart of grace ; the french outside , under the command of their great general , make hasty preparation for a more vigorous assault than all many , both vigorous and bloody , that have go before   for the siege be now at its fifty - first day , in hope of carry the town by storm before the reinforcement come by sea could arrive ; and Sir Sidney Smith , aware of Buonaparte 's desperate intention , order all the man , both sailor and marine , that could be spar from the necessity of keep up a continual flanking fire from the ship upon the French , to land , and assist the Turks and the british force already there in the defence of the old historic city . 

 Lieutenant Kinraid , who have share his captain 's daring adventure off the coast of France three year before , who have be a prisoner with he and Westley Wright , in the Temple at Paris , and have escape with they , and , through Sir Sidney 's earnest recommendation , be promote from be a warrant officer to the rank of lieutenant , receive on this day the honour from his admiral of be appoint to an especial post of danger . his heart be like a war - horse , and say , ha , ha ! as the boat bound over the wave that be to land he under the ancient machicolate wall where the Crusaders make their last stand in the Holy Land . not that Kinraid know or care one jot about those gallant knight of old : all he know be , that the French , under Boney , be try to take the town from the Turks , and that his admiral say they must not , and so they should not . 

 he and his man land on that sandy shore , and enter the town by the water - port gate ; he be sing to himself his own country song , 

 Weel may the keel row , the keel row ,   C. 

 and his man , with sailor ' aptitude for music , catch up the air , and join in the burden with inarticulate sound . 

 so , with merry heart , they thread the narrow street of Acre , hem in on either side by the white wall of turkish house , with small grated opening high up , above all chance of peep intrusion . 

 here and there they meet an ample - rob and turbane Turk go along with as much haste as his stately self - possession would allow . but the majority of the male inhabitant be gather together to defend the breach , where the french gun thunder out far above the head of the sailor . 

 they go along none the less merrily for the sound to Djezzar Pacha 's garden , where the old Turk sate on his carpet , beneath the shade of a great terebinth tree , listen to the interpreter , who make known to he the meaning of the eager speech of Sir Sidney Smith and the colonel of the marine . 

 as soon as the admiral see the gallant sailor of H.M.S. Tigre , he interrupt the council of war without much ceremony , and go to Kinraid , he despatch they , as before arrange , to the North Ravelin , show they the way with rapid , clear direction . 

 out of respect to he , they have keep silent while in the strange , desolate garden ; but once more in the street , the old Newcastle song rise up again till the man be , perforce , silence by the haste with which they go to the post of danger . 

 it be three o'clock in the afternoon . for many a day these very man have be swear at the terrific heat at this hour even when at sea , fan by the soft breeze ; but now , in the midst of hot smoke , with former carnage taint the air , and with the rush and whizz of death perpetually whistle in their ear , they be uncomplaine and light - hearted . many an old joke , and some new one , come brave and hearty , on their cheerful voice , even though the speaker be veil from sight in great cloud of smoke , cloven only by the bright flame of death . 

 a sudden message come ; as many of the crew of the Tigre as be under Lieutenant Kinraid 's command be to go down to the Mole , to assist the new reinforcement   see by the sailor from the masthead at day - dawn , under command of Hassan Bey , to land at the Mole , where Sir Sidney then be . 

 off they go , almost as bright and thoughtless as before , though two of their number lie silent for ever at the North Ravelin silence in that one little half - hour . and one go along with the rest , swear lustily at his ill - luck in have his right arm break , but ready to do good business with his left . 

 they help the turkish troop to land more with good - will than tenderness ; and then , lead by Sir Sidney , they go under the shelter of english gun to the fatal breach , so often assail , so gallantly defend , but never so fiercely contest as on this burn afternoon . the ruin of the massive wall that here have be break down by the French , be use by they as stepping stone to get on a level with the besiege , and so to escape the heavy stone which the latter hurl down ; nay , even the dead body of the morning 's comrade be make into ghastly stair . 

 when Djezzar Pacha hear that the british sailor be defend the breach , head by Sir Sidney Smith , he leave his station in the palace garden , gather up his robe in haste , and hurry to the breach ; where , with his own hand , and with right hearty good - will , he pull the sailor down from the post of danger , say that if he lose his english friend he lose all ! 

 but little recke the crew of the Tigre of the one old man Pacha or otherwise who try to hold they back from the fight ; they be up and at the french assailant clamber over the breach in an instant ; and so they go on , as if it be some game at play instead of a deadly combat , until Kinraid and his man be call off by Sir Sidney , as the reinforcement of turkish troop under Hassan Bey be now sufficient for the defence of that old breach in the wall , which be no long the principal object of the french attack ; for the besieger have make a new and more formidable breach by their incessant fire , knock down whole street of the city wall . 

 ' fight your good kinraid ! ' say Sir Sidney ; ' for there be Boney on yonder hill look at you . ' 

 and sure enough , on a rise ground , call Richard Coeur de Lion 's Mount , there be a half - circle of french general , on horseback , all deferentially attend to the motion , and apparently to the word , of a little man in their centre ; at whose bid the aide - de - camp gallop swift with message to the more distant french camp . 

 the two ravelin which Kinraid and his man have to occupy , for the purpose of send a flanking fire upon the enemy , be not ten yard from that enemy 's van . 

 but at length there be a sudden rush of the French to that part of the wall where they imagine they could enter unopposed . 

 surprise at this movement , Kinraid venture out of the shelter of the ravelin to ascertain the cause ; he , safe and untouched during that long afternoon of carnage , fall now , under a stray musket - shot , and lie helpless and expose upon the ground undiscerne by his man , who be recall to help in the hot reception which have be plan for the French ; who , descend the city wall into the Pacha 's garden , be attack with sabre and dagger , and lie headless corps under the flower rose - bush , and by the fountain side . 

 Kinraid lie beyond the ravelin , many yard outside the city wall . 

 he be utterly helpless , for the shot have break his leg . dead body of Frenchmen lie strew around he ; no Englishman have venture out so far . 

 all the wounded man that he could see be french ; and many of these , furious with pain , gnash their tooth at he , and curse he aloud , till he think that his good course be to assume the semblance of death ; for some among these man be still capable of drag themselves up to he , and by concentrate all their fail energy into one blow , put he to a speedy end . 

 the outlying picket of the french army be within easy rifle shoot ; and his uniform , although less conspicuous in colour than that of the marine , by whose side he have be fight , would make he a sure mark if he so much as move his arm . yet how he long to turn , if ever so slightly , so that the cruel slanting sun might not beat full into his ache eye . Fever , too , be come upon he ; the pain in his leg be every moment grow more severe ; the terrible thirst of the wound , add to the heat and fatigue of the day , make his lip and tongue feel baked and dry , and his whole throat seem parch and wooden . thought of other day , of cool Greenland sea , where ice abound , of grassy english home , begin to make the past more real than the present . 

 with a great effort he bring his wandering sens back ; he know where he be now , and could weigh the chance of his life , which be but small ; the unwonted tear come to his eye as he think of the newly - make wife in her english home , who might never know how he die think of she . 

 suddenly he see a party of English marine advance , under shelter of the ravelin , to pick up the wounded , and bear they within the wall for surgical help . they be so near he could see their face , could hear they speak ; yet he durst not make any sign to they when he lie within range of the french picket 's fire . 

 for one moment he could not resist raise his head , to give himself a chance for life ; before the unclean creature that infest a camp come round in the darkness of the night to strip and insult the dead body , and to put to death such as have yet the breath of life within they . but the set sun come full into his face , and he see nothing of what he long to see . 

 he fall back in despair ; he lie there to die . 

 that strong clear sunbeam have work his salvation . 

 he have be recognize as man be recognize when they stand in the red glare of a house on fire ; the same despair of help , of hopeless farewell to life , stamp on their face in blood - red light . 

 one man leave his fellow , and come run forwards , forwards in among the enemy 's wound , within range of their gun ; he bend down over Kinraid ; he seem to understand without a word ; he lift he up , carry he like a child ; and with the vehement energy that be more from the force of will than the strength of body , he bear he back to within the shelter of the ravelin not without many shot be aim at they , one of which hit Kinraid in the fleshy part of his arm . 

 Kinraid be rack with agony from his dangle broken leg , and his very life seem leave he ; yet he remember afterwards how the marine recall his fellow , and how , in the pause before they return , his face become like one formerly know to the sick sens of Kinraid ; yet it be too like a dream , too utterly improbable to be real . 

 yet the few word this man say , as he stand breathless and alone by the faint Kinraid , fit in well with the belief conjure up by his personal appearance . he pant out , 

 ' I niver think you would ha ' keep true to she ! ' 

 and then the other come up ; and while they be make a sling of their belt , Kinraid faint utterly away , and the next time that he be fully conscious , he be lie in his berth in the Tigre , with the ship surgeon set his leg . after that he be too feverish for several day to collect his sens . when he could first remember , and form a judgment upon his recollection , he call the man especially charge to attend upon he , and bid he go and make inquiry in every possible manner for a marine name Philip Hepburn , and , when he be find , to entreat he to come and see Kinraid . 

 the sailor be away the great part of the day , and return unsuccessful in his search ; he have be from ship to ship , hither and thither ; he have question all the marine he have meet with , no one know anything of any Philip Hepburn . 

 Kinraid pass a miserably feverish night , and when the doctor exclaim the next morning at his retrogression , he tell he , with some irritation , of the ill - success of his servant ; he accuse the man of stupidity , and wish fervently that he be able to go himself . 

 partly to soothe he , the doctor promise that he would undertake the search for Hepburn , and he engage faithfully to follow all Kinraid 's eager direction ; not to be satisfied with man 's careless word , but to look over muster - roll and ship ' book . 

 he , too , bring the same answer , however unwillingly give . 

 he have set out upon the search so confident of success , that he feel doubly discomfited by failure . however , he have persuade himself that the lieutenant have be partially delirious from the effect of his wound , and the power of the sun shin down just where he lay . there have , indeed , be slight symptom of Kinraid 's have receive a sun - stroke ; and the doctor dwelt largely on these in his endeavour to persuade his patient that it be his imagination which have endue a stranger with the lineament of some former friend . 

 Kinraid throw his arm out of bed with impatience at all this plausible talk , which be even more irritate than the fact that Hepburn be still undiscovered . 

 ' the man be no friend of mine ; I be like to have kill he when last I see he . he be a shopkeeper in a country town in England . I have see little enough of he ; but enough to make I able to swear to he anywhere , even in a marine 's uniform , and in this swelter country . ' 

 ' face once see , especially in excitement , be apt to return upon the memory in case of fever , ' quoth the doctor , sententiously . 

 the attendant sailor , reinstall to some complacency by the failure of another in the search in which he himself have be unsuccessful , now put in his explanation . 

 ' maybe it be a spirit . it be not th ' first time as I have   heared of a spirit come upon earth to save a man 's life I ' time o ' need . my father have an uncle , a west - country grazier . he be a - come over Dartmoor in Devonshire one moonlight night with a power o ' money as he would get for his sheep at t ' fair . it be stow I ' leather bag under th ' seat o ' th ' gig . it be a rough kind o ' road , both as a road and in character , for there would be many robbery there of late , and th ' great rock stand convenient for hiding - place . all at once father 's uncle feel as if some one be sit beside he on th ' empty seat ; and he turn his head and look , and there he see his brother sit his brother as have be dead twelve year and more . so he turn his head back again , eye right , and never say a word , but wonder what it all mean . all of a sudden two fellow come out upo ' th ' white road from some black shadow , and they look , and they let th ' gig go past , father 's uncle drive hard , I will warrant he . but for all that he hear one say to t ' other , " by , there be two on them ! " straight on he drive fast than ever , till he see th ' far light of some town or other . I forget its name , though I have   hear it many a time ; and then he draw a long breath , and turn his head to look at his brother , and ask he how he have manage to come out of his grave I ' Barum churchyard , and th ' seat be as empty as it have be when he set out ; and then he know that it be a spirit come to help he against th ' man who think to rob he , and would likely enough ha ' murder he . ' 

 Kinraid have keep quiet through this story . but when the sailor begin to draw the moral , and to say , ' and I think I may make bold to say , sir , as th ' marine who carry you out o ' th ' Frenchy 's gun - shot be just a spirit come to help you , ' he exclaim impatiently , swear a great oath as he do so , ' it be no spirit , I tell you ; and I be in my full sens . it be a man name Philip Hepburn . he say word to I , or over I , as none but himself would have say . yet we hat each other like poison ; and I can not   make out why he should be there and put himself in danger to save I . but so it be ; and as you can not   find he , let I hear no more of your nonsense . it be he , and not my fancy , doctor . it be flesh and blood , and not a spirit , Jack . so get along with you , and leave I quiet . ' 

 all this time Stephen Freeman lie friendless , sick , and shatter , on board the Theseus . 

 he have be about his duty close to some shell that be place on her deck ; a gay young midshipman be thoughtlessly strive to get the fusee out of one of these by a mallet and spike - nail that lie close at hand ; and a fearful explosion ensue , in which the poor marine , clean his bayonet near , be shockingly burn and disfigure , the very skin of all the low part of his face be utterly destroy by gunpowder . they say it be a mercy that his eye be spar ; but he could hardly feel anything to be a mercy , as he lie tossing in agony , burn by the explosion , wound by splinter , and feel that he be disabled for life , if life itself be preserve . of all that suffer by that fearful accident   and they be many   none be so forsaken , so hopeless , so desolate , as the Philip Hepburn about whom such anxious inquiry be be make at that very time . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 confidences 

 it be a little later on in that same summer that Mrs. Brunton come to visit her sister Bessy . 

 Bessy be married to a tolerably well - to - do farmer who live at an almost equal distance between Monkshaven and Hartswell ; but from old habit and convenience the latter be regard as the dawson ' market - town ; so Bessy seldom or never see her old friend in Monkshaven . 

 but Mrs. Brunton be far too flourish a person not to speak out her wish , and have her own way . she have no notion , she say , of come such a long journey only to see Bessy and her husband , and not to have a sight of her former acquaintance at Monkshaven . she might have add , that her new bonnet and cloak would be as good as lose if it be not display among those who , know she as Molly Corney , and be less fortunate in matrimony than she be , would look upon it with wonder admiration , if not with envy . 

 so one day farmer Dawson 's market - cart deposit Mrs. Brunton in all her bravery at the shop in the market - place , over which Hepburn and Coulson 's name still flourish in joint partnership . 

 after a few word of brisk recognition to Coulson and Hester , Mrs Brunton pass on into the parlour and greet Sylvia with boisterous heartiness . 

 it be now four year and more since the friend have meet ; and each secretly wonder how they have ever come to be friend . Sylvia have a country , raw , spiritless look to Mrs. Brunton 's eye ; Molly be loud and talkative , and altogether distasteful to Sylvia , train in daily companionship with hester to appreciate soft slow speech , and grave thoughtful way . 

 however , they keep up the form of their old friendship , though their heart have drift far apart . they sit hand in hand while each look at the other with eye inquisitive as to the change which time have make . molly be the first to speak . 

 ' well , to be sure ! how thin and pale yo've   grown , Sylvia ! Matrimony have not   agree wi ' yo ' as well as it be do wi I . Brunton be allay say   yo ' know what a man he be for his joke   that if he would ha ' know how many yard o ' silk I should ha ' ta'en for a gown , he would ha ' think twice afore he would ha ' marry I . why , I have   gain a matter o ' thirty pound o ' flesh sin ' I be marry ! ' 

 ' yo ' do look brave and hearty ! ' say Sylvia , put her sense of her companion 's capacious size and high colour into the prettiest word she could . 

 ' eh ! Sylvia ! but I know what it be , ' say Molly , shake her head . ' it be just because o ' that husband o ' thine as have go and leave thee ; thou 's pining after he , and he be not worth it . Brunton say , when he hear on it I mind he be smoke at t ' time , and he take his pipe out of his mouth , and shake out t ' ash as grave as any judge " the man , " say he , " as can desert a wife like Sylvia Robson as be , deserve hang ! " that be what he say ! eh ! Sylvia , but speakin ' o ' hang I be so grieve for yo ' when I hear of yo'r poor feyther ! such an end for a decent man to come to ! many a one come an ' call on I o ' purpose to hear all I could tell them about he ! ' 

 ' please do not   speak on it ! ' say Sylvia , tremble all over . 

 ' well , poor creature , I wunnot . it be hard on thee , I grant . but to give t ' devil his due , it be good I ' hepburn to marry thee , and so soon after there be a ' that talk about thy feyther . many a man would ha ' draw back , choose howiver far they would go . I be noane so sure about Charley Kinraid . eh , Sylvia ! only think on his be alive after all . I doubt if our Bessy would ha ' we d Frank Dawson if she have know as he be not   drown . but it be as well she do , for Dawson 's a man o ' property , and have getten twelve cow in his cow - house , beside three right down good horse ; and Kinraid be allay a fellow wi ' two string to his bow . I have   allay say and do maintain , that he go on pretty strong wi ' yo ' , Sylvie ; and I will say I think he care more for yo ' than for our Bessy , though it be only yesterday at e'en she be stand out that he like she well than yo ' . Yo'll ha ' heared on his grand marriage ? ' 

 ' no ! ' say Sylvia , with eager painful curiosity . 

 ' no ! it be in all t ' paper ! I wonder as yo ' do not   see it . wait a minute ! I cut it out o ' t ' Gentleman 's Magazine , as Brunton buy o ' purpose , and put it I ' my pocket - book when I be a - come here : I know I have   get it somewheere . ' 

 she take out her smart crimson pocket - book , and rummage in the pocket until she produce a little crumpled bit of print paper , from which she read aloud , 

 ' on January the third , at St Mary Redcliffe , Bristol , Charles Kinraid , Esq . , lieutenant Royal Navy , to Miss Clarinda Jackson , with a fortune of 10,000l . ' 

 ' theere ! ' say she , triumphantly , ' it be something as Brunton say , to be cousin to that . ' 

 ' would yo ' let I see it ? ' say Sylvia , timidly . 

 Mrs. Brunton graciously consent ; and Sylvia bring she newly acquire reading - knowledge , hitherto principally exercise on the Old Testament , to bear on these word . 

 there be nothing wonderful in they , nothing that she might not have expect ; and yet the surprise turn her giddy for a moment or two . she never think of see he again , never . but to think of his caring for another woman as much as he have do for she , nay , perhaps more ! 

 the idea be irresistibly force upon she that Philip would not have act so ; it would have take long year before he could have be induce to put another on the throne she have once occupy . for the first time in her life she seem to recognize the real nature of Philip 's love . 

 but she say nothing but ' thank yo ' , ' when she give the scrap of paper back to Molly Brunton . and the latter continue give her information about Kinraid 's marriage . 

 ' he be down in t ' west , Plymouth or somewheere , when he meet wi ' she . she be no feyther ; he would be in t ' sugar - bake business ; but from what Kinraid write to old Turner , th ' uncle as bring he up at Cullercoats , she be have t ' good of edication : can play on t ' instrument and dance t ' shawl dance ; and Kinraid have all her money settle on she , though she say she would rayther give it all to he , which I must say , be his cousin , be very pretty on she . he be leave she now , have to go off in t ' Tigre , as be his ship , to t ' Mediterranean sea ; and she be write to offer to come and see old Turner , and make friend with his relation , and Brunton be go to gi'e I a crimson satin as soon as we know for certain when she be come , for we be sure to be ask out to Cullercoats . ' 

 ' I wonder if she be very pretty ? ' ask Sylvia , faintly , in the first pause in this torrent of talk . 

 ' oh ! she be a perfect beauty , as I understand . there be a traveller as come to our shop as have be at York , and know some of her cousin theere that be in t ' grocery line her mother be a York lady and they say she be just a picture of a woman , and iver so many gentleman have be wantin ' to marry she , but she just wait for Charley Kinraid , yo ' see ! ' 

 ' well , I hope they will be happy ; I be sure I do ! ' say Sylvia . 

 ' that be just luck . some folk be happy I ' marriage , and some be not . it be just luck , and there be no forecasting it . man be such unaccountable animal , there be no prophesyin ' upon them . who would ha ' thought of yo'r husband , he as be so slow and sure steady Philip , as we lasse use to can ' he makin ' a moonlight flittin ' , and leavin ' yo ' to be a widow bewitch ? ' 

 ' he do not   go at night , ' say Sylvia , take the word ' moonlight flitting ' in their literal sense . 

 ' no ! well , I only say " moonlight flittin ' " just because it come uppermost and I know no well . tell I all about it , Sylvie , for I can not   mak ' it out from what Bessy say . have he and yo ' have word ? but in course yo ' have . ' 

 at this moment hester come into the room ; and Sylvia joyfully avail herself of the pretext for break off the conversation that have reach this painful and awkward point . she detain hester in the room for fear lest Mrs. Brunton should repeat her inquiry as to how it all happen that Philip have go away ; but the presence of a third person seem as though it would be but little restraint upon the inquisitive Molly , who repeatedly bear down upon the same question till she nearly drive Sylvia distract , between her astonishment at the news of Kinraid 's marriage ; her wish to be alone and quiet , so as to realize the full meaning of that piece of intelligence ; her desire to retain hester in the conversation ; her effort to prevent Molly 's recurrence to the circumstance of Philip 's disappearance , and the longing more vehement every minute for her visitor to go away and leave she in peace . she become so disturbed with all these thought and feeling that she hardly know what she be say , and assent or dissent to speech without there be either any reason or truth in her word . 

 Mrs. Brunton have arrange to remain with Sylvia while the horse rest , and have no compunction about the length of her visit . she expect to be ask to tea , as Sylvia find out at last , and this she feel would be the bad of all , as Alice Rose be not one to tolerate the coarse , careless talk of such a woman as Mrs. Brunton without uplift her voice in many a testimony against it . Sylvia sate hold hester 's gown tight in order to prevent she leave the room , and try to arrange her little plan so that too much discordance should not arise to the surface . just then the door open , and little Bella come in from the kitchen in all the pretty , sturdy dignity of two year old , Alice follow she with careful step , and protect , outstretched arm , a slow smile soften the sternness of her grave face ; for the child be the unconscious darling of the household , and all eye soften into love as they look on she . she make straight for her mother with something grasp in her little dimpled fist ; but half - way across the room she seem to have become suddenly aware of the presence of a stranger , and she stop short , fix her serious eye full on Mrs. Brunton , as if to take in her appearance , nay , as if to penetrate down into her very real self , and then , stretch out her disengage hand , the baby speak out the word that have be hover about her mother 's lip for an hour past . 

 ' do away ! ' say Bella , decisively . 

 ' what a perfect love ! ' say Mrs. Brunton , half in real admiration , half in patronage . as she speak , she get up and go towards the child , as if to take she up . 

 ' do away ! do away ! ' cry Bella , in shrill affright at this movement . 

 ' Dunnot , ' say Sylvia ; ' she be shy ; she do not   know stranger . ' 

 but Mrs. Brunton have grasp the struggling , kick child by this time , and her reward for this be a vehement little slap in the face . 

 ' Yo ' naughty little spoilt thing ! ' say she , set Bella down in a hurry . ' Yo ' deserve a good whipping , yo ' do , and if yo ' be mine yo ' should have it . ' 

 Sylvia have no need to stand up for the baby who have run to her arm , and be soothe herself with sob on her mother 's breast ; for Alice take up the defence . 

 ' the child say , as plain as word could say , " go away , " and if thou wouldst follow thine own will instead of heed her wish , thou mun put up with the wilfulness of the old Adam , of which it seem to I thee hast getten thy share at thirty as well as little Bella at two . ' 

 ' thirty ! ' say Mrs. Brunton , now fairly affront . ' thirty ! why , Sylvia , yo ' know I be but two year old than yo ' ; speak to that woman an ' tell she as I be only four - and - twenty . thirty , indeed ! ' 

 ' Molly 's but four - and - twenty , ' say Sylvia , in a pacificatory tone . 

 ' whether she be twenty , or thirty , or forty , be alike to I , ' say Alice . ' I mean no harm . I mean but for t ' say as her angry word to the child bespoke she to be one of the foolish . I know not who she be , nor what her age may be . ' 

 ' she be an old friend of mine , ' say Sylvia . ' she be Mrs. Brunton now , but when I know she she be Molly Corney . ' 

 ' ay ! and yo ' be Sylvia Robson , and as bonny and light - hearte a lass as any in a ' t ' riding , though now yo're a poor widow bewitch , leave wi ' a child as I must not   speak a word about , an ' live wi ' folk as talk about t ' old Adam as if he be not   dead and do wi ' long ago ! it be a change , Sylvia , as make my heart ache for yo ' , to think on they old day when yo ' be so thought on yo ' might have have any man , as Brunton often say ; it be a great mistake as yo ' iver take up wi ' yon man as have run away . but seven year will soon be past fro ' t ' time he go off , and yo'll only be six - and - twenty then ; and there will be a chance of a well husband for yo ' after all , so keep up yo'r heart , Sylvia . ' 

 Molly Brunton have put as much venom as she know how into this speech , mean it as a vengeful payment for the supposition of she be thirty , even more than for the reproof for her angry word about the child . she think that Alice Rose must be either mother or aunt to Philip , from the serious cast of countenance that be remarkable in both ; and she rather exult in the allusion to a happy second marriage for Sylvia , with which she have conclude her speech . it rouse Alice , however , as effectually as if she have be really a blood relation to Philip ; but for a different reason . she be not slow to detect the intentional offensiveness to herself in what have be say ; she be indignant at Sylvia for suffer the word speak to pass unanswered ; but in truth they be too much in keep with Molly Brunton 's character to make as much impression on Sylvia as they do on a stranger ; and besides , she feel as if the less reply molly receive , the less likely would it be that she would go on in the same strain . so she coax and chatter to her child and behave like a little coward in try to draw out of the conversation , while at the same time listen attentively . 

 ' as for Sylvia Hepburn as be Sylvia Robson , she know my mind , ' say Alice , in grim indignation . ' she be humble herself now , I trust and pray , but she be light - minded and full of vanity when Philip marry she , and it might ha ' be a lift towards her salvation in one way ; but it please the Lord to work in a different way , and she mun wear her sackcloth and ash in patience . so I will say naught more about she . but for he as be absent , as thee hast speak on so lightly and reproachfully , I would have thee to know he be one of a different kind to any thee ever know , I reckon . if he be lead away by a pretty face to slight one as be fitter for he , and who have love he as the apple of her eye , it be he as be suffer for it , inasmuch as he be a wanderer from his home , and an outcast from wife and child . ' 

 to the surprise of all , Molly 's word of reply be cut short even when they be on her lip , by Sylvia . Pale , fire - eye , and excited , with Philip 's child on one arm , and the other stretch out , she say , 

 ' Noane can tell noane know . no one shall speak a judgment ' twixt Philip and I . he act cruel and wrong by I . but I have   say my word to he hissel ' , and I be noane go to make any plaint to other ; only they as know should judge . and it be not fitting , it be not '   almost sob , ' to go on wi ' talk like this afore I . ' 

 the two for Hester , who be aware that her presence have only be desire by Sylvia as a check to an unpleasant tete - a - tete conversation , have slip back to her business as soon as her mother come in the two look with surprise at Sylvia ; her word , her whole manner , belong to a phase of her character which seldom come uppermost , and which have not be perceive by either of they before . 

 Alice Rose , though astonish , rather approve of Sylvia 's speech ; it show that she have more serious thought and feel on the subject than the old woman have give her credit for ; her general silence respect her husband 's disappearance have lead Alice to think that she be too childish to have receive any deep impression from the event . molly Brunton give vent to her opinion on Sylvia 's speech in the following word : 

 ' Hoighty - toighty ! that tell tale , lass . if yo ' treat steady Philip to many such look an ' speech as yo'n give we now , it be easy t ' see why he take hisself off . why , Sylvia , I niver see it in yo ' when yo ' be a girl ; yo're grow into a regular little vixen , theere wheere yo ' stand ! ' 

 indeed she do look defiant , with the swift colour flush her cheek to crimson on its return , and the fire in her eye not yet die away . but at Molly 's jesting word she sink back into her usual look and manner , only say quietly , 

 ' it be for noane to say whether I be vixen or not , as do not   know th ' past thing as be bury in my heart . but I can not hold they as my friend as go on talk on either my husband or I before my very face . what he be , I know ; and what I be , I reckon he know . and now I will go hurry tea , for yo'll be need it , molly ! ' 

 the last clause of this speech be mean to make peace ; but molly be in twenty mind as to whether she should accept the olive - branch or not . her temper , however , be of that obtuse kind which be not easily ruffle ; her mind , stagnant in itself , enjoy excitement from without ; and her appetite be invariably good , so she stay , in spite of the inevitable tete - a - tete with Alice . the latter , however , refuse to be draw into conversation again ; reply to Mrs. Brunton 's speech with a curt yes or no , when , indeed , she reply at all . 

 when all be gather at tea , Sylvia be quite calm again ; rather pale than usual , and very attentive and subduce in her behaviour to Alice ; she would evidently fain have be silent , but as Molly be her own especial guest , that could not be , so all her endeavour go towards steer the conversation away from any awkward point . but each of the four , let alone little Bella , be thankful when the market - cart draw up at the shop door , that be to take Mrs. Brunton back to her sister 's house . 

 when she be fairly off , Alice Rose open her mouth in strong condemnation ; wind up with 

 ' and if aught in my word give thee cause for offence , Sylvia , it be because my heart rise within I at the kind of talk thee and she have be have about Philip ; and her evil and light - minded counsel to thee about wait seven year , and then wed another . ' 

 hard as these word may seem when repeat , there be something of a near approach to an apology in Mrs. Rose 's manner than Sylvia have ever see in it before . she be silent for a few moment , then she say , 

 ' I ha ' often think of tell yo ' and Hester , special - like , when yo've   be so kind to my little Bella , that Philip an ' I could niver come together again ; no , not if he come home this very night ' 

 she would have go on speak , but hester interrupt she with a low cry of dismay . 

 Alice say , 

 ' hush thee , hester . it be no business o ' thine . Sylvia Hepburn , thou'rt speak like a silly child . ' 

 ' no . I be speak like a woman ; like a woman as find out she be be cheat by man as she trust , and as have no help for it . I be noane go to say any more about it . it be I as have be wrong , and as have to bear it : only I think I would tell yo ' both this much , that yo ' might know somewhat why he go away , and how I say my last word about it . ' 

 so indeed it seem . to all question and remonstrance from Alice , Sylvia turn a deaf ear . she avert her face from Hester 's sad , wistful look ; only when they be part for the night , at the top of the little staircase , she turn , and put her arm round Hester 's neck she lay her head on her neck , and whisper , 

 ' poor hester poor , poor hester ! if yo ' an ' he have but be marry together , what a deal o ' sorrow would ha ' be spar to we all ! ' 

 hester push she away as she finish these word ; look searchingly into her face , her eye , and then follow Sylvia into her room , where Bella lie sleep , shut the door , and almost kneel down at Sylvia 's foot , clasp she , and hide her face in the fold of the other 's gown . 

 ' Sylvia , Sylvia , ' she murmur , ' some one have tell you I think no one know it be no sin it be do away with now indeed it be it be long ago before yo ' be marry ; but I can not forget . it be a shame , perhaps , to have think on it iver , when he niver think o ' I ; but I niver believe as any one could ha ' find it out . I be just fit to sink into t ' ground , what wi ' my sorrow and my shame . ' 

 hester be stop by her own rise sob , immediately she be in Sylvia 's arm . Sylvia be sit on the ground hold she , and soothe she with caress and broken word . 

 ' I be allay say t ' wrong thing , ' say she . ' it seem as if I be all upset to - day ; and indeed I be ; ' she add , allude to the news of Kinraid 's marriage she have yet to think upon . 

 ' but it be not   yo ' , hester : it be nothing yo ' iver say , or do , or look , for that matter . it be yo'r mother as let it out . ' 

 ' oh , mother ! mother ! ' wail out hester ; ' I niver think as any one but God would ha ' know that I have iver for a day thought on his be more to I than a brother . ' 

 Sylvia make no reply , only go on stroke Hester 's smooth brown hair , off which her cap have fall . Sylvia be think how strange life be , and how love seem to go all at cross purpose ; and be lose herself in bewilderment at the mystery of the world ; she be almost startled when Hester rise up , and take Sylvia 's hand in both of her , and look solemnly at she , say , 

 ' Sylvia , yo ' know what have be my trouble and my shame , and I be sure yo're sorry for I for I will humble myself to yo ' , and own that for many month before yo ' be marry , I feel my disappointment like a heavy burden lay on I by day and by night ; but now I ask yo ' , if yo've   any pity for I for what I go through , or if yo've   any love for I because of yo'r dead mother 's love for I , or because of any fellowship , or daily breadliness between we two , put the hard thought of Philip away from out yo'r heart ; he may ha ' do yo ' wrong , anyway yo ' think that he have ; I niver know he aught but kind and good ; but if he come back from wheriver in th ' wide world he be go to   and there be not a night but I pray God to keep he , and send he safe back , yo ' put away the memory of past injury , and forgive it all , and be , what yo ' can be , Sylvia , if you have   a mind to , just the kind , good wife he ought to have . ' 

 ' I can not ; yo ' know nothing about it , Hester . ' 

 ' tell I , then , ' plead hester . 

 ' no ! ' say Sylvia , after a moment 's hesitation ; ' I would do a deal for yo ' , I would , but I dare not   forgive Philip , even if I could ; I take a great oath again ' he . ay , yo ' may look shocked at I , but it be he as yo ' ought for to be shock at if yo ' know all . I say I would niver forgive he ; I shall keep to my word . ' 

 ' I think I would well pray for his death , then , ' say hester , hopelessly , and almost bitterly , loose her hold of Sylvia 's hand . 

 ' if it be not   for baby theere , I could think as it be my death as ' ud be good . they as one think t ' most on , forget one soon . ' 

 it be Kinraid to whom she be allude ; but hester do not understand she ; and after stand for a moment in silence , she kiss she , and leave she for the night . 




 CHAPTER XL 

 an unexpected messenger 

 after this agitation , and these partial confidence , no more be say on the subject of Philip for many week . they avoid even the slight allusion to he ; and none of they know how seldom or how often he might be present in the mind of the other . 

 one day the little Bella be unusually fractious with some slight childish indisposition , and Sylvia be oblige to have recourse to a never - fail piece of amusement ; namely , to take the child into the shop , when the number of new , bright - colour article be sure to beguile the little girl out of her fretfulness . she be walk along the high terrace of the counter , keep steady by her mother 's hand , when Mr. Dawson 's market - cart once more stop before the door . but it be not Mrs. Brunton who alight now ; it be a very smartly - dress , very pretty young lady , who put one dainty foot before the other with care , as if descend from such a primitive vehicle be a new occurrence in her life . then she look up at the name above the shop - door , and after ascertain that this be indeed the place she desire to find , she come in blushing . 

 ' be Mrs. Hepburn at home ? ' she ask of Hester , whose position in the shop bring she forward to receive the customer , while Sylvia draw Bella out of sight behind some great bale of red flannel . 

 ' can I see she ? ' the sweet , south - country voice go on , still address hester . Sylvia hear the inquiry , and come forwards , with a little rustic awkwardness , feel both shy and curious . 

 ' will yo ' please walk this way , ma'am ? ' say she , lead her visitor back into her own dominion of the parlour , and leave Bella to Hester 's willing care . 

 ' you do not   know I ! ' say the pretty young lady , joyously . ' but I think you know my husband . I be Mrs. Kinraid ! ' 

 a sob of surprise rise to Sylvia 's lip she choke it down , however , and try to conceal any emotion she might feel , in place a chair for her visitor , and try to make she feel welcome , although , if the truth must be tell , Sylvia be wonder all the time why her visitor come , and how soon she would go . 

 ' you know Captain Kinraid , do you not ? ' say the young lady , with innocent inquiry ; to which Sylvia 's lip form the answer , ' yes , ' but no clear sound issue therefrom . 

 ' but I know your husband know the captain ; be he at home yet ? can I speak to he ? I do so want to see he . ' 

 Sylvia be utterly bewilder ; Mrs. Kinraid , this pretty , joyous , prosperous little bird of a woman , Philip , Charley 's wife , what could they have in common ? what could they know of each other ? all she could say in answer to Mrs. Kinraid 's eager question , and still more eager look , be , that her husband be from home , have be long from home : she do not know where he be , she do not know when he would come back . 

 Mrs. Kinraid 's face fall a little , partly from her own real disappointment , partly out of sympathy with the hopeless , indifferent tone of Sylvia 's reply . 

 ' Mrs. Dawson tell I he have go away rather suddenly a year ago , but I think he might be come home by now . I be expect the captain early next month . oh ! how I should have like to see Mr. Hepburn , and to thank he for save the captain 's life ! ' 

 ' what do yo ' mean ? ' ask Sylvia , stir out of all assumed indifference . ' the captain ! be that '   not ' Charley ' , she could not use that familiar name to the pretty young wife before her   ' yo'r husband ? ' 

 ' yes , you know he , do not   you ? when he use to be stay with Mr Corney , his uncle ? ' 

 ' yes , I know he ; but I do not   understand . will yo ' please to tell I all about it , ma'am ? ' say Sylvia , faintly . 

 ' I think your husband would have tell you all about it ; I hardly know where to begin . you know my husband be a sailor ? ' 

 Sylvia nod assent , listen greedily , her heart beat thick all the time . 

 ' and he be now a Commander in the Royal Navy , all earn by his own bravery ! oh ! I be so proud of he ! ' 

 so could Sylvia have be if she have be his wife ; as it be , she think how often she have feel sure that he would be a great man some day . 

 ' and he have be at the siege of Acre . ' 

 Sylvia look perplex at these strange word , and Mrs. Kinraid catch the look . 

 ' St Jean d'Acre , you know though it be fine say " you know " , when I do not   know a bit about it myself till the captain 's ship be order there , though I be the head girl at Miss Dobbin 's in the geography class acre be a seaport town , not far from Jaffa , which be the modern name for Joppa , where St Paul go to long ago ; you have   read of that , I be sure , and Mount Carmel , where the prophet Elijah be once , all in Palestine , you know , only the Turks have get it now ? ' 

 ' but I do not   understand yet , ' say Sylvia , plaintively ; ' I daresay it be all very true about St Paul , but please , ma'am , will yo ' tell I about yo'r husband and mine have they meet again ? ' 

 ' yes , at Acre , I tell you , ' say Mrs. Kinraid , with pretty petulance . ' the Turks hold the town , and the French want to take it ; and we , that be the British Fleet , would not   let they . so Sir Sidney Smith , a commodore and a great friend of the captain 's , land in order to fight the French ; and the captain and many of the sailor land with he ; and it be burn hot ; and the poor captain be wound , and lie a - dying of pain and thirst within the enemy 's that be the french fire ; so that they be ready to shoot any one of his own side who come near he . they think he be dead himself , you see , as he be very near ; and would have be too , if your husband have not come out of shelter , and take he up in his arm or on his back   I could not   make out which , and carry he safe within the wall . ' 

 ' it could not   have be Philip , ' say Sylvia , dubiously . 

 ' but it be . the captain say so ; and he be not a man to be mistake . I think I would get his letter with I ; and I would have read you a part of it , but I leave it at Mrs. Dawson 's in my desk ; and I can not   send it to you , ' blushing as she remember certain passage in which ' the captain ' write very much like a lover , ' or else I would . but you may be quite sure it be your husband that venture into all that danger to save his old friend 's life , or the captain would not have say so . ' 

 ' but they be not   they be not   not to call great friend . ' 

 ' I wish I would get the letter here ; I can not   think how I could be so stupid ; I think I can almost remember the very word , though I have   read they over so often . he say , " just as I give up all hope , I see one Philip Hepburn , a man whom I have know at Monkshaven , and whom I have some reason to remember well "   I be sure he say so " remember well " , " he see I too , and come at the risk of his life to where I lay . I fully expect he would be shoot down ; and I shut my eye not to see the end of my last chance . the shot rain about he , and I think he be hit ; but he take I up and carry I under cover . " I be sure he say that , I have   read it over so often ; and he go on and say how he hunt for Mr. Hepburn all through the ship , as soon as ever he could ; but he could hear nothing of he , either alive or dead . do not   go so white , for pity 's sake ! ' say she , suddenly startle by Sylvia 's blanch colour . ' you see , because he could not   find he alive be no reason for give he up as dead ; because his name be not   to be find on any of the ship ' book ; so the captain think he must have be know by a different name to his real one . only he say he should like to have see he to have thank he ; and he say he would give a deal to know what have become of he ; and as I be stay two day at Mrs. Dawson 's , I tell they I must come over to Monkshaven , if only for five minute , just to hear if your good husband be come home , and to shake his hand , that help to save my own dear captain . ' 

 ' I do not   think it could have be Philip , ' reiterate Sylvia . 

 ' why not ? ' ask her visitor ; ' you say you do not   know where he be ; why might not   he have be there where the captain say he be ? ' 

 ' but he be not   a sailor , nor yet a soldier . ' 

 ' oh ! but he be . I think somewhere the captain call he a marine ; that be neither one nor the other , but a little of both . he will be come home some day soon ; and then you will see ! ' 

 Alice Rose come in at this minute , and Mrs. Kinraid jump to the conclusion that she be Sylvia 's mother , and in her overflowing gratitude and friendliness to all the family of he who have ' save the captain ' she go forward , and shake the old woman 's hand in that pleasant confiding way that win all heart . 

 ' here be your daughter , ma'am ! ' say she to the half - astonish , half - pleased Alice . ' I be Mrs. Kinraid , the wife of the captain that use to be in these part , and I be come to bring her news of her husband , and she do not   half believe I , though it be all to his credit , I be sure . ' 

 Alice look so perplexed that Sylvia feel herself bind to explain . 

 ' she say he be either a soldier or a sailor , and a long way off at some place name in t ' Bible . ' 

 ' Philip Hepburn lead away to be a soldier ! ' say she , ' who have once be a Quaker ? ' 

 ' yes , and a very brave one too , and one that it would do my heart good to look upon , ' exclaim Mrs. Kinraid . ' he be be save my husband 's life in the Holy Land , where Jerusalem be , you know . ' 

 ' Nay ! ' say Alice , a little scornfully . ' I can forgive Sylvia for not be over keen to credit thy news . her man of peace become a man of war ; and suffer to enter Jerusalem , which be a heavenly and a typical city at this time ; while I , as be one of the elect , be oblige to go on dwell in Monkshaven , just like any other body . ' 

 ' Nay , but , ' say Mrs. Kinraid , gently , see she be touch on delicate ground , ' I do not say he have go to Jerusalem , but my husband see he in those part , and he be do his duty like a brave , good man ; ay , and more than his duty ; and , you may take my word for it , he will be at home some day soon , and all I beg be that you will let the captain and I know , for I be sure if we can , we will both come and pay our respect to he . and I be very glad I have   see you , ' say she , rise to go , and put out her hand to shake that of Sylvia ; ' for , besides be Hepburn 's wife , I be pretty sure I have   hear the captain speak of you ; and if ever you come to Bristol I hope you will come and see we on Clifton Downs . ' 

 she go away , leave Sylvia almost stunned by the new idea present to she . Philip a soldier ! Philip in a battle , risk his life . most strange of all , Charley and Philip once more meeting together , not as rival or as foe , but as saviour and save ! add to all this the conviction , strengthen by every word that happy , love wife have utter , that Kinraid 's old , passionate love for herself have fade away and vanish utterly : its very existence apparently blot out of his memory . she have tear up her love for he by the root , but she feel as if she could never forget that it have be . 

 hester bring back Bella to her mother . she have not like to interrupt the conversation with the strange lady before ; and now she find her mother in an obvious state of excitement ; Sylvia quieter than usual . 

 ' that be Kinraid 's wife , hester ! he that be th ' specksioneer as make such a noise about t ' place at the time of Darley 's death . he be now a captain a navy captain , accord to what she say . and she would fain have we believe that Philip be abide in all manner of scripture place ; place as have be long do away with , but the similitude whereof be in the heaven , where the elect shall one day see they . and she say Philip be there , and a soldier , and that he save her husband 's life , and be come home soon . I wonder what John and Jeremiah will say to his soldiering then ? it will noane be to their taste , I be think . ' 

 this be all very unintelligible to hester , and she would dearly have like to question Sylvia ; but Sylvia sate a little apart , with Bella on her knee , her cheek rest on her child 's golden curl , and her eye fix and almost trance - like , as if she be see thing not present . 

 so hester have to be content with ask her mother as many elucidatory question as she could ; and after all do not gain a very clear idea of what have really be say by Mrs. Kinraid , as her mother be more full of the apparent injustice of Philip 's be allow the privilege of treading on holy ground if , indeed , that holy ground exist on this side heaven , which she be inclined to dispute than to confine herself to the repetition of word , or narration of fact . 

 suddenly Sylvia rouse herself to a sense of hester 's deep interest and balked inquiry , and she go over the ground rapidly . 

 ' Yo'r mother say right she be his wife . and he be away fight ; and get too near t ' French as be shoot and fire all round he ; and just then , accord to her story , Philip see he , and go straight into t ' midst o ' t ' shot , and fetch he out o ' danger . that be what she say , and uphold . ' 

 ' and why should it not be ? ' ask Hester , her cheek flush . 

 but Sylvia only shake her head , and say , 

 ' I can not tell . it may be so . but they would little cause to be friend , and it seem all so strange Philip a soldier , and they meet theere after all ! ' 

 hester lay the story of Philip 's bravery to her heart she fully believe in it . Sylvia ponder it more deeply still ; the cause for her disbelief , or , at any rate , for her wonder , be unknown to hester ! many a time she sink to sleep with the picture of the event narrate by Mrs. Kinraid as present to her mind as her imagination or experience could make it : first one figure prominent , then another . many a morning she waken up , her heart beat wildly , why , she know not , till she shudder at the remembrance of the scene that have pass in her dream : scene that might be act in reality that very day ; for Philip might come back , and then ? 

 and where be Philip all this time , these many week , these heavily pass month ? 




 CHAPTER XLI 

 the bedesman of ST SEPULCHRE 

 Philip lie long ill on board the hospital ship . if his heart have be light , he might have rally soon ; but he be so depressed he do not care to live . his shattered jaw - bone , his burn and blacken face , his many injury of body , be torture to both his physical frame , and his sick , weary heart . no more chance for he , if indeed there ever have be any , of return gay and gallant , and thus regain his wife 's love . this have be his poor , foolish vision in the first hour of his enlistment ; and the vain dream have recur more than once in the feverish stage of excitement which the new scene into which he have be hurry as a recruit have call forth . but that be all over now . he know that it be the most unlikely thing in the world to have come to pass ; and yet those be happy day when he could think of it as barely possible . now all he could look forward to be disfigurement , feebleness , and the bare pittance that keep pensioner from absolute want . 

 those around he be kind enough to he in their fashion , and attend to his bodily requirement ; but they have no notion of listen to any revelation of unhappiness , if Philip have be the man to make confidence of that kind . as it be , he lie very still in his berth , seldom ask for anything , and always say he be well , when the ship - surgeon come round with his daily inquiry . but he do not care to rally , and be rather sorry to find that his case be consider so interesting in a surgical point of view , that he be likely to receive a good deal more than the average amount of attention . perhaps it be owe to this that he recover at all . the doctor say it be the heat that make he languid , for that his wound and burn be all do well at last ; and by - and - by they tell he they have order he ' home ' . his pulse sink under the surgeon 's finger at the mention of the word ; but he do not say a word . he be too indifferent to life and the world to have a will ; otherwise they might have keep their pet patient a little long where he be . 

 slowly pass from ship to ship as occasion serve ; rest here and there in garrison hospital , Philip at length reach Portsmouth on the evening of a September day in 1799 . the transport - ship in which he be , be load with wound and invalid soldier and sailor ; all who could manage it in any way struggle on deck to catch the first view of the white coast of England . one man lift his arm , take off his cap , and feebly wave it aloft , cry , ' Old England for ever ! ' in a faint shrill voice , and then burst into tear and sob aloud . other try to pipe up ' rule Britannia ' , while more sate , weak and motionless , look towards the shore that once , not so long ago , they never think to see again . Philip be one of these ; his place a little apart from the other man . he be muffle up in a great military cloak that have be give he by one of his officer ; he feel the September breeze chill after his sojourn in a warm climate , and in his shattered state of health . 

 as the ship come in sight of Portsmouth harbour , the signal flag run up the rope ; the beloved Union Jack float triumphantly over all . return signal be make from the harbour ; on board all become bustle and preparation for landing ; while on shore there be the evident movement of expectation , and man in uniform be see press their way to the front , as if to they belong the right of reception . they be the man from the barrack hospital , that have be signal for , come down with ambulance litter and other mark of forethought for the sick and wound , who be return to the country for which they have fight and suffer . 

 with a dash and a great rock swing the vessel come up to her appoint place , and be safely moor . Philip sit still , almost as if he have no part in the cry of welcome , the bustling care , the loud direction that cut the air around he , and pierce his nerve through and through . but one in authority give the order ; and Philip , discipline to obedience , rise to find his knapsack and leave the ship . Passive as he seem to be , he have his liking for particular comrade ; there be one especially , a man as different from Philip as well could be , to whom the latter have always attach himself ; a merry fellow from Somersetshire , who be almost always cheerful and bright , though Philip have overhear the doctor say he would never be the man he be before he have that shot through the side . this marine would often sit make his fellow laugh , and laugh himself at his own good - humour joke , till so terrible a fit of cough come on that those around he fear he would die in the paroxysm . after one of these fit he have gasp out some word , which lead Philip to question he a little ; and it turn out that in the quiet little village of Potterne , far inland , nestle beneath the high stretch of Salisbury Plain , he have a wife and a child , a little girl , just the same age even to a week as Philip 's own little Bella . it be this that draw Philip towards the man ; and this that make Philip wait and go ashore along with the poor consumptive marine . 

 the litter have move off towards the hospital , the sergeant in charge have give his word of command to the remain invalid , who try to obey they to the good of their power , fall into something like military order for their march ; but soon , very soon , the weak broke step , and lag behind ; and feel as if the rough welcome and rude expression of sympathy from the crowd around be almost too much for they . Philip and his companion be about midway , when suddenly a young woman with a child in her arm force herself through the people , between the soldier who keep press on either side , and throw herself on the neck of Philip 's friend . 

 ' oh , Jem ! ' she sob , ' I have   walk all the road from Potterne . I have   never stop but for food and rest for Nelly , and now I have   get you once again , I have   get you once again , bless God for it ! ' 

 she do not seem to see the deadly change that have come over her husband since she part with he a ruddy young labourer ; she have get he once again , as she phrase it , and that be enough for she ; she kiss his face , his hand , his very coat , nor would she be repulse from walk beside he and hold his hand , while her little girl run along scared by the voice and the strange face , and cling to her mammy 's gown . 

 Jem cough , poor fellow ! he cough his churchyard cough ; and Philip bitterly envy he envy his life , envy his approach death ; for be he not wrap round with that woman 's tender love , and be not such love strong than death ? Philip have feel as if his own heart be grow numb , and as though it have change to a cold heavy stone . but at the contrast of this man 's lot to his own , he feel that he have yet the power of suffering leave to he . 

 the road they have to go be full of people , keep off in some measure by the guard of soldier . all sort of kindly speech , and many a curious question , be address to the poor invalid as they walk along . Philip 's jaw , and the low part of his face , be bandage up ; his cap be slouch down ; he hold his cloak about he , and shiver within its fold . 

 they come to a standstill from some slight obstacle at the corner of a street . down the causeway of this street a naval officer with a lady on his arm be walk briskly , with a step that tell of health and a light heart . he stay his progress though , when he see the convoy of maim and wound man ; he say something , of which Philip only catch the word , ' same uniform , ' ' for his sake , ' to the young lady , whose cheek blanch a little , but whose eye kindle . then leave she for an instant , he press forward ; he be close to Philip , poor sad Philip absorb in his own thought , so absorb that he notice nothing till he hear a voice at his ear , have the northumbrian burr , the Newcastle inflection which he know of old , and that be to he like the sick memory of a deadly illness ; and then he turn his muffled face to the speaker , though he know well enough who it be , and avert his eye after one sight of the handsome , happy man , the man whose life he have save once , and would save again , at the risk of his own , but whom , for all that , he pray that he might never meet more on earth . 

 ' here , my fine fellow , take this , ' force a crown piece into Philip 's hand . ' I wish it be more ; I would give you a pound if I have it with I . ' 

 Philip mutter something , and hold out the coin to Captain Kinraid , of course in vain ; nor be there time to urge it back upon the giver , for the obstacle to their progress be suddenly remove , the crowd press upon the captain and his wife , the procession move on , and Philip along with it , hold the piece in his hand , and long to throw it far away . indeed he be on the point of drop it , hop to do so unperceived , when he bethink he of give it to Jem 's wife , the footsore woman , limp happily along by her husband 's side . they thank he , and speak in his praise more than he could well bear . it be no credit to he to give that away which burn his finger as long as he keep it . 

 Philip know that the injury he have receive in the explosion on board the Theseus would oblige he to leave the service . he also believe that they would entitle he to a pension . but he have little interest in his future life ; he be without hope , and in a depressed state of health . he remain for some little time stationary , and then go through all the form of dismissal on account of wound receive in service , and be turn out loose upon the world , uncertain where to go , indifferent as to what become of he . 

 it be fine , warm October weather as he turn his back upon the coast , and set off on his walk northward . green leaf be yet upon the tree ; the hedge be one flush of foliage and the wild rough - flavour fruit of different kind ; the field be tawny with the uncleared - off stubble , or emerald green with the growth of the aftermath . the roadside cottage garden be gay with hollyhock and Michaelmas daisy and marigold , and the bright pane of the window glitter through a veil of China rose . 

 the war be a popular one , and , as a natural consequence , soldier and sailor be hero everywhere . Philip 's long droop form , his arm hang in a sling , his face scar and blacken , his jaw bind up with a black silk handkerchief ; these mark of active service be reverence by the rustic cottager as though they have be crown and sceptre . many a hard - handed labourer leave his seat by the chimney corner , and come to his door to have a look at one who have be fight the French , and push forward to have a grasp of the stranger 's hand as he give back the empty cup into the good wife 's keeping , for the kind homely woman be ever ready with milk or homebrewe to slake the feverish traveller 's thirst when he stop at their door and ask for a drink of water . 

 at the village public - house he have have a welcome of a more interested character , for the landlord know full well that his circle of customer would be large that night , if it be only know that he have within his door a soldier or a sailor who have see service . the rustic politician would gather round Philip , and smoke and drink , and then question and discuss till they be drouthy again ; and in their sturdy obtuse mind they set down the extra glass and the supernumerary pipe to the score of patriotism . 

 altogether human nature turn its sunny side out to Philip just now ; and not before he need the warmth of brotherly kindness to cheer his shivering soul . day after day he drift northward , make but the slow progress of a feeble man , and yet this short daily walk tired he so much that he long for rest for the morning to come when he need not to feel that in the course of an hour or two he must be up and away . 

 he be toil on with this longing at his heart when he see that he be draw near a stately city , with a great old cathedral in the centre keep solemn guard . this place might be yet two or three mile distant ; he be on a rise ground look down upon it . a labour man pass by , observe his pallid look and his languid attitude , and tell he for his comfort , that if he turn down a lane to the left a few step far on , he would find himself at the Hospital of St Sepulchre , where bread and beer be give to all comer , and where he might sit he down and rest awhile on the old stone bench within the shadow of the gateway . obey these direction , Philip come upon a building which date from the time of Henry the Fifth . some knight who have fight in the french war of that time , and have survive his battle and come home to his old hall , have be stir up by his conscience , or by what be equivalent in those day , his confessor , to build and endow a hospital for twelve decayed soldier , and a chapel wherein they be to attend the daily mass he ordain to be say till the end of all time   which eternity last rather more than a century , pretty well for an eternity bespeak by a man , for his soul and the soul of those whom he have slay . there be a large division of the quadrangular building set apart for the priest who be to say these mass ; and to watch over the well - being of the bedesman . in process of year the origin and primary purpose of the hospital have be forget by all except the local antiquary ; and the place itself come to be regard as a very pleasant quaint set of almshouse ; and the warden 's office   he who should have say or sing his daily mass be now call the warden , and read daily prayer and preach a sermon on Sundays   an agreeable sinecure . 

 another legacy of old Sir Simon Bray be that of a small croft of land , the rent or profit of which be to go towards give to all who ask for it a manchet of bread and a cup of good beer . this beer be , so Sir Simon ordain , to be make after a certain receipt which he leave , in which ground ivy take the place of hop . but the receipt , as well as the mass , be modernize accord to the progress of time . 

 Philip stand under a great broad stone archway ; the back - door into the warden 's house be on the right side ; a kind of buttery - hatch be place by the porter 's door on the opposite side . after some consideration , Philip knock at the closed shutter , and the signal seem to be well understand . he hear a movement within ; the hatch be draw aside , and his bread and beer be hand to he by a pleasant - look old man , who prove himself not at all disinclined for conversation . 

 ' you may sit down on yonder bench , ' say he . ' nay , man ! sit I ' the sun , for it be a chilly place , this , and then you can look through the grate and watch th ' old fellow toddle about in th ' quad . ' 

 Philip sit down where the warm October sun slant upon he , and look through the iron railing at the peaceful sight . 

 a great square of velvet lawn , intersect diagonally with broad flag - pave walk , the same kind of walk go all round the quadrangle ; low two - storied brick house , tint gray and yellow by age , and in many place almost cover with vine , virginian creeper , and monthly rose ; before each house a little plot of garden ground , bright with flower , and evidently tend with the utmost care ; on the farth side the massive chapel ; here and there an old or infirm man sun himself , or leisurely do a bit of gardening , or talk to one of his comrade the place look as if care and want , and even sorrow , be lock out and exclude by the ponderous gate through which Philip be gaze . 

 ' it be a nice enough place , bean't   it ? ' say the porter , interpret Philip 's look pretty accurately . ' leastway , for they as like it . I have   get a bit weary on it myself ; it be so far from th ' world , as a man may say ; not a decent public within a mile and a half , where one can hear a bit o ' news of an evening . ' 

 ' I think I could make myself very content here , ' reply Philip . ' that be to say , if one be easy in one 's mind . ' 

 ' ay , ay , my man . that be it everywhere . why , I do not   think that I could enjoy myself not even at th ' White Hart , where they give you as good a glass of ale for twopence as anywhere I ' th ' four kingdom I could not , to say , flavour my ale even there , if my old woman lie a - dying ; which be a sign as it be the heart , and not the ale , as make the drink . ' 

 just then the warden 's back - door open , and out come the warden himself , dress in full clerical costume . 

 he be go into the neighbour city , but he stop to speak to Philip , the wounded soldier ; and all the more readily because his old faded uniform tell the warden 's experienced eye that he have belong to the Marines . 

 ' I hope you enjoy the victual provide for you by the founder of St Sepulchre , ' say he , kindly . ' you look but poorly , my good fellow , and as if a slice of good cold meat would help your bread down . ' 

 ' thank you , sir ! ' say Philip . ' I be not hungry , only weary , and glad of a draught of beer . ' 

 ' you have   be in the Marines , I see . where have you be serve ? ' 

 ' I be at the siege of Acre , last May , sir . ' 

 ' at acre ! be you , indeed ? then perhaps you know my boy Harry ? he be in the th . ' 

 ' it be my company , ' say Philip , warm up a little . look back upon his soldier 's life , it seem to he to have many charm , because it be so full of small daily interest . 

 ' then , do you know my son , Lieutenant Pennington ? ' 

 ' it be he that give I this cloak , sir , when they be send I back to England . I have be his servant for a short time before I be wound by the explosion on board the Theseus , and he say I should feel the cold of the voyage . he be very kind ; and I have   hear say he promise to be a first - rate officer . ' 

 ' you shall have a slice of roast beef , whether you want it or not , ' say the warden , ring the bell at his own back - door . ' I recognize the cloak now the young scamp ! how soon he have make it shabby , though , ' he continue , take up a corner where there be an immense tear not too well botch up . ' and so you be on board the Theseus at the time of the explosion ? bring some cold meat here for the good man or stay ! come in with I , and then you can tell Mrs. Pennington and the young lady all you know about Harry , and the siege , and the explosion . ' 

 so Philip be usher into the warden 's house and make to eat roast beef almost against his will ; and he be question and cross - question by three eager lady , all at the same time , as it seem to he . he have give all possible detail on the subject about which they be curious ; and be begin to consider how he could well make his retreat , when the young Miss Pennington go up to her father who have all this time stand , with his hat on , hold his coat - tail over his arm , with his back to the fire . he bend his ear down a very little to hear some whisper suggestion of his daughter 's , nod his head , and then go on question Philip , with kindly inquisitiveness and patronage , as the rich do question the poor . 

 ' and where be you go to now ? ' 

 Philip do not answer directly . he wonder in his own mind where he be go . at length he say , 

 ' Northwards , I believe . but perhaps I shall never reach there . ' 

 ' have not   you friend ? be not   you go to they ? ' 

 there be again a pause ; a cloud come over Philip 's countenance . he say , 

 ' no ! I be not go to my friend . I do not   know that I have   get any left . ' 

 they interpret his look and this speech to mean that he have either lose his friend by death , or offend they by enlist . 

 the warden go on , 

 ' I ask , because we have   get a cottage vacant in the mead . old Dobson , who be with General Wolfe at the taking of Quebec , die a fortnight ago . with such injury as your , I fear you will never be able to work again . but we require strict testimonial as to character , ' he add , with as penetrate a look as he could summon up at Philip . 

 Philip look unmoved , either by the offer of the cottage , or the illusion to the possibility of his character not be satisfactory . he be grateful enough in reality , but too heavy at heart to care very much what become of he . 

 the warden and his family , who be accustomed to consider a settlement at St Sepulchre 's as the sum of all good to a wear - out soldier , be a little annoyed at Philip 's cool way of receive the proposition . the warden go on to name the contingent advantage . 

 ' besides the cottage , you would have a load of wood for fire on all saint ' , on Christmas , and on Candlemas day a blue gown and suit of clothe to match every Michaelmas , and a shilling a day to keep yourself in all other thing . your dinner you would have with the other man , in hall . ' 

 ' the warden himself go into hall every day , and see that everything be comfortable , and say grace , ' add the warden 's lady . 

 ' I know I seem stupid , ' say Philip , almost humbly , ' not to be more grateful , for it be far beyond what I iver expect or think for again , and it be a great temptation , for I be just wear out with fatigue . several time I have   think I must lie down under a hedge , and just die for very weariness . but once I have a wife and a child up in the north , ' he stop . 

 ' and be they dead ? ' ask one of the young lady in a soft sympathize tone . her eye meet Philip 's , full of dumb woe . he try to speak ; he want to explain more fully , yet not to reveal the truth . 

 ' well ! ' say the warden , think he perceive the real state of thing , ' what I propose be this . you shall go into old Dobson 's house at once , as a kind of probationary bedesman . I will write to Harry , and get your character from he . Stephen Freeman I think you say your name be ? before I can receive his reply you will have be able to tell how you would like the kind of life ; and at any rate you will have the rest you seem to require in the meantime . you see , I take Harry 's have give you that cloak as a kind of character , ' add he , smile kindly . ' of course you will have to conform to rule just like all the rest , chapel at eight , dinner at twelve , light out at nine ; but I will tell you the remainder of our regulation as we walk across quad to your new quarter . ' 

 and thus Philip , almost in spite of himself , become instal in a bedesman 's house at St Sepulchre . 




 CHAPTER XLII 

 a fable at fault 

 Philip take possession of the two room which have belong to the dead Sergeant Dobson . they be furnish sufficiently for every comfort by the trustee of the hospital . some little fragment of ornament , some small article pick up in distant country , a few tattered book , remain in the room as legacy from their former occupant . 

 at first the repose of the life and the place be inexpressibly grateful to Philip . he have always shrink from encounter stranger , and display his blacken and scarred countenance to they , even where such disfigurement be most regard as a mark of honour . in St Sepulchre 's he meet none but the same set day after day , and when he have once tell the tale of how it happen and submit to their gaze , it be over for ever , if he so minded . the slight employment his garden give he there be a kitchen - garden behind each house , as well as the flower - plot in front and the daily arrangement of his parlour and chamber be , at the beginning of his time of occupation , as much bodily labour as he could manage . there be something stately and utterly remove from all Philip 's previous existence in the form observe at every day 's dinner , when the twelve bedesman meet in the large quaint hall , and the warden come in his college - cap and gown to say the long latin grace which wind up with something very like a prayer for the soul of Sir Simon Bray . it take some time to get a reply to ship letter in those time when no one could exactly say where the fleet might be find . 

 and before Dr Pennington have receive the excellent character of Stephen Freeman , which his son gladly send in answer to his father 's inquiry , Philip have become restless and uneasy in the midst of all this peace and comfort . 

 sit alone over his fire in the long winter evening , the scene of his past life rise before he ; his childhood ; his aunt Robson 's care of he ; his first go to Foster 's shop in Monkshaven ; Haytersbank Farm , and the spelling lesson in the bright warm kitchen there ; Kinraid 's appearance ; the miserable night of the Corneys ' party ; the farewell he have witness on Monkshaven sand ; the press - gang , and all the long consequence of that act of concealment ; poor Daniel Robson 's trial and execution ; his own marriage ; his child 's birth ; and then he come to that last day at Monkshaven : and he go over and over again the torture detail , the look of contempt and anger , the word of loathe indignation , till he almost bring himself , out of his extreme sympathy with Sylvia , to believe that he be indeed the wretch she have consider he to be . 

 he forget his own excuse for have act as he have do ; though these excuse have at one time seem to he to wear the garb of reason . after long thought and bitter memory come some wonder . what be Sylvia do now ? where be she ? what be his child like his child as well as her ? and then he remember the poor footsore wife and the little girl she carry in her arm , that be just the age of Bella ; he wish he have notice that child more , that a clear vision of it might rise up when he want to picture Bella . 

 one night he have go round this mill - wheel circle of idea till he be weary to the very marrow of his bone . to shake off the monotonous impression he rise to look for a book amongst the old tattered volume , hop that he might find something that would sufficiently lay hold of he to change the current of his thought . there be an old volume of Peregrine Pickle ; a book of sermon ; half an army list of 1774 , and the Seven Champions of Christendom . Philip take up this last , which he have never see before . in it he read how Sir Guy , Earl of Warwick , go to fight the Paynim in his own country , and be away for seven long year ; and when he come back his own wife Phillis , the countess in her castle , do not know the poor travel - wear hermit , who come daily to seek his dole of bread at her hand along with many beggar and much poor . but at last , when he lie a - die in his cave in the rock , he send for she by a secret sign know but to they twain . and she come with great speed , for she know it be her lord who have send for she ; and they have many sweet and holy word together before he give up the ghost , his head lie on her bosom . 

 the old story know to most people from their childhood be all new and fresh to Philip . he do not quite believe in the truth of it , because the fictitious nature of the history of some of the other Champions of Christendom be too patent . but he could not help think that this one might be true ; and that Guy and Phillis might have be as real flesh and blood , long , long ago , as he and Sylvia have even be . the old room , the quiet moonlit quadrangle into which the cross - barred casement look , the quaint aspect of everything that he have see for week and week ; all this predispose Philip to dwell upon the story he have just be read as a faithful legend of two lover whose bone be long since dust . he think that if he could thus see Sylvia , himself unknown , unseen could live at her gate , so to speak , and gaze upon she and his child some day too , when he lie a - dying , he might send for she , and in soft word of mutual forgiveness breathe his life away in her arm . or perhaps and so he lose himself , and from think , pass on to dream . all night long Guy and Phillis , Sylvia and his child , pass in and out of his vision ; it be impossible to make the fragment of his dream cohere ; but the impression make upon he by they be not the less strong for this . he feel as if he be call to Monkshaven , want at Monkshaven , and to Monkshaven he resolve to go ; although when his reason overtake his feeling , he know perfectly how unwise it be to leave a home of peace and tranquillity and surround friendliness , to go to a place where nothing but want and wretchedness await he unless he make himself know ; and if he do , a deep want , a more woeful wretchedness , would in all probability be his portion . 

 in the small oblong of look - glass hang against the wall , Philip catch the reflection of his own face , and laugh scornfully at the sight . the thin hair lie upon his temple in the flake that betoken long ill - health ; his eye be the same as ever , and they have always be consider the good feature in his face ; but they be sink in their orbit , and look hollow and gloomy . as for the low part of his face , blacken , contract , draw away from his tooth , the outline entirely change by the breakage of his jaw - bone , he be indeed a fool if he think himself fit to go forth to win back that love which Sylvia have forswear . as a hermit and a beggar , he must return to Monkshaven , and fall perforce into the same position which Guy of Warwick have only assume . but still he should see his Phillis , and might feast his sad hopeless eye from time to time with the sight of his child . his small pension of sixpence a day would keep he from absolute want of necessary . 

 so that very day he go to the warden and tell he he think of give up his share in the bequest of Sir Simon Bray . such a relinquishment have never occur before in all the warden 's experience ; and he be very much inclined to be offend . 

 ' I must say that for a man not to be satisfied as a bedesman of St Sepulchre 's argue a very wrong state of mind , and a very ungrateful heart . ' 

 ' I be sure , sir , it be not from any ingratitude , for I can hardly feel thankful to you and to Sir Simon , and to madam , and the young lady , and all my comrade in the hospital , and I niver expect to be either so comfortable or so peaceful again , but ' 

 ' but ? what can you have to say against the place , then ? not but what there be always plenty of applicant for every vacancy ; only I think I be do a kindness to a man out of Harry 's company . and you will not see Harry either ; he be get his leave in March ! ' 

 ' I be very sorry . I should like to have see the lieutenant again . but I can not rest any long so far away from people I once know . ' 

 ' ten to one they be dead , or remove , or something or other by this time ; and it will serve you right if they be . mind ! no one can be choose twice to be a bedesman of St Sepulchre 's . ' 

 the warden turn away ; and Philip , uneasy at stay , dishearten at leave , go to make his few preparation for set out once more on his journey northward . he have to give notice of his change of residence to the local distributor of pension ; and one or two farewell have to be take , with more than usual sadness at the necessity ; for Philip , under his name of Stephen Freeman , have attach some of the old bedesman a good deal to he , from his unselfishness , his willingness to read to they , and to render they many little service , and , perhaps , as much as anything , by his habitual silence , which make he a convenient recipient of all their garrulousness . so before the time for his departure come , he have the opportunity of one more interview with the warden , of a more friendly character than that in which he give up his bedesmanship . and so far it be well ; and Philip turn his back upon St Sepulchre 's with his sore heart partly heal by his four month ' residence there . 

 he be strong , too , in body , more capable of the day - after - day walk that be require of he . he have save some money from his allowance as bedesman and from his pension , and might occasionally have take an outside place on a coach , have it not be that he shrink from the first look of every stranger upon his disfigured face . yet the gentle , wistful eye , and the white and faultless tooth always do away with the first impression as soon as people become a little acquainted with his appearance . 

 it be February when Philip leave St Sepulchre 's . it be the first week in April when he begin to recognize the familiar object between York and Monkshaven . and now he begin to hang back , and to question the wisdom of what he have do just as the warden have prophesy that he would . the last night of his two hundred mile walk he sleep at the little inn at which he have be enlist nearly two year before . it be by no intention of his that he rest at that identical place . night be draw on ; and , in make , as he think , a short cut , he have miss his way , and be fain to seek shelter where he might find it . but it bring he very straight face to face with his life at that time , and ever since . his mad , wild hope half the result of intoxication , as he now know all dead and go ; the career then freshly opening shut up against he now ; his youthful strength and health change into premature infirmity , and the home and the love that should have open wide its door to console he for all , why in two year death might have be busy , and take away from he his last feeble chance of the faint happiness of see his beloved without be see or know of she . all that night and all the next day , the fear of Sylvia 's possible death overcloud his heart . it be strange that he have hardly ever think of this before ; so strange , that now , when the terror come , it take possession of he , and he could almost have swear that she must be lie dead in Monkshaven churchyard . or be it little Bella , that blooming , lovely babe , whom he be never to see again ? there be the tolling of mournful bell in the distant air to his disturbed fancy , and the cry of the happy bird , the plaintive bleating of the new - drop lamb , be all omen of evil import to he . 

 as well as he could , he find his way back to Monkshaven , over the wild height and moor he have cross on that black day of misery ; why he should have choose that path he could not tell it be as if he be lead , and have no free will of his own . 

 the soft clear evening be draw on , and his heart beat thick , and then stop , only to start again with fresh violence . there he be , at the top of the long , steep lane that be in some part a literal staircase lead down from the hill - top into the High Street , through the very entry up which he have pass when he shrink away from his former and his then present life . there he stand , look down once more at the numerous irregular roof , the many stack of chimney below he , seek out that which have once be his own dwelling who dwelt there now ? 

 the yellower gleam grow narrower ; the evening shadow broader , and Philip creep down the lane a weary , woeful man . at every gap in the close - pack building he hear the merry music of a band , the cheerful sound of excited voice . still he descend slowly , scarcely wonder what it could be , for it be not associate in his mind with the one pervading thought of Sylvia . 

 when he come to the angle of junction between the lane and the High Street , he seem plunge all at once into the very centre of the bustle , and he draw himself up into a corner of deep shadow , from whence he could look out upon the street . 

 a circus be make its grand entry into Monkshaven , with all the pomp of colour and of noise that it could muster . trumpeter in parti - colour clothe ride first , blare out triumphant discord . next come a gold - and - scarlet chariot draw by six piebald horse , and the winding of this team through the tortuous narrow street be pretty enough to look upon . in the chariot sate king and queen , hero and heroine , or what be mean for such ; all the little boy and girl run alongside of the chariot envy they ; but they themselves be very much tired , and shiver with cold in their heroic pomp of classic clothing . all this Philip might have see ; do see , in fact ; but heed not one jot . almost opposite to he , not ten yard apart , stand on the raise step at the well - know shop door , be Sylvia , hold a child , a merry dancing child , up in her arm to see the show . she too , Sylvia , be laugh for pleasure , and for sympathy with pleasure . she hold the little Bella aloft that the child might see the gaudy procession the well and the long , look at it herself with red lip apart and white tooth glance through ; then she turn to speak to some one behind her Coulson , as Philip see the moment afterwards ; his answer make her laugh once again . Philip see it all ; her bonny careless look , her pretty matronly form , her evident ease of mind and prosperous outward circumstance . the year that he have spend in gloomy sorrow , amongst wild scene , on land or by sea , his life in frequent peril of a bloody end , have go by with she like sunny day ; all the more sunny because he be not there . so bitterly think the poor disabled marine , as , weary and despairing , he stand in the cold shadow and look upon the home that should have be his haven , the wife that should have welcome he , the child that should have be his comfort . he have banish himself from his home ; his wife have forswear he ; his child be blossom into intelligence unwitting of any father . Wife , and child , and home , be all do well without he ; what madness have tempt he thither ? an hour ago , like a fanciful fool , he have think she might be dead dead with sad penitence for her cruel word at her heart with mournful wonder at the unaccounted - for absence of her child 's father preying on her spirit , and in some measure cause the death he have apprehend . but to look at she there where she stand , it do not seem as if she have have an hour 's painful thought in all her bloom life . 

 ay ! go in to the warm hearth , mother and child , now the gay cavalcade have go out of sight , and the chill of night have succeed to the sun 's setting . husband and father , steal out into the cold dark street , and seek some poor cheap lodging where you may rest your weary bone , and cheat your more weary heart into forgetfulness in sleep . the pretty story of the Countess Phillis , who mourn for her husband 's absence so long , be a fable of old time ; or rather say Earl Guy never wed his wife , know that one she love well than he be alive all the time she have believe he to be dead . 




 CHAPTER XLIII 

 the unknown 

 a few day before that on which Philip arrive at Monkshaven , Kester have come to pay Sylvia a visit . as the early friend she have , and also as one who know the real secret of her life , Sylvia always give he the warm welcome , the cordial word , and the sweet look in which the old man delight . he have a sort of delicacy of his own which keep he from go to see she too often , even when he be stationary at Monkshaven ; but he look forward to the time when he allow himself this pleasure as a child at school look forward to its holiday . the time of his service at Haytersbank have , on the whole , be the happy in all his long monotonous year of daily labour . Sylvia 's father have always treat he with the rough kindness of fellowship ; Sylvia 's mother have never stint he in his meat or grudge he his share of the good that be go ; and once , when he be ill for a few day in the loft above the cow - house , she have make he posset , and nurse he with the same tenderness which he remember his mother show to he when he be a little child , but which he have never experience since then . he have know Sylvia herself , as bud , and sweet promise of blossom ; and just as she be open into the full - blown rose , and , if she have be happy and prosperous , might have pass out of the narrow circle of Kester 's interest , one sorrow after another come down upon her pretty innocent head , and Kester 's period of service to Daniel Robson , her father , be tragically cut short . all this make Sylvia the great centre of the faithful herdsman 's affection ; and Bella , who remind he of what Sylvia be when first Kester know she , only occupy the second place in his heart , although to the child he be much more demonstrative of his regard than to the mother . 

 he have dress himself in his Sunday good , and although it be only Thursday , have forestall his Saturday 's shaving ; he have provide himself with a paper of humbug for the child ' humbug ' be the north - country term for certain lump of toffy , well - flavour with peppermint and now he sit in the accustomed chair , as near to the door as might be , in Sylvia 's presence , coax the little one , who be not quite sure of his identity , to come to he , by open the paper parcel , and let its sweet content be see . 

 ' she be like thee and yet she favour her feyther , ' say he ; and the moment he have utter the incautious word he look up to see how Sylvia have take the unpremeditated , unusual reference to her husband . his stealthy glance do not meet her eye ; but though he think she have colour a little , she do not seem offend as he have fear . it be true that Bella have her father 's grave , thoughtful , dark eye , instead of her mother 's gray one , out of which the childlike expression of wonder would never entirely pass away . and as Bella slowly and half distrustfully make her way towards the temptation offer she , she look at Kester with just her father 's look . 

 Sylvia say nothing in direct reply ; Kester almost think she could not have hear he . but , by - and - by , she say , 

 ' Yo'll have hear how Kinraid who be a captain now , and a grand officer have go and get marry . ' 

 ' Nay ! ' say Kester , in genuine surprise . ' he niver have , for sure ! ' 

 ' ay , but he have , ' say Sylvia . ' and I be sure I dunnot see why he should not . ' 

 ' well , well ! ' say Kester , not look up at she , for he catch the inflection in the tone of her voice . ' he be a fine stirrin ' chap , yon ; an ' he be allay for do summut ; an ' when he fund as he could not   ha ' one thing as he would set his mind on , a reckon he think he mun put up wi ' another . ' 

 ' it ' ud be no " put up , " ' say Sylvia . ' she be stay at Bessy Dawson 's , and she come here to see I she be as pretty a young lady as yo'd see on a summer 's day ; and a real lady , too , wi ' a fortune . she do not   speak two word wi'out bring in her husband 's name , " the captain " , as she call he . ' 

 ' An ' she come to see thee ? ' say Kester , cock his eye at Sylvia with the old shrewd look . ' that be summut queer , be not   it ? ' 

 Sylvia redden a good deal . 

 ' he be too fause to have speak to she on I , in t ' old way , as he use for t ' speak to I . I be nought to she but Philip 's wife . ' 

 ' An ' what t ' dickin have she to do wi ' Philip ? ' ask Kester , in intense surprise ; and so absorb in curiosity that he let the humbug all fall out of the paper upon the floor , and the little Bella sit down , plump , in the midst of treasure as great as those fabled to exist on Tom Tiddler 's ground . 

 Sylvia be again silent ; but Kester , know she well , be sure that she be struggle to speak , and bid his time without repeat his question . 

 ' she say and I think her tale be true , though I can not get to t ' right on it , think on it as I will as Philip save her husband 's life somewheere nearabout to Jerusalem . she would have it that t ' captain for I think I will niver can ' he Kinraid again be in a great battle , and be near upon be shoot by t ' French , when Philip our Philip come up and go right into t ' fire o ' t ' gun , and save her husband 's life . and she speak as if both she and t ' captain be more beholden to Philip than word could tell . and she come to see I , to try and get news on he . 

 ' it be a queer kind o ' story , ' say Kester , meditatively . ' a should ha ' thought as Philip be more likely to ha ' gi'en he a shove into t ' thick on it , than t ' help he out o ' t ' scrape . ' 

 ' Nay ! ' say Sylvia , suddenly look straight at Kester ; ' yo're out theere . Philip have a deal o ' good in he . and I dunnot think as he would ha ' go and marry another woman so soon , if he have be I ' Kinraid 's place . ' 

 ' an ' yo've   niver heared on Philip sin ' he leave ? ' ask Kester , after a while . 

 ' Niver ; nought but what she tell I . and she say that t ' captain make inquiry for he right and leave , as soon after that happen as might be , and could hear niver a word about he . no one have see he , or know his name . ' 

 ' yo ' niver heared of his go for t ' be a soldier ? ' persevere Kester . 

 ' Niver . I have   tell yo ' once . it be unlike Philip to think o ' such a thing . ' 

 ' but thou mun ha ' be thinkin ' on he at time I ' a ' these year . bad as he have behave hissel ' , he be t ' feyther o ' thy little un . what do ta think he have be agait on when he leave here ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . I be noane so keen a - thinking on he at first . I try to put he out o ' my thought a'together , for it make I like mad to think how he have stand between I and that other . but I would begin to wonder and to wonder about he , and to think I should like to hear as he be do well . I reckon I think he be I ' London , wheere he have be that time afore , yo ' know , and have allay speak as if he have enjoy hissel ' tolerable ; and then Molly Brunton tell I on t ' other one 's marriage ; and , somehow , it give I a shake in my heart , and I begin for to wish I have not   say all they word I ' my passion ; and then that fine young lady come wi ' her story and I have   think a deal on it since , and my mind have come out clear . Philip 's dead , and it be his spirit as come to t ' other 's help in his time o ' need . I have   hear feyther say as spirit can not rest I ' their graf for try to undo t ' wrong they have   do I ' their body . ' 

 ' they be my conclusion , ' say Kester , solemnly . ' a be fain for to hear what be yo'r judgment first ; but they be the conclusion I come to as soon as I hear t ' tale . ' 

 ' let alone that one thing , ' say Sylvia , ' he be a kind , good man . ' 

 ' it be a big deal on a " one thing " , though , ' say Kester . ' it just spoil yo'r life , my poor lass ; an ' might ha ' go near to spoilin ' Charley Kinraid 's too . ' 

 ' man take a deal more nor woman to spoil their life , ' say Sylvia , bitterly . 

 ' not a ' mak ' o ' man . I reckon , lass , Philip 's life be pretty well on for bein ' spoilt at after he leave here ; and it be , mebbe , a good thing he get rid on it so soon . ' 

 ' I wish I would just have a few kind word wi ' he , I do , ' say Sylvia , almost on the point of cry . 

 ' come , lass , it be as ill moanin ' after what be past as it ' ud be for I t ' fill my eye wi ' weepin ' after t ' humbug as this little wench o ' thine have grub up whilst we'n be talkin ' . why , there be not one on them leave ! ' 

 ' she be a sad spoilt little puss ! ' say Sylvia , hold out her arm to the child , who run into they , and begin pat her mother 's cheek , and pull at the soft brown curl tuck away beneath the matronly cap . ' Mammy spoil she , and hester spoil she ' 

 ' Granny Rose do not   spoil I , ' say the child , with quick , intelligent discrimination , interrupt her mother 's list . 

 ' no ; but Jeremiah Foster do above a bit . he will come in fro ' t ' Bank , Kester , and ask for she , a'most ivery day . and he will bring her thing in his pocket ; and she be so fause , she allay go straight to peep in , and then he shift t ' apple or t ' toy into another . eh ! but she be a little fause one , ' half devour the child with her kiss . ' and he come and take she a walk oftentime , and he go as slow as if he be quite an old man , to keep pace wi ' Bella 's step . I often run upstairs and watch them out o ' t ' window ; he do not   care to have I with them , he be so fain t ' have t ' child all to hisself . ' 

 ' she be a bonny un , for sure , ' say Kester ; ' but not so pretty as thou be , Sylvie . A've   niver tell'd thee what a come for tho ' , and it be about time for I t ' be go . A'm off to t ' cheviot to - morrow morn t ' fetch home some sheep as Jonas Blundell have purchase . it will be a job o ' well nor two month a reckon . ' 

 ' it will be a nice time o ' year , ' say Sylvia , a little surprised at Kester 's evident discouragement at the prospect of the journey or absence ; he have often be away from Monkshaven for a long time without seem to care so much about it . 

 ' well , yo ' see it be a bit hard upon I for t ' leave my sister she as be t ' widow - woman , wheere a put up when a'm at home . thing be main an ' dear ; four - pound loaf be at sixteenpence ; an ' there be a deal o ' talk on a famine I ' t ' land ; an ' whaten a pay for my victual an ' t ' bed I ' t ' lean - to help t ' oud woman a bit , an ' she be sadly down I ' t ' mouth , for she can not hear on a lodger for t ' tak ' my place , for a ' she be move o'er to t ' other side o ' t ' bridge for t ' be near t ' new building , an ' t ' grand new walk they be makin ' round t ' cliff , thinkin ' she would be likeli t ' pick up a labourer as would be glad on a bed near his work . A'd ha ' like to ha ' set her agait wi ' a ' sponsible lodger afore a'd ha ' left , for she be just so soft - hearted , any scamp may put upon she if he nobbut get houd on her blind side . ' 

 ' can I help she ? ' say Sylvia , in her eager way . ' I should be so glad ; and I have   a deal of money by I - ' 

 ' Nay , my lass , ' say Kester , ' thou munnot go off so fast ; it be just what I be fear on i ' tellin ' thee . I have   leave she a bit o ' money , and I will mak ' shift to send she more ; it be just a kind word , t ' keep up her heart when I be go , as I want . if thou'd step in and see her fra ' time to time , and cheer she up a bit wi ' talkin ' to she on I , I would tak ' it very kind , and I would go off wi ' a light heart . ' 

 ' then I be sure I will do it for yo ' , Kester . I niver justly feel like mysel ' when yo're away , for I be lonesome enough at time . she and I will talk a ' t ' well about yo ' for both on we grieve after yo ' . ' 

 so Kester take his leave , his mind set at ease by Sylvia 's promise to go and see his sister pretty often during his absence in the North . 

 but Sylvia 's habit be change since she , as a girl at Haytersbank , like to spend half her time in the open air , run out perpetually without anything on to scatter crumb to the poultry , or to take a piece of bread to the old cart - horse , to go up to the garden for a handful of herb , or to clamber to the high point around to blow the horn which summon her father and Kester home to dinner . live in a town where it be necessary to put on hat and cloak before go out into the street , and then to walk in a steady and decorous fashion , she have only care to escape down to the freedom of the sea - shore until Philip go away ; and after that time she have learn so to fear observation as a deserted wife , that nothing but Bella 's health would have be a sufficient motive to take she out of door . and , as she have tell Kester , the necessity of give the little girl a daily walk be very much lighten by the great love and affection which Jeremiah Foster now bear to the child . ever since the day when the baby have come to his knee , allure by the temptation of his watch , he have apparently consider she as in some sort belong to he ; and now he have almost come to think that he have a right to claim she as his companion in his walk back from the Bank to his early dinner , where a high chair be always place ready for the chance of she come to share his meal . on these occasion he generally bring she back to the shop - door when he return to his afternoon 's work at the Bank . sometimes , however , he would leave word that she be to be send for from his house in the New Town , as his business at the Bank for that day be end . then Sylvia be compel to put on her thing , and fetch back her darling ; and except for this errand she seldom go out at all on week - day . 

 about a fortnight after Kester 's farewell call , this need for her visit to Jeremiah Foster 's arise ; and it seem to Sylvia that there could not be a well opportunity of fulfil her promise and go to see the widow Dobson , whose cottage be on the other side of the river , low down on the cliff - side , just at the bend and rush of the full stream into the open sea . she set off pretty early in order to go there first . she find the widow with her house - place tidy up after the midday meal , and busy knitting at the open door not look at her rapid - click needle , but gaze at the rush and recession of the wave before she ; yet not see they either , rather see day long past . 

 she start into active civility as soon as she recognize Sylvia , who be to she as a great lady , never have know Sylvia Robson in her wild childish day . Widow Dobson be always a little scandalize at her brother Christopher 's familiarity with Mrs. Hepburn . 

 she dust a chair which need no dusting , and place it for Sylvia , sit down herself on a three - legged stool to mark her sense of the difference in their condition , for there be another chair or two in the humble dwelling ; and then the two fall into talk first about Kester , whom his sister would persist in call Christopher , as if his dignity as her eld brother be compromise by any familiar abbreviation ; and by - and - by she open her heart a little more . 

 ' a could wish as a'd learn write - of - hand , ' say she ; ' for a've   that for to tell Christopher as might set his mind at ease . but yo ' see , if a write he a letter he could not   read it ; so a just comfort mysel ' wi ' thinkin ' nobody need learn writin ' unless they'n get friend as can read . but a reckon he would ha ' be glad to hear as a've   getten a lodger . ' here she nod her head in the direction of the door open out of the house - place into the ' lean - to ' , which Sylvia have observe on draw near the cottage , and the recollection of the mention of which by Kester have enable she to identify widow Dobson 's dwelling . ' he be a - bed yonder , ' the latter continue , drop her voice . ' he be a queer - lookin ' tyke , but a do not   think as he be a bad un . ' 

 ' when do he come ? ' say Sylvia , remember Kester 's account of his sister 's character , and feeling as though it behove she , as Kester 's confidante on this head , to give cautious and prudent advice . 

 ' eh ! a matter of a s'ennight ago . a'm noane good at mindin ' time ; he be pay I his rent twice , but then he be keen to pay aforehand . he have come in one night , an ' sate he down afore he could speak , he be so do up ; he would be on tramp this many a day , a reckon . " can yo ' give I a bed ? " say he , pant like , after a bit . " a chap as a met near here say as yo've   a lodging for t ' let . " " ay , " say a , " a ha ' that ; but yo ' mun pay I a shilling a week for ' t. " then my mind misgive I , for a thought he have not   a shilling i ' t ' world , an ' yet if he have not , a should just ha ' gi'en he t ' bed a ' t ' same : a'm not one as can turn a dog out if he come t ' I weary o ' his life . so he out wi ' a shillin ' , an ' lay it down on t ' table , 'bout a word . " a'll not trouble yo ' long , " say he . " A'm one as be good out o ' t ' world , " he say . then a thought as a'd be a bit hard upon he . an ' say I , " A'm a widow - woman , and one as have getten but few friend : " for yo ' see a be low about our Christopher 's go away north ; ' so a'm force - like to speak hard to folk ; but a've   make mysel ' some stirabout for my supper ; and if yo'd like t ' share an ' share about wi ' I , it be but puttin ' a sup more watter to ' t , and God 's blessing will be on ' t , just as same as if ' t be meal . " so he up wi ' his hand afore his e'en , and say not a word . at last he say , " Missus , " say he , " can God 's blessing be share by a sinner one o ' t ' devil 's child ? " say he . " for the Scriptur ' say he be t ' father o ' lie . " so a be puzzle - like ; an ' at length a say , " thou mun ask t ' parson that ; a'm but a poor faint - hearted widow - woman ; but a've   allay have God 's blessing somehow , now a bethink I , an ' a'll share it wi ' thee as far as my will go . " so he raxe his hand across t ' table , an ' mutter summat , as he grip mine . a think it be Scriptur ' as he say , but a'd need a ' my strength just then for t ' lift t ' pot off t ' fire it be t ' first vittle a'd taste sin ' morn , for t ' famine come down like stone on t ' head o ' us poor folk : an ' a ' a said be just " Coom along , chap , an ' fa ' to ; an ' God 's blessing be on he as eat most . " an ' sin ' that day he and I be be as thick as thief , only he be niver tell I nought of who he be , or wheere he come fra ' . but a think he be one o ' they poor collier , as have getten brunt I ' t ' coal - pit ; for , t ' be sure , his face be a ' black wi ' fire - mark ; an ' o ' late day he be ta'en t ' his bed , an ' just lie there sigh , for one can hear he plain as dayleet thro ' t ' bit partition wa ' . ' 

 as a proof of this , a sigh almost a groan startle the two woman at this very moment . 

 ' poor fellow ! ' say Sylvia , in a soft whisper . ' there be more sore heart I ' t ' world than one reckon for ! ' but after a while , she bethink she again of Kester 's account of his sister 's ' softness ' ; and she think that it behove she to give some good advice . so she add , in a sterner , hard tone ' still , yo ' say yo ' know nought about he ; and tramp be tramp a ' t ' world over ; and yo're a widow , and it behove yo ' to be careful . I think I would just send he off as soon as he be a bit rest . Yo ' say he be plenty o ' money ? ' 

 ' Nay ! a never say that . a know nought about it . he pay I aforehand ; an ' he pay I down for whativer a've   getten for he ; but that be but little ; he be noane up t ' his vittle , though a've   make he some broth as good as a could make them . ' 

 ' I would not   send he away till he be well again , if I be yo ; but I think yo'd be well rid on he , ' say Sylvia . ' it would be different if yo'r brother be in Monkshaven . ' as she speak she rise to go . 

 Widow Dobson hold her hand in hers for a minute , then the humble woman say , 

 ' Yo'll noane be vex wi ' me , missus , if a can not find I ' my heart t ' turn he out till he want to go hissel ' ? for a would not   like to vex yo ' , for Christopher 's sake ; but a know what it be for t ' feel for friendless folk , an ' choose what may come on it , I can not send he away . ' 

 ' no ! ' say Sylvia . ' why should I be vex ? it be no business o ' mine . only I should send he away if I be yo ' . he might go lodge wheere there be man - folk , who know t ' way o ' tramp , and be up to they . ' 

 into the sunshine go Sylvia . in the cold shadow the miserable tramp lay sighing . she do not know that she have be so near to he towards whom her heart be soften , day by day . 




 CHAPTER XLIV 

 first word 

 it be the spring of 1800 . old people yet can tell of the hard famine of that year . the harvest of the autumn before have fail ; the war and the corn law have bring the price of corn up to a famine rate ; and much of what come into the market be unsound , and consequently unfit for food , yet hungry creature buy it eagerly , and try to cheat disease by mix the damp , sweet , clammy flour with rice or potato meal . rich family deny themselves pastry and all unnecessary and luxurious us of wheat in any shape ; the duty on hair - powder be increase ; and all these palliative be but as drop in the ocean of the great want of the people . 

 Philip , in spite of himself , recover and grow strong ; and as he grow strong hunger take the place of loathe dislike to food . but his money be all spend ; and what be his poor pension of sixpence a day in that terrible year of famine ? many a summer 's night he walk for hour and hour round the house which once be his , which might be his now , with all its homely , blessed comfort , could he but go and assert his right to it . but to go with authority , and in his poor , maim guise assert that right , he have need be other than Philip Hepburn . so he stand in the old shelter of the steep , crooked lane opening on to the hill out of the market - place , and watch the soft fading of the summer 's eve into night ; the closing of the once familiar shop ; the exit of good , comfortable William Coulson , go to his own home , his own wife , his comfortable , plentiful supper . then Philip there be no police in those day , and scarcely an old watchman in that primitive little town would go round on the shady side of street , and , quickly glance about he , cross the bridge , look on the quiet , ripple stream , the gray shimmer foretell the come dawn over the sea , the black mast and rigging of the still vessel against the sky ; he could see with his wistful , eager eye the shape of the window the window of the very room in which his wife and child slept , unheede of he , the hungry , break - hearted outcast . he would go back to his lodging , and softly lift the latch of the door ; still more softly , but never without an unspoken , grateful prayer , pass by the poor sleep woman who have give he a shelter and her share of God 's blessing she who , like he , know not the feeling of satisfied hunger ; and then he lay he down on the narrow pallet in the lean - to , and again give Sylvia happy lesson in the kitchen at Haytersbank , and the dead be alive ; and Charley Kinraid , the specksioneer , have never come to trouble the hopeful , gentle peace . 

 for widow Dobson have never take Sylvia 's advice . the tramp know to she by the name of Freeman that in which he receive his pension lodge with she still , and pay his meagre shilling in advance , weekly . a shilling be meagre in those hard day of scarcity . a hungry man might easily eat the produce of a shilling in a day . 

 Widow Dobson plead this to Sylvia as an excuse for keep her lodger on ; to a more calculate head it might have seem a reason for send he away . 

 ' Yo ' see , missus , ' say she , apologetically , to Sylvia , one evening , as the latter call upon the poor widow before go to fetch little Bella   it be now too hot for the child to cross the bridge in the full heat of the summer sun , and Jeremiah would take she up to her supper instead   ' yo ' see , missus , there be not a many as ' ud take he in for a shillin ' when it go so little way ; or if they do , they would take it out on he some other way , an ' he be not getten much else , a reckon . he can be I granny , but a'm vast mista'en if he be ten year young nor I ; but he be getten a fine appetite of his own , choose how young he may be ; an ' a can see as he could eat a deal more nor he be getten money to buy , an ' it be few as can mak ' victual go far nor I . eh , missus , but yo ' may trust I a'll send he off when time be well ; but just now it would be sendin ' he to his death ; for a ha ' plenty and to spare , thank be to God an ' yo'r bonny face . ' 

 so Sylvia have to be content with the knowledge that the money she gladly give to Kester 's sister go partly to feed the lodger who be neither labourer nor neighbour , but only just a tramp , who , she fear , be prey on the good old woman . still the cruel famine cut sharp enough to penetrate all heart ; and Sylvia , an hour after the conversation record above , be much touch , on her return from Jeremiah Foster 's with the little merry , chatter Bella , at see the feeble step of one , whom she know by description must be widow Dobson 's lodger , turn up from the newly - cut road which be to lead to the terrace walk around the North Cliff , a road which lead to no dwelling but widow Dobson 's . tramp , and vagrant , he might be in the eye of the law ; but , whatever his character , Sylvia could see he before she in the soft dusk , creep along , over the bridge , often stop to rest and hold by some support , and then go on again towards the town , to which she and happy little Bella be wend . 

 a thought come over she : she have always fancy that this unknown man be some fierce vagabond , and have dread lest in the lonely bit of road between widow Dobson 's cottage and the peopled highway , he should fall upon she and rob she if he learn that she have money with she ; and several time she have go away without leave the little gift she have intend , because she imagine that she have see the door of the small chamber in the ' lean - to ' open softly while she be there , as if the occupant   whom widow Dobson speak of as never leave the house before dusk , except once a week   be listen for the chink of the coin in her little leathern purse . now that she see he walk before she with heavy languid step , this fear give place to pity ; she remember her mother 's gentle superstition which have prevent she from ever send the hungry empty away , for fear lest she herself should come to need bread . 

 ' Lassie , ' say she to little Bella , who hold a cake which Jeremiah 's housekeeper have give she tight in her hand , ' yon poor man theere be hungry ; will Bella give he her cake , and mother will make she another to - morrow twice as big ? ' 

 for this consideration , and with the feeling of satisfaction which a good supper not an hour ago give even to the hungry stomach of a child of three year old , Bella , after some thought , graciously assent to the sacrifice . 

 Sylvia stop , the cake in her hand , and turn she back to the town , and to the slow wayfarer in front . under the cover of her shawl she slip a half - crown deep into the crumb of the cake , and then restore it to little Bella , she give she her direction . 

 ' Mammy will carry Bella ; and when Bella go past the poor man , she shall give he the cake over mammy 's shoulder . poor man be so hungry ; and Bella and mammy have plenty to eat , and to spare . ' 

 the child 's heart be touch by the idea of hunger , and her little arm be outstretche ready for the moment her mother 's hurried step take her brushing past the startle , tremble Philip . 

 ' poor man , eat this ; Bella not hungry . ' 

 they be the first word he have ever hear his child utter . the echo of they rang in his ear as he stand endeavour to hide his disfigured face by look over the parapet of the bridge down upon the stream run away towards the ocean , into which his hot tear slowly fall , unheede by the weeper . then he change the intention with which he have set out upon his nightly walk , and turn back to his lodging . 

 of course the case be different with Sylvia ; she would have forget the whole affair very speedily , if it have not be for little Bella 's frequent recurrence to the story of the hungry man , which have touch her small sympathy with the sense of an intelligible misfortune . she like to act the dropping of the bun into the poor man 's hand as she go past he , and would take up any article near she in order to illustrate the gesture she have use . one day she get hold of hester 's watch for this purpose , as be of the same round shape as the cake ; and though hester , for whose benefit the child be repeat the story in her broken language for the third or fourth time , try to catch the watch as it be intend that she should   she be the representative of the ' hungry man ' for the time be , it go to the ground with a smash that frighten the little girl , and she begin to cry at the mischief she have do . 

 ' do not   cry , Bella , ' say hester . ' niver play with watch again . I do not   see thee at mine , or I would ha ' stop thee in time . but I will take it to old Darley 's on th ' quay - side , and maybe he will soon set it to right again . only Bella must niver play with watch again . ' 

 ' Niver no more ! ' promise the little sob child . and that evening Hester take she watch down to old Darley 's . 

 this William Darley be the brother of the gardener at the rectory ; the uncle to the sailor who have be shoot by the press - gang year before , and to his bed - ride sister . he be a clever mechanician , and his skill as a repairer of watch and chronometer be great among the sailor , with whom he do a very irregular sort of traffic , conduct , often without much use of money , but rather on the principle of barter , they bring he foreign coin and odd curiosity pick up on their travel in exchange for his service to their nautical instrument or their watch . if he have ever have capital to extend his business , he might have be a rich man ; but it be to be doubt whether he would have be as happy as he be now in his queer little habitation of two room , the front one be both shop and workshop , the other serve the double purpose of bedroom and museum . 

 the skill of this odd - temper , shabby old man be sometimes seek by the jeweller who keep the more ostentatious shop in the High Street ; but before Darley would undertake any ' tickle ' piece of delicate workmanship for the other , he sneer at his ignorance , and taunt and abuse he well . yet he have soft place in his heart , and Hester Rose have find her way to one by her patient , endure kindness to his bed - ride niece . he never snarl at she as he do at too many ; and on the few occasion when she have ask he to do anything for she , he have seem as if she be confer the favour on he , not he on she , and only make the small possible charge . 

 she find he now sit where he could catch the most light for his work , spectacle on nose , and microscope in hand . 

 he take her watch , and examine it carefully without a word in reply to she . then he begin to open it and take it to piece , in order to ascertain the nature of the mischief . 

 suddenly he hear she catch her breath with a check sound of surprise . he look at she from above his spectacle ; she be hold a watch in her hand which she have just take up off the counter . 

 ' what be amiss wi ' thee now ? ' say Darley . ' hast ta niver see a watch o ' that mak ' afore ? or be it they letter on t ' back , as be so wonderful ? ' 

 yes , it be those letter that interlace , old - fashioned cipher . that Z. H. that she know of old stand for Zachary Hepburn , Philip 's father . she know how Philip value this watch . she remember have see it in his hand the very day before his disappearance , when he be look at the time in his annoyance at Sylvia 's detention in her walk with baby . hester have no doubt that he have take this watch as a matter of course away with he . she feel sure that he would not part with this relic of his dead father on any slight necessity . where , then , be Philip ? by what chance of life or death have this , his value property , find its way once more to monkshaven ? 

 ' where do yo ' get this ? ' she ask , in as quiet a manner as she could assume , sick with eagerness as she be . 

 to no one else would Darley have answer such a question . he make a mystery of most of his dealing ; not that he have anything to conceal , but simply because he delight in concealment . he take it out of her hand , look at the number mark inside , and the maker 's name ' Natteau Gent , York ' and then reply , 

 ' a man bring it I yesterday , at nightfall , for t ' sell it . it be a matter o ' forty year old . Natteau Gent have be dead and in his grave pretty nigh as long as that . but he do his work well when he be alive ; and so I give he as bring it for t ' sell about as much as it be worth , I ' good coin . a try he first I ' t ' bartering line , but he would not   bite ; like enough he want food , many a one do now - a - day . ' 

 ' who be he ? ' gasp Hester . 

 ' Bless t ' woman ! how should I know ? ' 

 ' what be he like ? how old ? tell I . ' 

 ' my lass , a've   summut else to do wi ' my eye than go peer into man 's face I ' t ' dusk light . ' 

 ' but yo ' must have have light for t ' judge about the watch . ' 

 ' eh ! how sharp we be ! A'd a candle close to my nose . but a do not   tak ' it up for to gaze int ' his face . that would not   be manner , to my thinking . ' 

 hester be silent . then Darley 's heart relent . 

 ' if yo're so set upo ' know who t ' fellow be , a could , mebbe , put yo ' on his track . ' 

 ' how ? ' say hester , eagerly . ' I do want to know . I want to know very much , and for a good reason . ' 

 ' well , then , a'll tell yo ' . he be a queer tyke , that one be . A'll be bind he be sore press for t ' brass ; yet he out 's wi ' a good half - crown , all wrap up I ' paper , and he ax I t ' make a hole in it . say I , " it be mar good king 's coin , at after a've   make a hole in't , it will never pass current again . " so he mumble , and mumble , but for a ' that it must need be do ; and he be leave it here , and be t ' call for ' t to - morrow at e'en . ' 

 ' oh , William Darley ! ' say Hester , clasp her hand tight together . ' find out who he be , where he be anything everything about he and I will so bless yo ' . ' 

 Darley look at she sharply , but with some sign of sympathy on his grave face . ' my woman , ' he say ' a could ha ' wish as you would niver see t ' watch . it be poor , thankless work think too much on one o ' God 's creature . but a'll do thy bidding , ' he continue , in a light and different tone . ' A'm a ' cute old badger when need be . come for thy watch in a couple o ' day , and a'll tell yo ' all as a've   learn . ' 

 so Hester go away , her heart beat with the promise of know something about Philip , how much , how little , in these first moment , she dare not say even to herself . some sailor newly land from distant sea might have become possess of Philip 's watch in far - off latitude ; in which case , Philip would be dead . that might be . she try to think that this be the most probable way of accounting for the watch . she could be certain as to the positive identity of the watch be in William Darley 's possession . again , it might be that Philip himself be near at hand be here in this very place starve , as too many be , for insufficiency of mean to buy the high - price food . and then her heart burn within she as she think of the succulent , comfortable meal which Sylvia provide every day nay , three time a day for the household in the market - place , at the head of which Philip ought to have be ; but his place know he not . for Sylvia have inherit her mother 's talent for housekeeping , and on she , in Alice 's decrepitude and hester 's other occupation in the shop , devolve the care of due provision for the somewhat heterogeneous family . 

 and Sylvia ! hester groan in heart over the remembrance of Sylvia 's word , ' I can niver forgive he the wrong he do to I , ' that night when Hester have come , and clung to she , make the sad , shameful confession of her unreturned love . 

 what could ever bring these two together again ? could hester herself ignorant of the strange mystery of Sylvia 's heart , as those who be guide solely by obedience to principle must ever be of the clue to the action of those who be lead by the passionate ebb and flow of impulse ? could hester herself ? oh ! how should she speak , how should she act , if Philip be near if Philip be sad and in miserable estate ? her own misery at this contemplation of the case be too great to bear ; and she seek her usual refuge in the thought of some text , some promise of Scripture , which should strengthen her faith . 

 ' with God all thing be possible , ' say she , repeat the word as though to lull her anxiety to rest . 

 yes ; with God all thing be possible . but ofttime he do his work with awful instrument . there be a peacemaker whose name be death . 




 CHAPTER XLV 

 SAVED and lose 

 Hester go out on the evening of the day after that on which the unknown owner of the half - crown have appoint to call for it again at William Darley 's . she have school herself to believe that time and patience would serve she good . her plan be to obtain all the knowledge about Philip that she could in the first instance ; and then , if circumstance allow it , as in all probability they would , to let drop by drop of healing , peacemake word and thought fall on Sylvia 's obdurate , unforgive heart . so hester put on her thing , and go out down towards the old quay - side on that evening after the shop be close . 

 Poor little Sylvia ! she be unforgiving , but not obdurate to the full extent of what hester believe . many a time since Philip go away have she unconsciously miss his protect love ; when folk speak shortly to she , when Alice scold she as one of the non - elect , when Hester 's gentle gravity have something of severity in it ; when her own heart fail she as to whether her mother would have judge that she have do well , could that mother have know all , as possibly she do by this time . Philip have never speak otherwise than tenderly to she during the eighteen month of their married life , except on the two occasion before record : once when she refer to her dream of Kinraid 's possible return , and once again on the evening of the day before her discovery of his concealment of the secret of Kinraid 's involuntary disappearance . 

 after she have learn that Kinraid be marry , her heart have still more strongly turn to Philip ; she think that he have judge rightly in what he have give as the excuse for his double dealing ; she be even more indignant at Kinraid 's fickleness than she have any reason to be ; and she begin to learn the value of such endure love as Philip 's have be last ever since the day when she first begin to fancy what a man 's love for a woman should be , when she have first shrink from the tone of tenderness he put into his especial term for she , a girl of twelve ' little lassie , ' as he be will not to call she . 

 but across all this relenting come the shadow of her vow like the chill of a great cloud pass over a sunny plain . how should she decide ? what would be her duty , if he come again , and once more call she ' wife ' ? she shrink from such a possibility with all the weakness and superstition of her nature ; and this it be which make she strengthen herself with the re - utterance of unforgive word ; and shun all recurrence to the subject on the rare occasion when Hester have try to bring it back , with a hope of soften the heart which to she appear altogether harden on this one point . 

 now , on this bright summer evening , while Hester have go down to the quay - side , Sylvia stand with her out - of - door thing on in the parlour , rather impatiently watch the sky , full of hurry cloud , and flush with the warm tint of the approach sunset . she could not leave Alice : the old woman have grow so infirm that she be never leave by her daughter and Sylvia at the same time ; yet Sylvia have to fetch her little girl from the New Town , where she have be to her supper at Jeremiah Foster 's . hester have say that she should not be away more than a quarter of an hour ; and hester be generally so punctual that any failure of her , in this respect , appear almost in the light of an injury on those who have learn to rely upon she . Sylvia want to go and see widow Dobson , and learn when Kester might be expect home . his two month be long past ; and Sylvia have hear through the Fosters of some suitable and profitable employment for he , of which she think he would be glad to know as soon as possible . it be now some time since she have be able to get so far as across the bridge ; and , for aught she know , Kester might already be come back from his expedition to the Cheviots . Kester be come back . scarce five minute have elapse after these thought have pass through her mind before his hasty hand lift the latch of the kitchen - door , his hurried step bring he face to face with she . the smile of greeting be arrest on her lip by one look at he : his eye star wide , the expression on his face wild , and yet pitiful . 

 ' that 's reet , ' say he , see that her thing be already on . ' thou're want sore . come along . ' 

 ' oh ! dear God ! my child ! ' cry Sylvia , clutch at the chair near she ; but recover she eddying sens with the strong fact before she that whatever the terror be , she be need to combat it . 

 ' ay ; thy child ! ' say Kester , take she almost roughly by the arm , and draw she away with he out through the open door on to the quay - side . 

 ' tell I ! ' say Sylvia , faintly , ' be she dead ? ' 

 ' she be safe now , ' say Kester . ' it be not she it be he as save she as need yo ' , if iver husband need a wife . ' 

 ' he ? who ? o Philip ! Philip ! be it yo ' at last ? ' 

 unheede what spectator might see her movement , she throw up her arm and stagger against the parapet of the bridge they be then cross . 

 ' he ! Philip ! save Bella ? Bella , our little Bella , as get her dinner by my side , and go out wi ' Jeremiah , as well as could be . I can not take it in ; tell I , Kester . ' she keep tremble so much in voice and in body , that he see she could not stir without danger of fall until she be calm ; as it be , her eye become filmy from time to time , and she draw her breath in great heavy pant , lean all the while against the wall of the bridge . 

 ' it be no illness , ' Kester begin . ' T ' little un have go for a walk wi ' Jeremiah Foster , an ' he be draw for to go round t ' edge o ' t ' cliff , wheere they be makin ' t ' new walk reet o'er t ' sea . but it be but a bit on a pathway now ; an ' t ' one be too oud , an ' t ' other too young for t ' see t ' water comin ' along wi ' great leap ; it be allay for comin ' high up again ' t ' cliff , an ' this spring - tide it be comin ' in I ' terrible big wave . some one say as they pass t ' man a - sittin ' on a bit on a rock up above a dunnot know , a only know as a heared a great fearful screech I ' t ' air . a be just a - restin ' I at after a'd come in , not half an hour I ' t ' place . A've   walk well nor a dozen mile to - day ; an ' a run out , an ' a looked , an ' just on t ' walk , at t ' turn , be t ' swish of a wave runnin ' back as quick as t ' mischief int ' t ' sea , an ' oud Jeremiah standin ' like one crazy , lookin ' o'er int ' t ' watter ; an ' like a stroke o ' leeghtnin ' come a man , an ' int ' t ' very midst o ' t ' great wave like a shot ; an ' then a knowed summut be in t ' watter as be nearer death than life ; an ' a seem to misdoubt I that it be our Bella ; an ' a shout an ' a cry for help , an ' a go mysel ' to t ' very edge o ' t ' cliff , an ' a bid oud Jeremiah , as be like one beside hissel ' , houd tight on I , for he be good for nought else ; an ' a bide my time , an ' when a see two arm houdin ' out a little drippin ' streamin ' child , a clutch she by her waist - band , an ' haul she to land . she 's noane t ' bad for her bath , a'll be bind . ' 

 ' I mun go let I , ' say Sylvia , struggle with his detaining hand , which he have lay upon she in the fear that she would slip down to the ground in a faint , so ashen - gray be her face . ' let I , Bella , I mun go see she . ' 

 he let go , and she stand still , suddenly feel herself too weak to stir . 

 ' now , if you will try a bit to be quiet , a'll lead yo ' along ; but yo ' mun be a steady and brave lass . ' 

 ' I will be aught if yo ' only let I see Bella , ' say Sylvia , humbly . 

 ' an ' yo ' niver ax at after he as save she , ' say Kester , reproachfully . 

 ' I know it be Philip , ' she whisper , ' and yo ' say he want I ; so I know he be safe ; and , Kester , I think I be ' fear on he , and I would like to gather courage afore see he , and a look at Bella would give I courage . it be a terrible time when I see he last , and I do say ' 

 ' niver think on what thou do say ; think on what thou will say to he now , for he lie a - dyin ' ! he be dash again t ' cliff an ' bruised sore in his innard afore t ' man as come wi ' a boat could pick he up . ' 

 she do not speak ; she do not even tremble now ; she set her tooth together , and , hold tight by Kester , she urge he on ; but when they come to the end of the bridge , she seem uncertain which way to turn . 

 ' this way , ' say Kester . ' he be be lodgin ' wi ' Sally this nine week , an ' niver a one about t ' place as know he ; he be be I ' t ' war an ' getten his face brunt . ' 

 ' and he be short o ' food , ' moan Sylvia , ' and we have plenty , and I try to make yo'r sister turn he out , and send he away . oh ! will God iver forgive I ? ' 

 mutter to herself , break her muttering with sharp cry of pain , Sylvia , with Kester 's help , reach widow Dobson 's house . it be no long a quiet , lonely dwelling . several sailor stand about the door , await , in silent anxiety , for the verdict of the doctor , who be even now examine Philip 's injury . two or three woman stand talk eagerly , in low voice , in the doorway . 

 but when Sylvia draw near the man fall back ; and the woman move aside as though to allow she to pass , all look upon she with a certain amount of sympathy , but perhaps with rather more of antagonistic wonder as to how she be take it she who have be live in ease and comfort while her husband 's shelter be little well than a hovel , her husband 's daily life a struggle with starvation ; for so much of the lodger at widow Dobson 's be popularly know ; and any distrust of he as a stranger and a tramp be quite forget now . 

 Sylvia feel the hardness of their look , the hardness of their silence ; but it be as nothing to she . if such thing could have touch she at this moment , she would not have stand still right in the midst of their avert heart , and murmur something to Kester . he could not hear the word utter by that hoarse choke voice , until he have stoop down and bring his ear to the level of her mouth . 

 ' we would well wait for t ' doctor to come out , ' she say again . she stand by the door , shiver all over , almost face the people in the road , but with her face turn a little to the right , so that they think she be look at the pathway on the cliff - side , a hundred yard or so distant , below which the hungry wave still lash themselves into high ascending spray ; while near to the cottage , where their force be break by the bar at the entrance to the river , they come softly lap up the shelve shore . 

 Sylvia see nothing of all this , though it be straight before her eye . she only see a blurred mist ; she hear no sound of water , though it fill the ear of those around . instead she hear low whisper pronounce Philip 's earthly doom . 

 for the doctor be both agree ; his internal injury be of a mortal kind , although , as the spine be severely injure above the seat of the fatal bruise , he have no pain in the low half of his body . 

 they have speak in so low a tone that John Foster , stand only a foot or so away , have not be able to hear their word . but Sylvia hear each syllable there where she stand outside , shiver all over in the sultry summer evening . she turn round to Kester . 

 ' I mun go to he , Kester ; thou'll see that noane come in to we , when t ' doctor come out . ' 

 she speak in a soft , calm voice ; and he , not know what she have hear , make some easy conditional promise . then those opposite to the cottage door fall back , for they could see the grave doctor come out , and John Foster , graver , sadder still , follow they . without a word to they , without a word even of inquiry which many outside thought and speak of as strange white - face , dry - eyed Sylvia slip into the house out of their sight . 

 and the wave keep lap on the shelve shore . 

 the room inside be dark , all except the little halo or circle of light make by a dip candle . Widow Dobson have she back to the bed her bed on to which Philip have be bear in the hurry of terror as to whether he be alive or whether he be dead . she be cry cry quietly , but the tear down - fall fast , as , with she back to the lowly bed , she be gather up the dripping clothe cut off from the poor maim body by the doctor ' order . she only shake her head as she see Sylvia , spirit - like , steal in white , noiseless , and upborne from earth . 

 but noiseless as her step might be , he hear , he recognize , and with a sigh he turn his poor disfigured face to the wall , hide it in the shadow . 

 he know that she be by he ; that she have kneel down by his bed ; that she be kiss his hand , over which the languor of approach death be steal . but no one speak . 

 at length he say , his face still avert , speak with an effort . 

 ' little lassie , forgive I now ! I can not live to see the morn ! ' 

 there be no answer , only a long miserable sigh , and he feel her soft cheek lay upon his hand , and the quiver that run through her whole body . 

 ' I do thee a cruel wrong , ' he say , at length . ' I see it now . but I be a die man . I think that God will forgive I and I have   sin against he ; try , lassie try , my Sylvie will not thou forgive I ? ' 

 he listen intently for a moment . he hear through the open window the wave lap on the shelve shore . but there come no word from she ; only that same long shiver , miserable sigh break from her lip at length . 

 ' child , ' say he , once more . ' I ha ' make thee my idol ; and if I could live my life o'er again I would love my God more , and thee less ; and then I should not   ha ' sin this sin against thee . but speak one word of love to I one little word , that I may know I have thy pardon . ' 

 ' oh , Philip ! Philip ! ' she moan , thus adjure . 

 then she lift her head , and say , 

 ' they be wicked , wicked word , as I say ; and a wicked vow as I vow ; and Lord God Almighty have ta'en I at my word . I be sorely punish , Philip , I be indeed . ' 

 he press her hand , he stroke her cheek . but he ask for yet another word . 

 ' I do thee a wrong . in my lie heart I forget to do to thee as I would have have thee to do to I . and I judge Kinraid in my heart . ' 

 ' Thou think as he be faithless and fickle , ' she answer quickly ; ' and so he be . he be married to another woman not so many week at after thou go away . oh , Philip , Philip ! and now I have thee back , and ' 

 ' die ' be the word she would have say , but first the dread of tell he what she believe he do not know , and next her passionate sob , choke she . 

 ' I know , ' say he , once more stroke her cheek , and soothe she with gentle , caress hand . ' little lassie ! ' he say , after a while when she be quiet from very exhaustion , ' I niver think to be so happy again . God be very merciful . ' 

 she lift up her head , and ask wildly , ' will he iver forgive I , think yo ' ? I drive yo ' out fra ' yo'r home , and send yo ' away to t ' war , wheere yo ' might ha ' getten yo'r death ; and when yo ' come back , poor and lone , and weary , I tell she for t ' turn yo ' out , for a ' I know yo ' must be starve in these famine time . I think I shall go about among they as gnash their tooth for iver , while yo ' be wheere all tear be wipe away . ' 

 ' no ! ' say Philip , turn round his face , forgetful of himself in his desire to comfort she . ' God pity we as a father pity his poor wandering child ; the nearer I come to death the clear I see he . but you and I have do wrong to each other ; yet we can see now how we be lead to it ; we can pity and forgive one another . I be get low and faint , lassie ; but thou must remember this : God know more , and be more forgiving than either you to I , or I to you . I think and do believe as we shall meet together before his face ; but then I shall ha ' learn to love thee second to he ; not first , as I have do here upon the earth . ' 

 then he be silent very still . Sylvia know widow Dobson have bring it in that there be some kind of medicine , send by the hopeless doctor , lie upon the table hard by , and she softly rise and pour it out and drop it into the half - open mouth . then she kneel down again , hold the hand feebly stretch out to she , and watch the faint light in the wistful love eye . and in the stillness she hear the ceaseless wave lap against the shelve shore . 

 something like an hour before this time , which be the deep midnight of the summer 's night , Hester Rose have come hurry up the road to where Kester and his sister sate outside the open door , keep their watch under the star - light sky , all other have go away , one by one , even John and Jeremiah Foster have return to their own house , where the little Bella lay , sleep a sound and healthy slumber after her perilous adventure . 

 hester have hear but little from William Darley as to the owner of the watch and the half - crown ; but he be chagrin at the failure of all his skilful interrogation to elicit the truth , and promise her further information in a few day , with all the more vehemence because he be unaccustomed to be baffle . and Hester have again whisper to herself ' Patience ! patience ! ' and have slowly return back to her home to find that Sylvia have leave it , why she do not at once discover . but , grow uneasy as the advance hour neither bring Sylvia nor little Bella to their home , she have set out for Jeremiah Foster 's as soon as she have see her mother comfortably asleep in her bed ; and then she have learn the whole story , bit by bit , as each person who speak break in upon the previous narration with some new particular . but from no one do she clearly learn whether Sylvia be with her husband , or not ; and so she come speed along the road , breathless , to where Kester sate in wakeful , mournful silence , his sister 's sleep head lie on his shoulder , the cottage door open , both for air and that there might be help within call if need ; and the dim slanting oblong of the interior light lie across the road . 

 hester come pant up , too agitated and breathless to ask how much be truth of the fatal , hopeless tale which she have hear . Kester look at she without a word . through this solemn momentary silence the lapping of the ceaseless wave be hear , as they come up close on the shelve shore . 

 ' he ? Philip ? ' say she . Kester shake his head sadly . 

 ' and his wife Sylvia ? ' say hester . 

 ' in there with he , alone , ' whisper Kester . 

 hester turn away , and wrung her hand together . 

 ' oh , Lord God Almighty ! ' say she , ' be I not even worthy to bring they together at last ? ' and she go away slowly and heavily back to the side of her sleep mother . but ' Thy will be do ' be on her quivering lip before she lie down to her rest . 

 the soft gray dawn lighten the darkness of a midsummer night soon after two o'clock . Philip watch it come , know that it be his last sight of day , as we reckon day on earth . 

 he have be often near death as a soldier ; once or twice , as when he rush into fire to save Kinraid , his chance of life have be as one to a hundred ; but yet he have have a chance . but now there be the new feeling the last new feeling which we shall any of we experience in this world that death be not only close at hand , but inevitable . 

 he feel its numbness steal up he steal up he . but the head be clear , the brain more than commonly active in produce vivid impression . 

 it seem but yesterday since he be a little boy at his mother 's knee , wish with all the earnestness of his childish heart to be like Abraham , who be call the friend of God , or David , who be say to be the man after God 's own heart , or St John , who be call ' the Beloved . ' as very present seem the day on which he make resolution of try to be like they ; it be in the spring , and some one have bring in cowslip ; and the scent of those flower be in his nostril now , as he lie a - die his life end , his battle fight , his time for ' be good ' over and go the opportunity , once give in all eternity , past . 

 all the temptation that have beset he rise clearly before he ; the scene themselves stand up in their solid materialism he could have touch the place ; the people , the thought , the argument that Satan have urge in behalf of sin , be reproduce with the vividness of a present time . and he know that the thought be illusion , the argument false and hollow ; for in that hour come the perfect vision of the perfect truth : he see the ' way to escape ' which have come along with the temptation ; now , the strong resolve of an ardent boyhood , with all a life before it to show the world ' what a Christian might be ' ; and then the swift , terrible now , when his naked , guilty soul shrink into the shadow of God 's mercy - seat , out of the blaze of his anger against all those who act a lie . 

 his mind be wander , and he pluck it back . be this death in very deed ? he try to grasp at the present , the earthly present , fade quick away . he lie there on the bed on Sally Dobson 's bed in the house - place , not on his accustomed pallet in the lean - to . he know that much . and the door be open into the still , dusk night ; and through the open casement he could hear the lapping of the wave on the shelve shore , could see the soft gray dawn over the sea he know it be over the sea he see what lie unseen behind the poor wall of the cottage . and it be Sylvia who hold his hand tight in her warm , living grasp ; it be his wife whose arm be throw around he , whose sobbing sigh shake his numbed frame from time to time . 

 ' God bless and comfort my darling , ' he say to himself . ' she know I now . all will be right in heaven in the light of God 's mercy . ' 

 and then he try to remember all that he have ever read about , God , and all that the bless Christ that bringeth glad tiding of great joy unto all people , have say of the Father , from whom he come . those saying drop like balm down upon his troubled heart and brain . he remember his mother , and how she have love he ; and he be go to a love wiser , tenderer , deep than her . 

 as he think this , he move his hand as if to pray ; but Sylvia clench her hold , and he lie still , pray all the same for she , for his child , and for himself . then he see the sky redden with the first flush of dawn ; he hear Kester 's long - draw sigh of weariness outside the open door . 

 he have see widow Dobson pass through long before to keep the remainder of her watch on the bed in the lean - to , which have be his for many and many a sleepless and tearful night . those night be over he should never see that poor chamber again , though it be scarce two foot distant . he begin to lose all sense of the comparative duration of time : it seem as long since kind Sally Dobson have bend over he with soft , lingering look , before go into the humble sleeping - room as long as it be since his boyhood , when he stand by his mother dream of the life that should be his , with the scent of the cowslip tempt he to be off to the woodland where they grow . then there come a rush and an eddying through his brain his soul try her wing for the long flight . again he be in the present : he hear the wave lap against the shelve shore once again . 

 and now his thought come back to Sylvia . once more he speak aloud , in a strange and terrible voice , which be not his . every sound come with effort that be new to he . 

 ' my wife ! Sylvie ! once more forgive I all . ' 

 she spring up , she kiss his poor burn lip ; she hold he in her arm , she moan , and say , 

 ' oh , wicke I ! forgive I me Philip ! ' 

 then he speak , and say , ' Lord , forgive we our trespass as we forgive each other ! ' and after that the power of speech be conquer by the come death . he lie very still , his consciousness fast fade away , yet come back in throb , so that he know it be Sylvia who touch his lip with cordial , and that it be Sylvia who murmur word of love in his ear . he seem to sleep at last , and so he do a kind of sleep , but the light of the red morning sun fall on his eye , and with one strong effort he rise up , and turn so as once more to see his wife 's pale face of misery . 

 ' in heaven , ' he cry , and a bright smile come on his face , as he fall back on his pillow . 

 not long after hester come , the little Bella scarce awake in her arm , with the purpose of bring his child to see he ere yet he pass away . hester have watch and pray through the livelong night . and now she find he dead , and Sylvia , tearless and almost unconscious , lie by he , her hand hold his , her other throw around he . 

 Kester , poor old man , be sob bitterly ; but she not at all . 

 then hester bear her child to she , and Sylvia open wide her miserable eye , and only star , as if all sense be go from she . but Bella suddenly rouse up at the sight of the poor , scarred , peaceful face , cry out , 

 ' poor man who be so hungry . be he not hungry now ? ' 

 ' no , ' say hester , softly . ' the former thing be pass away and he be go where there be no more sorrow , and no more pain . ' 

 but then she break down into weeping and cry . Sylvia sit up and look at she . 

 ' why do yo ' cry , hester ? ' she say . ' Yo ' niver say that yo ' would not   forgive he as long as yo ' live . Yo ' niver break the heart of he that love yo ' , and let he almost starve at yo'r very door . oh , Philip ! my Philip , tender and true . ' 

 then Hester come round and close the sad half - open eye ; kiss the calm brow with a long farewell kiss . as she do so , her eye fall on a black ribbon round his neck . she partly lift it out ; to it be hang a half - crown piece . 

 ' this be the piece he leave at William Darley 's to be bore , ' say she , ' not many day ago . ' 

 Bella have creep to her mother 's arm as a known haven in this strange place ; and the touch of his child loosen the fountain of her tear . she stretch out her hand for the black ribbon , put it round her own neck ; after a while she say , 

 ' if I live very long , and try hard to be very good all that time , do yo ' think , Hester , as God will let I to he where he be ? ' 

 Monkshaven be alter now into a rise bathing place . yet , stand near the site of widow Dobson 's house on a summer 's night , at the ebb of a spring - tide , you may hear the wave come lap up the shelve shore with the same ceaseless , ever - recurrent sound as that which Philip listen to in the pause between life and death . 

 and so it will be until ' there shall be no more sea ' . 

 but the memory of man fade away . a few old people can still tell you the tradition of the man who die in a cottage somewhere about this spot , die of starvation while his wife live in hard - hearte plenty not two good stone - throw away . this be the form into which popular feeling , and ignorance of the real fact , have mould the story . not long since a lady go to the ' Public Baths ' , a handsome stone building erect on the very site of widow Dobson 's cottage , and find all the room engage she sit down and have some talk with the bath woman ; and , as it chance , the conversation fall on Philip Hepburn and the legend of his fate . 

 ' I know an old man when I be a girl , ' say the bathing woman , ' as could niver abide to hear t ' wife blame . he would say nothing again ' th ' husband ; he use to say as it be not fit for man to be judge ; that she have have her sore trial , as well as Hepburn hisself . ' 

 the lady ask , ' what become of the wife ? ' 

 ' she be a pale , sad woman , allay dress in black . I can just remember she when I be a little child , but she die before her daughter be well grow up ; and Miss Rose take t ' lassie , as have always be like her own . ' 

 ' Miss Rose ? ' 

 ' hester Rose ! have yo ' niver heared of Hester Rose , she as found t ' alm - house for poor disabled sailor and soldier on t ' Horncastle road ? there be a piece o ' stone in front to say that " this building be erect in memory of P. H. " and some folk will have it P. H. stand for t ' name o ' th ' man as be starve to death . ' 

 ' and the daughter ? ' 

 ' one o ' th ' Fosters , they as found t ' Old Bank , leave she a vast o ' money ; and she be married to distant cousin of theirs , and go off to settle in America many and many a year ago . ' 

 the END .