wives and daughter . 

 an EVERY - DAY STORY . 

 

 BY 

 MRS . GASKELL . 
 CHAPTER I. 

 the dawn of a GALA DAY . 
 

 Illustrationo begin with the old rigmarole of childhood . in a country there be a shire , and in that shire there be a town , and in that town there be a house , and in that house there be a room , and in that room there be a bed , and in that bed there lie a little girl ; wide awake and long to get up , but not dare to do so for fear of the unseen power in the next room a certain Betty , whose slumber must not be disturb until six o'clock strike , when she waken of herself " as sure as clockwork , " and leave the household very little peace afterwards . it be a June morning , and early as it be , the room be full of sunny warmth and light . 

 on the drawer opposite to the little white dimity bed in which Molly Gibson lie , be a primitive kind of bonnet - stand on which be hang a bonnet , carefully cover over from any chance of dust with a large cotton handkerchief , of so heavy and serviceable a texture that if the thing underneath it have be a flimsy fabric of gauze and lace and flower , it would have be altogether ' scomfishe "   again to quote from Betty 's vocabulary . but the bonnet be make of solid straw , and its only trimming be a plain white ribbon put over the crown , and form the string . still , there be a neat little quilling inside , every plait of which molly know , for have she not make it herself the evening before , with infinite pain ? and be there not a little blue bow in this quilling , the very first bit of such finery Molly have ever have the prospect of wear ? 

 six o'clock now ! the pleasant , brisk ringing of the church bell tell that ; call every one to their daily work , as they have do for hundred of year . up jump molly , and run with her bare little foot across the room , and lift off the handkerchief and see once again the bonnet ; the pledge of the gay bright day to come . then to the window , and after some tugging she open the casement , and let in the sweet morning air . the dew be already off the flower in the garden below , but still rise from the long hay - grass in the meadow directly beyond . at one side lie the little town of Hollingford , into a street of which Mr. Gibson 's front door open ; and delicate column , and little puff of smoke be already begin to rise from many a cottage chimney where some housewife be already up , and prepare breakfast for the bread - winner of the family . 

 molly Gibson see all this , but all she think about it be , " oh ! it will be a fine day ! I be afraid it never , never would come ; or that , if it ever come , it would be a rainy day ! " five - and - forty year ago , child 's pleasure in a country town be very simple , and Molly have live for twelve long year without the occurrence of any event so great as that which be now impend . poor child ! it be true that she have lose her mother , which be a jar to the whole tenour of her life ; but that be hardly an event in the sense refer to ; and besides , she have be too young to be conscious of it at the time . the pleasure she be look forward to to - day be her first share in a kind of annual festival in Hollingford . 

 the little straggle town fade away into country on one side close to the entrance - lodge of a great park , where live my Lord and Lady Cumnor : " the earl " and " the countess , " as they be always call by the inhabitant of the town ; where a very pretty amount of feudal feeling still linger , and show itself in a number of simple way , droll enough to look back upon , but serious matter of importance at the time . it be before the passing of the Reform Bill , but a good deal of liberal talk take place occasionally between two or three of the more enlightened freeholder live in Hollingford ; and there be a great Tory family in the county who , from time to time , come forward and contest the election with the rival Whig family of Cumnor . one would have think that the above - mention liberal - talk inhabitant would have , at least , admit the possibility of their voting for the Hely - Harrison , and thus try to vindicate their independence . but no such thing . " the earl " be lord of the manor , and owner of much of the land on which Hollingford be build ; he and his household be feed , and doctor , and , to a certain measure , clothe by the good people of the town ; their father ' grandfather have always vote for the eld son of Cumnor Towers , and follow in the ancestral track , every man - jack in the place give his vote to the liege lord , totally irrespective of such chimera as political opinion . 

 this be no unusual instance of the influence of the great land - owner over humbler neighbour in those day before railway , and it be well for a place where the powerful family , who thus overshadow it , be of so respectable a character as the Cumnors . they expect to be submit to , and obey ; the simple worship of the townspeople be accept by the earl and countess as a right ; and they would have stand still in amazement , and with a horrid memory of the french sansculotte who be the bugbear of their youth , have any inhabitant of Hollingford venture to set his will or opinion in opposition to those of the earl . but , yield all that obeisance , they do a good deal for the town , and be generally condescend , and often thoughtful and kind in their treatment of their vassal . Lord Cumnor be a forbearing landlord ; put his steward a little on one side sometimes , and take the rein into his own hand now and then , much to the annoyance of the agent , who be , in fact , too rich and independent to care greatly for preserve a post where his decision might any day be overturn by my lord 's take a fancy to go " potter "   as the agent irreverently express it in the sanctuary of his own home , which , be interpret , mean that occasionally the earl ask his own question of his own tenant , and use his own eye and ear in the management of the small detail of his property . but his tenant like my lord all the well for this habit of his . Lord Cumnor have certainly a little time for gossip , which he contrive to combine with the failing of personal intervention between the old land - steward and the tenantry . but , then , the countess make up by her unapproachable dignity for this weakness of the earl 's . once a year she be condescend . she and the lady , her daughter , have set up a school ; not a school after the manner of school now - a - day , where far well intellectual teaching be give to the boy and girl of labourer and work - people than often fall to the lot of their better in worldly estate ; but a school of the kind we should call " industrial , " where girl be teach to sew beautifully , to be capital housemaid , and pretty fair cook , and , above all , to dress neatly in a kind of charity uniform devise by the lady of Cumnor Towers ; white cap , white tippet , check apron , blue gown , and ready curtsey , and " please , ma'ams , " be de rigueur . 

 now , as the countess be absent from the tower for a considerable part of the year , she be glad to enlist the sympathy of the Hollingford lady in this school , with a view to obtain their aid as visitor during the many month that she and her daughter be away . and the various unoccupied gentlewoman of the town respond to the call of their liege lady , and give she their service as require ; and along with it , a great deal of whispered and fussy admiration . " how good of the countess ! so like the dear countess always think of other ! " and so on ; while it be always suppose that no stranger have see Hollingford properly , unless they have be take to the countess 's school , and be duly impress by the neat little pupil , and the still neater needlework there to be inspect . in return , there be a day of honour set apart every summer , when with much gracious and stately hospitality , Lady Cumnor and her daughter receive all the school visitor at the Towers , the great family mansion stand in aristocratic seclusion in the centre of the large park , of which one of the lodge be close to the little town . the order of this annual festivity be this . about ten o'clock one of the Towers ' carriage roll through the lodge , and drive to different house , wherein dwelt a woman to be honour ; pick they up by one or two , till the loaded carriage drive back again through the ready portal , bowl along the smooth tree - shade road , and deposit its covey of smartly - dress lady on the great flight of step lead to the ponderous door of Cumnor Towers . back again to the town ; another pick up of womankind in their good clothe , and another return , and so on till the whole party be assemble either in the house or in the really beautiful garden . after the proper amount of exhibition on the one part , and admiration on the other , have be do , there be a collation for the visitor , and some more display and admiration of the treasure inside the house . towards four o'clock , coffee be bring round ; and this be a signal of the approach carriage that be to take they back to their own home ; whither they return with the happy consciousness of a well - spend day , but with some fatigue at the long - continue exertion of behave their good , and talk on stilt for so many hour . nor be Lady Cumnor and her daughter free from something of the same self - approbation , and something , too , of the same fatigue ; the fatigue that always follow on conscious effort to behave as will well please the society you be in . 

 for the first time in her life , Molly Gibson be to be include among the guest at the tower . she be much too young to be a visitor at the school , so it be not on that account that she be to go ; but it have so happen that one day when Lord Cumnor be on a " potter " expedition , he have meet Mr. Gibson , the doctor of the neighbourhood , come out of the farm - house my lord be enter ; and have some small question to ask the surgeon   Lord Cumnor seldom pass any one of his acquaintance without ask a question of some sort not always attend to the answer ; it be his mode of conversation , he accompany Mr. Gibson to the out - building , to a ring in the wall of which the surgeon 's horse be fasten . molly be there too , sit square and quiet on her rough little pony , wait for her father . her grave eye open large and wide at the close neighbourhood and evident advance of " the earl ; " for to her little imagination the grey - haired , red - face , somewhat clumsy man , be a cross between an arch - angel and a king . 

 " your daughter , eh , Gibson ? nice little girl , how old ? Pony want groom though , " pat it as he talk . " what be your name , my dear ? he be sadly behindhand with his rent , as I be say , but if he be really ill , I must see after sheepshank , who be a hardish man of business . what be his complaint ? you will come to our school - scrimmage on Thursday , little girl what' - your - name ? mind you send she , or bring she , Gibson ; and just give a word to your groom , for I be sure that pony be not   sing last year , now , be he ? do not   forget Thursday , little girl what' - your - name ? it be a promise between we , be it not ? " and off the earl trot , attract by the sight of the farmer 's eld son on the other side of the yard . 

 Mr. Gibson mount , and he and Molly ride off . they do not speak for some time . then she say , " may I go , papa ? " in rather an anxious little tone of voice . 

 " where , my dear ? " say he , waken up out of his own professional thought . 

 " to the tower on Thursday , you know . that gentleman "   she be shy of call he by his title , " ask I . " 

 " would you like it , my dear ? it have always seem to I rather a tiresome piece of gaiety rather a tiring day , I mean begin so early and the heat , and all that . " 

 " oh , papa ! " say Molly , reproachfully . 

 " you would like to go then , would you ? " 

 " yes ; if I may ! he ask I , you know . do not   you think I may ? he ask I twice over . " 

 " well ! we will see yes ! I think we can manage it , if you wish it so much , Molly . " 

 then they be silent again . by - and - by , Molly say , 

 " please , papa I do wish to go , but I do not   care about it . " 

 " that be rather a puzzle speech . but I suppose you mean you do not   care to go , if it will be any trouble to get you there . I can easily manage it , however , so you may consider it settle . you will want a white frock , remember ; you would well tell Betty you be go , and she will see after make you tidy . " 

 now , there be two or three thing to be do by Mr. Gibson , before he could feel quite comfortable about Molly 's go to the festival at the Towers , and each of they involve a little trouble on his part . but he be very willing to gratify his little girl ; so the next day he ride over to the Towers , ostensibly to visit some sick housemaid , but , in reality , to throw himself in my lady 's way , and get she to ratify Lord Cumnor 's invitation to Molly . he choose his time , with a little natural diplomacy ; which , indeed , he have often to exercise in his intercourse with the great family . he ride into the stable - yard about twelve o'clock , a little before luncheon - time , and yet after the worry of open the post - bag and discuss its content be over . after he have put up his horse , he go in by the back - way to the house ; the " House " on this side , the " tower " at the front . he see his patient , give his direction to the housekeeper , and then go out , with a rare wild - flower in his hand , to find one of the lady tranmere in the garden , where , accord to his hope and calculation , he come upon Lady Cumnor too , now talk to her daughter about the content of an open letter which she hold in her hand , now direct a gardener about certain bed - out plant . 

 " I be call to see nanny , and I take the opportunity of bring Lady Agnes the plant I be tell she about as grow on Cumnor Moss . " 

 " thank you , so much , Mr. Gibson . Mamma , look ! this be the Drosera rotundifolia I have be want so long . " 

 " ah ! yes ; very pretty I daresay , only I be no botanist . nanny be well , I hope ? we can not   have any one lay up next week , for the house will be quite full of people , and here be the Danbys wait to offer themselves as well . one come down for a fortnight of quiet , at Whitsuntide , and leave half one 's establishment in town , and as soon as people know of our be here , we get letter without end , long for a breath of country air , or say how lovely the tower must look in spring ; and I must own , Lord Cumnor be a great deal to blame for it all , for as soon as ever we be down here , he rid about to all the neighbour , and invite they to come over and spend a few day . " 

 " we shall go back to town on Friday the 18th , " say Lady Agnes , in a consolatory tone . 

 " ah , yes ! as soon as we have get over the school visitor ' affair . but it be a week to that happy day . " 

 " by the way ! " say Mr. Gibson , avail himself of the good opening thus present , " I meet my lord at the Cross - tree Farm yesterday , and he be kind enough to ask my little daughter , who be with I , to be one of the party here on Thursday ; it would give the lassie great pleasure , I believe . " he pause for Lady Cumnor to speak . 

 " oh , well ! if my lord ask she , I suppose she must come , but I wish he be not so amazingly hospitable ! not but what the little girl will be quite welcome ; only , you see , he meet a young Miss Browning the other day , of whose existence I have never hear . " 

 " she visit at the school , mamma , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " well , perhaps she do ; I never say she do not . I know there be one visitor of the name of Browning ; I never know there be two , but , of course , as soon as Lord Cumnor hear there be another , he must need ask she ; so the carriage will have to go backwards and forwards four time now to fetch they all . so your daughter can come quite easily , Mr. Gibson , and I shall be very glad to see she for your sake . she can sit bodkin with the Brownings , I suppose ? you will arrange it all with they ; and mind you get Nanny well up to her work next week . " 

 just as Mr. Gibson be go away , Lady Cumnor call after he , " oh ! by - the - by , Clare be here ; you remember Clare , do not   you ? she be a patient of your , long ago . " 

 " Clare , " he repeat , in a bewildered tone . 

 " do not   you recollect she ? Miss Clare , our old governess , " say Lady Agnes . " about twelve or fourteen year ago , before Lady Cuxhaven be marry . " 

 " oh , yes ! " say he . " Miss Clare , who have the scarlet fever here ; a very pretty delicate girl . but I think she be marry ! " 

 " yes ! " say Lady Cumnor . " she be a silly little thing , and do not know when she be well off ; we be all very fond of she , I be sure . she go and marry a poor curate , and become a stupid Mrs. Kirkpatrick ; but we always keep on call she ' Clare . ' and now he be dead , and leave she a widow , and she be stay here ; and we be rack our brain to find out some way of help she to a livelihood without part she from her child . she be somewhere about the ground , if you like to renew your acquaintance with she . " 

 " thank you , my lady . I be afraid I can not stop to - day . I have a long round to go ; I have   stay here too long as it be , I be afraid . " 

 long as his ride have be that day , he call on the Miss Brownings in the evening , to arrange about Molly 's accompany they to the tower . they be tall handsome woman , past their first youth , and incline to be extremely complaisant to the widow doctor . 

 " eh dear ! Mr. Gibson , but we shall be delighted to have she with we . you should never have think of ask we such a thing , " say Miss Browning the elder . 

 " I be sure I be hardly sleep at night for thinking of it , " say Miss Phobe . " you know I have   never be there before . Sister have many a time ; but somehow , though my name have be down on the visitor ' list these three year , the countess have never name I in her note ; and you know I could not push myself into notice , and go to such a grand place without be ask ; how could I ? " 

 " I tell Phobe last year , " say her sister , " that I be sure it be only inadvertence , as one may call it , on the part of the countess , and that her ladyship would be as hurt as any one when she do not   see Phobe among the school visitor ; but Phobe have get a delicate mind , you see , Mr. Gibson , and all I could say she would not   go , but stop here at home ; and it spoil all my pleasure all that day , I do assure you , to think of Phobe 's face , as I see it over the window - blind , as I ride away ; her eye be full of tear , if you will believe I . " 

 " I have a good cry after you be go , Dorothy , " say Miss Phobe ; " but for all that , I think I be right in stop away from where I be not ask . do not   you , Mr. Gibson ? " 

 " certainly , " say he . " and you see you be go this year ; and last year it rain . " 

 " yes ! I remember ! I set myself to tidy my drawer , to string myself up , as it be ; and I be so take up with what I be about that I be quite startled when I hear the rain beat against the window - pane . ' goodness I ! ' say I to myself , ' whatever will become of sister 's white satin shoe , if she have to walk about on soppy grass after such rain as this ? ' for , you see , I think a deal about she have a pair of smart shoe ; and this year she have go and get I a white satin pair just as smart as her , for a surprise . " 

 " molly will know she be to put on her good clothe , " say Miss Browning . " we could perhaps lend she a few bead , or artificial , if she want they . " 

 " molly must go in a clean white frock , " say Mr. Gibson , rather hastily ; for he do not admire the Miss Brownings ' taste in dress , and be unwilling to have his child deck up accord to their fancy ; he esteem his old servant Betty 's as the more correct , because the more simple . Miss Browning have just a shade of annoyance in her tone as she draw herself up , and say , " oh ! very well . it be quite right , I be sure . " but Miss Phobe say , " molly will look very nice in whatever she put on , that be certain . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER II . 

 a novice amongst the GREAT FOLK . 
 

 at ten o'clock on the eventful Thursday the tower ' carriage begin its work . molly be ready long before it make its first appearance , although it have be settle that she and the Miss Brownings be not to go until the last , or fourth , time of its coming . her face have be soap , scrub , and shine brilliantly clean ; her frill , her frock , her ribbon be all snow - white . she have on a black mode cloak that have be her mother 's ; it be trim round with rich lace , and look quaint and old - fashioned on the child . for the first time in her life she wear kid glove ; hitherto she have only have cotton one . her glove be far too large for the little dimpled finger , but as Betty have tell she they be to last she for year , it be all very well . she tremble many a time , and almost turn faint once with the long expectation of the morning . Betty might say what she like about a watch pot never boil ; molly never cease to watch the approach through the wind street , and after two hour the carriage come for she at last . she have to sit very forward to avoid crush the Miss Brownings ' new dress ; and yet not too forward , for fear of incommode fat Mrs. Goodenough and her niece , who occupy the front seat of the carriage ; so that altogether the fact of sit down at all be rather doubtful , and to add to her discomfort , Molly feel herself to be very conspicuously place in the centre of the carriage , a mark for all the observation of Hollingford . it be far too much of a gala day for the work of the little town to go forward with its usual regularity . maid - servant gaze out of upper window ; shopkeeper ' wife stand on the door - step ; cottager run out , with baby in their arm ; and little child , too young to know how to behave respectfully at the sight of an earl 's carriage , huzzae merrily as it bowl along . the woman at the lodge hold the gate open , and drop a low curtsey to the livery . and now they be in the Park ; and now they be in sight of the Towers , and silence fall upon the carriage - full of lady , only break by one faint remark from Mrs. Goodenough 's niece , a stranger to the town , as they draw up before the double semicircle flight of step which lead to the door of the mansion . 

 " they call that a perron , I believe , do not   they ? " she ask . but the only answer she obtain be a simultaneous " hush . " it be very awful , as Molly think , and she half wish herself at home again . but she lose all consciousness of herself by - and - by when the party stroll out into the beautiful ground , the like of which she have never even imagine . green velvet lawn , bath in sunshine , stretch away on every side into the finely woode park ; if there be division and ha - have between the soft sunny sweep of grass , and the dark gloom of the forest - tree beyond , Molly do not see they ; and the melting away of exquisite cultivation into the wilderness have an inexplicable charm to she . near the house there be wall and fence ; but they be cover with climbing rose , and rare honeysuckle and other creeper just burst into bloom . there be flower - bed , too , scarlet , crimson , blue , orange ; mass of blossom lie on the greensward . molly hold Miss Browning 's hand very tight as they loiter about in company with several other lady , and marshal by a daughter of the Towers , who seem half amuse at the voluble admiration shower down upon every possible thing and place . molly say nothing , as become her age and position , but every now and then she relieve her full heart by draw a deep breath , almost like a sigh . presently they come to the long glitter range of greenhouse and hothouse , and an attendant gardener be there to admit the party . molly do not care for this half so much as for the flower in the open air ; but Lady Agnes have a more scientific taste , she expatiate on the rarity of this plant , and the mode of cultivation require by that , till molly begin to feel very tired , and then very faint . she be too shy to speak for some time ; but at length , afraid of make a great sensation if she begin to cry , or if she fall against the stand of precious flower , she catch at Miss Browning 's hand , and gasp out 

 " may I go back , out into the garden ? I can not   breathe here ! " 

 " oh , yes , to be sure , love . I daresay it be hard understanding for you , love ; but it be very fine and instructive , and a deal of Latin in it too . " 

 she turn hastily round not to lose another word of Lady Agnes ' lecture on orchid , and Molly turn back and pass out of the heated atmosphere . she feel well in the fresh air ; and unobserve , and at liberty , go from one lovely spot to another , now in the open park , now in some shut - in flower - garden , where the song of the bird , and the drip of the central fountain , be the only sound , and the tree - top make an enclosing circle in the blue June sky ; she go along without more thought as to her whereabouts than a butterfly have , as it skim from flower to flower , till at length she grow very weary , and wish to return to the house , but do not know how , and feel afraid of encounter all the stranger who would be there , unprotecte by either of the Miss Brownings . the hot sun tell upon her head , and it begin to ache . she see a great wide - spread cedar - tree upon a burst of lawn towards which she be advance , and the black repose beneath its branch lure she thither . there be a rustic seat in the shadow , and weary Molly sate down there , and presently fall asleep . 

 she be startle from her slumber after a time , and jump to her foot . two lady be stand by she , talk about she . they be perfect stranger to she , and with a vague conviction that she have do something wrong , and also because she be wear - out with hunger , fatigue , and the morning 's excitement , she begin to cry . 

 " poor little woman ! she have lose herself ; she belong to some of the people from Hollingford , I have no doubt , " say the oldest - looking of the two lady ; she who appear to be about forty , though she do not really number more than thirty year . she be plain - feature , and have rather a severe expression on her face ; her dress be as rich as any morning dress could be ; her voice deep and unmodulated , what in a low rank of life would have be call gruff ; but that be not a word to apply to Lady Cuxhaven , the eld daughter of the earl and countess . the other lady look much young , but she be in fact some year the elder ; at first sight molly think she be the most beautiful person she have ever see , and she be certainly a very lovely woman . her voice , too , be soft and plaintive , as she reply to Lady Cuxhaven , 

 " poor little darling ! she be overcome by the heat , I have no doubt such a heavy straw bonnet , too . let I untie it for you , my dear . " 

 molly now find voice to say " I be Molly Gibson , please . I come here with Miss Brownings ; " for her great fear be that she should be take for an unauthorized intruder . 

 " Miss Brownings ? " say Lady Cuxhaven to her companion , as if inquiringly . 

 " I think they be the two tall large young woman that Lady Agnes be talk about . " 

 " oh , I daresay . I see she have a number of people in tow ; " then look again at Molly , she say , " have you have anything to eat , child , since you come ? you look a very white little thing ; or be it the heat ? " 

 " I have have nothing to eat , " say Molly , rather piteously ; for , indeed , before she fall asleep she have be very hungry . 

 the two lady speak to each other in a low voice ; then the elder say in a voice of authority , which , indeed , she have always use in speak to the other , " sit still here , my dear ; we be go to the house , and Clare shall bring you something to eat before you try to walk back ; it must be a quarter of a mile at least . " so they go away , and Molly sit upright , wait for the promise messenger . she do not know who Clare might be , and she do not care much for food now ; but she feel as if she could not walk without some help . at length she see the pretty lady come back , follow by a footman with a small tray . 

 " look how kind Lady Cuxhaven be , " say she who be call Clare . " she choose you out this little lunch herself ; and now you must try and eat it , and you will be quite right when you have   have some food , darle you need not stop , Edwards ; I will bring the tray back with I . " 

 there be some bread , and some cold chicken , and some jelly , and a glass of wine , and a bottle of sparkle water , and a bunch of grape . molly put out her tremble little hand for the water ; but she be too faint to hold it . Clare put it to her mouth , and she take a long draught and be refresh . but she could not eat ; she try , but she could not ; her headache be too bad . Clare look bewildered . " take some grape , they will be the good for you ; you must try and eat something , or I do not   know how I shall get you to the house . " 

 " my head ache so , " say Molly , lift her heavy eye wistfully . 

 " oh , dear , how tiresome ! " say Clare , still in her sweet gentle voice , not at all as if she be angry , only express an obvious truth . molly feel very guilty and very unhappy . Clare go on , with a shade of asperity in her tone : " you see , I do not   know what to do with you here if you do not   eat enough to enable you to walk home . and I have   be out for these three hour trapese about the ground till I be as tired as can be , and miss my lunch and all . " then , as if a new idea have strike she , she say , " you lie back in that seat for a few minute , and try to eat the bunch of grape , and I will wait for you , and just be eat a mouthful meanwhile . you be sure you do not   want this chicken ? " 

 molly do as she be bid , and leant back , pick languidly at the grape , and watch the good appetite with which the lady eat up the chicken and jelly , and drink the glass of wine . she be so pretty and so graceful in her deep mourning , that even her hurry in eating , as if she be afraid of some one come to surprise she in the act , do not keep she little observer from admire she in all she do . 

 " and now , darling , be you ready to go ? " say she , when she have eat up everything on the tray . " oh , come ; you have nearly finish your grape ; that be a good girl . now , if you will come with I to the side entrance , I will take you up to my own room , and you shall lie down on the bed for an hour or two ; and if you have a good nap your headache will be quite go . " 

 so they set off , Clare carry the empty tray , rather to Molly 's shame ; but the child have enough work to drag herself along , and be afraid of offer to do anything more . the ' side entrance " be a flight of step lead up from a private flower - garden into a private matted hall , or ante - room , out of which many door open , and in which be deposit the light garden - tool and the bow and arrow of the young lady of the house . Lady Cuxhaven must have see their approach , for she meet they in this hall as soon as they come in . 

 " how be she now ? " she ask ; then glance at the plate and glass , she add , " come , I think there can not   be much amiss ! you be a good old Clare , but you should have let one of the man fetch that tray in ; life in such weather as this be trouble enough of itself . " 

 molly could not help wish that her pretty companion would have tell Lady Cuxhaven that she herself have help to finish up the ample luncheon ; but no such idea seem to come into her mind . she only say , " poor dear ! she be not quite the thing yet ; have get a headache , she say . I be go to put she down on my bed , to see if she can get a little sleep . " 

 molly see Lady Cuxhaven say something in a half - laugh manner to " Clare , " as she pass she ; and the child could not keep from torment herself by fancy that the word speak sound wonderfully like " over - eat herself , I suspect . " however , she feel too poorly to worry herself long ; the little white bed in the cool and pretty room have too many attraction for her aching head . the muslin curtain flap softly from time to time in the scented air that come through the open window . Clare cover she up with a light shawl , and darken the room . as she be go away molly rouse herself to say , " please , ma'am , do not   let they go away without I . please ask somebody to waken I if I go to sleep . I be to go back with Miss Brownings . " 

 " do not   trouble yourself about it , dear ; I will take care , " say Clare , turn round at the door , and kiss her hand to little anxious Molly . and then she go away , and think no more about it . the carriage come round at half - past four , hurry a little by Lady Cumnor , who have suddenly become tired of the business of entertaining , and annoy at the repetition of indiscriminate admiration . 

 " why not have both carriage out , mamma , and get rid of they all at once ? " say Lady Cuxhaven . " this go by instalment be the most tiresome thing that could be imagine . " so at last there have be a great hurry and an unmethodical way of pack off every one at once . Miss Browning have go in the chariot   or " chawyot , " as Lady Cumnor call it ; it rhyme to her daughter , Lady Hawyot or Harriet , as the name be spell in the peerage , and Miss Phobe have be speed along with several other guest , away in a great roomy family conveyance , of the kind which we should now call an " omnibus . " each think that Molly Gibson be with the other , and the truth be , that she lie fast asleep on Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's bed Mrs. Kirkpatrick nťe Clare . 

 the housemaid come in to arrange the room . their talking arouse Molly , who sit up on the bed , and try to push back the hair from her hot forehead , and to remember where she be . she drop down on her foot by the side of the bed , to the astonishment of the woman , and say , " please , how soon be we go away ? " 

 " bless we and save we ! who would ha ' thought of any one be in the bed ? be you one of the Hollingford lady , my dear ? they be all go this hour or more ! " 

 " oh , dear , what shall I do ? that lady they call Clare promise to waken I in time . papa will so wonder where I be , and I do not   know what Betty will say . " 

 the child begin to cry , and the housemaid look at each other in some dismay and much sympathy . just then , they hear Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's step along the passage , approach . she be sing some little italian air in a low musical voice , come to her bedroom to dress for dinner . one housemaid say to the other , with a know look , " good leave it to she ; " and they pass on to their work in the other room . 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick open the door , and stand aghast at the sight of Molly . 

 " why , I quite forget you ! " she say at length . " Nay , do not   cry ; you will make yourself not fit to be see . of course I must take the consequence of your over - sleep yourself , and if I can not   manage to get you back to Hollingford to - night , you shall sleep with I , and we will do our good to send you home to - morrow morning . " 

 " but papa ! " sob out molly . " he always want I to make tea for he ; and I have no night - thing . " 

 " well , do not   go and make a piece of work about what can not   be help now . I will lend you night - thing , and your papa must do without your make tea for he to - night . and another time do not   over - sleep yourself in a strange house ; you may not always find yourself among such hospitable people as they be here . why now , if you do not   cry and make a figure of yourself , I will ask if you may come in to dessert with Master Smythe and the little lady . you shall go into the nursery , and have some tea with they ; and then you must come back here and brush your hair and make yourself tidy . I think it be a very fine thing for you to be stop in such a grand house as this ; many a little girl would like nothing well . " 

 during this speech she be arrange she toilette for dinner take off her black morning gown ; put on her dressing - gown ; shake her long soft auburn hair over her shoulder , and glance about the room in search of various article of her dress , a run flow of easy talk come babble out all the time . 

 " I have a little girl of my own , dear ! I do not   know what she would not give to be stay here at Lord Cumnor 's with I ; but , instead of that , she have to spend her holiday at school ; and yet you be look as miserable as can be at the thought of stop for just one night . I really have be as busy as can be with those tiresome those good lady , I mean , from Hollingford and one can not   think of everything at a time . " 

 molly only child as she be have stop her tear at the mention of that little girl of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's , and now she venture to say , 

 " be you marry , ma'am ; I think she call you Clare ? " 

 in high good - humour Mrs. Kirkpatrick make reply : " I do not   look as if I be marry , do I ? every one be surprised . and yet I have be a widow for seven month now : and not a grey hair on my head , though Lady Cuxhaven , who be young than I , have ever so many . " 

 " why do they call you ' Clare ? ' " continue molly , find she so affable and communicative . 

 " because I live with they when I be Miss Clare . it be a pretty name , be not   it ? I marry a Mr. Kirkpatrick ; he be only a curate , poor fellow ; but he be of a very good family , and if three of his relation have die without child I should have be a baronet 's wife . but Providence do not see fit to permit it ; and we must always resign ourselves to what be decreed . two of his cousin marry , and have large family ; and poor dear Kirkpatrick die , leave I a widow . " 

 " you have a little girl ? " ask Molly . 

 " yes : darle Cynthia ! I wish you could see she ; she be my only comfort now . if I have time I will show you her picture when we come up to bed ; but I must go now . it do not do to keep Lady Cumnor wait a moment , and she ask I to be down early , to help with some of the people in the house . now I shall ring this bell , and when the housemaid come , ask she to take you into the nursery , and to tell Lady Cuxhaven 's nurse who you be . and then you will have tea with the little lady , and come in with they to dessert . there ! I be sorry you have   over - sleep yourself , and be leave here ; but give I a kiss , and do not   cry you really be rather a pretty child , though you have   not get Cynthia 's colouring ! oh , Nanny , would you be so very kind as to take this young lady   what be your name , my dear ? Gibson ? , Miss Gibson , to Mrs. Dyson , in the nursery , and ask she to allow she to drink tea with the young lady there ; and to send she in with they to dessert . I will explain it all to my lady . " 

 Nanny 's face brighten out of its gloom when she hear the name Gibson ; and , have ascertain from molly that she be " the doctor 's " child , she show more willingness to comply with Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's request than be usual with she . 

 Molly be an obliging girl , and fond of child ; so , as long as she be in the nursery , she get on pretty well , be obedient to the wish of the supreme power , and even very useful to Mrs. Dyson , by play at trick , and thus keep a little one quiet while its brother and sister be be array in gay attire , lace and muslin , and velvet , and brilliant broad ribbon . 

 " now , miss , " say Mrs. Dyson , when her own especial charge be all ready , " what can I do for you ? you have not get another frock here , have you ? " no , indeed , she have not ; nor if she have have one , could it have be of a smart nature than her present thick white dimity . so she could only wash her face and hand , and submit to the nurse 's brushing and perfume her hair . she think she would rather have stay in the park all night long , and sleep under the beautiful quiet cedar , than have to undergo the unknown ordeal of " go down to dessert , " which be evidently regard both by child and nurse as the event of the day . at length there be a summon from a footman , and Mrs. Dyson , in a rustle silk gown , marshal her convoy , and set sail for the dining - room door . 

 there be a large party of gentleman and lady sit round the deck table , in the brilliantly light room . each dainty little child run up to its mother , or aunt , or particular friend ; but molly have no one to go to . 

 " who be that tall girl in the thick white frock ? not one of the child of the house , I think ? " 

 the lady address put up her glass , gaze at Molly , and drop it in an instant . " a french girl , I should imagine . I know Lady Cuxhaven be inquire for one to bring up with her little girl , that they might get a good accent early . poor little woman , she look wild and strange ! " and the speaker , who sate next to Lord Cumnor , make a little sign to Molly to come to she ; molly creep up to she as to the first shelter ; but when the lady begin talk to she in French , she blush violently , and say in a very low voice , 

 " I do not   understand French . I be only Molly Gibson , ma'am . " 

 " Molly Gibson ! " say the lady , out loud ; as if that be not much of an explanation . 

 Lord Cumnor catch the word and the tone . 

 " oh , ho ! " say he . " be you the little girl who have be sleep in my bed ? " 

 he imitate the deep voice of the fabulous bear , who ask this question of the little child in the story ; but Molly have never read the " Three Bears , " and fancy that his anger be real ; she tremble a little , and draw near to the kind lady who have beckon she as to a refuge . Lord Cumnor be very fond of get hold of what he fancy be a joke , and work his idea threadbare ; so all the time the lady be in the room he keep on his run fire at Molly , allude to the Sleeping Beauty , the Seven Sleepers , and any other famous sleeper that come into his head . he have no idea of the misery his joke be to the sensitive girl , who already think herself a miserable sinner , for have sleep on , when she ought to have be awake . if Molly have be in the habit of put two and two together , she might have find an excuse for herself , by remember that Mrs. Kirkpatrick have promise faithfully to awaken she in time ; but all the girl think of be , how little they want she in this grand house ; how she must seem like a careless intruder who have no business there . once or twice she wonder where her father be , and whether he be miss she ; but the thought of the familiar happiness of home bring such a choking in her throat , that she feel she must not give way to it , for fear of burst out cry ; and she have instinct enough to feel that , as she be leave at the Towers , the less trouble she give , the more she keep herself out of observation , the well . 

 she follow the lady out of the dining - room , almost hop that no one would see she . but that be impossible , and she immediately become the subject of conversation between the awful Lady Cumnor and her kind neighbour at dinner . 

 " do you know , I think this young lady be french when I first see she ? she have get the black hair and eyelash , and grey eye , and colourless complexion which one meet with in some part of France , and I know Lady Cuxhaven be try to find a well - educate girl who would be a pleasant companion to her child . " 

 " no ! " say Lady Cumnor , look very stern , as molly think . " she be the daughter of our medical man at Hollingford ; she come with the school visitor this morning , and she be overcome by the heat and fall asleep in Clare 's room , and somehow manage to over - sleep herself , and do not waken up till all the carriage be go . we will send her home to - morrow morning , but for to - night she must stay here , and Clare be kind enough to say she may sleep with she . " 

 there be an imply blame run through this speech , that molly feel like needle - point all over she . Lady Cuxhaven come up at this moment . her tone be as deep , her manner of speak as abrupt and authoritative , as her mother 's , but molly feel the kind nature underneath . 

 " how be you now , my dear ? you look well than you do under the cedar - tree . so you be to stop here to - night ? Clare , do not   you think we could find some of those book of engraving that would interest Miss Gibson . " 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick come glide up to the place where molly stand ; and begin pet she with pretty word and action , while Lady Cuxhaven turn over heavy volume in search of one that might interest the girl . 

 " poor darling ! I see you come into the dining - room , look so shy ; and I want you to come near I , but I could not make a sign to you , because Lord Cuxhaven be speak to I at the time , tell I about his travel . ah , here be a nice book Lodge 's portrait ; now I will sit by you and tell you who they all be , and all about they . do not   trouble yourself any more , dear Lady Cuxhaven ; I will take charge of she ; pray leave she to I ! " 

 molly grow hotter and hotter as these last word meet her ear . if they would only leave she alone , and not labour at be kind to she ; would " not trouble themselves " about she ! these word of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's seem to quench the gratitude she be feel to Lady Cuxhaven for look for something to amuse she . but , of course , it be a trouble , and she ought never to have be there . 

 by - and - by , Mrs. Kirkpatrick be call away to accompany Lady Agnes ' song ; and then molly really have a few minute ' enjoyment . she could look round the room , unobserved , and , sure , never be any place out of a king 's house so grand and magnificent . large mirror , velvet curtain , picture in their gild frame , a multitude of dazzle light decorate the vast saloon , and the floor be stud with group of lady and gentleman , all dress in gorgeous attire . suddenly Molly bethink she of the child whom she have accompany into the dining - room , and to whose rank she have appear to belong , where be they ? go to bed an hour before , at some quiet signal from their mother . molly wonder if she might go , too if she could ever find her way back to the haven of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's bedroom . but she be at some distance from the door ; a long way from Mrs. Kirkpatrick , to whom she feel herself to belong more than to any one else . far , too , from Lady Cuxhaven , and the terrible Lady Cumnor , and her jocose and good - natured lord . so molly sate on , turn over picture which she do not see ; her heart grow heavy and heavy in the desolation of all this grandeur . presently a footman enter the room , and after a moment 's look about he , he go up to Mrs. Kirkpatrick , where she sate at the piano , the centre of the musical portion of the company , ready to accompany any singer , and smile pleasantly as she willingly accede to all request . she come now towards Molly , in her corner , and say to she , 

 " do you know , darling , your papa have come for you , and bring your pony for you to ride home ; so I shall lose my little bedfellow , for I suppose you must go ? " 

 go ! be there a question of it in Molly 's mind , as she stand up quiver , sparkling , almost cry out loud . she be bring to her sens , though , by Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's next word . 

 " you must go and wish Lady Cumnor good - night , you know , my dear , and thank her ladyship for her kindness to you . she be there , near that statue , talk to Mr. Courtenay . " 

 yes ! she be there forty foot away a hundred mile away ! all that blank space have to be cross ; and then a speech to be make ! 

 " must I go ? " ask Molly , in the most pitiful and plead voice possible . 

 " yes ; make haste about it ; there be nothing so formidable in it , be there ? " reply Mrs. Kirkpatrick , in a sharp voice than before , aware that they be want she at the piano , and anxious to get the business in hand do as soon as possible . 

 molly stand still for a minute , then , look up , she say , softly , 

 " would you mind come with I , please ? " 

 " no ! not I ! " say Mrs. Kirkpatrick , see that her compliance be likely to be the most speedy way of get through the affair ; so she take Molly 's hand , and , on the way , in pass the group at the piano , she say , smile , in her pretty genteel manner , 

 " our little friend here be shy and modest , and want I to accompany she to Lady Cumnor to wish good - night ; her father have come for she , and she be go away . " 

 molly do not know how it be afterwards , but she pull her hand out of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's on hear these word , and go a step or two in advance come up to Lady Cumnor , grand in purple velvet , and drop a curtsey , almost after the fashion of the school - child , she say , 

 " my lady , papa be come , and I be go away ; and , my lady , I wish you good - night , and thank you for your kindness . your ladyship 's kindness , I mean , " she say , correct herself as she remember Miss Browning 's particular instruction as to the etiquette to be observe to earl and countess , and their honourable progeny , as they be give that morning on the road to the Towers . 

 she get out of the saloon somehow ; she believe afterwards , on think about it , that she have never bid good - by to Lady Cuxhaven , or Mrs. Kirkpatrick , or " all the rest of they , " as she irreverently style they in her thought . 

 Mr. Gibson be in the housekeeper 's room , when molly run in , rather to the stately Mrs. Brown 's discomfiture . she throw her arm round her father 's neck . " oh , papa , papa , papa ! I be so glad you have come ; " and then she burst out cry , stroke his face almost hysterically as if to make sure he be there . 

 " why , what a noodle you be , molly ! do you think I be go to give up my little girl to live at the tower all the rest of her life ? you make as much work about my come for you , as if you think I have . make haste , now , and get on your bonnet . Mrs. Brown , may I ask you for a shawl , or a plaid , or a wrap of some kind to pin about she for a petticoat ? " 

 he do not mention that he have come home from a long round not half an hour before , a round from which he have return dinnerless and hungry ; but , on find that Molly have not come back from the tower , he have ride his tired horse round by Miss Brownings ' , and find they in self - reproachful , helpless dismay . he would not wait to listen to their tearful apology ; he gallop home , have a fresh horse and Molly 's pony saddle , and though Betty call after he with a riding - skirt for the child , when he be not ten yard from his own stable - door , he refuse to turn back for it , but go off , as Dick the stableman say , " mutter to himself awful . " 

 Mrs. Brown have her bottle of wine out , and her plate of cake , before molly come back from her long expedition to Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's room , " pretty nigh on to a quarter of a mile off , " as the housekeeper inform the impatient father , as he wait for his child to come down array in her morning 's finery with the gloss of newness wear off . Mr. Gibson be a favourite in all the tower ' household , as family doctor generally be ; bring hope of relief at time of anxiety and distress ; and Mrs. Brown , who be subject to gout , especially delighted in pet he whenever he would allow she . she even go out into the stable - yard to pin molly up in the shawl , as she sate upon the rough - coat pony , and hazard the somewhat safe conjecture , 

 " I daresay she will be happy at home , Mr. Gibson , " as they ride away . 

 once out into the park molly strike her pony , and urge he on as hard as he would go . Mr. Gibson call out at last : 

 " molly ! we be come to the rabbit - hole ; it be not safe to go at such a pace . stop . " and as she draw rein he ride up alongside of she . 

 " we be get into the shadow of the tree , and it be not safe riding fast here . " 

 " oh ! papa , I never be so glad in all my life . I feel like a light candle when they be put the extinguisher on it . " 

 " do you ? how d'ye know what the candle feel ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know , but I do . " and again , after a pause she say , " oh , I be so glad to be here ! it be so pleasant riding here in the open , free , fresh air , crush out such a good smell from the dewy grass . Papa ! be you there ? I can not   see you . " 

 he ride close up alongside of she : he be not sure but what she might be afraid of rid in the dark shadow , so he lay his hand upon her . 

 " oh ! I be so glad to feel you , " squeeze his hand hard . " Papa , I should like to get a chain like Ponto 's , just as long as your long round , and then I could fasten we two to each end of it , and when I want you I could pull , and if you do not   want to come , you could pull back again ; but I should know you know I want you , and we could never lose each other . " 

 " I be rather lose in that plan of your ; the detail , as you state they , be a little puzzling ; but if I make they out rightly , I be to go about the country , like the donkey on the common , with a clog fasten to my hind leg . " 

 " I do not   mind your call I a clog , if only we be fasten together . " 

 " but I do mind you call I a donkey , " he reply . 

 " I never do . at least I do not   mean to . but it be such a comfort to know that I may be as rude as I like . " 

 " be that what you have   learn from the grand company you have   be keep to - day ? I expect to find you so polite and ceremonious , that I read a few chapter of Sir Charles Grandison , in order to bring myself up to concert pitch . " 

 " oh , I do hope I shall never be a lord or a lady . " 

 " well , to comfort you , I will tell you this : I be sure you will never be a lord ; and I think the chance be a thousand to one against your ever be the other , in the sense in which you mean . " 

 " I should lose myself every time I have to fetch my bonnet , or else get tired of long passage and great staircase long before I could go out walk . " 

 " but you would have your lady's - maid , you know . " 

 " do you know , papa , I think lady' - maid be bad than lady . I should not mind be a housekeeper so much . " 

 " no ! the jam - cupboard and dessert would lie very conveniently to one 's hand , " reply her father , meditatively . " but Mrs. Brown tell I that the thought of the dinner often keep she from sleep ; there be that anxiety to be take into consideration . still , in every condition of life , there be heavy care and responsibility . " 

 " well ! I suppose so , " say Molly , gravely . " I know Betty say I wear her life out with the green stain I get in my frock from sit in the cherry - tree . " 

 " and Miss Browning say she have fret herself into a headache with think how they have leave you behind . I be afraid you will be as bad as a bill of fare to they to - night . how do it all happen , goosey ? " 

 " oh , I go by myself to see the garden ; they be so beautiful ! and I lose myself , and sit down to rest under a great tree ; and Lady Cuxhaven and that Mrs. Kirkpatrick come ; and Mrs. Kirkpatrick bring I some lunch , and then put I to sleep on her bed , and I think she would waken I in time , and she do not ; and so they would all go away ; and when they plan for I to stop till to - morrow , I do not   like say how very , very much I want to go home , but I keep think how you would wonder where I be . " 

 " then it be rather a dismal day of pleasure , goosey , eh ? " 

 " not in the morning . I shall never forget the morning in that garden . but I be never so unhappy in all my life , as I have be all this long afternoon . " 

 Mr. Gibson think it his duty to ride round by the Towers , and pay a visit of apology and thank to the family , before they leave for London . he find they all on the wing , and no one be sufficiently at liberty to listen to his grateful civility but Mrs. Kirkpatrick , who , although she be to accompany Lady Cuxhaven , and pay a visit to her former pupil , make leisure enough to receive Mr. Gibson , on behalf of the family ; and assure he of her faithful remembrance of his great professional attention to she in former day in the most win manner . 

 

 

 CHAPTER III . 

 MOLLY GIBSON 's childhood . 
 

 sixteen year before this time , all Hollingford have be disturb to its foundation by the intelligence that Mr. Hall , the skilful doctor , who have attend they all their day , be go to take a partner . it be no use reasoning to they on the subject ; so Mr. Browning the vicar , Mr. Sheepshanks   Lord Cumnor 's agent , and Mr. Hall himself , the masculine reasoner of the little society , leave off the attempt , feel that the Che sara sara would prove more silence to the murmur than many argument . Mr. Hall have tell his faithful patient that , even with the strong spectacle , his sight be not to be depend upon ; and they might have find out for themselves that his hearing be very defective , although , on this point , he obstinately adhere to his own opinion , and be frequently hear to regret the carelessness of people 's communication nowadays , " like write on blot - paper , all the word run into each other , " he would say . and more than once Mr. Hall have have attack of a suspicious nature , " rheumatism " he use to call they , but he prescribe for himself as if they have be gout which have prevent his immediate attention to imperative summons . but , blind and deaf , and rheumatic as he might be , he be still Mr. Hall the doctor who could heal all their ailment unless they die meanwhile and he have no right to speak of grow old , and take a partner . 

 he go very steadily to work all the same ; advertising in medical journal , read testimonial , sift character and qualification ; and just when the elderly maiden lady of Hollingford think that they have convince their contemporary that he be as young as ever , he startle they by bring his new partner , Mr. Gibson , to call upon they , and begin ' slyly , " as these lady say , to introduce he into practice . and " who be this Mr. Gibson ? " they ask , and echo might answer the question , if she like , for no one else do . no one ever in all his life know anything more of his antecedent than the Hollingford people might have find out the first day they see he : that he be tall , grave , rather handsome than otherwise ; thin enough to be call " a very genteel figure , " in those day , before muscular Christianity have come into vogue ; speak with a slight Scotch accent ; and , as one good lady observe , ' so very trite in his conversation , " by which she mean sarcastic . as to his birth , parentage , and education , the favourite conjecture of Hollingford society be , that he be the illegitimate son of a Scotch duke , by a Frenchwoman ; and the ground for this conjecture be these : he speak with a Scotch accent ; therefore , he must be Scotch . he have a very genteel appearance , an elegant figure , and be apt so his ill - wisher say to give himself air ; therefore , his father must have be some person of quality ; and , that grant , nothing be easy than to run this supposition up all the note of the scale of the peerage , baronet , baron , viscount , earl , marquis , duke . higher they dare not go , though one old lady , acquaint with english history , hazard the remark , that ' she believe that one or two of the Stuarts hem have not always be , ahem quite correct in their conduct ; and she fancy such ahem thing run in family . " but , in popular opinion , Mr. Gibson 's father always remain a duke ; nothing more . 

 then his mother must have be a Frenchwoman , because his hair be so black ; and he be so sallow ; and because he have be in Paris . all this might be true , or might not ; nobody ever know , or find out anything more about he than what Mr. Hall tell they , namely , that his professional qualification be as high as his moral character , and that both be far above the average , as Mr. Hall have take pain to ascertain before introduce he to his patient . the popularity of this world be as transient as its glory , as Mr. Hall find out before the first year of his partnership be over . he have plenty of leisure leave to he now to nurse his gout and cherish his eyesight . the young doctor have carry the day ; nearly every one send for Mr. Gibson . even at the great house even at the Towers , that great of all , where Mr. Hall have introduce his new partner with fear and trembling , with untold anxiety as to his behaviour , and the impression he might make on my lord the Earl , and my lady the Countess , Mr. Gibson be receive at the end of a twelvemonth with as much welcome respect for his professional skill as Mr. Hall himself have ever be . Nay and this be a little too much for even the kind old doctor 's good temper Mr. Gibson have even be invite once to dinner at the tower , to dine with the great Sir Astley , the head of the profession ! to be sure , Mr. Hall have be ask as well ; but he be lay up just then with his gout   since he have have a partner the rheumatism have be allow to develope itself , and he have not be able to go . poor Mr. Hall never quite get over this mortification ; after it he allow himself to become dim of sight and hard of hearing , and keep pretty closely to the house during the two winter that remain of his life . he send for an orphan grand - niece to keep he company in his old age ; he , the woman - contemn old bachelor , become thankful for the cheerful presence of the pretty , bonny Mary Pearson , who be good and sensible , and nothing more . she form a close friendship with the daughter of the vicar , Mr. Browning , and Mr. Gibson find time to become very intimate with all three . Hollingford speculate much on which young lady would become Mrs. Gibson , and be rather sorry when the talk about possibility , and the gossip about probability , with regard to the handsome young surgeon 's marriage , end in the most natural manner in the world , by his marry his predecessor 's niece . the two Miss Brownings show no sign of go into a consumption on the occasion , although their look and manner be carefully watch . on the contrary , they be rather boisterously merry at the wedding , and poor Mrs. Gibson it be that die of consumption , four or five year after her marriage three year after the death of her great - uncle , and when her only child , Molly , be just three year old . 

 Mr. Gibson do not speak much about the grief at the loss of his wife , which it be suppose that he feel . indeed , he avoid all demonstration of sympathy , and get up hastily and leave the room when Miss Phobe Browning first see he after his loss , and burst into an uncontrollable flood of tear , which threaten to end in hysteric . Miss Browning declare she never could forgive he for his hard - heartedness on that occasion ; but a fortnight afterwards she come to very high word with old Mrs. Goodenough , for gasp out her doubt whether Mr. Gibson be a man of deep feeling ; judge by the narrowness of his crape hat - band , which ought to have cover his hat , whereas there be at least three inch of beaver to be see . and , in spite of it all , Miss Browning and Miss Phobe consider themselves as Mr. Gibson 's most intimate friend , in right of their regard for his dead wife , and would fain have take a quasi - motherly interest in his little girl , have she not be guard by a watchful dragon in the shape of Betty , her nurse , who be jealous of any interference between she and her charge ; and especially resentful and disagreeable towards all those lady who , by suitable age , rank , or propinquity , she think capable of " cast sheep 's eye at master . " 

 several year before the opening of this story , Mr. Gibson 's position seem settle for life , both socially and professionally . he be a widower , and likely to remain so ; his domestic affection be centre on little Molly , but even to she , in their most private moment , he do not give way to much expression of his feeling ; his most caressing appellation for she be " Goosey , " and he take a pleasure in bewilder her infant mind with his badinage . he have rather a contempt for demonstrative people , arise from his medical insight into the consequence to health of uncontrolled feeling . he deceive himself into believe that still his reason be lord of all , because he have never fall into the habit of expression on any other than purely intellectual subject . molly , however , have her own intuition to guide she . though her papa laugh at she , quiz she , joke at she , in a way which the Miss Brownings call " really cruel " to each other when they be quite alone , Molly take her little grief and pleasure , and pour they into her papa 's ear , soon even than into Betty 's , that kind - hearted termagant . the child grow to understand her father well , and the two have the most delightful intercourse together half banter , half seriousness , but altogether confidential friendship . Mr. Gibson keep three servant ; Betty , a cook , and a girl who be suppose to be housemaid , but who be under both the eld two , and have a pretty life of it in consequence . three servant would not have be require if it have not be Mr. Gibson 's habit , as it have be Mr. Hall 's before he , to take two " pupil " as they be call in the genteel language of Hollingford , " apprentice " as they be in fact be bind by indenture , and pay a handsome premium to learn their business . they live in the house , and occupy an uncomfortable , ambiguous , or , as Miss Browning call it with some truth , " amphibious " position . they have their meal with Mr. Gibson and Molly , and be feel to be terribly in the way ; Mr. Gibson not be a man who could make conversation , and hat the duty of talk under restraint . yet something within he make he wince , as if his duty be not rightly perform , when , as the cloth be draw , the two awkward lad rise up with joyful alacrity , give he a nod , which be to be interpret as a bow , knock against each other in their endeavour to get out of the dining - room quickly ; and then might be hear dash along a passage which lead to the surgery , choke with half - suppress laughter . yet the annoyance he feel at this dull sense of imperfectly fulfil duty only make his sarcasm on their inefficiency , or stupidity , or ill manner , more bitter than before . 

 beyond direct professional instruction , he do not know what to do with the succession of pair of young man , whose mission seem to be , to be plague by their master consciously , and to plague he unconsciously . once or twice Mr. Gibson have decline take a fresh pupil , in the hope of shake himself free from the incubus , but his reputation as a clever surgeon have spread so rapidly that his fee which he have think prohibitory , be willingly pay , in order that the young man might make a start in life , with the prestige of have be a pupil of Gibson of Hollingford . but as molly grow to be a little girl instead of a child , when she be about eight year old , her father perceive the awkwardness of she have her breakfast and dinner so often alone with the pupil , without his uncertain presence . to do away with this evil , more than for the actual instruction she could give , he engage a respectable woman , the daughter of a shopkeeper in the town , who have leave a destitute family , to come every morning before breakfast , and to stay with Molly till he come home at night ; or , if he be detain , until the child 's bed - time . 

 " now , Miss Eyre , " say he , sum up his instruction the day before she enter upon her office , " remember this : you be to make good tea for the young man , and see that they have their meal comfortably , and you be five - and - thirty , I think you say ? try and make they talk , rationally , I be afraid be beyond your or anybody 's power ; but make they talk without stammer or giggle . do not   teach molly too much : she must sew , and read , and write , and do she sum ; but I want to keep she a child , and if I find more learning desirable for she , I will see about give it to her myself . after all , I be not sure that read or writing be necessary . many a good woman get married with only a cross instead of her name ; it be rather a diluting of mother - wit , to my fancy ; but , however , we must yield to the prejudice of society , Miss Eyre , and so you may teach the child to read . " 

 Miss Eyre listen in silence , perplex but determine to be obedient to the direction of the doctor , whose kindness she and her family have good cause to know . she make strong tea ; she help the young man liberally in Mr. Gibson 's absence , as well as in his presence , and she find the way to unloosen their tongue , whenever their master be away , by talk to they on trivial subject in her pleasant homely way . she teach Molly to read and write , but try honestly to keep she back in every other branch of education . it be only by fight and struggle hard , that bit by bit molly persuade her father to let she have french and draw lesson . he be always afraid of she become too much educate , though he need not have be alarm ; the master who visit such small country town as Hollingford forty year ago , be no such great proficient in their art . once a week she join a dancing class in the assembly - room at the principal inn in the town : the " George ; " and , be daunt by her father in every intellectual attempt , she read every book that come in her way , almost with as much delight as if it have be forbid . for his station in life , Mr. Gibson have an unusually good library ; the medical portion of it be inaccessible to Molly , be keep in the surgery , but every other book she have either read , or try to read . her summer place of study be that seat in the cherry - tree , where she get the green stain on her frock , that have already be mention as likely to wear Betty 's life out . in spite of this " hide worm I ' th ' bud , " Betty be to all appearance strong , alert , and flourish . she be the one crook in Miss Eyre 's lot , who be otherwise so happy in have meet with a suitable well - pay employment just when she need it most . but Betty , though agree in theory with her master when he tell she of the necessity of have a governess for his little daughter , be vehemently oppose to any division of her authority and influence over the child who have be her charge , her plague , and her delight ever since Mrs. Gibson 's death . she take up her position as censor of all Miss Eyre 's saying and doing from the very first , and do not for a moment condescend to conceal her disapprobation . in her heart she could not help respect the patience and painstaking of the good lady , for a " lady " Miss Eyre be in the good sense of the word , though in Hollingford she only take rank as a shopkeeper 's daughter . yet Betty buzz about she with the teasing pertinacity of a gnat , always ready to find fault , if not to bite . Miss Eyre 's only defence come from the quarter whence it might least have be expect from her pupil ; on whose fancied behalf , as an oppress little personage , Betty always base her attack . but very early in the day molly perceive their injustice , and soon afterwards she begin to respect Miss Eyre for her silent endurance of what evidently give she far more pain than Betty imagine . Mr. Gibson have be a friend in need to her family , so Miss Eyre restrain her complaint , soon than annoy he . and she have her reward . Betty would offer molly all sort of small temptation to neglect Miss Eyre 's wish ; molly steadily resist , and plod away at her task of sewing or her difficult sum . Betty make cumbrous joke at Miss Eyre 's expense ; molly look up with the utmost gravity , as if request the explanation of an unintelligible speech ; and there be nothing so quench to a wag as to be ask to translate his jest into plain matter - of - fact English , and to show wherein the point lie . occasionally Betty lose her temper entirely , and speak impertinently to Miss Eyre ; but when this have be do in Molly 's presence , the girl fly out into such a violent passion of word in defence of her silent trembling governess , that even Betty herself be daunt , though she choose to take the child 's anger as a good joke , and try to persuade Miss Eyre herself to join in her amusement . 

 " bless the child ! one ' ud think I be a hungry pussy - cat , and she a hen - sparrow , with her wing all flutter , and her little eye aflame , and her beak ready to peck I just because I happen to look near her nest . Nay , child ! if thou lik'st to be stifle in a nasty close room , learn thing as be of no earthly good when they be learn , instead o ' riding on Job Donkin 's hay - cart , it be thy look - out , not mine . she be a little vixen , be not   she ? " smile at Miss Eyre , as she finish her speech . but the poor governess see no humour in the affair ; the comparison of Molly to a hen - sparrow be lose upon she . she be sensitive and conscientious , and know , from home experience , the evil of an ungovernable temper . so she begin to reprove Molly for give way to her passion , and the child think it hard to be blame for what she consider she just anger against Betty . but , after all , these be the small grievance of a very happy childhood . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IV . 

 MR . GIBSON 's NEIGHBOURS . 
 

 illustrationolly grow up among these quiet people in calm monotony of life , without any great event than that which have be record the being leave behind at the tower until she be nearly seventeen . she have become a visitor at the school , but she have never go again to the annual festival at the great house ; it be easy to find some excuse for keep away , and the recollection of that day be not a pleasant one on the whole , though she often think how much she should like to see the garden again . 

 Lady Agnes be marry ; there be only Lady Harriet remain at home ; Lord Hollingford , the eld son , have lose his wife , and be a good deal more at the tower since he have become a widower . he be a tall ungainly man , consider to be as proud as his mother , the countess ; but , in fact , he be only shy , and slow at make commonplace speech . he do not know what to say to people whose daily habit and interest be not the same as his ; he would have be very thankful for a handbook of small - talk , and would have learn off his sentence with good - humour diligence . he often envy the fluency of his garrulous father , who delight in talk to everybody , and be perfectly unconscious of the incoherence of his conversation . but , owe to his constitutional reserve and shyness , Lord Hollingford be not a popular man although his kindness of heart be very great , his simplicity of character extreme , and his scientific acquirement considerable enough to entitle he to much reputation in the european republic of learn man . in this respect Hollingford be proud of he . the inhabitant know that the great , grave , clumsy heir to its fealty be highly esteemed for his wisdom ; and that he have make one or two discovery , though in what direction they be not quite sure . but it be safe to point he out to stranger visit the little town , as " that be Lord Hollingford the famous Lord Hollingford , you know ; you must have hear of he , he be so scientific . " if the stranger know his name , they also know his claim to fame ; if they do not , ten to one but they would make as if they do , and so conceal not only their own ignorance , but that of their companion , as to the exact nature of the source of his reputation . 

 he be leave a widower with two or three boy . they be at a public school ; so that their companionship could make the house in which he have pass his married life but little of a home to he , and he consequently spend much of his time at the Towers ; where his mother be proud of he , and his father very fond , but ever so little afraid of he . his friend be always welcome by Lord and Lady Cumnor ; the former , indeed , be in the habit of welcome everybody everywhere ; but it be a proof of Lady Cumnor 's real affection for her distinguished son , that she allow he to ask what she call " all sort of people " to the Towers . " all sort of people " mean really those who be distinguish for science and learning , without regard to rank : and it must be confess , without much regard to polished manner likewise . 

 Mr. Hall , Mr. Gibson 's predecessor , have always be receive with friendly condescension by my lady , who have find he establish as the family medical man , when first she come to the tower on her marriage ; but she never think of interfere with his custom of take his meal , if he need refreshment , in the housekeeper 's room , not with the housekeeper , bien entendu . the comfortable , clever , stout , and red - faced doctor would very much have prefer this , even if he have have the choice give he   which he never have   of take his ' snack , " as he call it , with my lord and my lady , in the grand dining - room . of course , if some great surgical gun   like Sir Astley   be bring down from London to bear on the family 's health , it be due to he , as well as to the local medical attendant , to ask Mr. Hall to dinner , in a formal and ceremonious manner , on which occasion Mr. Hall bury his chin in voluminous fold of white muslin , put on his black knee - breech , with bunch of ribbon at the side , his silk stocking and buckled shoe , and otherwise make himself excessively uncomfortable in his attire , and go forth in state in a post - chaise from the " George , " console himself in the private corner of his heart for the discomfort he be endure with the idea of how well it would sound the next day in the ear of the squire whom he be in the habit of attend : " yesterday at dinner the earl say , " or " the countess remark , " or " I be surprised to hear when I be din at the Towers yesterday . " but somehow thing have change since Mr. Gibson have become " the doctor " par excellence at Hollingford . Miss Brownings think that it be because he have such an elegant figure , and ' such a distinguished manner ; " Mrs. Goodenough , " because of his aristocratic connection " " the son of a Scotch duke , my dear , never mind on which side of the blanket . " but the fact be certain ; although he might frequently ask Mrs. Brown to give he something to eat in the housekeeper 's room he have no time for all the fuss and ceremony of luncheon with my lady he be always welcome to the grand circle of visitor in the house . he might lunch with a duke any day that he choose ; give that a duke be forthcoming at the tower . his accent be Scotch , not provincial . he have not an ounce of superfluous flesh on his bone ; and leanness go a great way to gentility . his complexion be sallow , and his hair black ; in those day , the decade after the conclusion of the great continental war , to be sallow and black - a - vise be of itself a distinction ; he be not jovial   as my lord remark with a sigh , but it be my lady who endorse the invitation , spar of his word , intelligent , and slightly sarcastic . therefore he be perfectly presentable . 

 his Scotch blood   for that he be of scottish descent there could be no manner of doubt   give he just the kind of thistly dignity which make every one feel that they must treat he with respect ; so on that head he be assure . the grandeur of be an invited guest to dinner at the Towers from time to time , give he but little pleasure for many year , but it be a form to be go through in the way of his profession , without any idea of social gratification . 

 but when Lord Hollingford return to make the tower his home , affair be alter . Mr. Gibson really hear and learn thing that interest he seriously , and that give fresh flavour to his reading . from time to time he meet the leader of the scientific world ; odd - looking , simple - hearted man , very much in earnest about their own particular subject , and not have much to say on any other . Mr. Gibson find himself capable of appreciate such person , and also perceive that they value his appreciation , as it be honestly and intelligently give . indeed , by - and - by , he begin to send contribution of his own to the more scientific of the medical journal , and thus partly in receive , partly in give out information and accurate thought , a new zest be add to his life . there be not much intercourse between Lord Hollingford and himself ; the one be too silent and shy , the other too busy , to seek each other 's society with the perseverance require to do away with the social distinction of rank that prevent their frequent meeting . but each be thoroughly pleased to come into contact with the other . each could rely on the other 's respect and sympathy with a security unknown to many who call themselves friend ; and this be a source of happiness to both ; to Mr. Gibson the most so , of course ; for his range of intelligent and cultivate society be the small . indeed , there be no one equal to himself among the man with whom he associate , and this he have feel as a depressing influence , although he never recognize the cause of his depression . there be Mr. Ashton , the vicar , who have succeed Mr. Browning , a thoroughly good and kind - hearted man , but one without an original thought in he ; whose habitual courtesy and indolent mind lead he to agree to every opinion , not palpably heterodox , and to utter platitude in the most gentlemanly manner . Mr. Gibson have once or twice amuse himself , by lead the vicar on in his agreeable admission of argument " as perfectly convincing , " and of statement as " curious but undoubted , " till he have plant the poor clergyman in a bog of heretical bewilderment . but then Mr. Ashton 's pain and suffering at suddenly find out into what a theological predicament he have be bring , his real self - reproach at his previous admission , be so great that Mr. Gibson lose all sense of fun , and hasten back to the thirty - nine Articles with all the good - will in life , as the only mean of soothe the vicar 's conscience . on any other subject , except that of orthodoxy , Mr. Gibson could lead he any length ; but then his ignorance on most of they prevent bland acquiescence from arrive at any result which could startle he . he have some private fortune , and be not marry , and live the life of an indolent and refined bachelor ; but though he himself be no very active visitor among his poor parishioner , he be always willing to relieve their want in the most liberal , and , consider his habit , occasionally in the most self - deny manner , whenever Mr. Gibson , or any one else , make they clearly know to he . " use my purse as freely as if it be your own , Gibson , " he be will not to say . " I be such a bad one at go about and make talk to poor folk I daresay I do not   do enough in that way but I be most willing to give you anything for any one you may consider in want . " 

 " thank you ; I come upon you pretty often , I believe , and make very little scruple about it ; but if you will allow I to suggest , it be , that you should not   try to make talk when you go into the cottage ; but just talk . " 

 " I do not   see the difference , " say the vicar , a little querulously ; " but I daresay there be a difference , and I have no doubt what you say be quite true . I should not   make talk , but talk ; and as both be equally difficult to I , you must let I purchase the privilege of silence by this ten - pound note . " 

 " thank you . it be not so satisfactory to I ; and , I should think , not to yourself . but probably the Joneses and Greens will prefer it . " 

 Mr. Ashton would look with plaintive inquiry into Mr. Gibson 's face after some such speech , as if ask if a sarcasm be intend . on the whole , they go on in the most amicable way ; only beyond the gregarious feeling common to most man , they have very little actual pleasure in each other 's society . perhaps the man of all other to whom Mr. Gibson take the most kindly at least , until Lord Hollingford come into the neighbourhood be a certain squire Hamley . he and his ancestor have be call squire as long back as local tradition extend . but there be many a great land - owner in the county , for Squire Hamley 's estate be not more than eight hundred acre or so . but his family have be in possession of it long before the Earls of Cumnor have be hear of ; before the Hely - Harrisons have buy Coldstone Park ; no one in Hollingford know the time when the Hamleys have not live at Hamley . " ever since the Heptarchy , " say the vicar . " Nay , " say Miss Browning , " I have hear that there be Hamleys of Hamley before the Romans . " the vicar be prepare a polite assent , when Mrs. Goodenough come in with a still more startling assertion . " I have always heerd , " say she , with all the slow authority of an old inhabitant , " that there be Hamleys of Hamley afore the time of the pagan . " Mr. Ashton could only bow , and say , " possibly , very possibly , madam . " but he say it in so courteous a manner that Mrs. Goodenough look round in a gratified way , as much as to say , " the Church confirm my word ; who now will dare dispute they ? " at any rate , the Hamleys be a very old family , if not aborigine . they have not increase their estate for century ; they have hold their own , if even with an effort , and have not sell a rood of it for the last hundred year or so . but they be not an adventurous race . they never trade , or speculate , or try agricultural improvement of any kind . they have no capital in any bank ; nor what perhaps would have be more in character , hoard of gold in any stocking . their mode of life be simple , and more like that of yeoman than squire . indeed Squire Hamley , by continue the primitive manner and custom of his forefather , the squire of the eighteenth century , do live more as a yeoman , when such a class exist , than as a squire of this generation . there be a dignity in this quiet conservatism that gain he an immense amount of respect both from high and low ; and he might have visit at every house in the county have he so choose . but he be very indifferent to the charm of society ; and perhaps this be owe to the fact that the squire , Roger Hamley , who at present live and reign at Hamley , have not receive so good an education as he ought to have do . his father , Squire Stephen , have be pluck at Oxford , and , with stubborn pride , he have refuse to go up again . Nay , more ! he have swear a great oath , as man do in those day , that none of his child to come should ever know either university by become a member of it . he have only one child , the present squire , and he be bring up accord to his father 's word ; he be send to a petty provincial school , where he see much that he hat , and then turn loose upon the estate as its heir . such a bringing up do not do he all the harm that might have be anticipate . he be imperfectly educate , and ignorant on many point ; but he be aware of his deficiency , and regret it in theory . he be awkward and ungainly in society , and so keep out of it as much as possible ; and he be obstinate , violent - temper , and dictatorial in his own immediate circle . on the other side , he be generous , and true as steel ; the very soul of honour , in fact . he have so much natural shrewdness , that his conversation be always worth listen to , although he be apt to start by assume entirely false premise , which he consider as incontrovertible as if they have be mathematically prove ; but , give the correctness of his premise , nobody could bring more natural wit and sense to bear upon the argument base upon they . 

 he have marry a delicate fine London lady ; it be one of those perplexing marriage of which one can not understand the reason . yet they be very happy , though possibly Mrs. Hamley would not have sink into the condition of a chronic invalid , if her husband have care a little more for her various taste , or allow she the companionship of those who do . after his marriage he be will not to say he have get all that be worth have out of the crowd of house they call London . it be a compliment to his wife which he repeat until the year of her death ; it charm she at first , it please she up to the last time of she hear it ; but , for all that , she use sometimes to wish that he would recognize the fact that there might still be something worth hear and see in the great city . but he never go there again , and though he do not prohibit she go , yet he show so little sympathy with she when she come back full of what she have do on her visit that she cease care to go . not but what he be kind and willing in give his consent , and in furnish she amply with money . " there , there , my little woman , take that ! dress yourself up as fine as any on them , and buy what you like , for the credit of Hamley of Hamley ; and go to the park and the play , and show off with the good on them . I shall be glad to see thee back again , I know ; but have thy fling while thou'rt about it . " then when she come back it be , " well , well , it have please thee , I suppose , so that be all right . but the very talk about it tire I , I know , and I can not   think how you have stand it all . come out and see how pretty the flower be look in the south garden . I have   make they sow all the seed you like ; and I go over to Hollingford nursery to buy the cutting of the plant you admire last year . a breath of fresh air will clear my brain after listen to all this talk about the whirl of London , which be like to have turn I giddy . " 

 Mrs. Hamley be a great reader , and have considerable literary taste . she be gentle and sentimental ; tender and good . she give up her visit to London ; she give up her sociable pleasure in the company of her fellow in education and position . her husband , owe to the deficiency of his early year , dislike associate with those to whom he ought to have be an equal ; he be too proud to mingle with his inferior . he love his wife all the more dearly for her sacrifice for he ; but , deprive of all her strong interest , she sink into ill - health ; nothing definite ; only she never be well . perhaps if she have have a daughter it would have be well for she : but her two child be boy , and their father , anxious to give they the advantage of which he himself have suffer the deprivation , send the lad very early to a preparatory school . they be to go on to Rugby and Cambridge ; the idea of Oxford be hereditarily distasteful in the Hamley family . Osborne , the eld so call after his mother 's maiden name be full of taste , and have some talent . his appearance have all the grace and refinement of his mother 's . he be sweet - tempered and affectionate , almost as demonstrative as a girl . he do well at school , carry away many prize ; and be , in a word , the pride and delight of both father and mother ; the confidential friend of the latter , in default of any other . Roger be two year young than Osborne ; clumsy and heavily build , like his father ; his face be square , and the expression grave , and rather immobile . he be good , but dull , his schoolmaster say . he win no prize , but bring home a favourable report of his conduct . when he caress his mother , she use laughingly to allude to the fable of the lap - dog and the donkey ; so thereafter he leave off all personal demonstration of affection . it be a great question as to whether he be to follow his brother to college after he leave Rugby . Mrs. Hamley think it would be rather a throwing away of money , as he be so little likely to distinguish himself in intellectual pursuit ; anything practical such as a civil engineer would be more the kind of life for he . she think that it would be too mortifying for he to go to the same college and university as his brother , who be sure to distinguish himself and , to be repeatedly pluck , to come away wooden - spoon at last . but his father persevere doggedly , as be his will not , in his intention of give both his son the same education ; they should both have the advantage of which he have be deprive . if Roger do not do well at Cambridge it would be his own fault . if his father do not send he thither , some day or other he might be regret the omission , as the Squire have do himself for many a year . so Roger follow his brother Osborne to Trinity , and Mrs. Hamley be again leave alone , after the year of indecision as to Roger 's destination , which have be bring on by her urgency . she have not be able for many year to walk beyond her garden ; the great part of her life be spend on a sofa , wheel to the window in summer , to the fireside in winter . the room which she inhabit be large and pleasant ; four tall window look out upon a lawn dot over with flower - bed , and melt away into a small wood , in the centre of which there be a pond , fill with water - lily . about this unseen pond in the deep shade Mrs. Hamley have write many a pretty four - verse poem since she lie on her sofa , alternately read and compose verse . she have a small table by her side on which there be the new work of poetry and fiction ; a pencil and blotting - book , with loose sheet of blank paper ; a vase of flower always of her husband 's gathering ; winter and summer , she have a sweet fresh nosegay every day . she maid bring she a draught of medicine every three hour , with a glass of clear water and a biscuit ; her husband come to she as often as his love for the open air and his labour out - of - door permit ; but the event of her day , when her boy be absent , be Mr. Gibson 's frequent professional visit . 

 he know there be real secret harm go on all this time that people speak of she as a merely fanciful invalid ; and that one or two accuse he of humour her fancy . but he only smile at such accusation . he feel that his visit be a real pleasure and lightening of her grow and indescribable discomfort ; he know that Squire Hamley would have be only too glad if he have come every day ; and he be conscious that by careful watching of her symptom he might mitigate her bodily pain . besides all these reason , he take great pleasure in the Squire 's society . Mr. Gibson enjoy the other 's unreasonableness ; his quaintness ; his strong conservatism in religion , politic , and moral . Mrs. Hamley try sometimes to apologize for , or to soften away , opinion which she fancy be offensive to the doctor , or contradiction which she think too abrupt ; but at such time her husband would lay his great hand almost caressingly on Mr. Gibson 's shoulder , and soothe his wife 's anxiety , by say , " let we alone , little woman . we understand each other , do not   we , doctor ? why , bless your life , he give I well than he get many a time ; only , you see , he sugar it over , and say a sharp thing , and pretend it be all civility and humility ; but I can tell when he be give I a pill . " 

 one of Mrs. Hamley 's often - express wish have be , that Molly might come and pay she a visit . Mr. Gibson always refuse this request of her , though he could hardly have give his reason for these refusal . he do not want to lose the companionship of his child , in fact ; but he put it to himself in quite a different way . he think her lesson and her regular course of employment would be interrupt . the life in Mrs. Hamley 's heated and scented room would not be good for the girl ; Osborne and Roger Hamley would be at home , and he do not wish Molly to be throw too exclusively upon they for young society ; or they would not be at home , and it would be rather dull and depressing for his girl to be all the day long with a nervous invalid . 

 but at length the day come when Mr. Gibson ride over , and volunteer a visit from Molly ; an offer which Mrs. Hamley receive with the " open arm of her heart , " as she express it ; and of which the duration be unspecified . 

 the cause for the change in Mr. Gibson 's wish just refer to be as follow : it have be mention that he take pupil , rather against his inclination , it be true ; but there they be , a Mr. Wynne and Mr. Coxe , " the young gentleman , " as they be call in the household ; " Mr. Gibson 's young gentleman , " as they be term in the town . Mr. Wynne be the elder , the more experienced one , who could occasionally take his master 's place , and who gain experience by visit the poor , and the " chronic case . " Mr. Gibson use to talk over his practice with Mr. Wynne , and try and elicit his opinion in the vain hope that , some day or another , Mr. Wynne might start an original thought . the young man be cautious and slow ; he would never do any harm by his rashness , but at the same time he would always be a little behind his day . still Mr. Gibson remember that he have have far bad " young gentleman " to deal with ; and be content with , if not thankful for , such an eld pupil as Mr. Wynne . Mr. Coxe be a boy of nineteen or so , with brilliant red hair , and a tolerably red face , of both of which he be very conscious and much ashamed . he be the son of an indian officer , an old acquaintance of Mr. Gibson 's . Major Coxe be at some unpronounceable station in the Punjaub , at the present time ; but the year before he have be in England , and have repeatedly express his great satisfaction at have place his only child as a pupil to his old friend , and have in fact almost charge Mr. Gibson with the guardianship as well as the instruction of his boy , give he many injunction which he think be special in this case ; but which Mr. Gibson with a touch of annoyance assure the major be always attend to in every case , with every pupil . but when the poor major venture to beg that his boy might be consider as one of the family , and that he might spend his evening in the drawing - room instead of the surgery , Mr. Gibson turn upon he with a direct refusal . 

 " he must live like the other . I can not   have the pestle and mortar carry into the drawing - room , and the place smell of aloe . " 

 " must my boy make pill himself , then ? " ask the major , ruefully . 

 " to be sure . the young apprentice always do . it be not hard work . he will have the comfort of think he will not   have to swallow they himself . and he will have the run of the pomfret cake , and the conserve of hip , and on Sundays he shall have a taste of tamarind to reward he for his weekly labour at pill - making . " 

 Major Coxe be not quite sure whether Mr. Gibson be not laugh at he in his sleeve ; but thing be so far arrange , and the real advantage be so great , that he think it be good to take no notice , but even to submit to the indignity of pill - making . he be console for all these rub by Mr. Gibson 's manner at last when the supreme moment of final parting arrive . the doctor do not say much ; but there be something of real sympathy in his manner that speak straight to the father 's heart , and an imply " you have trust I with your boy , and I have accept the trust in full , " in each of the few last word . 

 Mr. Gibson know his business and human nature too well to distinguish young Coxe by any overt mark of favouritism ; but he could not help show the lad occasionally that he regard he with especial interest as the son of a friend . besides this claim upon his regard , there be something about the young man himself that please Mr. Gibson . he be rash and impulsive , apt to speak , hit the nail on the head sometimes with unconscious cleverness , at other time make gross and startling blunder . Mr. Gibson use to tell he that his motto would always be " kill or cure , " and to this Mr. Coxe once make answer that he think it be the good motto a doctor could have ; for if he could not cure the patient , it be surely good to get he out of his misery quietly , and at once . Mr. Wynne look up in surprise , and observe that he should be afraid that such put out of misery might be look upon as homicide by some people . Mr. Gibson say in a dry tone , that for his part he should not mind the imputation of homicide , but that it would not do to make away with profitable patient in so speedy a manner ; and that he think that as long as they be willing and able to pay two - and - sixpence for the doctor 's visit , it be his duty to keep they alive ; of course , when they become pauper the case be different . Mr. Wynne ponder over this speech ; Mr. Coxe only laugh . at last Mr. Wynne say , 

 " but you go every morning , sir , before breakfast to see old Nancy Grant , and you have   order she this medicine , sir , which be about the most costly in Corbyn 's bill ? " 

 " have you not find out how difficult it be for man to live up to their precept ? you have   a great deal to learn yet , Mr. Wynne ! " say Mr. Gibson , leave the surgery as he speak . 

 " I never can make the governor out , " say Mr. Wynne , in a tone of utter despair . " what be you laugh at , Coxey ? " 

 " oh ! I be think how bl you be in have parent who have instill moral principle into your youthful bosom . you would go and be poison all the pauper off , if you have not   be tell that murder be a crime by your mother ; you would be think you be do as you be bid , and quote old Gibson 's word when you come to be try . ' please , my lord judge , they be not able to pay for my visit , and so I follow the rule of the profession as teach I by Mr. Gibson , the great surgeon at Hollingford , and poison the pauper . ' " 

 " I can not   bear that scoff way of his . " 

 " and I like it . if it be not   for the governor 's fun , and the tamarind , and something else that I know of , I would run off to India . I hate stifle room , and sick people , and the smell of drug , and the stink of pill on my hand ; faugh ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER V. 

 CALF - LOVE . 
 

 one day , for some reason or other , Mr. Gibson come home unexpectedly . he be cross the hall , have come in by the garden - door the garden communicate with the stable - yard , where he have leave his horse when the kitchen door open , and the girl who be underle in the establishment , come quickly into the hall with a note in her hand , and make as if she be take it upstairs ; but on see her master she give a little start , and turn back as if to hide herself in the kitchen . if she have not make this movement , so conscious of guilt , Mr. Gibson , who be anything but suspicious , would never have take any notice of she . as it be , he step quickly forwards , open the kitchen door , and call out " Bethia " so sharply that she could not delay come forwards . 

 " give I that note , " he say . she hesitate a little . 

 " it be for Miss Molly , " she stammer out . 

 " give it to I ! " he repeat more quickly than before . she look as if she would cry ; but still she keep the note tight hold behind her back . 

 " he say as I be to give it into her own hand ; and I promise as I would , faithful . " 

 " Cook , go and find Miss Molly . tell she to come here at once . " 

 he fix Bethia with his eye . it be of no use try to escape : she might have throw it into the fire , but she have not presence of mind enough . she stand immovable , only her eye look any way rather than encounter her master 's steady gaze . " molly , my dear ! " 

 " Papa ! I do not know you be at home , " say innocent , wonder molly . 

 " Bethia , keep your word . here be Miss Molly ; give she the note . " 

 " indeed , miss , I could not   help it ! " 

 molly take the note , but before she could open it , her father say , " that be all , my dear ; you need not   read it . give it to I . tell those who send you , Bethia , that all letter for Miss Molly must pass through my hand . now be off with you , goosey , and go back to where you come from . " 

  a Love Letter . 
 a Love Letter . 
 click to enlarge 
 " Papa , I shall make you tell I who my correspondent be . " 

 " we will see about that , by - and - by . " 

 she go a little reluctantly , with ungratified curiosity , upstairs to Miss Eyre , who be still her daily companion , if not her governess . he turn into the empty dining - room , shut the door , break the seal of the note , and begin to read it . it be a flame love - letter from Mr. Coxe ; who profess himself unable to go on see her day after day without speak to she of the passion she have inspire an " eternal passion , " he call it ; on read which Mr. Gibson laugh a little . would she not look kindly at he ? would she not think of he whose only thought be of she ? and so on , with a very proper admixture of violent compliment to her beauty . she be fair , not pale ; her eye be loadstar , her dimples mark of Cupid 's finger ,   c. 

 Mr. Gibson finish read it ; and begin to think about it in his own mind . " who would have think the lad have be so poetical ? but , to be sure , there be a ' Shakspeare ' in the surgery library : I will take it away and put ' Johnson 's Dictionary ' instead . one comfort be the conviction of her perfect innocence ignorance , I should rather say for it be easy to see it be the first ' confession of his love , ' as he call it . but it be an awful worry to begin with lover so early . why , she be only just seventeen , not seventeen , indeed , till July ; not for six week yet . sixteen and three - quarter ! why , she be quite a baby . to be sure poor Jeanie be not so old , and how I do love she ! "   Mrs. Gibson 's name be Mary , so he must have be refer to some one else .   then his thought wander back to other day , though he still hold the open note in his hand . by - and - by his eye fall upon it again , and his mind come back to bear upon the present time . " I will not be hard upon he . I will give he a hint ; he be quite sharp enough to take it . poor laddie ! if I send he away , which would be the wise course , I do believe he be get no home to go to . " 

 after a little more consideration in the same strain , Mr. Gibson go and sit down at the writing - table and write the following formula : 

 Master Coxe . 
  " that ' master ' will touch he to the quick , " say Mr. Gibson to himself as he write the word . 
 

 Recipe 	  Verecundia ouncei . 
 Fidelitatis Domestica ouncei . 
 Reticentia gr . iij . 
 M. 	  Capiat hanc dosim ter die in aqu   pur . 
 	
 R. Gibson , Ch . 

 Mr. Gibson smile a little sadly as he re - read his word . " Poor Jeanie , " he say aloud . and then he choose out an envelope , enclose the fervid love - letter , and the above prescription ; seal it with his own sharply - cut seal - ring , R. G. , in old english letter , and then pause over the address . 

 " he will not like Master Coxe outside ; no need to put he to unnecessary shame . " so the direction on the envelope be 

 Edward Coxe , Esq . 
 then Mr. Gibson apply himself to the professional business which have bring he home so opportunely and unexpectedly , and afterwards he go back through the garden to the stable ; and just as he have mount his horse , he say to the stable - man , " oh ! by the way , here be a letter for Mr. Coxe . do not   send it through the woman ; take it round yourself to the surgery - door , and do it at once . " 

 the slight smile upon his face , as he ride out of the gate , die away as soon as he find himself in the solitude of the lane . he slacken his speed , and begin to think . it be very awkward , he consider , to have a motherless girl grow up into womanhood in the same house with two young man , even if she only meet they at meal - time ; and all the intercourse they have with each other be merely the utterance of such word as , " may I help you to potato ? " or , as Mr. Wynne would persevere in say , " may I assist you to potato ? " a form of speech which grate daily more and more upon Mr. Gibson 's ear . yet Mr. Coxe , the offender in this affair which have just occur , have to remain for three year more as a pupil in Mr. Gibson 's family . he should be the very last of the race . still there be three year to be get over ; and if this stupid passionate calf - love of his last , what be to be do ? soon or later molly would become aware of it . the contingency of the affair be so excessively disagreeable to contemplate , that Mr. Gibson determine to dismiss the subject from his mind by a good strong effort . he put his horse to a gallop , and find that the violent shake over the lane pave as they be with round stone , which have be dislocate by the wear and tear of a hundred year be the very good thing for the spirit , if not for the bone . he make a long round that afternoon , and come back to his home imagining that the bad be over , and that Mr. Coxe would have take the hint convey in the prescription . all that would be need be to find a safe place for the unfortunate Bethia , who have display such a daring aptitude for intrigue . but Mr. Gibson reckon without his host . it be the habit of the young man to come in to tea with the family in the dining - room , to swallow two cup , munch their bread or toast , and then disappear . this night Mr. Gibson watch their countenance furtively from under his long eye - lash , while he try against his will not to keep up a dťgagť manner , and a brisk conversation on general subject . he see that Mr. Wynne be on the point of break out into laughter , and that red - haired , red - faced Mr. Coxe be red and fiercer than ever , while his whole aspect and way betray indignation and anger . 

 " he will have it , will he ? " think Mr. Gibson to himself ; and he gird up his loin for the battle . he do not follow molly and Miss Eyre into the drawing - room as he usually do . he remain where he be , pretend to read the newspaper , while Bethia , her face swell up with crying , and with an aggrieved and offended aspect , remove the tea - thing . not five minute after the room be clear , come the expected tap at the door . " may I speak to you , sir ? " say the invisible Mr. Coxe , from outside . 

 " to be sure . come in , Mr. Coxe . I be rather want to talk to you about that bill of Corbyn 's . pray sit down . " 

 " it be about nothing of that kind , sir , that I want that I wish no , thank you I would rather not sit down . " he , accordingly , stand in offended dignity . " it be about that letter , sir that letter with the insulting prescription , sir . " 

 " insulting prescription ! I be surprised at such a word be apply to any prescription of mine though , to be sure , patient be sometimes offend at be tell the nature of their illness ; and , I daresay , they may take offence at the medicine which their case require . " 

 " I do not ask you to prescribe for I . " 

 " oh , ho ! then you be the Master Coxe who send the note through Bethia ! let I tell you it have cost she her place , and be a very silly letter into the bargain . " 

 " it be not the conduct of a gentleman , sir , to intercept it , and to open it , and to read word never address to you , sir . " 

 " no ! " say Mr. Gibson , with a slight twinkle in his eye and a curl on his lip , not unnoticed by the indignant Mr. Coxe . " I believe I be once consider tolerably good - look , and I daresay I be as great a coxcomb as any one at twenty ; but I do not   think that even then I should quite have believe that all those pretty compliment be address to myself . " 

 " it be not the conduct of a gentleman , sir , " repeat Mr. Coxe , stammer over his word he be go on to say something more , when Mr. Gibson break in , 

 " and let I tell you , young man , " reply Mr. Gibson , with a sudden sternness in his voice , " that what you have do be only excusable in consideration of your youth and extreme ignorance of what be consider the law of domestic honour . I receive you into my house as a member of my family you induce one of my servant corrupt she with a bribe , I have no doubt " 

 " indeed , sir ! I never give she a penny . " 

 " then you ought to have do . you should always pay those who do your dirty work . " 

 " just now , sir , you call it corrupt with a bribe , " mutter Mr. Coxe . 

 Mr. Gibson take no notice of this speech , but go on " induce one of my servant to risk her place , without offer she the slight equivalent , by beg she to convey a letter clandestinely to my daughter a mere child . " 

 " Miss Gibson , sir , be nearly seventeen ! I hear you say so only the other day , " say Mr. Coxe , age twenty . again Mr. Gibson ignore the remark . 

 " a letter which you be unwilling to have see by her father , who have tacitly trust to your honour , by receive you as an inmate of his house . your father 's son I know Major Coxe well ought to have come to I , and have say out openly , ' Mr. Gibson , I love or I fancy that I love your daughter ; I do not think it right to conceal this from you , although unable to earn a penny ; and with no prospect of an unassisted livelihood , even for myself , for several year , I shall not say a word about my feeling or fancy feeling to the very young lady herself . ' that be what your father 's son ought to have say ; if , indeed , a couple of grain of reticent silence would not   have be well still . " 

 " and if I have say it , sir perhaps I ought to have say it , " say Mr. Coxe , in a hurry of anxiety , " what would have be your answer ? would you have sanction my passion , sir ? " 

 " I would have say , most probably I will not be certain of my exact word in a suppositional case that you be a young fool , but not a dishonourable young fool , and I should have tell you not to let your thought run upon a calf - love until you have magnify it into a passion . and I daresay , to make up for the mortification I should have give you , I might have prescribe your join the Hollingford Cricket Club , and set you at liberty as often as I could on the Saturday afternoon . as it be , I must write to your father 's agent in London , and ask he to remove you out of my household , repay the premium , of course , which will enable you to start afresh in some other doctor 's surgery . " 

 " it will so grieve my father , " say Mr. Coxe , startle into dismay , if not repentance . 

 " I see no other course open . it will give Major Coxe some trouble   I shall take care that he be at no extra expense , but what I think will grieve he the most be the betrayal of confidence ; for I trust you , Edward , like a son of my own ! " there be something in Mr. Gibson 's voice when he speak seriously , especially when he refer to any feeling of his own he who so rarely betray what be pass in his heart that be irresistible to most people : the change from joking and sarcasm to tender gravity . 

 Mr. Coxe hang his head a little , and meditate . 

 " I do love Miss Gibson , " say he , at length . " who could help it ? " 

 " Mr. Wynne , I hope ! " say Mr. Gibson . 

 " his heart be pre - engaged , " reply Mr. Coxe . " mine be free as air till I see she . " 

 " would it tend to cure your well ! passion , we will say if she wear blue spectacle at meal - time ? I observe you dwell much on the beauty of her eye . " 

 " you be ridicule my feeling , Mr. Gibson . do you forget that you yourself be young once ? " 

 " Poor Jeanie " rise before Mr. Gibson 's eye ; and he feel a little rebuke . 

 " come , Mr. Coxe , let we see if we can not   make a bargain , " say he , after a minute or so of silence . " you have do a really wrong thing , and I hope you be convinced of it in your heart , or that you will be when the heat of this discussion be over , and you come to think a little about it . but I will not   lose all respect for your father 's son . if you will give I your word that , as long as you remain a member of my family pupil , apprentice , what you will you will not   again try to disclose your passion you see I be careful to take your view of what I should call a mere fancy by word or writing , look or act , in any manner whatever , to my daughter , or to talk about your feeling to any one else , you shall remain here . if you can not give I your word , I must follow out the course I name , and write to your father 's agent . " 

 Mr. Coxe stand irresolute . 

 " Mr. Wynne know all I feel for Miss Gibson , sir . he and I have no secret from each other . " 

 " well , I suppose he must represent the reed . you know the story of King Midas 's barber , who find out that his royal master have the ear of an ass beneath his hyacinthine curl . so the barber , in default of a Mr. Wynne , go to the reed that grow on the shore of a neighbouring lake , and whisper to they , ' King Midas have the ear of an ass . ' but he repeat it so often that the reed learn the word , and keep on say they all day long , till at last the secret be no secret at all . if you keep on tell your tale to Mr. Wynne , be you sure he will not   repeat it in his turn ? " 

 " if I pledge my word as a gentleman , sir , I pledge it for Mr. Wynne as well . " 

 " I suppose I must run the risk . but remember how soon a young girl 's name may be breathe upon , and sully . molly have no mother , and for that very reason she ought to move among you all , as unharmed as Una herself . " 

 " Mr. Gibson , if you wish it , I will swear it on the Bible , " cry the excitable young man . 

 " Nonsense . as if your word , if it be worth anything , be not   enough ! we will shake hand upon it , if you like . " 

 Mr. Coxe come forward eagerly , and almost squeeze Mr. Gibson 's ring into his finger . 

 as he be leave the room , he say , a little uneasily , " may I give Bethia a crown - piece ? " 

 " no , indeed ! leave Bethia to I . I hope you will not   say another word to she while she be here . I shall see that she get a respectable place when she go away . " 

 then Mr. Gibson ring for his horse , and go out on the last visit of the day . he use to reckon that he ride the world around in the course of the year . there be not many surgeon in the county who have so wide a range of practice as he ; he go to lonely cottage on the border of great common ; to farm - house at the end of narrow country lane that lead to nowhere else , and be overshadow by the elm and beeche overhead . he attend all the gentry within a circle of fifteen mile round Hollingford ; and be the appoint doctor to the still great family who go up to London every February as the fashion then be and return to their acre in the early week of July . he be , of necessity , a great deal from home , and on this soft and pleasant summer evening he feel the absence as a great evil . he be startle at discover that his little one be grow fast into a woman , and already the passive object of some of the strong interest that affect a woman 's life ; and he her mother as well as her father so much away that he could not guard she as he would have wish . the end of his cogitation be that ride to Hamley the next morning , when he propose to allow his daughter to accept Mrs. Hamley 's last invitation an invitation that have be decline at the time . 

 " you may quote against I the proverb , ' he that will not when he may , when he will he shall have nay . ' and I shall have no reason to complain , " he have say . 

 but Mrs. Hamley be only too much charm with the prospect of have a young girl for a visitor ; one whom it would not be a trouble to entertain ; who might be send out to ramble in the garden , or tell to read when the invalid be too much fatigued for conversation ; and yet one whose youth and freshness would bring a charm , like a waft of sweet summer air , into her lonely shut - up life . nothing could be pleasanter , and so Molly 's visit to Hamley be easily settle . 

 " I only wish Osborne and Roger have be at home , " say Mrs. Hamley , in her low soft voice . " she may find it dull , be with old people , like the squire and I , from morning till night . when can she come ? the darling I be begin to love she already ! " 

 Mr. Gibson be very glad in his heart that the young man of the house be out of the way ; he do not want his little Molly to be pass from Scylla to Charybdis ; and , as he afterwards scoff at himself for thinking , he have get an idea that all young man be wolf in chase of his one ewe - lamb . 

 " she know nothing of the pleasure in store for she , " he reply ; " and I be sure I do not   know what feminine preparation she may think necessary , or how long they may take . you will remember she be a little ignoramus , and have have no " training in etiquette ; our way at home be rather rough for a girl , I be afraid . but I know I could not send she into a kind atmosphere than this . " 

 when the Squire hear from his wife of Mr. Gibson 's proposal , he be as much pleased as she at the prospect of their youthful visitor ; for he be a man of a hearty hospitality , when his pride do not interfere with its gratification ; and he be delighted to think of his sick wife 's have such an agreeable companion in her hour of loneliness . after a while he say , " it be as well the lad be at Cambridge ; we might have be have a love - affair if they have be at home . " 

 " well and if we have ? " ask his more romantic wife . 

 " it would not   have do , " say the Squire , decidedly . " Osborne will have have a first - rate education as good as any man in the county he will have this property , and he be a Hamley of Hamley ; not a family in the shire be as old as we be , or settle on their ground so well . Osborne may marry where he like . if Lord Hollingford have a daughter , Osborne would have be as good a match as she could have require . it would never do for he to fall in love with Gibson 's daughter I should not   allow it . so it be as well he be out of the way . " 

 " well ! perhaps Osborne have well look high . " 

 " perhaps ! I say he must . " the Squire bring his hand down with a thump on the table , near he , which make his wife 's heart beat hard for some minute . " and as for Roger , " he continue , unconscious of the flutter he have put she into , " he will have to make his own way , and earn his own bread ; and , I be afraid , he be not get on very brilliantly at Cambridge . he must not   think of fall in love for these ten year . " 

 " unless he marry a fortune , " say Mrs. Hamley , more by way of conceal her palpitation than anything else ; for she be unworldly and romantic to a fault . 

 " no son of mine shall ever marry a wife who be rich than himself with my good will , " say the squire again , with emphasis , but without a thump . 

 " I do not   say but what if Roger be gain five hundred a year by the time he be thirty , he shall not choose a wife with ten thousand pound down ; but I do say , if a boy of mine , with only two hundred a year which be all Roger will have from we , and that not for a long time go and marry a woman with fifty thousand to her portion , I will disown he it would be just disgusting . " 

 " not if they love each other , and their whole happiness depend upon their marry each other , " put in Mrs. Hamley , mildly . 

 " Pooh ! away with love ! Nay , my dear , we love each other so dearly we should never have be happy with any one else ; but that be a different thing . People be not   like what they be when we be young . all the love nowadays be just silly fancy , and sentimental romance , as far as I can see . " 

 Mr. Gibson think that he have settle everything about Molly be go to Hamley before he speak to she about it , which he do not do , until the morning of the day on which Mrs. Hamley expect she . then he say , " by the way , molly ! you be to go to Hamley this afternoon ; Mrs. Hamley want you to go to she for a week or two , and it suit I capitally that you should accept her invitation just now . " 

 " go to Hamley ! this afternoon ! papa , you have   get some odd reason at the back of your head some mystery , or something . please , tell I what it be . go to Hamley for a week or two ! why , I never be from home before this without you in all my life . " 

 " perhaps not . I do not   think you ever walk before you put your foot to the ground . everything must have a beginning . " 

 " it have something to do with that letter that be direct to I , but that you take out of my hand before I could even see the writing of the direction . " she fix her grey eye on her father 's face , as if she mean to pluck out his secret . 

 he only smile and say , " you be a witch , goosey ! " 

 " then it have ! but if it be a note from Mrs. Hamley , why might I not see it ? I have be wonder if you have some plan in your head ever since that day . Thursday , be not   it ? you have   go about in a kind of thoughtful , perplexed way , just like a conspirator . tell I , papa " come up to he , and put on a beseech manner " why might not   I see that note ? and why be I to go to Hamley all on a sudden ? " 

 " do not   you like to go ? would you rather not ? " if she have say that she do not want to go he would have be rather pleased than otherwise , although it would have put he into a great perplexity ; but he be begin to dread the parting from she even for so short a time . however , she reply directly , 

 " I do not   know I daresay I shall like it when I have think a little more about it . just now I be so startled by the suddenness of the affair , I have not   consider whether I shall like it or not . I shall not   like go away from you , I know . why be I to go , papa ? " 

 " there be three old lady sit somewhere , and think about you just at this very minute ; one have a distaff in her hand , and be spin a thread ; she have come to a knot in it , and be puzzle what to do with it . her sister have a great pair of scissor in her hand , and want as she always do , when any difficulty arise in the smoothness of the thread to cut it off short ; but the third , who have the most head of the three , plan how to undo the knot ; and she it be who have decide that you be to go to Hamley . the other be quite convinced by her argument ; so , as the Fates have decree that this visit be to be pay , there be nothing leave for you and I but to submit . " 

 " that be all nonsense , papa , and you be only make I more curious to find out this hide reason . " 

 Mr. Gibson change his tone , and speak gravely now . " there be a reason , Molly , and one which I do not wish to give . when I tell you this much , I expect you to be an honourable girl , and to try and not even conjecture what the reason may be , much less endeavour to put little discovery together till very likely you may find out what I want to conceal . " 

 " Papa , I will not   even think about your reason again . but then I shall have to plague you with another question . I have   have no new gown this year , and I have   outgrow all my last summer frock . I have   only three that I can wear at all . Betty be say only yesterday that I ought to have some more . " 

 " that will do that you have get on , will not   it ? it be a very pretty colour . " 

 " yes ; but , papa "   hold it out as if she be go to dance , " it be make of woollen , and so hot and heavy ; and every day it will be get warm . " 

 " I wish girl could dress like boy , " say Mr. Gibson , with a little impatience . " how be a man to know when his daughter want clothe ? and how be he to rig she out when he find it out , just when she need they most and have not   got they ? " 

 " ah , that be the question ! " say Molly , in some despair . 

 " can not   you go to Miss Rose 's ? do not   she keep ready - make frock for girl of your age ? " 

 " Miss Rose ! I never have anything from she in my life , " reply molly , in some surprise ; for Miss Rose be the great dressmaker and milliner of the little town , and hitherto Betty have make the girl 's frock . 

 " well , but it seem people consider you as a young woman now , and so I suppose you must run up milliner ' bill like the rest of your kind . not that you be to get anything anywhere that you can not   pay for down in ready money . here be a ten - pound note ; go to Miss Rose 's , or Miss anybody 's , and get what you want at once . the Hamley carriage be to come for you at two , and anything that be not   quite ready , can easily be send by their cart on Saturday , when some of their people always come to market . Nay , do not   thank I ! I do not   want to have the money spend , and I do not   want you to go and leave I : I shall miss you , I know ; it be only hard necessity that drive I to send you a - visit , and to throw away ten pound on your clothe . there , go away ; you be a plague , and I mean to leave off love you as fast as I can . " 

 " Papa ! " hold up her finger as in warning , " you be get mysterious again ; and though my honourableness be very strong , I will not   promise that it shall not yield to my curiosity if you go on hint at untold secret . " 

 " go away and spend your ten pound . what do I give it you for but to keep you quiet ? " 

 Miss Rose 's ready - make resource and Molly 's taste combine , do not arrive at a very great success . she buy a lilac print , because it would wash , and would be cool and pleasant for the morning ; and this Betty could make at home before Saturday . and for high - day and holiday by which be understand afternoon and Sundays Miss Rose persuade she to order a gay - coloured flimsy plaid silk , which she assure she be quite the late fashion in London , and which molly think would please her father 's Scotch blood . but when he see the scrap which she have bring home as a pattern , he cry out that the plaid belong to no clan in existence , and that Molly ought to have know this by instinct . it be too late to change it , however , for Miss Rose have promise to cut the dress out as soon as molly leave her shop . 

 Mr. Gibson have hang about the town all the morning instead of go away on his usual distant ride . he pass his daughter once or twice in the street , but he do not cross over when he be on the opposite side only give she a look or a nod , and go on his way , scold himself for his weakness in feel so much pain at the thought of her absence for a fortnight or so . 

 " and , after all , " think he , " I be only where I be when she come back ; at least , if that foolish fellow go on with his imaginate fancy . she will have to come back some time , and if he choose to imagine himself constant , there be still the devil to pay . " presently he begin to hum the air out of the " Beggar 's Opera " 

 I wonder any man alive 
  should ever rear a daughter . 
 

 

 CHAPTER VI . 

 a visit to the hamleys . 
 

 of course the news of Miss Gibson 's approach departure have spread through the household before the one o'clock dinner - time come ; and Mr. Coxe 's dismal countenance be a source of much inward irritation to Mr. Gibson , who keep give the youth sharp glance of savage reproof for his melancholy face , and want of appetite ; which he trot out , with a good deal of sad ostentation ; all of which be lose upon Molly , who be too full of her own personal concern to have any thought or observation to spare from they , except once or twice when she think of the many day that must pass over before she should again sit down to dinner with her father . 

 when she name this to he after the meal be over , and they be sit together in the drawing - room , wait for the sound of the wheel of the Hamley carriage , he laugh , and say , 

 " I be come over to - morrow to see Mrs. Hamley ; and I daresay I shall dine at their lunch ; so you will not   have to wait long before you have   the treat of see the wild beast feed . " 

 then they hear the approach carriage . 

 " oh , papa , " say Molly , catch at his hand , " I do so wish I be not   go , now that the time be come . " 

 " nonsense ; do not   let we have any sentiment . have you get your key ? that be more to the purpose . " 

 yes ; she have get her key , and her purse ; and her little box be put up on the seat by the coachman ; and her father hand she in ; the door be shut , and she drive away in solitary grandeur , look back and kiss her hand to her father , who stand at the gate , in spite of his dislike of sentiment , as long as the carriage could be see . then he turn into the surgery , and find Mr. Coxe have have his watch too , and have , indeed , remain at the window gazing , moonstruck , at the empty road , up which the young lady have disappear . Mr. Gibson startle he from his reverie by a sharp , almost venomous , speech about some small neglect of duty a day or two before . that night Mr. Gibson insist on pass by the bedside of a poor girl whose parent be wear - out by many wakeful anxious night succeed to hard - work day . 

 molly cry a little , but check her tear as soon as she remember how annoyed her father would have be at the sight of they . it be very pleasant drive quickly along in the luxurious carriage , through the pretty green lane , with dog - rose and honeysuckle so plentiful and rathe in the hedge , that she once or twice be tempt to ask the coachman to stop till she have gather a nosegay . she begin to dread the end of her little journey of seven mile ; the only drawback to which be , that her silk be not a true clan - tartan , and a little uncertainty as to Miss Rose 's punctuality . at length they come to a village ; straggle cottage line the road , an old church stand on a kind of green , with the public - house close by it ; there be a great tree , with a bench all round the trunk , midway between the church gate and the little inn . the wooden stock be close to the gate . molly have long pass the limit of her ride , but she know this must be the village of Hamley , and that they must be very near to the hall . 

 they swing in at the gate of the park in a few minute , and drive up through meadow - grass , ripen for hay , it be no grand aristocratic deer - park this to the old red - brick hall ; not three hundred yard from the high - road . there have be no footman send with the carriage , but a respectable servant stand at the door , even before they draw up , ready to receive the expect visitor , and take she into the drawing - room where his mistress lie await she . 

 Mrs. Hamley rise from her sofa to give molly a gentle welcome ; she keep the girl 's hand in her after she have finish speak , look into her face , as if study it , and unconscious of the faint blush she call up on the otherwise colourless cheek . 

 " I think we shall be great friend , " say she , at length . " I like your face , and I be always guide by first impression . give I a kiss , my dear . " 

 it be far easy to be active than passive during this process of ' swear eternal friendship , " and molly willingly kiss the sweet pale face hold up to she . 

 " I mean to have go and fetch you myself ; but the heat oppress I , and I do not feel up to the exertion . I hope you have a pleasant drive ? " 

 " very , " say Molly , with shy conciseness . 

 " and now I will take you to your room ; I have have you put close to I ; I think you would like it well , even though it be a small room than the other . " 

 she rise languidly , and wrap her light shawl round her yet elegant figure , lead the way upstairs . Molly 's bedroom open out of Mrs. Hamley 's private sitting - room ; on the other side of which be her own bedroom . she show molly this easy mean of communication , and then , tell her visitor she would await she in the sitting - room , she close the door , and Molly be leave at leisure to make acquaintance with her surrounding . 

 first of all , she go to the window to see what be to be see . a flower - garden right below ; a meadow of ripe grass just beyond , change colour in long sweep , as the soft wind blow over it ; great old forest - tree a little on one side ; and , beyond they again , to be see only by stand very close to the side of the window - sill , or by put her head out , if the window be open , the silver shimmer of a mere , about a quarter of a mile off . on the opposite side to the tree and the mere , the look - out be bound by the old wall and high - peak roof of the extensive farm - building . the deliciousness of the early summer silence be only break by the song of the bird , and the near hum of bee . listen to these sound , which enhance the exquisite sense of stillness , and puzzle out object obscure by distance or shadow , molly forget herself , and be suddenly startle into a sense of the present by a sound of voice in the next room some servant or other speak to Mrs. Hamley . molly hurry to unpack her box , and arrange her few clothe in the pretty old - fashioned chest of drawer , which be to serve she as dressing - table as well . all the furniture in the room be as old - fashioned and as well - preserve as it could be . the chintz curtain be indian calico of the last century the colour almost wash out , but the stuff itself exquisitely clean . there be a little strip of bedside carpeting , but the wooden flooring , thus liberally display , be of finely - grain oak , so firmly join , plank to plank , that no grain of dust could make its way into the interstice . there be none of the luxury of modern day ; no writing - table , or sofa , or pier - glass . in one corner of the wall be a bracket , hold an indian jar fill with pot - pourri ; and that and the climbing honeysuckle outside the open window scent the room more exquisitely than any toilette perfume . molly lay out her white gown   of last year 's date and size   upon the bed , ready for the   to her new   operation of dress for dinner , and have arrange her hair and dress , and take out her company worst - work , she open the door softly , and see Mrs. Hamley lie on the sofa . 

 " shall we stay up here , my dear ? I think it be pleasanter than down below ; and then I shall not have to come upstairs again at dressing - time . " 

 " I shall like it very much , " reply molly . 

 " ah ! you have   get your sewing , like a good girl , " say Mrs. Hamley . " now , I do not   sew much . I live alone a great deal . you see , both my boy be at Cambridge , and the squire be out of door all day long so I have almost forget how to sew . I read a great deal . do you like read ? " 

 " it depend upon the kind of book , " say Molly . " I be afraid I do not   like ' steady reading , ' as papa call it . " 

 " but you like poetry ! " say Mrs. Hamley , almost interrupt molly . " I be sure you do , from your face . have you read this last poem of Mrs. Hemans ? shall I read it aloud to you ? " 

 so she begin . molly be not so much absorb in listening but that she could glance round the room . the character of the furniture be much the same as in her own . Old - fashion , of handsome material , and faultlessly clean , the age and the foreign appearance of it give an aspect of comfort and picturesqueness to the whole apartment . on the wall there hang some crayon sketch portrait . she think she could make out that one of they be a likeness of Mrs. Hamley , in her beautiful youth . and then she become interested in the poem , and drop her work , and listen in a manner that be after Mrs. Hamley 's own heart . when the reading of the poem be end , Mrs. Hamley reply to some of Molly 's word of admiration , by say : 

 " ah ! I think I must read you some of Osborne 's poetry some day ; under seal of secrecy , remember ; but I really fancy they be almost as good as Mrs. Hemans ' . " 

 to be nearly as good as Mrs. Hemans ' be say as much to the young lady of that day , as say that poetry be nearly as good as Tennyson 's would be in this . molly look up with eager interest . 

 " Mr. Osborne Hamley ? do your son write poetry ? " 

 " yes . I really think I may say he be a poet . he be a very brilliant , clever young man , and he quite hop to get a fellowship at Trinity . he say he be sure to be high up among the wrangler , and that he expect to get one of the Chancellor 's medal . that be his likeness the one hang against the wall behind you . " 

 molly turn round , and see one of the crayon sketch represent two boy , in the most youthful kind of jacket and trouser , and fall collar . the elder be sit down , read intently . the young be stand by he , and evidently try to call the attention of the reader off to some object out of door out of the window of the very room in which they be sit , as molly discover when she begin to recognize the article of furniture faintly indicate in the picture . 

 " I like their face ! " say Molly . " I suppose it be so long ago now , that I may speak of their likeness to you as if they be somebody else ; may not I ? " 

 " certainly , " say Mrs. Hamley , as soon as she understand what Molly mean . " tell I just what you think of they , my dear ; it will amuse I to compare your impression with what they really be . " 

 " oh ! but I do not mean to guess at their character . I could not do it ; and it would be impertinent , if I could . I can only speak about their face as I see they in the picture . " 

 " well ! tell I what you think of they ! " 

 " the eld the reading boy be very beautiful ; but I can not   quite make out his face yet , because his head be down , and I can not   see the eye . that be the Mr. Osborne Hamley who write poetry . " 

 " yes . he be not quite so handsome now ; but he be a beautiful boy . Roger be never to be compare with he . " 

 " no ; he be not handsome . and yet I like his face . I can see his eye . they be grave and solemn - looking ; but all the rest of his face be rather merry than otherwise . it look too steady and sober , too good a face , to go tempt his brother to leave his lesson . " 

 " ah ! but it be not a lesson . I remember the painter , Mr. Green , once see Osborne read some poetry , while Roger be try to persuade he to come out and have a ride in the hay - cart that be the ' motive ' of the picture , to speak artistically . Roger be not much of a reader ; at least , he do not   care for poetry , and book of romance , or sentiment . he be so fond of natural history ; and that take he , like the squire , a great deal out of door ; and when he be in , he be always read scientific book that bear upon his pursuit . he be a good , steady fellow , though , and give we great satisfaction , but he be not likely to have such a brilliant career as Osborne . " 

 molly try to find out in the picture the characteristic of the two boy , as they be now explain to she by their mother ; and in question and answer about the various drawing hang round the room the time pass away until the dressing - bell ring for the six o'clock dinner . 

 Molly be rather dismay by the offer of the maid whom Mrs. Hamley have send to assist she . " I be afraid they expect I to be very smart , " she keep think to herself . " if they do , they will be disappoint ; that be all . but I wish my plaid silk gown have be ready . " 

 she look at herself in the glass with some anxiety , for the first time in her life . she see a slight , lean figure , promise to be tall ; a complexion browner than cream - colour , although in a year or two it might have that tint ; plentiful curly black hair , tie up in a bunch behind with a rose - colour ribbon ; long , almond - shape , soft gray eye , shade both above and below by curl black eyelash . 

 " I do not   think I be pretty , " think molly , as she turn away from the glass ; " and yet I be not sure . " she would have be sure , if , instead of inspect herself with such solemnity , she have smile her own sweet merry smile , and call out the gleam of her tooth , and the charm of her dimple . 

 she find her way downstairs into the drawing - room in good time ; she could look about she , and learn how to feel at home in her new quarter . the room be forty - foot long or so , fit up with yellow satin at some distant period ; high spindle - legge chair and pembroke - table abound . the carpet be of the same date as the curtain , and be thread - bare in many place ; and in other be cover with drugget . stand of plant , great jar of flower , old indian china and cabinet give the room the pleasant aspect it certainly have . and to add to it , there be five high , long window on one side of the room , all open to the prettiest bit of flower - garden in the ground or what be consider as such brilliant - colour , geometrically - shape bed , converge to a sun - dial in the midst . the squire come in abruptly , and in his morning dress ; he stand at the door , as if surprised at the white - rob stranger in possession of his hearth . then , suddenly remember himself , but not before Molly have begin to feel very hot , he say 

 " why , God bless my soul , I would quite forget you ; you be Miss Gibson , Gibson 's daughter , be not   you ? come to pay we a visit ? I be sure I be very glad to see you , my dear . " 

 by this time , they have meet in the middle of the room , and he be shake Molly 's hand with vehement friendliness , intend to make up for his not know she at first . 

 " I must go and dress , though , " say he , look at his soil gaiter . " Madam like it . it be one of her fine London way , and she be break I into it at last . very good plan , though , and quite right to make oneself fit for lady ' society . do your father dress for dinner , Miss Gibson ? " he do not stay to wait for her answer , but hasten away to perform his toilette . 

 they din at a small table in a great large room . there be so few article of furniture in it , and the apartment itself be so vast , that molly long for the snugness of the home dining - room ; nay , it be to be fear that , before the stately dinner at Hamley Hall come to an end , she even regret the crowd chair and table , the hurry of eat , the quick unformal manner in which everybody seem to finish their meal as fast as possible , and to return to the work they have leave . she try to think that at six o'clock all the business of the day be end , and that people might linger if they choose . she measure the distance from the sideboard to the table with her eye , and make allowance for the man who have to carry thing backwards and forwards ; but , all the same , this dinner appear to she a wearisome business , prolong because the squire like it , for Mrs. Hamley seem tired out . she eat even less than Molly , and send for fan and smell - bottle to amuse herself with , until at length the table - cloth be clear away , and the dessert be put upon a mahogany table , polish like a look - glass . 

 the Squire have hitherto be too busy to talk , except about the immediate concern of the table , and one or two of the great break to the usual monotony of his day ; a monotony in which he delight , but which sometimes become oppressive to his wife . now , however , peel his orange , he turn to molly 

 " to - morrow you will have to do this for I , Miss Gibson . " 

 " Shall I ? I will do it to - day , if you like , sir . " 

 " no ; to - day I shall treat you as a visitor , with all proper ceremony . to - morrow I shall send you errand , and call you by your christian name . " 

 " I shall like that , " say Molly . 

 " I be want to call you something less formal than Miss Gibson , " say Mrs. Hamley . 

 " my name be Molly . it be an old - fashioned name , and I be christen Mary . but papa like Molly . " 

 " that be right . keep to the good old fashion , my dear . " 

 " well , I must say I think Mary be pretty than Molly , and quite as old a name , too , " say Mrs. Hamley . 

 " I think it be , " say Molly , lower her voice , and drop her eye , " because mamma be Mary , and I be call molly while she live . " 

 " ah , poor thing , " say the squire , not perceive his wife 's sign to change the subject , " I remember how sorry every one be when she die ; no one think she be delicate , she have such a fresh colour , till all at once she pop off , as one may say . " 

 " it must have be a terrible blow to your father , " say Mrs. Hamley , see that molly do not know what to answer . 

 " ay , ay . it come so sudden , so soon after they be marry . " 

 " I think it be nearly four year , " say Molly . 

 " and four year be soon be a short time to a couple who look to spend their lifetime together . every one think Gibson would have marry again . " 

 " hush , " say Mrs. Hamley , see in Molly 's eye and change of colour how completely this be a new idea to she . but the squire be not so easily stop . 

 " well I would perhaps well not have say it , but it be the truth ; they do . he be not likely to marry now , so one may say it out . why , your father be past forty , be not   he ? " 

 " forty - three . I do not   believe he ever think of marry again , " say Molly , recur to the idea , as one do to that of danger which have pass by , without one 's be aware of it . 

 " no ! I do not   believe he do , my dear . he look to I just like a man who would be constant to the memory of his wife . you must not mind what the squire say . " 

 " ah ! you would well go away , if you be go to teach Miss Gibson such treason as that against the master of the house . " 

 molly go into the drawing - room with Mrs. Hamley , but her thought do not change with the room . she could not help dwell on the danger which she fancy she have escape , and be astonish at her own stupidity at never have imagine such a possibility as her father 's second marriage . she feel that she be answer Mrs. Hamley 's remark in a very unsatisfactory manner . 

 " there be papa , with the squire ! " she suddenly exclaim . there they be come across the flower - garden from the stable - yard , her father switch his boot with his rid whip , in order to make they presentable in Mrs. Hamley 's drawing - room . he look so exactly like his usual self , his home - self , that the see he in the flesh be the most efficacious way of dispel the phantom fear of a second wedding , which be begin to harass his daughter 's mind ; and the pleasant conviction that he could not rest till he have come over to see how she be go on in her new home , steal into her heart , although he speak but little to she , and that little be all in a joking tone . after he have go away , the Squire undertake to teach her cribbage , and she be happy enough now to give he all her attention . he keep on prattling while they play ; sometimes in relation to the card ; at other tell she of small occurrence which he think might interest she . 

 " so you do not   know my boy , even by sight . I should have think you would have do , for they be fond enough of rid into Hollingford ; and I know Roger have often enough be to borrow book from your father . Roger be a scientific sort of a fellow . Osborne be clever , like his mother . I should not   wonder if he publish a book some day . you be not count right , Miss Gibson . why , I could cheat you as easily as possible . " and so on , till the butler come in with a solemn look , place a large prayer - book before his master , who huddle the card away in a hurry , as if catch in an incongruous employment ; and then the maid and man troop in to prayer the window be still open , and the sound of the solitary corncrake , and the owl hoot in the tree , mingle with the word speak . then to bed ; and so end the day . 

 molly look out of her chamber window lean on the sill , and snuff up the night odour of the honeysuckle . the soft velvet darkness hide everything that be at any distance from she ; although she be as conscious of their presence as if she have see they . 

 " I think I shall be very happy here , " be in Molly 's thought , as she turn away at length , and begin to prepare for bed . before long the squire 's word , relate to her father 's second marriage , come across she , and spoil the sweet peace of her final thought . " who could he have marry ? " she ask herself . " Miss Eyre ? Miss Browning ? Miss Phobe ? Miss Goodenough ? " one by one , each of these be reject for sufficient reason . yet the unsatisfied question rankle in her mind , and dart out of ambush to disturb her dream . 

 Mrs. Hamley do not come down to breakfast ; and Molly find out with a little dismay , that the squire and she be to have it by themselves . on this first morning he put aside his newspaper one an old establish Tory journal , with all the local and county news , which be the most interesting to he ; the other the Morning Chronicle , which he call his dose of bitter , and which call out many a strong expression and tolerably pungent oath . to - day , however , he be " on his manner , " as he afterwards explain to Molly ; and he plunge about , try to find ground for a conversation . he could talk of his wife and his son , his estate , and his mode of farming ; his tenant , and the mismanagement of the last county election . Molly 's interest be her father , Miss Eyre , her garden and pony ; in a fainter degree Miss Brownings , the Cumnor Charity School , and the new gown that be to come from Miss Rose 's ; into the midst of which the one great question , " who be it that people think it be possible papa might marry ? " keep pop up into her mouth , like a troublesome Jack - in - the - box . for the present , however , the lid be snap down upon the intruder as often as he show his head between her tooth . they be very polite to each other during the meal ; and it be not a little tiresome to both . when it be end the Squire withdraw into his study to read the untasted newspaper . it be the custom to call the room in which Squire Hamley keep his coat , boot , and gaiter , his different stick and favourite spud , his gun and fishing - rod , " the study . " there be a bureau in it , and a three - cornered arm - chair , but no book be visible . the great part of they be keep in a large , musty - smell room , in an unfrequented part of the house ; so unfrequented that the housemaid often neglect to open the window - shutter , which look into a part of the ground over - grow with the luxuriant growth of shrub . indeed , it be a tradition in the servant ' hall that , in the late squire 's time he who have be pluck at college the library window have be board up to avoid pay the window - tax . and when the " young gentleman " be at home the housemaid , without a single direction to that effect , be regular in her charge of this room ; open the window and light fire daily , and dust the handsomely - bind volume , which be really a very fair collection of the standard literature in the middle of the last century . all the book that have be purchase since that time be hold in small book - case between each two of the drawing - room window , and in Mrs. Hamley 's own sitting - room upstairs . those in the drawing - room be quite enough to employ molly ; indeed , she be so deep in one of Sir Walter Scott 's novel that she jump as if she have be shoot , when an hour or so after breakfast the squire come to the gravel - path outside one of the window , and call to ask she if she would like to come out of door and go about the garden and home - field with he . 

 " it must be a little dull for you , my girl , all by yourself , with nothing but book to look at , in the morning here ; but you see , madam have a fancy for be quiet in the morning : she tell your father about it , and so do I , but I feel sorry for you all the same , when I see you sit on the ground all alone in the drawing - room . " 

 molly have be in the very middle of the Bride of Lammermoor , and would gladly have stay in - door to finish it , but she feel the squire 's kindness all the same . they go in and out of old - fashioned greenhouse , over trim lawn , the Squire unlock the great walled kitchen - garden , and go about give direction to gardener ; and all the time molly follow he like a little dog , her mind quite full of " Ravenswood " and " Lucy Ashton . " presently , every place near the house have be inspect and regulate , and the squire be more at liberty to give his attention to his companion , as they pass through the little wood that separate the garden from the adjoining field . molly , too , pluck away her thought from the seventeenth century ; and , somehow or other , that one question , which have so haunt she before , come out of her lip before she be aware a literal impromptu , 

 " who do people think papa would marry ? that time long ago soon after mamma die ? " 

 she drop her voice very soft and low , as she speak the last word . the Squire turn round upon she , and look at her face , he know not why . it be very grave , a little pale , but her steady eye almost command some kind of answer . 

 " whew , " say he , whistle to gain time ; not that he have anything definite to say , for no one have ever have any reason to join Mr. Gibson 's name with any know lady : it be only a loose conjecture that have be hazard on the probability a young widower , with a little girl . 

 " I never hear of any one his name be never couple with any lady 's ' twa only in the nature of thing that he should marry again ; he may do it yet , for aught I know , and I do not   think it would be a bad move either . I tell he so , the last time but one he be here . " 

 " and what do he say ? " ask breathless Molly . 

 " oh : he only smile and say nothing . you should not   take up word so seriously , my dear . very likely he may never think of marry again , and if he do , it would be a very good thing both for he and for you ! " 

 molly mutter something , as if to herself , but the squire might have hear it if he have choose . as it be , he wisely turn the current of the conversation . 

 " look at that ! " he say , as they suddenly come upon the mere , or large pond . there be a small island in the middle of the glassy water , on which grow tall tree , dark Scotch fir in the centre , silvery shimmering willow close to the water 's edge . " we must get you punt over there , some of these day . I be not fond of use the boat at this time of the year , because the young bird be still in the nest among the reed and water - plant ; but we will go . there be coot and grebe . " 

 " oh , look , there be a swan ! " 

 " yes ; there be two pair of they here . and in those tree there be both a rookery and a heronry ; the heron ought to be here by now , for they be off to the sea in August , but I have   not see one yet . Stay ! be not   that one that fellow on a stone , with his long neck bend down , look into the water ? " 

 " yes ! I think so . I have never see a heron , only picture of they . " 

 " they and the rook be always at war , which do not   do for such near neighbour . if both heron leave the nest they be build , the rook come and tear it to piece ; and once Roger show I a long straggle fellow of a heron , with a flight of rook after he , with no friendly purpose in their mind , I will be bind . Roger know a deal of natural history , and find out queer thing sometimes . he would have be off a dozen time during this walk of ours , if he have be here : his eye be always wander about , and see twenty thing where I only see one . why ! I have   know he bolt into a copse because he see something fifteen yard off some plant , maybe , which he would tell I be very rare , though I should say I would see its marrow at every turn in the wood ; and , if we come upon such a thing as this , " touch a delicate film of a cobweb upon a leaf with his stick , as he speak , " why , he could tell you what insect or spider make it , and if it live in rotten fir - wood , or in a cranny of good sound timber , or deep down in the ground , or up in the sky , or anywhere . it be a pity they do not   take honour in Natural history at Cambridge . Roger would be safe enough if they do . " 

 " Mr. Osborne Hamley be very clever , be he not ? " molly ask , timidly . 

 " oh , yes . Osborne 's a bit of a genius . his mother look for great thing from Osborne . I be rather proud of he myself . he will get a Trinity fellowship , if they play he fair . as I be say at the magistrate ' meeting yesterday , ' I have   get a son who will make a noise at Cambridge , or I be very much mistaken . ' now , be not   it a queer quip of Nature , " continue the squire , turn his honest face towards Molly , as if he be go to impart a new idea to she , " that I , a Hamley of Hamley , straight in descent from nobody know where the Heptarchy , they say what be the date of the Heptarchy ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Molly , startle at be thus appeal to . 

 " well ! it be some time before King Alfred , because he be the King of all England , you know ; but , as I be say , here be I , of as good and as old a descent as any man in England , and I doubt if a stranger , to look at I , would take I for a gentleman , with my red face , great hand and foot , and thick figure , fourteen stone , and never less than twelve even when I be a young man ; and there be Osborne , who take after his mother , who could not   tell her great - grandfather from Adam , bless she ; and Osborne have a girl 's delicate face , and a slight make , and hand and foot as small as a lady 's . he take after madam 's side , who , as I say , can not   tell who be her grandfather . now , Roger be like I , a Hamley of Hamley , and no one who see he in the street will ever think that red - brown , big - bone , clumsy chap be of gentle blood . yet all those cumnor people , you make such ado of in Hollingford , be mere muck of yesterday . I be talk to madam the other day about Osborne 's marry a daughter of Lord Hollingford 's that be to say , if he have a daughter he be only get boy , as it happen ; but I be not sure if I should consent to it . I really be not sure ; for you see Osborne will have have a first - rate education , and his family date from the Heptarchy , while I should be glad to know where the Cumnor folk be in the time of Queen Anne ? " he walk on , ponder the question of whether he could have give his consent to this impossible marriage ; and after some time , and when Molly have quite forget the subject to which he allude , he break out with " no ! I be sure I should have look high . so , perhaps , it be as well my Lord Hollingford have only boy . " 

 after a while , he thank molly for her companionship , with old - fashioned courtesy ; and tell she that he think , by this time , madam would be up and dress , and glad to have her young visitor with she . he point out the deep purple house , with its stone facing , as it be see at some distance between the tree , and watch she protectingly on her way along the field - path . 

 " that be a nice girl of Gibson 's , " quoth he to himself . " but what a tight hold the wench get of the notion of his marrying again ! one have need be on one 's guard as to what one say before she . to think of she never have thought of the chance of a stepmother . to be sure , a stepmother to a girl be a different thing to a second wife to a man ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER VII . 

 FORESHADOWS of LOVE PERILS . 
 

 Illustrationf Squire Hamley have be unable to tell Molly who have ever be think of as her father 's second wife , fate be all this time prepare an answer of a pretty positive kind to her wonder curiosity . but fate be a cunning hussy , and build up her plan as imperceptibly as a bird build her nest ; and with much the same kind of unconsidered trifle . the first " trifle " of an event be the disturbance which Jenny   Mr. Gibson 's cook   choose to make at Bethia 's be dismiss . Bethia be a distant relation and protťgťe of Jenny 's , and she choose to say it be Mr. Coxe the tempter who ought to have " be send packing , " not Bethia the tempt , the victim . in this view there be quite enough plausibility to make Mr. Gibson feel that he have be rather unjust . he have , however , take care to provide Bethia with another situation , to the full as good as that which she hold in his family . Jenny , nevertheless , choose to give warning ; and though Mr. Gibson know full well from former experience that her warning be word , not deed , he hat the discomfort , the uncertainty , the entire disagreeableness of meet a woman at any time in his house , who wear a grievance and an injury upon her face as legibly as Jenny take care to do . 

 down into the middle of this small domestic trouble come another , and one of great consequence . Miss Eyre have go with her old mother , and her orphan nephew and niece , to the sea - side , during Molly 's absence , which be only intend at first to last for a fortnight . after about ten day of this time have elapse , Mr. Gibson receive a beautifully write , beautifully word , admirably fold , and most neatly seal letter from Miss Eyre . her eld nephew have fall ill of scarlet fever , and there be every probability that the young child would be attack by the same complaint . it be distress enough for poor Miss Eyre this additional expense , this anxiety the long detention from home which the illness involve . but she say not a word of any inconvenience to herself ; she only apologize with humble sincerity for her inability to return at the appoint time to her charge in Mr. Gibson 's family ; meekly adding , that perhaps it be as well , for Molly have never have the scarlet fever , and even if Miss Eyre have be able to leave the orphan child to return to her employment , it might not have be a safe or a prudent step . 

 " to be sure not , " say Mr. Gibson , tear the letter in two , and throw it into the hearth , where he soon see it burn to ash . " I wish I have a five - pound house and not a woman within ten mile of I . I might have some peace then . " apparently , he forget Mr. Coxe 's power of make mischief ; but indeed he might have trace that evil back to the unconscious Molly . the martyr - cook 's entrance to take away the breakfast thing , which she announce by a heavy sigh , rouse Mr. Gibson from thought to action . 

 " molly must stay a little long at Hamley , " he resolve . " they have   often ask for she , and now they will have enough of she , I think . but I can not   have she back here just yet ; and so the good I can do for she be to leave she where she be . Mrs. Hamley seem very fond of she , and the child be look happy , and strong in health . I will ride round by Hamley to - day at any rate , and see how the land lie . " 

 he find Mrs. Hamley lie on a sofa place under the shadow of the great cedar - tree on the lawn . molly be flit about she , garden away under her direction ; tie up the long sea - green stalk of bright bud carnation , snip off dead rose . 

 " oh ! here 's papa ! " she cry out , joyfully , as he ride up to the white pal which separate the trim lawn and trimmer flower - garden from the rough park - like ground in front of the house . 

 " come in come here through the drawing - room window , " say Mrs. Hamley , raise herself on her elbow . " we have   get a rose - tree to show you that molly have bud all by herself . we be both so proud of it . " 

 so Mr. Gibson ride round to the stable , leave his horse there , and make his way through the house to the open - air summer - parlour under the cedar - tree , where there be chair , table , book , and tangle work . somehow , he rather dislike ask for Molly to prolong her visit ; so he determine to swallow his bitter first , and then take the pleasure of the delicious day , the sweet repose , the murmurous , scented air . molly stand by he , her hand on his shoulder . he sate opposite to Mrs. Hamley . 

 " I have   come here to - day to ask a favour , " he begin . 

 " grant before you name it . be not I a bold woman ? " 

 he smile and bow , but go straight on with his speech . 

 " Miss Eyre , who have be molly 's governess , I suppose I must call she for many year , write to - day to say that one of the little nephew she take with she to Newport while molly be stay here , have catch the scarlet fever . " 

 " I guess your request . I make it before you do . I beg for dear little Molly to stay on here . of course Miss Eyre can not   come back to you ; and of course molly must stay here ! " 

 " thank you ; thank you very much . that be my request . " 

 Molly 's hand steal down to his , and nestle in that firm compact grasp . 

 " Papa ! Mrs. Hamley ! I know you will both understand I but may not   I go home ? I be very happy here ; but oh papa ! I think I should like to be at home with you well . " 

 an uncomfortable suspicion flash across his mind . he pull her round , and look straight and piercingly into her innocent face . her colour come at his unwonted scrutiny , but her sweet eye be fill with wonder , rather than with any feeling which he dread to find . for an instant he have doubt whether young red - head Mr. Coxe 's love might not have call out a response in his daughter 's breast ; but he be quite clear now . 

 " molly , you be rude to begin with . I do not   know how you be to make your peace with Mrs. Hamley , I be sure . and in the next place , do you think you be wise than I be ; or that I do not   want you at home , if all other thing be conformable ? stay where you be , and be thankful . " 

 molly know he well enough to be certain that the prolongation of her visit at Hamley be quite a decide affair in his mind ; and then she be smite with a sense of ingratitude . she leave her father , and go to Mrs. Hamley , and bend over she and kiss she ; but she do not speak . Mrs. Hamley take hold of her hand , and make room on the sofa for she . 

 " I be go to have ask for a long visit the next time you come , Mr. Gibson . we be such happy friend , be not we , molly ? and now , that this good little nephew of Miss Eyre 's " 

 " I wish he be whip , " say Mr. Gibson . 

 " have give we such a capital reason , I shall keep Molly for a real long visitation . you must come over and see we very often . there be a room here for you always , you know ; and I do not   see why you should not start on your round from Hamley every morning , just as well as from Hollingford . " 

 " thank you . if you have not   be so kind to my little girl , I might be tempt to say something rude in answer to your last speech . " 

 " pray say it . you will not   be easy till you have give it out , I know . " 

 " Mrs. Hamley have find out from whom I get my rudeness , " say Molly , triumphantly . " it be an hereditary quality . " 

 " I be go to say that proposal of yours that I should sleep at Hamley be just like a woman 's idea all kindness , and no common sense . how in the world would my patient find I out , seven mile from my accustomed place ? they would be sure to send for some other doctor , and I should be ruin in a month . " 

 " could not   they send on here ? a messenger cost very little . " 

 " fancy old Goody Henbury struggle up to my surgery , groan at every step , and then be tell to just step on seven mile far ! or take the other end of society : I do not   think my Lady Cumnor 's smart groom would thank I for have to ride on to Hamley every time his mistress want I . " 

 " well , well , I submit . I be a woman . molly , thou art a woman ! go and order some strawberry and cream for this father of your . such humble office fall within the province of woman . strawberry and cream be all kindness and no common sense , for they will give he a horrid fit of indigestion . " 

 " please speak for yourself , Mrs. Hamley , " say Molly , merrily . " I eat oh , such a great basketful yesterday , and the squire go himself to the dairy and bring out a great bowl of cream , when he find I at my busy work . and I be as well as ever I be , to - day , and never have a touch of indigestion near I . " 

 " she be a good girl , " say her father , when she have dance out of hearing . the word be not quite an inquiry , he be so certain of his answer . there be a mixture of tenderness and trust in his eye , as he await the reply , which come in a moment . 

 " she be a darling . I can not tell you how fond the Squire and I be of she ; both of we . I be so delighted to think she be not   to go away for a long time . the first thing I think of this morning when I waken up , be that she would soon have to return to you , unless I could persuade you into leave she with I a little long . and now she must stay oh , two month at least . " 

 it be quite true that the squire have become very fond of Molly . the charm of have a young girl dance and sing inarticulate ditty about the house and garden , be indescribable in its novelty to he . and then Molly be so willing and so wise ; ready both to talk and to listen at the right time . Mrs. Hamley be quite right in speak of her husband 's fondness for Molly . but either she herself choose a wrong time for tell he of the prolongation of the girl 's visit , or one of the fit of temper to which he be liable , but which he generally strove to check in the presence of his wife , be upon he ; at any rate , he receive the news in anything but a gracious frame of mind . 

 " stay long ! do Gibson ask for it ? " 

 " yes ! I do not   see what else be to become of she ; Miss Eyre away and all . it be a very awkward position for a motherless girl like she to be at the head of a household with two young man in it . " 

 " that be Gibson 's look - out ; he should have think of it before take pupil , or apprentice , or whatever he call they . " 

 " my dear squire ! why , I think you would be as glad as I be as I be to keep molly . I ask she to stay for an indefinite time ; two month at least . " 

 " and to be in the house with Osborne ! Roger , too , will be at home . " 

 by the cloud in the squire 's eye , Mrs. Hamley read his mind . 

 " oh , she be not at all the sort of girl young man of their age would take to . we like she because we see what she really be ; but lad of one or two and twenty want all the accessory of a young woman . " 

 " want what ? " growl the squire . 

 " such thing as become dress , style of manner . they would not at their age even see that she be pretty ; their idea of beauty would include colour . " 

 " I suppose all that be very clever ; but I do not   understand it . all I know be , that it be a very dangerous thing to shut two young man of one and three and twenty up in a country - house like this with a girl of seventeen choose what her gown may be like , or her hair , or her eye . and I tell you particularly I do not   want Osborne , or either of they , indeed , to be fall in love with she . I be very much annoyed . " 

 Mrs. Hamley 's face fall ; she become a little pale . 

 " shall we make arrangement for their stop away while she be here ; stay up at Cambridge , or read with some one ? go abroad for a month or two ? " 

 " no ; you have   be reckon this ever so long on their come home . I have   see the mark of the week on your almanack . I would soon speak to Gibson , and tell he he must take his daughter away , for it be not convenient to we " 

 " my dear Roger ! I beg you will do no such thing . it will be so unkind ; it will give the lie to all I say yesterday . do not , please , do that . for my sake , do not   speak to Mr. Gibson ! " 

 " well , well , do not   put yourself in a flutter , " for he be afraid of she become hysterical ; " I will speak to Osborne when he come home , and tell he how much I should dislike anything of the kind . " 

 " and Roger be always far too full of his natural history and comparative anatomy , and mess of that sort , to be think of fall in love with Venus herself . he have not the sentiment and imagination of Osborne . " 

 " ah , you do not   know ; you never can be sure about a young man ! but with Roger it would not   so much signify . he would know he could not   marry for year to come . " 

 all that afternoon the Squire try to steer clear of Molly , to whom he feel himself to have be an inhospitable traitor . but she be so perfectly unconscious of his shyness of she , and so merry and sweet in her behaviour as a welcome guest , never distrust he for a moment , however gruff he might be , that by the next morning she have completely win he round , and they be quite on the old term again . at breakfast this very morning , a letter be pass from the squire to his wife , and back again , without a word as to its content ; but 

 " Fortunate ! " 

 " yes ! very ! " 

 Little do molly apply these expression to the piece of news Mrs. Hamley tell she in the course of the day ; namely , that her son Osborne have receive an invitation to stay with a friend in the neighbourhood of Cambridge , and perhaps to make a tour on the Continent with he subsequently ; and that , consequently , he would not accompany his brother when Roger come home . 

 molly be very sympathetic . 

 " oh , dear ! I be so sorry ! " 

 Mrs. Hamley be thankful her husband be not present , Molly speak the word so heartily . 

 " you have be think so long of his come home . I be afraid it be a great disappointment . " 

 Mrs. Hamley smile relieve . 

 " yes ! it be a disappointment certainly , but we must think of Osborne 's pleasure . and with his poetical mind , he will write we such delightful travel letter . poor fellow ! he must be go into the examination to - day ! both his father and I feel sure , though , that he will be a high wrangler . only I should like to have see he , my own dear boy . but it be good as it be . " 

 molly be a little puzzled by this speech , but soon put it out of her head . it be a disappointment to she , too , that she should not see this beautiful , brilliant young man , his mother 's hero . from time to time her maiden fancy have dwell upon what he would be like ; how the lovely boy of the picture in Mrs. Hamley 's dressing - room would have change in the ten year that have elapse since the likeness be take ; if he would read poetry aloud ; if he would even read his own poetry . however , in the never - end feminine business of the day , she soon forget her own disappointment ; it only come back to she on first waken the next morning , as a vague something that be not quite so pleasant as she have anticipate , and then be banish as a subject of regret . her day at Hamley be well fill up with the small duty that would have belong to a daughter of the house have there be one . she make breakfast for the lonely squire , and would willingly have carry up madam 's , but that daily piece of work belong to the squire , and be jealously guard by he . she read the small print of the newspaper aloud to he , city article , money and corn market include . she stroll about the garden with he , gather fresh flower , meanwhile , to deck the drawing - room against Mrs. Hamley should come down . she be her companion when she take her drive in the close carriage ; they read poetry and mild literature together in Mrs. Hamley 's sit - room upstairs . she be quite clever at cribbage now , and could beat the squire if she take pain . besides these thing , there be her own independent way of employ herself . she use to try to practise an hour daily on the old grand piano in the solitary drawing - room , because she have promise Miss Eyre she would do so . and she have find her way into the library , and use to undo the heavy bar of the shutter if the housemaid have forget this duty , and mount the ladder , sit on the step , for an hour at a time , deep in some book of the old english classic . the summer day be very short to this happy girl of seventeen . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VIII . 

 drift into DANGER . 
 

 on Thursday , the quiet country household be stir through all its fibre with the thought of Roger 's come home . Mrs. Hamley have not seem quite so well , or quite in such good spirit for two or three day before ; and the squire himself have appear to be put out without any visible cause . they have not choose to tell Molly that Osborne 's name have only appear very low down in the mathematical tripos . so all that their visitor know be that something be out of tune , and she hop that Roger 's come home would set it to right , for it be beyond the power of her small care and wile . 

 on Thursday , the housemaid apologize to she for some slight negligence in her bedroom , by say she have be busy scour Mr. Roger 's room . " not but what they be as clean as could be beforehand ; but mistress would always have the young gentleman 's room clean afresh before they come home . if it have be Mr. Osborne , the whole house would have have to be do ; but , to be sure , he be the eld son , so it be but likely . " Molly be amuse at this testimony to the right of heirship ; but somehow she herself have fall into the family manner of think that nothing be too great or too good for " the eld son . " in his father 's eye , Osborne be the representative of the ancient house of Hamley of Hamley , the future owner of the land which have be theirs for a thousand year . his mother clung to he because they two be cast in the same mould , both physically and mentally because he bear her maiden name . she have indoctrinate molly with her faith , and , in spite of her amusement at the housemaid 's speech , the girl visitor would have be as anxious as any one to show her feudal loyalty to the heir , if indeed it have be he that be come . after luncheon , Mrs. Hamley go to rest , in preparation for Roger 's return ; and Molly also retire to her own room , feel that it would be well for she to remain there until dinner - time , and so to leave the father and mother to receive their boy in privacy . she take a book of MS . poem with she ; they be all of Osborne Hamley 's composition ; and his mother have read some of they aloud to her young visitor more than once . molly have ask permission to copy one or two of those which be her great favourite ; and this quiet summer afternoon she take this copying for her employment , sit at the pleasant open window , and lose herself in dreamy out - look into the garden and wood , quiver in the noon - tide heat . the house be so still , in its silence it might have be the " moate grange ; " the booming buzz of the blue fly , in the great staircase window , seem the loud noise in - door . and there be scarcely a sound out - of - door but the humming of bee , in the flower - bed below the window . distant voice from the far - away field where they be make hay the scent of which come in sudden waft distinct from that of the nearer rose and honeysuckle these merry piping voice just make molly feel the depth of the present silence . she have leave off copying , her hand weary with the unusual exertion of so much writing , and she be lazily try to learn one or two of the poem off by heart . 

 I ask of the wind , but answer make it none , 
 save its accustomed sad and solitary moan 
 she keep say to herself , lose her sense of whatever mean the word have ever have , in the repetition which have become mechanical . suddenly there be the snap of a shutting gate ; wheel crackling on the dry gravel , horse ' foot on the drive ; a loud cheerful voice in the house , come up through the open window , the hall , the passage , the staircase , with unwonted fulness and roundness of tone . the entrance - hall downstair be pave with diamond of black and white marble ; the low wide staircase that go in short flight around the hall , till you could look down upon the marble floor from the top story of the house , be uncarpeted uncover . the squire be too proud of his beautifully - joined oaken floor to cover this stair - case up unnecessarily ; not to say a word of the usual state of want of ready money to expend upon the decoration of his house . so , through the undraperied hollow square of the hall and staircase every sound ascend clear and distinct ; and molly hear the squire 's glad " Hallo ! here he be , " and madam 's soft , more plaintive voice ; and then the loud , full , strange tone , which she know must be Roger 's . then there be an opening and shutting of door , and only a distant buzz of talk . molly begin again 

 I ask of the wind , but answer make it none . 
 and this time she have nearly finish learn the poem , when she hear Mrs. Hamley come hastily into her sitting - room that adjoin Molly 's bedroom , and burst out into an irrepressible half - hysterical fit of sobbing . molly be too young to have any complication of motif which should prevent she go at once to try and give what comfort she could . in an instant she be kneel at Mrs. Hamley 's foot , hold the poor lady 's hand , kiss they , murmur soft word ; which , all unmeaning as they be of aught but sympathy with the untold grief , do Mrs. Hamley good . she check herself , smile sadly at Molly through the midst of her thick - come sob . 

 " it be only Osborne , " say she , at last . " Roger have be tell we about he . " 

 " what about he ? " ask Molly , eagerly . 

 " I know on Monday ; we have a letter he say he have not do so well as we have hop as he have hop himself , poor fellow ! he say he have just pass , but be only low down among the junior optime , and not where he have expect , and have lead we to expect . but the squire have never be at college , and do not understand college term , and he have be ask Roger all about it , and Roger have be tell he , and it have make he so angry . but the squire hat college slang ; he have never be there , you know ; and he think poor Osborne be take it too lightly , and he have be ask Roger about it , and Roger " 

 there be a fresh fit of the sobbing cry . molly burst out , " I do not   think Mr. Roger should have tell ; he have no need to begin so soon about his brother 's failure . why , he have not   be in the house an hour ! " 

 " hush , hush , love ! " say Mrs. Hamley . " Roger be so good . you do not   understand . the squire would begin and ask question before Roger have taste food as soon as ever we have get into the dining - room . and all he say to I , at any rate be that Osborne be nervous , and that if he could only have go in for the Chancellor 's medal , he would have carry all before he . but Roger say that after fail like this , he be not very likely to get a fellowship , which the Squire have place his hope on . Osborne himself seem so sure of it , that the squire can not   understand it , and be seriously angry , and grow more so the more he talk about it . he have keep it in two or three day , and that never suit he . he be always well when he be angry about a thing at once , and do not   let it smoulder in his mind . poor , poor Osborne ! I do wish he have be come straight home , instead of go to these friend of his ; I think I could have comfort he . but now I be glad , for it will be well to let his father 's anger cool first . " 

 so talk out what be in her heart , Mrs. Hamley become more composed ; and at length she dismiss Molly to dress for dinner , with a kiss , say , 

 " you be a real blessing to mother , child ! you give one such pleasant sympathy , both in one 's gladness and in one 's sorrow ; in one 's pride   for I be so proud last week , so confident , and in one 's disappointment . and now your be a fourth at dinner will keep we off that sore subject ; there be time when a stranger in the household be a wonderful help . " 

 molly think over all that she have hear , as she be dress and put on the terrible , over - smart plaid gown in honour of the new arrival . her unconscious fealty to Osborne be not in the least shake by his have come to grief at Cambridge . only she be indignant with or without reason against Roger , who seem to have bring the reality of bad news as an offering of first - fruit on his return home . 

 she go down into the drawing - room with anything but a welcome to he in her heart . he be stand by his mother ; the Squire have not yet make his appearance . molly think that the two be hand in hand when she first open the door , but she could not be quite sure . Mrs. Hamley come a little forwards to meet she , and introduce she in so fondly intimate a way to her son , that molly , innocent and simple , know nothing but Hollingford manner , which be anything but formal , half put out her hand to shake hand with one of whom she have hear so much the son of such kind friend . she could only hope he have not see the movement , for he make no attempt to respond to it ; only bow . 

 he be a tall powerfully - make young man , give the impression of strength more than elegance . his face be rather square , ruddy - colour   as his father have say , hair and eye brown the latter rather deep - set beneath his thick eyebrow ; and he have a trick of wrinkle up his eyelid when he want particularly to observe anything , which make his eye look even small still at such time . he have a large mouth , with excessively mobile lip ; and another trick of his be , that when he be amuse at anything , he resist the impulse to laugh , by a droll manner of twitch and pucker up his mouth , till at length the sense of humour have its way , and his feature relax , and he break into a broad sunny smile ; his beautiful tooth his only beautiful feature break out with a white gleam upon the red - brown countenance . these two trick of his of crumple up the eyelid , so as to concentrate the power of sight , which make he look stern and thoughtful ; and the odd twitching of the lip that be preliminary to a smile , which make he look intensely merry give the vary expression of his face a great range " from grave to gay , from lively to severe , " than be common with most man . to Molly , who be not finely discriminative in her glance at the stranger this first night , he simply appear " heavy - look , clumsy , " and " a person she be sure she should never get on with . " he certainly do not seem to care much what impression he make upon his mother 's visitor . he be at that age when young man admire a form beauty more than a face with any amount of future capability of loveliness , and when they be morbidly conscious of the difficulty of find subject of conversation in talk to girl in a state of feminine hobbledehoyhood . besides , his thought be full of other subject , which he do not intend to allow to ooze out in word , yet he want to prevent any of that heavy silence which he fear might be impend with an angry and displeased father , and a timorous and distressed mother . he only look upon molly as a badly - dress , and rather awkward girl , with black hair and an intelligent face , who might help he in the task he have set himself of keep up a bright general conversation during the rest of the evening ; might help he if she would , but she would not . she think he unfeele in his talkativeness ; his constant flow of word upon indifferent subject be a wonder and a repulsion to she . how could he go on so cheerfully while his mother sit there , scarcely eat anything , and do she good , with ill - success , to swallow down the tear that would keep rise to her eye ; when his father 's heavy brow be deeply clouded , and he evidently care nothing at first at least for all the chatter his son pour forth ? have Mr. Roger Hamley no sympathy in he ? she would show that she have some , at any rate . so she quite decline the part , which he have hop she would have take , of respondent , and possible questioner ; and his work become more and more like that of a man walk in a quagmire . once the Squire rouse himself to speak to the butler ; he feel the need of outward stimulus of a well vintage than usual . 

 " bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal . " 

 he speak low ; he have no spirit to speak in his usual voice . the butler answer in the same tone . molly sit near they , and silent herself , hear what they say . 

 " if you please , sir , there be not above six bottle of that seal leave ; and it be Mr. Osborne 's favourite wine . " 

 the Squire turn round with a growl in his voice . 

 " bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal , as I say . " 

 the butler go away wonder . " Mr. Osborne 's " like and dislike have be the law of the house in general until now . if he have like any particular food or drink , any seat or place , any special degree of warmth or coolness , his wish be to be attend to ; for he be the heir , and he be delicate , and he be the clever one of the family . all the out - of - door man would have say the same . Mr. Osborne wish a tree cut down , or keep stand , or have such - and - such a fancy about the game , or desire something unusual about the horse ; and they have all to attend to it as if it be law . but to - day the Burgundy with the yellow seal be to be bring ; and it be bring . molly testify with quiet vehemence of action ; she never take wine , so she need not have be afraid of the man be pour it into her glass ; but as an open mark of fealty to the absent Osborne , however little it might be understand , she place the palm of her small brown hand over the top of the glass , and hold it there , till the wine have go round , and Roger and his father be in full enjoyment of it . 

 after dinner , too , the gentleman linger long over their dessert , and Molly hear they laugh ; and then she see they loiter about in the twilight out - of - door ; Roger hatless , his hand in his pocket , lounge by his father 's side , who be now able to talk in his usual loud and cheerful way , forget Osborne . Va victis ! 

  Va Victis ! 
 Va Victis ! 
 click to enlarge 
 and so in mute opposition on Molly 's side , in polite indifference , scarcely verge upon kindliness on his , Roger and she steer clear of each other . he have many occupation in which he need no companionship , even if she have be qualified to give it . the bad be , that she find he be in the habit of occupy the library , her favourite retreat , in the morning before Mrs. Hamley come down . she open the half - close door a day or two after his return home , and find he busy among book and paper , with which the large leather - cover table be strew ; and she softly withdraw before he could turn his head and see she , so as to distinguish she from one of the housemaid . he ride out every day , sometimes with his father about the outlying field , sometimes far away for a good gallop . molly would have enjoy accompany he on these occasion , for she be very fond of riding ; and there have be some talk of send for her habit and grey pony when first she come to Hamley ; only the squire , after some consideration , have say he so rarely do more than go slowly from one field to another , where his labourer be at work , that he fear she would find such slow work ten minute rid through heavy land , twenty minute sit still on horseback , listen to the direction he should have to give to his man rather dull . now , when if she have have her pony here she might have ride out with Roger , without give he any trouble she would have take care of that nobody seem to think of renew the proposal . 

 altogether it be pleasanter before he come home . 

 her father ride over pretty frequently ; sometimes there be long unaccountable absence , it be true ; when his daughter begin to fidget after he , and to wonder what have become of he . but when he make his appearance he have always good reason to give ; and the right she feel that she have to his familiar household tenderness ; the power she possess of fully understand the exact value of both his word and his silence , make these glimpse of intercourse with he inexpressibly charming . Latterly her burden have always be , " when may I come home , papa ? " it be not that she be unhappy , or uncomfortable ; she be passionately fond of Mrs. Hamley , she be a favourite of the Squire 's , and could not as yet fully understand why some people be so much afraid of he ; and as for Roger , if he do not add to her pleasure , he scarcely take away from it . but she want to be at home once more . the reason why she could not tell ; but this she know full well . Mr. Gibson reason with she till she be weary of be completely convinced that it be right and necessary for she to stay where she be . and then with an effort she stop the cry upon her tongue , for she see that its repetition harass her father . 

 during this absence of hers Mr. Gibson be drift into matrimony . he be partly aware of whither he be go ; and partly it be like the soft float movement of a dream . he be more passive than active in the affair ; though , if his reason have not fully approve of the step he be tend to if he have not believe that a second marriage be the very good way of cut the gordian knot of domestic difficulty , he could have make an effort without any great trouble , and extricate himself without pain from the mesh of circumstance . it happen in this manner : Lady Cumnor have marry her two eld daughter , find her labour as a chaperone to Lady Harriet , the young , considerably lighten by co - operation ; and , at length , she have leisure to be an invalid . she be , however , too energetic to allow herself this indulgence constantly ; only she permit herself to break down occasionally after a long course of dinner , late hour , and London atmosphere : and then , leave Lady Harriet with either Lady Cuxhaven or Lady Agnes Manners , she betake herself to the comparative quiet of the Towers , where she find occupation in do her benevolence , which be sadly neglect in the hurly - burly of London . this particular summer she have break down early than usual , and long for the repose of the country . she believe that her state of health , too , be more serious than previously ; but she do not say a word of this to her husband or daughter ; reserve her confidence for Mr. Gibson 's ear . she do not wish to take Lady Harriet away from the gaiety of town which she be thoroughly enjoy , by any complaint of her , which might , after all , be ill - found ; and yet she do not quite like be without a companion in the three week or a month that might intervene before her family would join she at the tower , especially as the annual festivity to the school visitor be impending ; and both the school and the visit of the lady connect with it , have rather lose the zest of novelty . 

 " Thursday the 19th , Harriet , " say Lady Cumnor , meditatively ; " what do you say to come down to the tower on the 18th , and help I over that long day . you could stay in the country till Monday , and have a few day ' rest and good air ; you would return a great deal fresher to the remainder of your gaiety . your father would bring you down , I know : indeed , he be come naturally . " 

 " oh , mamma ! " say Lady Harriet , the young daughter of the house the prettiest , the most indulge ; " I can not go ; there be the water - party up to Maidenhead on the 20th , I should be so sorry to miss it : and Mrs. Duncan 's ball , and Grisi 's concert ; please , do not   want I . besides , I should do no good . I can not   make provincial small - talk ; I be not up in the local politic of Hollingford . I should be make mischief , I know I should . " 

 " very well , my dear , " say Lady Cumnor , sigh , " I have forget the Maidenhead water - party , or I would not have ask you . " 

 " what a pity it be not   the Eton holiday , so that you could have have Hollingford 's boy to help you to do the honours , mamma . they be such affable little prig . it be the great fun to watch they last year at Sir Edward 's , do the honour of their grandfather 's house to much such a collection of humble admirer as you get together at the Towers . I shall never forget see Edgar gravely squire about an old lady in a portentous black bonnet , and give her information in the correct grammar possible . " 

 " well , I like those lad , " say Lady Cuxhaven ; " they be on the way to become true gentleman . but , mamma , why should not   you have Clare to stay with you ? you like she , and she be just the person to save you the trouble of hospitality to the Hollingford people , and we should all be so much more comfortable if we know you have she with you . " 

 " yes , Clare would do very well , " say Lady Cumnor ; " but be not   it her school - time or something ? we must not interfere with her school so as to injure she , for I be afraid she be not do too well as it be ; and she have be so very unlucky ever since she leave we first her husband die , and then she lose Lady Davies ' situation , and then Mrs. Maude 's , and now Mr. Preston tell your father it be all she could do to pay her way in Ashcombe , though Lord Cumnor let she have the house rent - free . " 

 " I can not   think how it be , " say Lady Harriet . " she be not very wise , certainly ; but she be so useful and agreeable , and have such pleasant manner , I should have think any one who be not   particular about education would have be charm to keep she as a governess . " 

 " what do you mean by not be particular about education ? Most people who keep governess for their child be suppose to be particular , " say Lady Cuxhaven . 

 " well , they think themselves so , I have   no doubt ; but I call you particular , Mary , and I do not   think mamma be ; but she think herself so , I be sure . " 

 " I can not   think what you mean , Harriet , " say Lady Cumnor , a good deal annoy at this speech of her clever , heedless , young daughter . 

 " oh dear , mamma , you do everything you could think of for we ; but you see you would ever so many other engrossing interest , and Mary hardly ever allow her love for her husband to interfere with her all - absorb care for the child . you give we the good of master in every department , and Clare to dragonize and keep we up to our preparation for they , as well as ever she could ; but then you know , or rather you do not   know , some of the master admire our very pretty governess , and there be a kind of respectable veil flirtation go on , which never come to anything , to be sure ; and then you be often so overwhelmed with your business as a great lady fashionable and benevolent , and all that sort of thing that you use to call Clare away from we at the most critical time of our lesson , to write your note , or add up your account , and the consequence be , that I be about the most ill - inform girl in London . only Mary be so capitally train by good awkward Miss Benson , that she be always full to overflow with accurate knowledge , and her glory be reflect upon I . " 

 " do you think what Harriet say be true , Mary ? " ask Lady Cumnor , rather anxiously . 

 " I be so little with Clare in the school - room . I use to read French with she ; she have a beautiful accent , I remember . both Agnes and Harriet be very fond of she . I use to be jealous for Miss Benson 's sake , and perhaps " Lady Cuxhaven pause a minute " that make I fancy that she have a way of flatter and indulge they not quite conscientious , I use to think . but girl be severe judge , and certainly she have have an anxious enough lifetime . I be always so glad when we can have she , and give she a little pleasure . the only thing that make I uneasy now be the way in which she seem to send her daughter away from she so much ; we never can persuade she to bring Cynthia with she when she come to see we . " 

 " now that I call ill - natured , " say Lady Harriet ; " here be a poor dear woman try to earn her livelihood , first as a governess , and what could she do with her daughter then , but send she to school ? and after that , when Clare be ask to go visit , and be too modest to bring her girl with she besides all the expense of the journey , and the rigging out Mary find fault with she for her modesty and economy . " 

 " well , after all , we be not discuss Clare and her affair , but try to plan for mamma 's comfort . I do not   see that she can do well than ask Mrs. Kirkpatrick to come to the tower as soon as her holiday begin , I mean . " 

 " here be her last letter , " say Lady Cumnor , who have be search for it in her escritoire , while her daughter be talk . hold her glass before her eye , she begin to read , " ' my wonte misfortune appear to have follow I to Ashcombe ' um , um , um ; that be not it ' Mr. Preston be most kind in send I fruit and flower from the Manor - house , accord to dear Lord Cumnor 's kind injunction . ' oh , here it be ! ' the vacation begin on the 11th , accord to the usual custom of school in Ashcombe ; and I must then try and obtain some change of air and scene , in order to fit myself for the resumption of my duty on the 10th of August . ' you see , girl , she would be at liberty , if she have not make any other arrangement for spend her holiday . to - day be the 15th . " 

 " I will write to she at once , mamma , " Lady Harriet say . " Clare and I be always great friend ; I be her confidant in she love with poor Mr. Kirkpatrick , and we have   keep up our intimacy ever since . I know of three offer she have besides . " 

 " I sincerely hope Miss Bowes be not tell her love - affair to Grace or Lily . why , Harriet , you could not have be old than Grace when Clare be marry ! " say Lady Cuxhaven , in maternal alarm . 

 " no ; but I be well verse in the tender passion , thank to novel . now I daresay you do not   admit novel into your school - room , Mary ; so your daughter would not   be able to administer discreet sympathy to their governess in case she be the heroine of a love - affair . " 

 " my dear Harriet , do not   let I hear you talk of love in that way ; it be not pretty . love be a serious thing . " 

 " my dear mamma , your exhortation be just eighteen year too late . I have   talk all the freshness off love , and that be the reason I be tired of the subject . " 

 this last speech refer to a recent refusal of Lady Harriet 's , which have displease Lady Cumnor , and rather annoy my lord ; as they , the parent , could see no objection to the gentleman in question . Lady Cuxhaven do not want to have the subject bring up , so she hasten to say , 

 " do ask the poor little daughter to come with her mother to the tower ; why , she must be seventeen or more ; she would really be a companion to you , mamma , if her mother be unable to come . " 

 " I be not ten when Clare marry , and I be nearly nine - and - twenty , " add Lady Harriet . 

 " do not   speak of it , Harriet ; at any rate you be but eight - and - twenty now , and you look a great deal young . there be no need to be always bring up your age on every possible occasion . " 

 " there be need of it now , though . I want to make out how old Cynthia Kirkpatrick be . I think she can not   be far from eighteen . " 

 " she be at school at Boulogne , I know ; and so I do not   think she can be as old as that . Clare say something about she in this letter : ' under these circumstance '   the ill - success of her school , ' I can not think myself justify in allow myself the pleasure of have darle Cynthia at home for the holiday ; especially as the period when the vacation in french school commence differ from that common in England ; and it might occasion some confusion in my arrangement if darle Cynthia be to come to Ashcombe , and occupy my time and thought so immediately before the commencement of my scholastic duty as the 8th of August , on which day her vacation begin , which be but two day before my holiday end . ' so , you see , Clare would be quite at liberty to come to I , and I daresay it would be a very nice change for she . " 

 " and Hollingford be busy see after his new laboratory at the Towers , and be constantly backwards and forwards . and Agnes want to go there for change of air , as soon as she be strong enough after her confinement . and even my own dear insatiable ' I ' will have have enough of gaiety in two or three week , if this hot weather last . " 

 " I think I may be able to come down for a few day too , if you will let I , mamma ; and I will bring Grace , who be look rather pale and weedy ; grow too fast , I be afraid . so I hope you will not   be dull . " 

 " my dear , " say Lady Cumnor , draw herself up , " I should be ashamed of feel dull with my resource ; my duty to other and to myself ! " 

 so the plan in its present shape be tell to Lord Cumnor , who highly approve of it ; as he always do of every project of his wife 's . Lady Cumnor 's character be perhaps a little too ponderous for he in reality , but he be always full of admiration for all her word and deed , and use to boast of her wisdom , her benevolence , her power and dignity , in her absence , as if by this mean he could buttress up his own more feeble nature . 

 " very good very good , indeed ! Clare to join you at the Towers ! capital ! I could not   have plan it well myself ! I shall go down with you on Wednesday in time for the jollification on Thursday . I always enjoy that day ; they be such nice , friendly people , those good Hollingford lady . then I will have a day with sheepshank , and perhaps I may ride over to Ashcombe and see Preston Brown Jess can do it in a day , eighteen mile to be sure ! but there be back again to the tower ! how much be twice eighteen thirty ? " 

 " thirty - six , " say Lady Cumnor , sharply . 

 " so it be ; you be always right , my dear . Preston 's a clever , sharp fellow . " 

 " I do not   like he , " say my lady . 

 " he take look after ; but he be a sharp fellow . he be such a good - look man , too , I wonder you do not   like he . " 

 " I never think whether a land - agent be handsome or not . they do not   belong to the class of people whose appearance I notice . " 

 " to be sure not . but he be a handsome fellow ; and what should make you like he be the interest he take in Clare and her prospect . he be constantly suggest something that can be do to her house , and I know he send her fruit , and flower , and game just as regularly as we should ourselves if we live at Ashcombe . " 

 " how old be he ? " say Lady Cumnor , with a faint suspicion of motif in her mind . 

 " about twenty - seven , I think . ah ! I see what be in your ladyship 's head . no ! no ! he be too young for that . you must look out for some middle - aged man , if you want to get poor Clare marry ; Preston will not   do . " 

 " I be not a match - maker , as you might know . I never do it for my own daughter . I be not likely to do it for Clare , " say she , lean back languidly . 

 " well ! you might do a bad thing . I be begin to think she will never get on as a schoolmistress , though why she should not , I be sure I do not   know ; for she be an uncommonly pretty woman for her age , and her have live in our family , and your have have she so often with you , ought to go a good way . I say , my lady , what do you think of Gibson ? he would be just the right age widower live near the tower ? " 

 " I tell you just now I be no match - maker , my lord . I suppose we have well go by the old road the people at those inn know we ? " 

 and so they pass on to speak about other thing than Mrs. Kirkpatrick and her prospect , scholastic or matrimonial . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IX . 

 the WIDOWER and the WIDOW . 
 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick be only too happy to accept Lady Cumnor 's invitation . it be what she have be hop for , but hardly dare to expect , as she believe that the family be settle in London for some time to come . the tower be a pleasant and luxurious house in which to pass her holiday ; and though she be not one to make deep plan , or to look far ahead , she be quite aware of the prestige which her be able to say she have be stay with " dear Lady Cumnor " at the Towers , be likely to give she and her school in the eye of a good many people ; so she gladly prepare to join her ladyship on the 17th . her wardrobe do not require much arrangement ; if it have do , the poor lady would not have have much money to appropriate to the purpose . she be very pretty and graceful ; and that go a great way towards carry off shabby clothe ; and it be her taste more than any depth of feeling , that have make her persevere in wear all the delicate tint the violet and gray which , with a certain admixture of black , constitute half - mourning . this style of become dress she be suppose to wear in memory of Mr. Kirkpatrick ; in reality because it be both lady - like and economical . her beautiful hair be of that rich auburn that hardly ever turn gray ; and partly out of consciousness of its beauty , and partly because the washing of cap be expensive , she do not wear anything on her head ; her complexion have the vivid tint that often accompany the kind of hair which have once be red ; and the only injury her skin have receive from advance year be that the colouring be rather more brilliant than delicate , and vary less with every pass emotion . she could no long blush ; and at eighteen she have be very proud of her blush . her eye be soft , large , and china - blue in colour ; they have not much expression or shadow about they , which be perhaps owe to the flaxen colour of her eyelash . her figure be a little full than it use to be , but her movement be as soft and sinuous as ever . altogether , she look much young than her age , which be not far short of forty . she have a very pleasant voice , and read aloud well and distinctly , which Lady Cumnor like . indeed , for some inexplicable reason , she be a great , more positive favourite with Lady Cumnor than with any of the rest of the family , though they all like she up to a certain point , and find it agreeably useful to have any one in the house who be so well acquainted with their way and habit ; so ready to talk , when a little trickle of conversation be require ; so willing to listen , and to listen with tolerable intelligence , if the subject speak about do not refer to serious solid literature , or science , or politic , or social economy . about novel and poetry , travel and gossip , personal detail , or anecdote of any kind , she always make exactly the remark which be expect from an agreeable listener ; and she have sense enough to confine herself to those short expression of wonder , admiration , and astonishment , which may mean anything , when more recondite thing be talk about . 

 it be a very pleasant change to a poor unsuccessful schoolmistress to leave her own house , full of battered and shabby furniture   she have take the good - will and furniture of her predecessor at a valuation , two or three year before , where the look - out be as gloomy , and the surround as squalid , as be often the case in the small street of a country town , and to come bowl through the Towers Park in the luxurious carriage send to meet she ; to alight , and feel secure that the well - train servant would see after her bag , and umbrella , and parasol , and cloak , without her load herself with all these portable article , as she have have to do while follow the wheelbarrow contain her luggage in go to the Ashcombe coach - office that morning ; to pass up the deep - pile carpet of the broad shallow stair into my lady 's own room , cool and deliciously fresh , even on this sultry day , and fragrant with great bowl of freshly gather rose of every shade of colour . there be two or three new novel lie uncut on the table ; the daily paper , the magazine . every chair be an easy - chair of some kind or other ; and all cover with french chintz that mimic the real flower in the garden below . she be familiar with the bedroom call her , to which she be soon usher by Lady Cumnor 's maid . it seem to she far more like home than the dingy place she have leave that morning ; it be so natural to she to like dainty drapery , and harmonious colouring , and fine linen , and soft raiment . she sate down in the arm - chair by the bed - side , and wonder over her fate something in this fashion 

 " one would think it be an easy enough thing to deck a look - glass like that with muslin and pink ribbon ; and yet how hard it be to keep it up ! People do not   know how hard it be till they have   try as I have . I make my own glass just as pretty when I first go to Ashcombe ; but the muslin get dirty , and the pink ribbon fade , and it be so difficult to earn money to renew they ; and when one have get the money one have not   the heart to spend it all at once . one think and one think how one can get the most good out of it ; and a new gown , or a day 's pleasure , or some hot - house fruit , or some piece of elegance that can be see and notice in one 's drawing - room , carry the day , and good - by to prettily deck look - glass . now here , money be like the air they breathe . no one even ask or know how much the washing cost , or what pink ribbon be a yard . ah ! it would be different if they have to earn every penny as I have ! they would have to calculate , like I , how to get the most pleasure out of it . I wonder if I be to go on all my life toil and moil for money ? it be not natural . marriage be the natural thing ; then the husband have all that kind of dirty work to do , and his wife sit in the drawing - room like a lady . I do , when poor Kirkpatrick be alive . Heigho ! it be a sad thing to be a widow . " 

 then there be the contrast between the dinner which she have to share with her scholar at Ashcombe round of beef , leg of mutton , great dish of potato , and large batter - pudding , with the tiny meal of exquisitely cook delicacy , send up on old Chelsea china , that be serve every day to the earl and countess and herself at the tower . she dread the end of her holiday as much as the most home - love of her pupil . but at this time that end be some week off , so Clare shut her eye to the future , and try to relish the present to its full extent . a disturbance to the pleasant , even course of the summer day come in the indisposition of Lady Cumnor . her husband have go back to London , and she and Mrs. Kirkpatrick have be leave to the very even tenor of life , which be accord to my lady 's wish just now . in spite of her languor and fatigue , she have go through the day when the school visitor come to the Towers , in full dignity , dictate clearly all that be to be do , what walk be to be take , what hothouse to be see , and when the party be to return to the " collation . " she herself remain indoor , with one or two lady who have venture to think that the fatigue or the heat might be too much for they , and who have therefore decline accompany the lady in charge of Mrs. Kirkpatrick , or those other favour few to whom Lord Cumnor be explain the new building in his farm - yard . " with the utmost condescension , " as her hearer afterwards express it , Lady Cumnor tell they all about her married daughter ' establishment , nursery , plan for the education of their child , and manner of pass the day . but the exertion tire she ; and when every one have leave , the probability be that she would have go to lie down and rest , have not her husband make an unlucky remark in the kindness of his heart . he come up to she and put his hand on her shoulder . 

 " I be afraid you be sadly tired , my lady ? " he say . 

 she brace her muscle , and draw herself up , say coldly , 

 " when I be tired , Lord Cumnor , I will tell you so . " and her fatigue show itself during the rest of the evening in she sit particularly upright , and decline all offer of easy - chair or foot - stool , and refuse the insult of a suggestion that they should all go to bed early . she go on in something of this kind of manner as long as Lord Cumnor remain at the Towers . Mrs. Kirkpatrick be quite deceive by it , and keep assure Lord Cumnor that she have never see dear Lady Cumnor look well , or so strong . but he have an affectionate heart , if a blunder head ; and though he could give no reason for his belief , he be almost certain his wife be not well . yet he be too much afraid of she to send for Mr. Gibson without her permission . his last word to Clare be 

 " it be such a comfort to leave my lady to you ; only do not   you be delude by her way . she will not show she be ill till she can not   help it . Consult with Bradley "   Lady Cumnor 's " own woman , " she dislike the new - fangledness of " lady's - maid " ; " and if I be you , I would send and ask Gibson to call you might make any kind of a pretence , " and then the idea he have have in London of the fitness of a match between the two come into his head just now , he could not help add , " get he to come and see you , he be a very agreeable man ; Lord Hollingford say there be no one like he in these part : and he might be look at my lady while he be talk to you , and see if he think she really ill . and let I know what he say about she . " 

 but Clare be just as great a coward about do anything for Lady Cumnor which she have not expressly order , as Lord Cumnor himself . she know she might fall into such disgrace if she send for Mr. Gibson without direct permission , that she might never be ask to stay at the tower again ; and the life there , monotonous in its smoothness of luxury as it might be to some , be exactly to her taste . she in her turn try to put upon Bradley the duty which Lord Cumnor have put upon she . 

 " Mrs. Bradley , " she say one day , " be you quite comfortable about my lady 's health ? Lord Cumnor fancy that she be look wear and ill ? " 

 " indeed , Mrs. Kirkpatrick , I do not   think my lady be herself . I can not   persuade myself as she be , though if you be to question I till night I could not   tell you why . " 

 " do not   you think you could make some errand to Hollingford , and see Mr. Gibson , and ask he to come round this way some day , and make a call on Lady Cumnor ? " 

 " it would be as much as my place be worth , Mrs. Kirkpatrick . till my lady 's die day , if Providence keep she in her sens , she will have everything do her own way , or not at all . there be only Lady Harriet that can manage she the least , and she not always . " 

 " well , then we must hope that there be nothing the matter with she ; and I daresay there be not . she say there be not , and she ought to know good herself . " 

 but a day or two after this conversation take place , Lady Cumnor startle Mrs. Kirkpatrick , by say suddenly , " Clare , I wish you would write a note to Mr. Gibson , say I should like to see he this afternoon . I think he would have call of himself before now . he ought to have do so , to pay his respect . " 

 Mr. Gibson have be far too busy in his profession to have time for mere visit of ceremony , though he know quite well he be neglect what be expect of he . but the district of which he may be say to have have medical charge be full of a bad kind of low fever , which take up all his time and thought , and often make he very thankful that molly be out of the way in the quiet shade of Hamley . 

 his domestic " row " have not heal over in the least , though he be oblige to put the perplexity on one side for the time . the last drop the final straw , have be an impromptu visit of Lord Hollingford 's , whom he have meet in the town one forenoon . they have have a good deal to say to each other about some new scientific discovery , with the detail of which Lord Hollingford be well acquainted , while Mr. Gibson be ignorant and deeply interested . at length Lord Hollingford say suddenly , 

 " Gibson , I wonder if you would give I some lunch ; I have   be a good deal about since my seven - o'clock breakfast , and be get quite ravenous . " 

 now Mr. Gibson be only too much pleased to show hospitality to one whom he like and respect so much as Lord Hollingford , and he gladly take he home with he to the early family dinner . but it be just at the time when the cook be sulk at Bethia 's dismissal and she choose to be unpunctual and careless . there be no successor to Bethia as yet appoint to wait at the meal . so , though Mr. Gibson know well that bread - and - cheese , cold beef , or the simple food available , would have be welcome to the hungry lord , he could not get either these thing for luncheon , or even the family dinner , at anything like the proper time , in spite of all his ringing , and as much anger as he like to show , for fear of make Lord Hollingford uncomfortable . at last dinner be ready , but the poor host see the want of nicety almost the want of cleanliness , in all its accompaniment dingy plate , dull - look glass , a table - cloth that , if not absolutely dirty , be anything but fresh in its splashed and rumpled condition , and compare it in his own mind with the dainty delicacy with which even a loaf of brown bread be serve up at his guest 's home . he do not apologize directly , but , after dinner , just as they be part , he say , " you see a man like I a widower with a daughter who can not always be at home have not the regulated household which would enable I to command the small portion of time I can spend there . " 

 he make no allusion to the comfortless meal of which they have both partake , though it be full in his mind . nor be it absent from Lord Hollingford 's as he make reply , 

 " true , true . yet a man like you ought to be free from any thought of household care . you ought to have somebody . how old be Miss Gibson ? " 

 " Seventeen . it be a very awkward age for a motherless girl . " 

 " yes ; very . I have only boy , but it must be very awkward with a girl . excuse I , Gibson , but we be talk like friend . have you never think of marry again ? it would not   be like a first marriage , of course ; but if you find a sensible , agreeable woman of thirty or so , I really think you could not   do well than take she to manage your home , and so save you either discomfort or worry ; and , besides , she would be able to give your daughter that kind of tender supervision which , I fancy , all girl of that age require . it be a delicate subject , but you will excuse my have speak frankly . " 

 Mr. Gibson have think of this advice several time since it be give ; but it be a case of " first catch your hare . " where be the ' sensible and agreeable woman of thirty or so ? " not Miss Browning , nor Miss Phobe , nor Miss Goodenough . among his country patient there be two class pretty distinctly mark : farmer , whose child be unrefined and uneducated ; squire , whose daughter would , indeed , think the world be come to a pretty pass , if they be to marry a country surgeon . 

 but the first day on which Mr. Gibson pay his visit to Lady Cumnor , he begin to think it possible that Mrs. Kirkpatrick be his " hare . " he ride away with slack rein , think over what he know of she , more than about the prescription he should write , or the way he be go . he remember she as a very pretty Miss Clare : the governess who have the scarlet fever ; that be in his wife 's day , a long time ago ; he could hardly understand Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's youthfulness of appearance when he think how long . then he have hear of her marriage to a curate ; and the next day   or so it seem , he could not recollect the exact duration of the interval , of his death . he know , in some way , that she have be live ever since as a governess in different family ; but that she have always be a great favourite with the family at the Towers , for whom , quite independent of their rank , he have a true respect . a year or two ago he have hear that she have take the good - will of a school at Ashcombe ; a small town close to another property of Lord Cumnor 's , in the same county . ashcombe be a large estate than that near Hollingford , but the old Manor - house there be not nearly so good a residence as the Towers ; so it be give up to Mr. Preston , the land - agent for the Ashcombe property , just as Mr. Sheepshanks be for that at Hollingford . there be a few room at the Manor - house reserve for the occasional visit of the family , otherwise Mr. Preston , a handsome young bachelor , have it all to himself . Mr. Gibson know that Mrs. Kirkpatrick have one child , a daughter , who must be much about the same age as Molly . of course she have very little , if any , property . but he himself have live carefully , and have a few thousand well invest ; besides which , his professional income be good , and increase rather than diminish every year . by the time he have arrive at this point in his consideration of the case , he be at the house of the next patient on his round , and he put away all thought of matrimony and Mrs. Kirkpatrick for the time . once again , in the course of the day , he remember with a certain pleasure that molly have tell he some little detail connect with her unlucky detention at the Towers five or six year ago , which have make he feel at the time as if Mrs. Kirkpatrick have behave very kindly to his little girl . so there the matter rest for the present , as far as he be concern . 

 Lady Cumnor be out of health ; but not so ill as she have be fancy herself during all those day when the people about she dare not send for the doctor . it be a great relief to she to have Mr. Gibson to decide for she what she be to do ; what to eat , drink , avoid . such decision ab extra , be sometimes a wonderful relief to those whose habit it have be to decide , not only for themselves , but for every one else ; and occasionally the relaxation of the strain which a character for infallible wisdom bring with it , do much to restore health . Mrs. Kirkpatrick think in her secret soul that she have never find it so easy to get on with Lady Cumnor ; and Bradley and she have never do sing the praise of Mr. Gibson , " who always manage my lady so beautifully . " 

 Reports be duly send up to my lord , but he and his daughter be strictly forbid to come down . Lady Cumnor wish to be weak and languid , and uncertain both in body and mind , without family observation . it be a condition so different to anything she have ever be in before , that she be unconsciously afraid of lose her prestige , if she be see in it . sometimes she herself write the daily bulletin ; at other time she bade Clare do it , but she would always see the letter . any answer she receive from her daughter she use to read herself , occasionally impart some of their content to " that good Clare . " but anybody might read my lord 's letter . there be no great fear of family secret ooze out in his sprawl line of affection . but once Mrs. Kirkpatrick come upon a sentence in a letter from Lord Cumnor , which she be read out loud to his wife , that catch her eye before she come to it , and if she could have skip it and keep it for private perusal , she would gladly have do so . my lady be too sharp for she , though . in her opinion " Clare be a good creature , but not clever , " the truth be that she be not always quick at resource , though tolerably unscrupulous in the use of they . 

 " read on . what be you stop for ? there be no bad news , be there , about Agnes ? give I the letter . " 

 Lady Cumnor read , half aloud , 

 " ' how be Clare and Gibson get on ? you despise my advice to help on that affair , but I really think a little match - making would be a very pleasant amusement now that you be shut up in the house ; and I can not conceive any marriage more suitable . ' " 

 " oh ! " say Lady Cumnor , laugh , " it be awkward for you to come upon that , Clare : I do not   wonder you stop short . you give I a terrible fright , though . " 

 " Lord Cumnor be so fond of joking , " say Mrs. Kirkpatrick , a little flurry , yet quite recognize the truth of his last word , " I can not conceive any marriage more suitable . " she wonder what Lady Cumnor think of it . Lord Cumnor write as if there be really a chance . it be not an unpleasant idea ; it bring a faint smile out upon her face , as she sit by Lady Cumnor , while the latter take her afternoon nap . 

 

 

 CHAPTER X. 

 A CRISIS . 
 

 Illustrationrs . Kirkpatrick have be read aloud till Lady Cumnor fall asleep , the book rest on her knee , just keep from fall by her hold . she be look out of the window , not see the tree in the park , nor the glimpse of the hill beyond , but think how pleasant it would be to have a husband once more ; some one who would work while she sate at her elegant ease in a prettily - furnish drawing - room ; and she be rapidly invest this imaginary breadwinner with the form and feature of the country surgeon , when there be a slight tap at the door , and almost before she could rise , the object of her thought come in . she feel herself blush , and she be not displeased at the consciousness . she advance to meet he , make a sign towards her sleeping ladyship . 

 " very good , " say he , in a low voice , cast a professional eye on the slumber figure ; " can I speak to you for a minute or two in the library ? " 

 " be he go to offer ? " think she , with a sudden palpitation , and a conviction of her willingness to accept a man whom an hour before she have simply look upon as one of the category of unmarried man to whom matrimony be possible . 

 he be only go to make one or two medical inquiry ; she find that out very speedily , and consider the conversation as rather flat to she , though it might be instructive to he . she be not aware that he finally make up his mind to propose , during the time that she be speak answer his question in many word , but he be accustom to winnow the chaff from the corn ; and her voice be so soft , her accent so pleasant , that it strike he as particularly agreeable after the broad country accent he be perpetually hear . then the harmonious colour of her dress , and her slow and graceful movement , have something of the same soothe effect upon his nerve that a cat 's purring have upon some people 's . he begin to think that he should be fortunate if he could win she , for his own sake . yesterday he have look upon she more as a possible stepmother for Molly ; to - day he think more of she as a wife for himself . the remembrance of Lord Cumnor 's letter give she a very become consciousness ; she wish to attract , and hop that she be succeed . still they only talk of the countess 's state for some time : then a lucky shower come on . Mr. Gibson do not care a jot for rain , but just now it give he an excuse for linger . 

 " it be very stormy weather , " say he . 

 " yes , very . my daughter write I word , that for two day last week the packet could not sail from Boulogne . " 

 " Miss Kirkpatrick be at Boulogne , be she ? " 

 " yes , poor girl ; she be at school there , try to perfect herself in the french language . but , Mr. Gibson , you must not call her Miss Kirkpatrick . Cynthia remember you with so much affection , I may say . she be your little patient when she have the measle here four year ago , you know . pray call she Cynthia ; she would be quite hurt at such a formal name as Miss Kirkpatrick from you . " 

 " cynthia seem to I such an out - of - the - way name , only fit for poetry , not for daily use . " 

 " it be mine , " say Mrs. Kirkpatrick , in a plaintive tone of reproach . " I be christen Hyacinth , and her poor father would have she call after I . I be sorry you do not   like it . " 

 Mr. Gibson do not know what to say . he be not quite prepared to plunge into the directly personal style . while he be hesitate , she go on 

 " Hyacinth Clare ! once upon a time I be quite proud of my pretty name ; and other people think it pretty , too . " 

 " I have   no doubt " Mr. Gibson begin ; and then stop . 

 " perhaps I do wrong in yield to his wish , to have she call by such a romantic name . it may excite prejudice against she in some people ; and , poor child ! she will have enough to struggle with . a young daughter be a great charge , Mr. Gibson , especially when there be only one parent to look after she . " 

 " you be quite right , " say he , recall to the remembrance of Molly ; " though I should have think that a girl who be so fortunate as to have a mother could not feel the loss of her father so acutely as one who be motherless must suffer from her deprivation . " 

 " you be think of your own daughter . it be careless of I to say what I do . dear child ! how well I remember her sweet little face as she lie sleep on my bed . I suppose she be nearly grow - up now . she must be near my Cynthia 's age . how I should like to see she ! " 

 " I hope you will . I should like you to see she . I should like you to love my poor little molly , to love she as your own " he swallow down something that rise in his throat , and be nearly choke he . 

 " be he go to offer ? be he ? " she wonder ; and she begin to tremble in the suspense before he next speak . 

 " could you love she as your daughter ? will you try ? will you give I the right of introduce you to she as her future mother ; as my wife ? " 

 there ! he have do it whether it be wise or foolish he have do it ! but he be aware that the question as to its wisdom come into his mind the instant that the word be say past recall . 

 she hide her face in her hand . 

 " oh ! Mr. Gibson , " she say ; and then , a little to his surprise , and a great deal to her own , she burst into hysterical tear : it be such a wonderful relief to feel that she need not struggle any more for a livelihood . 

 " my dear my dearest , " say he , try to soothe she with word and caress ; but , just at the moment , uncertain what name he ought to use . after her sobbing have abate a little , she say herself , as if understand his difficulty , 

 " call I Hyacinth your own Hyacinth . I can not   bear ' Clare , ' it do so remind I of be a governess , and those day be all past now . " 

 " yes ; but surely no one can have be more value , more beloved than you have be in this family at least . " 

 " oh , yes ! they have be very good . but still one have always have to remember one 's position . " 

 " we ought to tell Lady Cumnor , " say he , thinking , perhaps , more of the various duty which lie before he in consequence of the step he have just take , than of what his future bride be say . 

 " you will tell she , will not   you ? " say she , look up in his face with beseech eye . " I always like other people to tell her thing , and then I can see how she take they . " 

 " certainly ! I will do whatever you wish . shall we go and see if she be awake now ? " 

 " no ! I think not . I have well prepare she . you will come to - morrow , will not   you ? and you will tell she then . " 

 " yes ; that will be good . I ought to tell molly first . she have the right to know . I do hope you and she will love each other dearly . " 

 " oh , yes ! I be sure we shall . then you will come to - morrow and tell Lady Cumnor ? and I will prepare she . " 

 " I do not   see what preparation be necessary ; but you know well , my dear . when can we arrange for you and molly to meet ? " 

 just then a servant come in , and the pair start apart . 

 " her ladyship be awake , and wish to see Mr. Gibson . " 

 they both follow the man upstairs ; Mrs. Kirkpatrick try hard to look as if nothing have happen , for she particularly wish " to prepare " Lady Cumnor ; that be to say , to give her version of Mr. Gibson 's extreme urgency , and her own coy unwillingness . 

 but Lady Cumnor have observant eye in sickness as well as in health . she have go to sleep with the recollection of the passage in her husband 's letter full in her mind , and , perhaps , it give a direction to her waken idea . 

 " I be glad you be not go , Mr. Gibson . I want to tell you what be the matter with you both ? what have you be say to Clare ? I be sure something have happen . " 

 there be nothing for it , in Mr. Gibson 's opinion , but to make a clean breast of it , and tell her ladyship all . he turn round , and take hold of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's hand , and say out straight , " I have be ask Mrs. Kirkpatrick to be my wife , and to be a mother to my child ; and she have consent . I hardly know how to thank she enough in word . " 

 " Umph ! I do not   see any objection . I daresay you will be very happy . I be very glad of it ! here ! shake hand with I , both of you . " then laugh a little , she add , " it do not seem to I that any exertion have be require on my part . " 

 Mr. Gibson look perplexed at these word . Mrs. Kirkpatrick redden . 

 " do she not tell you ? oh , then , I must . it be too good a joke to be lose , especially as everything have end so well . when Lord Cumnor 's letter come this morning this very morning I give it to Clare to read aloud to I , and I see she suddenly come to a full stop , where no full stop could be , and I think it be something about Agnes , so I take the letter and read stay ! I will read the sentence to you . where be the letter , Clare ? oh ! do not   trouble yourself , here it be . ' how be Clare and Gibson get on ? you despise my advice to help on that affair , but I really think a little match - making would be a very pleasant amusement , now that you be shut up in the house ; and I can not conceive any marriage more suitable . ' you see , you have my lord 's full approbation . but I must write , and tell he you have manage your own affair without any interference of mine . now we will just have a little medical talk , Mr. Gibson , and then you and Clare shall finish your tete - a - tete . " 

 they be neither of they quite as desirous of further conversation together as they have be before the passage out of Lord Cumnor 's letter have be read aloud . Mr. Gibson try not to think about it , for he be aware that if he dwelt upon it , he might get to fancy all sort of thing , as to the conversation which have end in his offer . but Lady Cumnor be imperious now , as always . 

 " come , no nonsense . I always make my girl go and have tete - a - tete with the man who be to be their husband , whether they would or no : there be a great deal to be talk over before every marriage , and you two be certainly old enough to be above affectation . go away with you . " 

 so there be nothing for it but for they to return to the library ; Mrs. Kirkpatrick pout a little , and Mr. Gibson feel more like his own cool , sarcastic self , by many degree , than he have do when last in that room . 

 she begin , half cry , 

 " I can not tell what poor Kirkpatrick would say if he know what I have do . he do so dislike the notion of second marriage , poor fellow ! " 

 " let we hope that he do not   know , then ; or that , if he do , he be wise I mean , that he see how second marriage may be most desirable and expedient in some case . " 

 altogether , this second tete - a - tete , do to command , be not so satisfactory as the first ; and Mr. Gibson be quite alive to the necessity of proceed on his round to see his patient before very much time have elapse . 

 " we shall shake down into uniformity before long , I have   no doubt , " say he to himself , as he ride away . " it be hardly to be expect that our thought should run in the same groove all at once . nor should I like it , " he add . " it would be very flat and stagnant to have only an echo of one 's own opinion from one 's wife . Heigho ! I must tell Molly about it : dear little woman , I wonder how she will take it ? it be do , in a great measure , for her good . " and then he lose himself in recapitulate Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's good quality , and the advantage to be gain to his daughter from the step he have just take . 

 it be too late to go round by Hamley that afternoon . the tower and the tower ' round lie just in the opposite direction to Hamley . so it be the next morning before Mr. Gibson arrive at the Hall , time his visit as well as he could so as to have half - an - hour 's private talk with Molly before Mrs. Hamley come down into the drawing - room . he think that his daughter would require sympathy after receive the intelligence he have to communicate ; and he know there be no one more fit to give it than Mrs. Hamley . 

 it be a brilliantly hot summer 's morning ; man in their shirtsleeve be in the field get in the early harvest of oat ; as Mr. Gibson ride slowly along , he could see they over the tall hedge - row , and even hear the soothing measure sound of the fall of the long swathe , as they be mow . the labourer seem too hot to talk ; the dog , guard their coat and can , lie pant loudly on the other side of the elm , under which Mr. Gibson stop for an instant to survey the scene , and gain a little delay before the interview that he wish be well over . in another minute he have snap at himself for his weakness , and put spur to his horse . he come up to the Hall at a good sharp trot ; it be early than the usual time of his visit , and no one be expect he ; all the stable - man be in the field , but that signify little to Mr. Gibson ; he walk his horse about for five minute or so before take he into the stable , and loosen his girth , examine he with perhaps unnecessary exactitude . he go into the house by a private door , and make his way into the drawing - room , half expect , however , that Molly would be in the garden . she have be there , but it be too hot and dazzle now for she to remain out of door , and she have come in by the open window of the drawing - room . oppress with the heat , she have fall asleep in an easy - chair , her bonnet and open book upon her knee , one arm hang listlessly down . she look very soft , and young , and childlike ; and a gush of love spring into her father 's heart as he gaze at she . 

 " molly ! " say he , gently , take the little brown hand that be hang down , and hold it in his own . " molly ! " 

 she open her eye , that for one moment have no recognition in they . then the light come brilliantly into they and she spring up , and throw her arm round his neck , exclaim , 

 " oh , papa , my dear , dear papa ! what make you come while I be asleep ? I lose the pleasure of watch for you . " 

 Mr. Gibson turn a little pale than he have be before . he still hold her hand , and draw she to a seat by he on a sofa , without speak . there be no need ; she be chatter away . 

 " I be up so early ! it be so charming to be out here in the fresh morning air . I think that make I sleepy . but be not   it a gloriously hot day ? I wonder if the italian sky they talk about can be blue than that that little bit you see just between the oak there ! " 

 she pull her hand away , and use both it and the other to turn her father 's head , so that he should exactly see the very bit she mean . she be rather strike by his unusual silence . 

 " have you hear from Miss Eyre , papa ? how be they all ? and this fever that be about ? do you know , papa , I do not   think you be look well ? you want I at home to take care of you . how soon may I come home ? " 

 " do not   I look well ? that must be all your fancy , goosey . I feel uncommonly well ; and I ought to look well , for I have a piece of news for you , little woman . "   he feel that he be do his business very awkwardly , but he be determined to plunge on .   " can you guess it ? " 

 " how should I ? " say she ; but her tone be change , and she be evidently uneasy , as with the presage of an instinct . 

 " why , you see , my love , " say he , again take her hand , " that you be in a very awkward position a girl grow up in such a family as mine young man which be a piece of confound stupidity on my part . and I be oblige to be away so much . " 

 " but there be Miss Eyre , " say she , sick with the strengthen indefinite presage of what be to come . " Dear Miss Eyre , I want nothing but she and you . " 

 " still there be time like the present when Miss Eyre can not be with you ; her home be not with we ; she have other duty . I have   be in great perplexity for some time ; but at last I have   take a step which will , I hope , make we both happy . " 

 " you be go to be marry again , " say she , help he out , with a quiet dry voice , and gently draw her hand out of his . 

 " yes . to Mrs. Kirkpatrick you remember she ? they call her clare at the Towers . you recollect how kind she be to you that day you be leave there ? " 

 she do not answer . she could not tell what word to use . she be afraid of say anything , lest the passion of anger , dislike , indignation whatever it be that be boil up in her breast should find vent in cry and scream , or bad , in rag word that could never be forget . it be as if the piece of solid ground on which she stand have break from the shore , and she be drift out to the infinite sea alone . 

 Mr. Gibson see that her silence be unnatural , and half - guess at the cause of it . but he know that she must have time to reconcile herself to the idea , and still believe that it would be for her eventual happiness . he have , besides , the relief of feeling that the secret be tell , the confidence make , which he have be dread for the last twenty - four hour . he go on recapitulate all the advantage of the marriage ; he know they off by heart now . 

 " she be a very suitable age for I . I do not   know how old she be exactly , but she must be nearly forty . I should not   have wish to marry any one young . she be highly respect by Lord and Lady Cumnor and their family , which be of itself a character . she have very agreeable and polished manner of course , from the circle she have be throw into and you and I , goosey , be apt to be a little brusque , or so ; we must brush up our manner now . " 

 no remark from she on this little bit of playfulness . he go on , 

 " she have be accustom to housekeep economical housekeeping , too for of late year she have have a school at Ashcombe , and have have , of course , to arrange all thing for a large family . and last , but not least , she have a daughter about your age , molly who , of course , will come and live with we , and be a nice companion a sister for you . " 

 still she be silent . at length she say , 

 " so I be send out of the house that all this might be quietly arrange in my absence ? " 

 out of the bitterness of her heart she speak , but she be rouse out of her assumed impassiveness by the effect produce . her father start up , and quickly leave the room , say something to himself what , she could not hear , though she run after he , follow he through dark stone passage , into the glare of the stable - yard , into the stable 

 " oh , papa , papa I be not myself I do not   know what to say about this hateful detestable " 

 he lead his horse out . she do not know if he hear her word . just as he mount , he turn round upon she with a grey grim face 

 " I think it be well for both of we , for I to go away now . we may say thing difficult to forget . we be both much agitated . by to - morrow we shall be more compose ; you will have think it over , and have see that the principal one great motive , I mean be your good . you may tell Mrs. Hamley I mean to have tell she myself . I will come again to - morrow . good - by , Molly . " 

 for many minute after he have ride away long after the sound of his horse 's hoof on the round stone of the paved lane , beyond the home - meadow , have die away molly stand there , shade her eye , and look at the empty space of air in which his form have last appear . her very breath seem suspend ; only , two or three time , after long interval , she draw a miserable sigh , which be catch up into a sob . she turn away at last , but could not go into the house , could not tell Mrs. Hamley , could not forget how her father have look and speak and leave she . 

 she go out through a side - door it be the way by which the gardener pass when they take the manure into the garden and the walk to which it lead be conceal from sight as much as possible by shrub and evergreen and over - arch tree . no one would know what become of she and , with the ingratitude of misery , she add to herself , no one would care . Mrs. Hamley have her own husband , her own child , her close home interest she be very good and kind , but there be a bitter grief in Molly 's heart , with which the stranger could not intermeddle . she go quickly on to the bourne which she have fix for herself a seat almost surround by the droop leaf of a weeping - ash a seat on the long broad terrace walk on the other side of the wood , that overlook the pleasant slope of the meadow beyond . the walk have probably be make to command this sunny , peaceful landscape , with tree , and a church spire , two or three red - tile roof of old cottage , and a purple bit of rise ground in the distance ; and at some previous date , when there might have be a large family of Hamleys reside at the Hall , lady in hoop , and gentleman in bag - wig with sword by their side , might have fill up the breadth of the terrace , as they saunter , smile , along . but no one ever care to saunter there now . it be a deserted walk . the squire or his son might cross it in pass to a little gate that lead to the meadow beyond ; but no one loiter there . molly almost think that no one know of the hidden seat under the ash - tree but herself ; for there be not more gardener employ upon the ground than be necessary to keep the kitchen - garden and such of the ornamental part as be frequent by the family , or in sight of the house , in good order . 

 when she have once get to the seat she break out with suppress passion of grief . she do not care to analyze the source of her tear and sob her father be go to be marry again her father be angry with she ; she have do very wrong he have go away displeased ; she have lose his love ; he be go to be marry away from she away from his child his little daughter forget her own dear , dear mother . so she think in a tumultuous kind of way , sob till she be weary out , and have to gain strength by be quiet for a time , to break forth into her passion of tear afresh . she have cast herself on the ground that natural throne for violent sorrow and leant up against the old moss - grow seat ; sometimes bury her face in her hand ; sometimes clasp they together , as if by the tight painful grasp of her finger she could deaden mental suffering . 

 she do not see Roger Hamley return from the meadow , nor hear the click of the little white gate . he have be out dredging in pond and ditch , and have his wet sling - net , with its imprisoned treasure of nastiness , over his shoulder . he be come home to lunch , have always a fine midday appetite , though he pretend to despise the meal in theory . but he know that his mother like his companionship then ; she depend much upon her luncheon , and be seldom downstairs and visible to her family much before the time . so he overcome his theory , for the sake of his mother , and have his reward in the hearty relish with which he keep her company in eat . 

 he do not see molly as he cross the terrace - walk on his way homeward . he have go about twenty yard along the small wood - path at right angle to the terrace , when , look among the grass and wild plant under the tree , he spy out one which be rare , one which he have be long wish to find in flower , and see it at last , with those bright keen eye of his . down go his net , skilfully twisted so as to retain its content , while it lie amid the herbage , and he himself go with light and well - plant footstep in search of the treasure . he be so great a lover of nature that , without any thought , but habitually , he always avoid treading unnecessarily on any plant ; who know what long - seek growth or insect might develop itself in that which now appear but insignificant ? 

 his step lead he in the direction of the ash - tree seat , much less screen from observation on this side than on the terrace . he stop ; he see a light - colour dress on the ground somebody half - lie on the seat , so still just then , he wonder if the person , whoever it be , have fall ill or faint . he pause to watch . in a minute or two the sob break out again the word . it be Miss Gibson cry out in a broken voice , 

 " oh , papa , papa ! if you would but come back ! " 

 for a minute or two he think it would be kind to leave she fancy herself unobserved ; he have even make a retrograde step or two , on tip - toe ; but then he hear the miserable sob again . it be farth than his mother could walk , or else , be the sorrow what it would , she be the natural comforter of this girl , her visitor . however , whether it be right or wrong , delicate or obtrusive , when he hear the sad voice talk again , in such tone of uncomforted , lonely misery , he turn back , and go to the green tent under the ash - tree . she start up when he come thus close to she ; she try to check her sob , and instinctively smooth her wet tangle hair back with her hand . 

 he look down upon she with grave , kind sympathy , but he do not know exactly what to say . 

 " be it lunch - time ? " say she , try to believe that he do not see the trace of her tear and the disturbance of her feature that he have not see her lie , sob her heart out there . 

 " I do not   know . I be go home to lunch . but you must let I say it I could not   go on when I see your distress . have anything happen ? anything in which I can help you , I mean ; for , of course , I have   no right to make the inquiry , if it be any private sorrow , in which I can be of no use . " 

 she have exhaust herself so much with cry , that she feel as if she could neither stand nor walk just yet . she sate down on the seat , and sigh , and turn so pale , he think she be go to faint . 

 " wait a moment , " say he , quite unnecessarily , for she could not have stir , and he be off like a shot to some spring of water that he know of in the wood , and in a minute or two he return with careful step , bring a little in a broad green leaf , turn into an impromptu cup . little as it be , it do she good . 

 " thank you ! " she say : " I can walk back now , in a short time . do not   stop . " 

 " you must let I , " say he : " my mother would not   like I to leave you to come home alone , while you be so faint . " 

 so they remain in silence for a little while ; he , break off and examine one or two abnormal leaf of the ash - tree , partly from the custom of his nature , partly to give her time to recover . 

 " Papa be go to be marry again , " say she , at length . 

 she could not have say why she tell he this ; an instant before she speak , she have no intention of do so . he drop the leaf he hold in his hand , turn round , and look at she . her poor wistful eye be fill with tear as they meet his , with a dumb appeal for sympathy . her look be much more eloquent than her word . there be a momentary pause before he reply , and then it be more because he feel that he must say something than that he be in any doubt as to the answer to the question he ask . 

 " you be sorry for it ? " 

 she do not take her eye away from his , as her quivering lip form the word " yes , " though her voice make no sound . he be silent again now ; look on the ground , kick softly at a loose pebble with his foot . his thought do not come readily to the surface in the shape of word ; nor be he apt at give comfort till he see his way clear to the real source from which consolation must come . at last he speak , almost as if he be reason out the matter with himself . 

 " it seem as if there might be case where set the question of love entirely on one side it must be almost a duty to find some one to be a substitute for the mother " I can believe , " say he , in a different tone of voice , and look at Molly afresh , " that this step may be greatly for your father 's happiness it may relieve he from many care , and may give he a pleasant companion . " 

 " he have I . you do not   know what we be to each other at least , what he be to I , " she add , humbly . 

 " still he must have think it for the good , or he would not   have do it . he may have think it the good for your sake even more than for his own . " 

 " that be what he try to convince I of . " 

 Roger begin kick the pebble again . he have not get hold of the right end of the clue . suddenly he look up . 

 " I want to tell you of a girl I know . her mother die when she be about sixteen the eld of a large family . from that time all through the bloom of her youth she give herself up to her father , first as his comforter , afterwards as his companion , friend , secretary anything you like . he be a man with a great deal of business on hand , and often come home only to set to afresh to preparation for the next day 's work . Harriet be always there , ready to help , to talk , or to be silent . it go on for eight or ten year in this way ; and then her father marry again , a woman not many year old than Harriet herself . well they be just the happy set of people I know you would not   have think it likely , would you ? " 

 she be listen , but she have no heart to say anything . yet she be interested in this little story of Harriet a girl who have be so much to her father , more than molly in this early youth of hers could have be to Mr. Gibson . " how be it ? " she sigh out at last . 

 " harriet thought of her father 's happiness before she think of her own , " Roger answer , with something of severe brevity . molly need the bracing . she begin to cry again a little . 

 " if it be for papa 's happiness " 

 " he must believe that it be . whatever you fancy , give he a chance . he can not have much comfort , I should think , if he see you fret or pin , you who have be so much to he , as you say . the lady herself , too if Harriet 's stepmother have be a selfish woman , and be always clutch after the gratification of her own wish ; but she be not : she be as anxious for Harriet to be happy as Harriet be for her father and your father 's future wife may be another of the same kind , though such people be rare . " 

 " I do not   think she be , though , " murmur Molly , a waft of recollection bring to her mind the detail of her day at the tower long ago . 

 Roger do not want to hear Molly 's reason for this doubt speech . he feel as if he have no right to hear more of Mr. Gibson 's family life , past , present , or to come , than be absolutely necessary for he , in order that he might comfort and help the cry girl , whom he have come upon so unexpectedly . and besides , he want to go home , and be with his mother at lunch - time . yet he could not leave she alone . 

 " it be right to hope for the good about everybody , and not to expect the bad . this sound like a truism , but it have comfort I before now , and some day you will find it useful . one have always to try to think more of other than of oneself , and it be good not to prejudge people on the bad side . my sermon be not   long , be they ? have they give you an appetite for lunch ? sermon always make I hungry , I know . " 

 he appear to be wait for she to get up and come along with he , as indeed he be . but he mean she to perceive that he should not leave she ; so she rise up languidly , too languid to say how much she should prefer be leave alone , if he would only go away without she . she be very weak , and stumble over the straggling root of a tree that project across the path . he , watchful though silent , see this stumble , and put out his hand hold she up from fall . he still hold her hand when the occasion be past ; this little physical failure impress on his heart how young and helpless she be , and he yearn to she , remember the passion of sorrow in which he have find she , and long to be of some little tender bit of comfort to she , before they part before their tete - a - tete walk be merge in the general familiarity of the household life . yet he do not know what to say . 

 " you will have think I hard , " he burst out at length , as they be near the drawing - room window and the garden - door . " I never can manage to express what I feel somehow I always fall to philosophize but I be sorry for you . yes , I be ; it be beyond my power to help you , as far as altering fact go , but I can feel for you , in a way which it be good not to talk about , for it can do no good . remember how sorry I be for you ! I shall often be think of you , though I daresay it be good not to talk about it again . " 

 she say , " I know you be sorry , " under her breath , and then she break away , and run indoor , and upstairs to the solitude of her own room . he go straight to his mother , who be sit before the untasted luncheon , as much annoy by the mysterious unpunctuality of her visitor as she be capable of be with anything ; for she have hear that Mr. Gibson have be , and be go , and she could not discover if he have leave any message for she ; and her anxiety about her own health , which some people esteem hypochondriacal , always make she particularly crave for the wisdom which might fall from her doctor 's lip . 

 " where have you be , Roger ? where be molly ? Miss Gibson , I mean , " for she be careful to keep up a barrier of form between the young man and young woman who be throw together in the same household . 

 " I have   be out dredging .   by the way , I leave my net on the terrace walk .   I find Miss Gibson sit there , cry as if her heart would break . her father be go to be marry again . " 

 " marry again ! you do not   say so . " 

 " yes , he be ; and she take it very hardly , poor girl . mother , I think if you could send some one to she with a glass of wine , a cup of tea , or something of that sort she be very nearly faint " 

 " I will go to her myself , poor child , " say Mrs. Hamley , rise . 

 " indeed you must not , " say he , lay his hand upon her arm . " we have keep you wait already too long ; you be look quite pale . Hammond can take it , " he continue , ring the bell . she sate down again , almost stunned with surprise . 

 " whom be he go to marry ? " 

 " I do not   know . I do not   ask , and she do not   tell I . " 

 " that be so like a man . why , half the character of the affair lie in the question of who it be that he be go to marry . " 

 " I daresay I ought to have ask . but somehow I be not a good one on such occasion . I be as sorry as could be for she , and yet I could not   tell what to say . " 

 " what do you say ? " 

 " I give she the good advice in my power . " 

 " Advice ! you ought to have comfort she . poor little molly ! " 

 " I think that if advice be good it be the good comfort . " 

 " that depend on what you mean by advice . hush ! here she be . " 

 to their surprise , Molly come in , try hard to look as usual . she have bath her eye , and arrange her hair ; and be make a great struggle to keep from cry , and to bring her voice into order . she be unwilling to distress Mrs. Hamley by the sight of pain and suffering . she do not know that she be follow Roger 's injunction to think more of other than of herself but so she be . Mrs. Hamley be not sure if it be wise in she to begin on the piece of news she have just hear from her son ; but she be too full of it herself to talk of anything else . " so I hear your father be go to be marry , my dear ? may I ask whom it be to ? " 

 " Mrs. Kirkpatrick . I think she be governess a long time ago at the Countess of Cumnor 's . she stay with they a great deal , and they call she Clare , and I believe they be very fond of she . " molly try to speak of her future stepmother in the most favourable manner she know how . 

 " I think I have   hear of she . then she be not very young ? that be as it should be . a widow too . have she any family ? " 

 " one girl , I believe . but I know so little about she ! " 

 molly be very near cry again . 

 " never mind , my dear . that will all come in good time . Roger , you have   hardly eat anything ; where be you go ? " 

 " to fetch my dredging - net . it be full of thing I do not   want to lose . besides , I never eat much , as a general thing . " the truth be partly tell , not all . he think he have well leave the other two alone . his mother have such sweet power of sympathy , that she would draw the sting out of the girl 's heart when she have she alone . as soon as he be go , molly lift up her poor swell eye , and , look at Mrs. Hamley , she say , " he be so good to I . I mean to try and remember all he say . " 

 " I be glad to hear it , love ; very glad . from what he tell I , I be afraid he have be give you a little lecture . he have a good heart , but he be not   so tender in his manner as Osborne . Roger be a little rough sometimes . " 

 " then I like roughness . it do I good . it make I feel how badly oh , Mrs. Hamley , I do behave so badly to papa this morning ! " 

 she rise up and throw herself into Mrs. Hamley 's arm , and sob upon her breast . her sorrow be not now for the fact that her father be go to be marry again , but for her own ill - behaviour . 

 if Roger be not tender in word , he be in deed . unreasonable and possibly exaggerate as Molly 's grief have appear to he , it be real suffering to she ; and he take some pain to lighten it , in his own way , which be characteristic enough . that evening he adjust his microscope , and put the treasure he have collect in his morning 's ramble on a little table ; and then he ask his mother to come and admire . of course molly come too , and this be what he have intend . he try to interest she in his pursuit , cherish her first little morsel of curiosity , and nurse it into a very proper desire for further information . then he bring out book on the subject , and translate the slightly pompous and technical language into homely every - day speech . molly have come down to dinner , wonder how the long hour till bedtime would ever pass away : hour during which she must not speak on the one thing that would be occupy her mind to the exclusion of all other ; for she be afraid that already she have weary Mrs. Hamley with it during their afternoon tete - a - tete . but prayer and bedtime come long before she expect ; she have be refresh by a new current of thought , and she be very thankful to Roger . and now there be to - morrow to come , and a confession of penitence to be make to her father . 

 but Mr. Gibson do not want speech or word . he be not fond of expression of feeling at any time , and perhaps , too , he feel that the less say the well on a subject about which it be evident that his daughter and he be not thoroughly and impulsively in harmony . he read her repentance in her eye ; he see how much she have suffer ; and he have a sharp pang at his heart in consequence . and he stop she from speak out her regret at her behaviour the day before , by a " there , there , that will do . I know all you want to say . I know my little molly my silly little goosey well than she know herself . I have   bring you an invitation . Lady Cumnor want you to go and spend next Thursday at the tower ! " 

 " do you wish I to go ? " say she , her heart sink . 

 " I wish you and Hyacinth to become well acquainted to learn to love each other . " 

 " Hyacinth ! " say Molly , entirely bewildered . 

 " yes ; Hyacinth ! it be the silly name I ever hear of ; but it be her , and I must call she by it . I can not   bear Clare , which be what my lady and all the family at the tower call she ; and ' Mrs. Kirkpatrick ' be formal and nonsensical too , as she will change her name so soon . " 

 " when , papa ? " ask Molly , feel as if she be live in a strange , unknown world . 

 " not till after Michaelmas . " and then , continue on his own thought , he add , " and the bad be , she be go and perpetuate her own affect name by have her daughter call after she . Cynthia ! one think of the moon , and the man in the moon with his bundle of faggot . I be thankful you be plain molly , child . " 

 " how old be she Cynthia , I mean ? " 

 " ay , get accustomed to the name . I should think Cynthia Kirkpatrick be about as old as you be . she be at school in France , pick up air and grace . she be to come home for the wedding , so you will be able to get acquaint with she then ; though , I think , she be to go back again for another half - year or so . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XI . 

 make FRIENDSHIP . 
 

 Mr. Gibson believe that Cynthia Kirkpatrick be to return to England to be present at her mother 's wedding ; but Mrs. Kirkpatrick have no such intention . she be not what be commonly call a woman of determination ; but somehow what she dislike she avoid , and what she like she try to do , or to have . so although in the conversation , which she have already lead to , as to the when and the how she be to be marry , she have listen quietly to Mr. Gibson 's proposal that Molly and Cynthia should be the two bridesmaid , still she have feel how disagreeable it would be to she to have her young daughter flash out her beauty by the side of the faded bride , her mother ; and as the further arrangement for the wedding become more definite , she see further reason in her own mind for Cynthia 's remain quietly at her school at Boulogne . 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick have go to bed that first night of her engagement to Mr. Gibson , fully anticipate a speedy marriage . she look to it as a release from the thraldom of keep school keep an unprofitable school , with barely pupil enough to pay for house rent and taxis , food , washing , and the requisite master . she see no reason for ever go back to Ashcombe , except to wind up her affair , and to pack up her clothe . she hop that Mr. Gibson 's ardour would be such that he would press on the marriage , and urge she never to resume her school drudgery , but to relinquish it now and for ever . she even make up a very pretty , very passionate speech for he in her own mind ; quite sufficiently strong to prevail upon she , and to overthrow the scruple which she feel she ought to have , at tell the parent of her pupil that she do not intend to resume school , and that they must find another place of education for their daughter , in the last week but one of the midsummer holiday . 

 it be rather like a douche of cold water on Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's plan , when the next morning at breakfast Lady Cumnor begin to decide upon the arrangement and duty of the two middle - aged lover . 

 " of course you can not   give up your school all at once , Clare . the wedding can not   be before Christmas , but that will do very well . we shall all be down at the tower ; and it will be a nice amusement for the child to go over to Ashcombe , and see you married . " 

 " I think I be afraid I do not   believe Mr. Gibson will like wait so long ; man be so impatient under these circumstance . " 

 " oh , nonsense ! Lord Cumnor have recommend you to his tenant , and I be sure he would not   like they to be put to any inconvenience . Mr. Gibson will see that in a moment . he be a man of sense , or else he would not   be our family doctor . now , what be you go to do about your little girl ? have you fix yet ? " 

 " no . yesterday there seem so little time , and when one be agitate it be so difficult to think of anything . Cynthia be nearly eighteen , old enough to go out as a governess , if he wish it , but I do not   think he will . he be so generous and kind . " 

 " well ! I must give you time to settle some of your affair to - day . do not   waste it in sentiment , you be too old for that . come to a clear understanding with each other ; it will be for your happiness in the long run . " 

 so they do come to a clear understanding about one or two thing . to Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's dismay , she find that Mr. Gibson have no more idea than Lady Cumnor of her break faith with the parent of her pupil . though he really be at a serious loss as to what be to become of Molly till she could be under the protection of his new wife at her own home , and though his domestic worry tease he more and more every day , he be too honourable to think of persuade Mrs. Kirkpatrick to give up school a week soon than be right for his sake . he do not even perceive how easy the task of persuasion would be ; with all her win wile she could scarcely lead he to feel impatience for the wedding to take place at Michaelmas . 

 " I can hardly tell you what a comfort and relief it will be to I , Hyacinth , when you be once my wife the mistress of my home poor little Molly 's mother and protector ; but I would not   interfere with your previous engagement for the world . it would not   be right . " 

 " thank you , my own love . how good you be ! so many man would think only of their own wish and interest ! I be sure the parent of my dear pupil will admire you will be quite surprised at your consideration for their interest . " 

 " do not   tell they , then . I hate be admire . why should not   you say it be your wish to keep on your school till they have   have time to look out for another ? " 

 " because it be not , " say she , dare all . " I long to be make you happy ; I want to make your home a place of rest and comfort to you ; and I do so wish to cherish your sweet Molly , as I hope to do , when I come to be her mother . I can not   take virtue to myself which do not   belong to I . if I have to speak for myself , I shall say , ' good people , find a school for your daughter by Michaelmas , for after that time I must go and make the happiness of other . ' I can not   bear to think of your long ride in November come home wet at night with no one to take care of you . oh ! if you leave it to I , I shall advise the parent to take their daughter away from the care of one whose heart will be absent . though I could not   consent to any time before Michaelmas that would not   be fair or right , and I be sure you would not   urge I you be too good . " 

 " well , if you think that they will consider we have act uprightly by they , let it be Michaelmas with all my heart . what do Lady Cumnor say ? " 

 " oh ! I tell she I be afraid you would not   like wait , because of your difficulty with your servant , and because of molly it would be so desirable to enter on the new relationship with she as soon as possible . " 

 " to be sure ; so it would . poor child ! I be afraid the intelligence of my engagement have rather startle she . " 

 " cynthia will feel it deeply , too , " say Mrs. Kirkpatrick , unwilling to let her daughter be behind Mr. Gibson 's in sensibility and affection . 

 " we will have she over to the wedding ! she and Molly shall be bridesmaid , " say Mr. Gibson , in the unguarded warmth of his heart . 

 this plan do not quite suit Mrs. Kirkpatrick : but she think it well not to oppose it , until she have a presentable excuse to give , and perhaps also some reason would naturally arise out of future circumstance ; so at this time she only smile , and softly press the hand she hold in her . 

 it be a question whether Mrs. Kirkpatrick or Molly wish the most for the day to be over which they be to spend together at the Towers . Mrs. Kirkpatrick be rather weary of girl as a class . all the trial of her life be connect with girl in some way . she be very young when she first become a governess , and have be worst in her struggle with her pupil , in the first place she ever go to . her elegance of appearance and manner , and her accomplishment , more than her character and acquirement , have render it easy for she than for most to obtain good ' situation ; " and she have be absolutely pet in some ; but still she be constantly encounter naughty or stubborn , or over - conscientious , or severe - judging , or curious and observant girl . and again , before Cynthia be bear , she have long for a boy , think it possible that if some three or four intervene relation die , he might come to be a baronet ; and instead of a son , lo and behold it be a daughter ! nevertheless , with all her dislike to girl in the abstract as " the plague of her life "   and her aversion be not diminish by the fact of she have keep a school for " young lady " at Ashcombe , she really mean to be as kind as she could be to her new step - daughter , whom she remember principally as a black - haired , sleepy child , in whose eye she have read admiration of herself . Mrs. Kirkpatrick accept Mr. Gibson principally because she be tired of the struggle of earn her own livelihood ; but she like he personally nay , she even love he in her torpid way , and she intend to be good to his daughter , though she feel as if it would have be easy for she to have be good to his son . 

 Molly be brace herself up in her way too . " I will be like Harriet . I will think of other . I will not   think of myself , " she keep repeat all the way to the tower . but there be no selfishness in wish that the day be come to an end , and that she do very heartily . Mrs. Hamley send she thither in the carriage , which be to wait and bring she back at night . Mrs. Hamley want molly to make a favourable impression , and she send for she to come and show herself before she set out . 

 " do not   put on your silk gown your white muslin will look the nice , my dear . " 

 " not my silk ? it be quite new ! I have it to come here . " 

 " still , I think your white muslin suit you the good . " " anything but that horrid plaid silk " be the thought in Mrs. Hamley 's mind ; and , thank to she , molly set off for the tower , look a little quaint , it be true , but thoroughly lady - like , if she be old - fashioned . her father be to meet she there ; but he have be detain , and she have to face Mrs. Kirkpatrick by herself , the recollection of her last day of misery at the tower fresh in her mind as if it have be yesterday . Mrs. Kirkpatrick be as caressing as could be . she hold Molly 's hand in her , as they sate together in the library , after the first salutation be over . she keep stroke it from time to time , and purr out inarticulate sound of love satisfaction , as she gaze in the blushing face . 

  the New Mamma . 
 the New Mamma . 
 click to enlarge 
 " what eye ! so like your dear father 's ! how we shall love each other shall not   we , darling ? for his sake ! " 

 " I will try , " say Molly , bravely ; and then she could not finish her sentence . 

 " and you have   just get the same beautiful black curling hair ! " say Mrs. Kirkpatrick , softly lift one of Molly 's curl from off her white temple . 

 " Papa 's hair be grow grey , " say Molly . 

 " be it ? I never see it . I never shall see it . he will always be to I the handsome of man . " 

 Mr. Gibson be really a very handsome man , and Molly be pleased with the compliment ; but she could not help say , 

 " still he will grow old , and his hair will grow grey . I think he will be just as handsome , but it will not   be as a young man . " 

 " ah ! that be just it , love . he will always be handsome ; some people always be . and he be so fond of you , dear . " Molly 's colour flash into her face . she do not want an assurance of her own father 's love from this strange woman . she could not help be angry ; all she could do be to keep silent . " you do not   know how he speak of you ; ' his little treasure , ' as he call you . I be almost jealous sometimes . " 

 molly take her hand away , and her heart begin to harden ; these speech be so discordant to she . but she set her tooth together , and " try to be good . " 

 " we must make he so happy . I be afraid he have have a great deal to annoy he at home ; but we will do away with all that now . you must tell I , " see the cloud in Molly 's eye , " what he like and dislike , for of course you will know . " 

 Molly 's face clear a little ; of course she do know . she have not watch and love he so long without believe that she understand he well than any one else : though how he have come to like Mrs. Kirkpatrick enough to wish to marry she , be an unsolved problem that she unconsciously put aside as inexplicable . Mrs. Kirkpatrick go on , " all man have their fancy and antipathy , even the wise . I have know some gentleman annoy beyond measure by the mere trifle ; leave a door open , or spill tea in their saucer , or a shawl crookedly put on . why , " continue she , lower her voice , " I know of a house to which Lord Hollingford will never be ask again because he do not   wipe his shoe on both the mat in the hall ! now you must tell I what your dear father dislike most in these fanciful way , and I shall take care to avoid it . you must be my little friend and helper in please he . it will be such a pleasure to I to attend to his slight fancy . about my dress , too what colour do he like well ? I want to do everything in my power with a view to his approval . " 

 Molly be gratify by all this , and begin to think that really , after all , perhaps her father have do well for himself ; and that if she could help towards his new happiness , she ought to do it . so she try very conscientiously to think over Mr. Gibson 's wish and way ; to ponder over what annoy he the most in his household . 

 " I think , " say she , " papa be not   particular about many thing ; but I think our not have the dinner quite punctual quite ready for he when he come in , fidget he more than anything . you see , he have often have a long ride , and there be another long ride to come , and he have only half - an - hour sometimes only a quarter to eat his dinner in . " 

 " thank you , my own love . punctuality ! yes ; it be a great thing in a household . it be what I have   have to enforce with my young lady at Ashcombe . no wonder poor dear Mr. Gibson have be displease at his dinner not be ready , and he so hard - worked ! " 

 " Papa do not   care what he have , if it be only ready . he would take bread - and - cheese , if cook would only send it in instead of dinner . " 

 " bread - and - cheese ! do Mr. Gibson eat cheese ? " 

 " yes ; he be very fond of it , " say Molly , innocently . " I have   know he eat toast cheese when he have be too tired to fancy anything else . " 

 " oh ! but , my dear , we must change all that . I should not   like to think of your father eat cheese ; it be such a strong - smell , coarse kind of thing . we must get he a cook who can toss he up an omelette , or something elegant . Cheese be only fit for the kitchen . " 

 " Papa be very fond of it , " persevere molly . 

 " oh ! but we will cure he of that . I could not   bear the smell of cheese ; and I be sure he would be sorry to annoy I . " 

 molly be silent ; it do not do , she find , to be too minute in tell about her father 's like or dislike . she have well leave they for Mrs. Kirkpatrick to find out for herself . it be an awkward pause ; each be try to find something agreeable to say . molly speak at length . " please ! I should so like to know something about Cynthia your daughter . " 

 " yes , call her Cynthia . it be a pretty name , be not   it ? Cynthia Kirkpatrick . not so pretty , though , as my old name , Hyacinth Clare . People use to say it suit I so well . I must show you an acrostic that a gentleman he be a lieutenant in the 53rd make upon it . oh ! we shall have a great deal to say to each other , I foresee ! " 

 " but about Cynthia ? " 

 " oh , yes ! about dear Cynthia . what do you want to know , my dear ? " 

 " Papa say she be to live with we ! when will she come ? " 

 " oh , be it not sweet of your kind father ? I think of nothing else but Cynthia be go out as a governess when she have complete her education ; she have be bring up for it , and have have great advantage . but good dear Mr. Gibson would not   hear of it . he say yesterday that she must come and live with we when she leave school . " 

 " when will she leave school ? " 

 " she go for two year . I do not   think I must let she leave before next summer . she teach English as well as learn French . next summer she shall come home , and then shall not   we be a happy little quartette ? " 

 " I hope so , " say Molly . " but she be to come to the wedding , be not   she ? " she go on timidly , not know how far Mrs. Kirkpatrick would like the allusion to her marriage . 

 " your father have beg for she to come ; but we must think about it a little more before quite fix it . the journey be a great expense ! " 

 " be she like you ? I do so want to see she . " 

 " she be very handsome , people say . in the bright - coloured style , perhaps something like what I be . but I like the dark - haired foreign kind of beauty well just now , " touch Molly 's hair , and look at she with an expression of sentimental remembrance . 

 " do Cynthia be she very clever and accomplish ? " ask Molly , a little afraid lest the answer should remove Miss Kirkpatrick at too great a distance from she . 

 " she ought to be ; I have   pay ever so much money to have she teach by the good master . but you will see she before long , and I be afraid we must go now to Lady Cumnor . it have be very charming have you all to myself , but I know Lady Cumnor will be expect we now , and she be very curious to see you , my future daughter , as she call you . " 

 molly follow Mrs. Kirkpatrick into the morning - room , where Lady Cumnor be sit a little annoyed , because , have complete her toilette early than usual , Clare have not be aware by instinct of the fact , and so have not bring molly Gibson for inspection a quarter of an hour before . every small occurrence be an event in the day of a convalescent invalid , and a little while ago molly would have meet with patronize appreciation , where now she have to encounter criticism . of Lady Cumnor 's character as an individual she know nothing ; she only know she be go to see and be see by a live countess ; nay , more , by " the countess " of Hollingford . 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick lead she into Lady Cumnor 's presence by the hand , and in present she , say , " my dear little daughter , Lady Cumnor ! " 

 " now , Clare , do not   let I have nonsense . she be not your daughter yet , and may never be , I believe that one - third of the engagement I have hear of , have never come to marriage . Miss Gibson , I be very glad to see you , for your father 's sake ; when I know you well , I hope it will be for your own . " 

 Molly very heartily hop that she might never be know any well by the stern - look lady who sate so upright in the easy chair , prepare for lounging , and which therefore give all the more effect to the stiff attitude . Lady Cumnor luckily take Molly 's silence for acquiescent humility , and go on speak after a further little pause of inspection . 

 " yes , yes , I like her look , Clare . you may make something of she . it will be a great advantage to you , my dear , to have a lady who have train up several young people of quality always about you just at the time when you be grow up . I will tell you what , Clare ! " a sudden thought strike she , " you and she must become well acquaint you know nothing of each other at present ; you be not to be marry till Christmas , and what could be well than that she should go back with you to Ashcombe ! she would be with you constantly , and have the advantage of the companionship of your young people , which would be a good thing for an only child ! it be a capital plan ; I be very glad I think of it ! " 

 now it would be difficult to say which of Lady Cumnor 's two hearer be the most dismayed at the idea which have take possession of she . Mrs. Kirkpatrick have no fancy for be encumber with a step - daughter before her time . if molly come to be an inmate of her house , farewell to many little background economy , and a still more serious farewell to many little indulgence , that be innocent enough in themselves , but which Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's former life have cause she to look upon as sin to be conceal : the dirty dog's - eare delightful novel from the Ashcombe circulating library , the leaf of which she turn over with a pair of scissor ; the lounging - chair which she have for use at her own home , straight and upright as she sate now in Lady Cumnor 's presence ; the dainty morsel , savoury and small , to which she treat herself for her own solitary supper , all these and many other similarly pleasant thing would have to be foregone if molly come to be her pupil , parlour - boarder , or visitor , as Lady Cumnor be plan . one two thing Clare be instinctively resolve upon : to be marry at Michaelmas , and not to have Molly at Ashcombe . but she smile as sweetly as if the plan propose be the most charming project in the world , while all the time her poor brain be beat about in every bush for the reason or excuse of which she should make use at some future time . molly , however , save she all this trouble . it be a question which of the three be the most surprised by the word which burst out of her lip . she do not mean to speak , but her heart be very full , and almost before she be aware of her thought she hear herself say , 

 " I do not   think it would be nice at all . I mean , my lady , that I should dislike it very much ; it would be take I away from papa just these very few last month . I will like you , " she go on , her eye full of tear ; and , turn to Mrs. Kirkpatrick , she put her hand into her future stepmother 's with the prettiest and most trustful action . " I will try hard to love you , and to do all I can to make you happy ; but you must not take I away from papa just this very last bit of time that I shall have he . " 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondle the hand thus place in her , and be grateful to the girl for her outspoken opposition to Lady Cumnor 's plan . Clare be , however , exceedingly unwilling to back up molly by any word of her own until Lady Cumnor have speak and give the cue . but there be something in Molly 's little speech , or in her straightforward manner , that amuse instead of irritate Lady Cumnor in her present mood . perhaps she be tired of the silkiness with which she have be shut up for so many day . 

 she put up her glass , and look at they both before speak . then she say " upon my word , young lady ! why , Clare , you have   get your work before you ! not but what there be a good deal of truth in what she say . it must be very disagreeable to a girl of her age to have a stepmother come in between her father and herself , whatever may be the advantage to she in the long run . " 

 molly almost feel as if she could make a friend of the stiff old countess , for her clearness of sight as to the plan propose be a trial ; but she be afraid , in her new - bear desire of think for other , of Mrs. Kirkpatrick be hurt . she need not have fear as far as outward sign go , for the smile be still on that lady 's pretty rosy lip , and the soft fondling of her hand never stop . Lady Cumnor be more interested in Molly the more she look at she ; and her gaze be pretty steady through her gold - rim eye - glass . she begin a sort of catechism ; a string of very straightforward question , such as any lady under the rank of countess might have scruple to ask , but which be not unkindly mean . 

 " you be sixteen , be you not ? " 

 " no ; I be seventeen . my birthday be three week ago . " 

 " very much the same thing , I should think . have you ever be to school ? " 

 " no , never ! Miss Eyre have teach I everything I know . " 

 " Umph ! Miss Eyre be your governess , I suppose ? I should not have think your father could have afford to keep a governess . but of course he must know his own affair well . " 

 " certainly , my lady , " reply Molly , a little touchy as to any reflection on her father 's wisdom . 

 " you say ' certainly ! ' as if it be a matter of course that every one should know their own affair well . you be very young , Miss Gibson very . you will know well before you come to my age . and I suppose you have   be teach music , and the use of globe , and French , and all the usual accomplishment , since you have have a governess ? I never hear of such nonsense ! " she go on , lash herself up . " an only daughter ! if there have be half - a - dozen , there might have be some sense in it . " 

 molly do not speak , but it be by a strong effort that she keep silence . Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondle her hand more perseveringly than ever , hop thus to express a sufficient amount of sympathy to prevent she from say anything injudicious . but the caress have become wearisome to Molly , and only irritate her nerve . she take her hand out of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's , with a slight manifestation of impatience . 

 it be , perhaps , fortunate for the general peace that just at this moment Mr. Gibson be announce . it be odd enough to see how the entrance of a person of the opposite sex into an assemblage of either man or woman calm down the little discordance and the disturbance of mood . it be the case now ; at Mr. Gibson 's entrance my lady take off her glass , and smooth her brow ; Mrs. Kirkpatrick manage to get up a very become blush , and as for Molly , her face glow with delight , and the white tooth and pretty dimple come out like sunlight on a landscape . 

 of course , after the first greeting , my lady have to have a private interview with her doctor ; and Molly and her future stepmother wander about in the garden with their arm round each other 's waist , or hand in hand , like two babe in the wood ; Mrs. Kirkpatrick active in such endearment , molly passive , and feel within herself very shy and strange ; for she have that particular kind of shy modesty which make any one uncomfortable at receive caress from a person towards whom the heart do not go forth with an impulsive welcome . 

 then come the early dinner ; Lady Cumnor have hers in the quiet of her own room , to which she be still a prisoner . once or twice during the meal , the idea cross Molly 's mind that her father dislike his position as a middle - aged lover be make so evident to the man in wait as it be by Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's affectionate speech and innuendo . he try to banish every tint of pink sentimentalism from the conversation , and to confine it to matter of fact ; and when Mrs. Kirkpatrick would persevere in refer to such thing as have a bearing on the future relationship of the party , he insist upon view they in the most matter - of - fact way ; and this continue even after the man have leave the room . an old rhyme Molly have hear Betty use , would keep run in her head and make she uneasy , 

 two be company , 
 three be trumpery . 
 but where could she go to in that strange house ? what ought she to do ? she be rouse from this fit of wonder and abstraction by her father 's say " what do you think of this plan of Lady Cumnor 's ? she say she be advise you to have Molly as a visitor at Ashcombe until we be marry . " 

 Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's countenance fall . if only molly would be so good as to testify again , as she have do before Lady Cumnor ! but if the proposal be make by her father , it would come to his daughter from a different quarter than it have do from a strange lady , be she ever so great . molly do not say anything ; she only look pale , and wistful , and anxious . Mrs. Kirkpatrick have to speak for herself . 

 " it would be a charming plan , only Well ! we know why we would rather not have it , do not   we , love ? and we will not   tell papa , for fear of make he vain . no ! I think I must leave she with you , dear Mr. Gibson , to have you all to herself for these last few week . it would be cruel to take she away . " 

 " but you know , my dear , I tell you of the reason why it do not do to have Molly at home just at present , " say Mr. Gibson , eagerly . for the more he know of his future wife , the more he feel it necessary to remember that , with all her foible , she would be able to stand between Molly and any such adventure as that which have occur lately with Mr. Coxe ; so that one of the good reason for the step he have take be always present to he , while it have slip off the smooth surface of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's mirror - like mind without leave any impression . she now recall it , on see Mr. Gibson 's anxious face . 

 but what be Molly 's feeling at these last word of her father 's ? she have be send from home for some reason , keep a secret from she , but tell to this strange woman . be there to be perfect confidence between these two , and she to be for ever shut out ? be she , and what concern she though how she do not know to be discuss between they for the future , and she to be keep in the dark ? a bitter pang of jealousy make her heart - sick . she might as well go to Ashcombe , or anywhere else , now . think more of other ' happiness than of her own be very fine ; but do it not mean give up her very individuality , quench all the warm love , the true desire , that make she herself ? yet in this deadness lie her only comfort ; or so it seem . wander in such maze , she hardly know how the conversation go on ; a third be indeed " trumpery , " where there be entire confidence between the two who be company , from which the other be shut out . she be positively unhappy , and her father do not appear to see it ; he be absorb with his new plan and his new wife that be to be . but he do notice it ; and be truly sorry for his little girl : only he think that there be a great chance for the future harmony of the household , if he do not lead molly to define her present feeling by put they into word . it be his general plan to repress emotion by not show the sympathy he feel . yet , when he have to leave , he take Molly 's hand in his , and hold it there , in such a different manner to that in which Mrs. Kirkpatrick have do ; and his voice soften to his child as he bid her good - by , and add the word   most unusual to he , " God bless you , child ! " 

 molly have hold up all the day bravely ; she have not show anger , or repugnance , or annoyance , or regret ; but when once more by herself in the Hamley carriage , she burst into a passion of tear , and cry her fill till she reach the village of Hamley . then she try in vain to smooth her face into smile , and do away with the other sign of her grief . she only hop she could run upstairs to her own room without notice , and bathe her eye in cold water before she be see . but at the Hall - door she be catch by the squire and Roger come in from an after - dinner stroll in the garden , and hospitably anxious to help she to alight . Roger see the state of thing in an instant , and say , 

 " my mother have be look for you to come back for this last hour , " he lead the way to the drawing - room . but Mrs. Hamley be not there ; the Squire have stop to speak to the coachman about one of the horse ; they two be alone . Roger say , 

 " I be afraid you have   have a very try day . I have think of you several time , for I know how awkward these new relation be . " 

 " thank you , " say she , her lip tremble , and on the point of cry again . " I do try to remember what you say , and to think more of other , but it be so difficult sometimes ; you know it be , do not   you ? " 

 " yes , " say he , gravely . he be gratify by her simple confession of have bear his word of advice in mind , and try to act up to they . he be but a very young man , and he be honestly flatter ; perhaps this lead he on to offer more advice , and this time it be evidently mingle with sympathy . he do not want to draw out her confidence , which he feel might very easily be do with such a simple girl ; but he wish to help she by give she a few of the principle on which he have learn to rely . " it be difficult , " he go on , " but by - and - by you will be so much happy for it . " 

 " no , I shall not ! " say Molly , shake her head . " it will be very dull when I shall have kill myself , as it be , and live only in try to do , and to be , as other people like . I do not   see any end to it . I might as well never have live . and as for the happiness you speak of , I shall never be happy again . " 

 there be an unconscious depth in what she say , that Roger do not know how to answer at the moment ; it be easy to address himself to the assertion of the girl of seventeen , that she should never be happy again . 

 " nonsense : perhaps in ten year ' time you will be look back on this trial as a very light one who know ? " 

 " I daresay it seem foolish ; perhaps all our earthly trial will appear foolish to we after a while ; perhaps they seem so now to angel . but we be ourselves , you know , and this be now , not some time to come , a long , long way off . and we be not angel , to be comfort by see the end for which everything be send . " 

 she have never speak so long a sentence to he before ; and when she have say it , though she do not take her eye away from his , as they stand steadily look at each other , she blush a little ; she could not have tell why . nor do he tell himself why a sudden pleasure come over he as he gaze at her simple expressive face and for a moment lose the sense of what she be say , in the sensation of pity for her sad earnestness . in an instant more he be himself again . only it be pleasant to the wise , most reasonable youth of one or two and twenty to find himself look up to as a Mentor by a girl of seventeen . 

 " I know , I understand . yes : it be now we have to do with . do not   let we go into metaphysics . " molly open her eye wide at this . have she be talk metaphysic without know it ? " one look forward to a mass of trial , which will only have to be encounter one by one , little by little . oh , here be my mother ! she will tell you well than I can . " 

 and the tete - a - tete be merge in a trio . Mrs. Hamley lie down ; she have not be well all day she have miss Molly , she say , and now she want to hear of all the adventure that have occur to the girl at the Towers . molly sate on a stool close to the head of the sofa , and Roger , though at first he take up a book and try to read that he might be no restraint , soon find his reading all a pretence : it be so interesting to listen to Molly 's little narrative , and , besides , if he could give she any help in her time of need , be it not his duty to make himself acquaint with all the circumstance of her case ? 

 and so they go on during all the remain time of Molly 's stay at Hamley . Mrs. Hamley sympathize , and like to hear detail ; as the french say , her sympathy be give en dťtail , the squire 's en gros . he be very sorry for her evident grief , and almost feel guilty , as if he have have a share in bring it about , by the mention he have make of the possibility of Mr. Gibson 's marrying again , when first Molly come on her visit to they . he say to his wife more than once , 

 " ' pon my word , now , I wish I would never speak those unlucky word that first day at dinner . do you remember how she take they up ? it be like a prophecy of what be to come , now , be not   it ? and she look pale from that day , and I do not   think she have ever fairly enjoy her food since . I must take more care what I say for the future . not but what Gibson be do the very good thing , both for himself and she , that he can do . I tell he so only yesterday . but I be very sorry for the little girl , though . I wish I would never speak about it , that I do ! but it be like a prophecy , be not   it ? " 

 Roger try hard to find out a reasonable and right method of comfort , for he , too , in his way , be sorry for the girl , who bravely struggle to be cheerful , in spite of her own private grief , for his mother 's sake . he feel as if high principle and noble precept ought to perform an immediate work . but they do not , for there be always the unknown quantity of individual experience and feeling , which offer a tacit resistance , the amount incalculable by another , to all good counsel and high decree . but the bond between the Mentor and his Telemachus strengthen every day . he endeavour to lead she out of morbid thought into interest in other than personal thing ; and , naturally enough , his own object of interest come readiest to hand . she feel that he do she good , she do not know why or how ; but after a talk with he , she always fancy that she have get the clue to goodness and peace , whatever befell . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XII . 

 prepare for the wedding . 
 

 illustrationeanwhile the love - affair between the middle - aged couple be prosper well , after a fashion ; after the fashion that they like well , although it might probably have appear dull and prosaic to young people . Lord Cumnor have come down in great glee at the news he have hear from his wife at the Towers . he , too , seem to think he have take an active part in bring about the match by only speak about it . his first word on the subject to Lady Cumnor be , 

 " I tell you so . now do not   I say what a good , suitable thing this affair between Gibson and Clare would be ! I do not   know when I have   be so much pleased . you may despise the trade of match - maker , my lady , but I be very proud of it . after this , I shall go on look out for suitable case among the middle - aged people of my acquaintance . I shall not   meddle with young folk , they be so apt to be fanciful ; but I have   be so successful in this , that I do think it be good encouragement to go on . " 

 " go on with what ? " ask Lady Cumnor , drily . 

 " oh , planning , you can not   deny that I plan this match . " 

 " I do not   think you be likely to do either much good or harm by planning , " she reply , with cool , good sense . 

 " it put it into people 's head , my dear . " 

 " yes , if you speak about your plan to they , of course it do . but in this case you never speak to either Mr. Gibson or Clare , do you ? " 

 all at once the recollection of how Clare have come upon the passage in Lord Cumnor 's letter flash on his lady , but she do not say anything about it , but leave her husband to flounder about as good he might . 

 " no ! I never speak to they ; of course not . " 

 " then you must be strongly mesmeric , and your will act upon theirs , if you be to take credit for any part in the affair , " continue his pitiless wife . 

 " I really can not   say . it be no use look back to what I say or do . I be very well satisfied with it , and that be enough , and I mean to show they how much I be pleased . I shall give Clare something towards her rig out , and they shall have a breakfast at Ashcombe Manor - house . I will write to Preston about it . when do you say they be to be marry ? " 

 " I think they would well wait till Christmas , and I have tell they so . it would amuse the child , go over to Ashcombe for the wedding ; and if it be bad weather during the holiday I be always afraid of their find it dull at the tower . it be very different if it be a good frost , and they can go out skating and sledging in the park . but these last two year it have be so wet for they , poor dear ! " 

 " and will the other poor dear be content to wait to make a holiday for your grandchild ? ' to make a roman holiday . ' Pope , or somebody else , have a line of poetry like that . ' to make a roman holiday , ' " he repeat , please with his unusual aptitude at quotation . 

 " it be Byron , and it be nothing to do with the subject in hand . I be surprised at your lordship 's quote Byron , he be a very immoral poet . " 

 " I see he take his oath in the House of Lords , " say Lord Cumnor , apologetically . 

 " well ! the less say about he the well , " say Lady Cumnor . " I have tell Clare that she have well not think of be marry before Christmas : and it will not   do for she to give up her school in a hurry either . " 

 but Clare do not intend to wait till Christmas ; and for this once she carry her point against the will of the countess , and without many word , or any open opposition . she have a hard task in set aside Mr. Gibson 's desire to have Cynthia over for the wedding , even if she go back to her school at Boulogne directly after the ceremony . at first she have say that it would be delightful , a charming plan ; only she fear that she must give up her own wish to have her child near she at such a time , on account of the expense of the double journey . 

 but Mr. Gibson , economical as he be in his habitual expenditure , have a really generous heart . he have already show it , in entirely relinquish his future wife 's life - interest in the very small property the late Mr. Kirkpatrick have leave , in favour of Cynthia ; while he arrange that she should come to his home as a daughter as soon as she leave the school she be at . the life - interest be about thirty pound a year . now he give Mrs. Kirkpatrick three five - pound note , say that he hop they would do away with the objection to Cynthia 's come over to the wedding ; and at the time Mrs. Kirkpatrick feel as if they would , and catch the reflection of his strong wish , and fancy it be her own . if the letter could have be write and the money send off that day while the reflect glow of affection last , Cynthia would have be bridesmaid to her mother . but a hundred little interruption come in the way of letter - writing ; and by the next day maternal love have diminish ; and the value affix to the money have increase : money have be so much need , so hardly earn in Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's life ; while the perhaps necessary separation of mother and child have lessen the amount of affection the former have to bestow . so she persuade herself , afresh , that it would be unwise to disturb Cynthia at her study ; to interrupt the fulfilment of her duty just after the semestre have begin afresh ; and she write a letter to Madame Lefevre so well imbue with this persuasion , that an answer which be almost an echo of her word be return , the sense of which be convey to Mr. Gibson , who be no great french scholar , settle the vex question , to his moderate but unfeigned regret . but the fifteen pound be not return . indeed , not merely that sum , but a great part of the hundred which Lord Cumnor have give she for her trousseau , be require to pay off debt at Ashcombe ; for the school have be anything but flourish since Mrs. Kirkpatrick have have it . it be really very much to her credit that she prefer clear herself from debt to purchase wedding finery . but it be one of the few point to be respect in Mrs. Kirkpatrick that she have always be careful in payment to the shop where she deal ; it be a little sense of duty crop out . whatever other fault might arise from her superficial and flimsy character , she be always uneasy till she be out of debt . yet she have no scruple in appropriate her future husband 's money to her own use , when it be decide that it be not to be employ as he intend . what new article she buy for herself , be all such as would make a show , and an impression upon the lady of Hollingford . she argue with herself that linen , and all under - clothing , would never be see ; while she know that every gown she have , would give rise to much discussion , and would be count up in the little town . 

 so her stock of underclothe be very small , and scarcely any of it new ; but it be make of dainty material , and be finely mend up by her deft finger , many a night long after her pupil be in bed ; inwardly resolve all the time she sew , that hereafter some one else should do her plain - work . indeed , many a little circumstance of former subjection to the will of other rise up before she during these quiet hour , as an endurance or a suffering never to occur again . so apt be people to look forward to a different kind of life from that to which they have be accustom , as be free from care and trial ! she recollect how , one time during this very summer at the Towers , after she be engage to Mr. Gibson , when she have take above an hour to arrange her hair in some new mode carefully study from Mrs. Bradley 's fashion - book after all , when she come down , look she very well , as she think , and ready for her lover , Lady Cumnor have send she back again to her room , just as if she have be a little child , to do her hair over again , and not to make such a figure of fun of herself ! another time she have be send to change her gown for one in her opinion far less become , but which suit Lady Cumnor 's taste well . these be little thing ; but they be late sample of what in different shape she have have to endure for many year ; and her like for Mr. Gibson grow in proportion to her sense of the evil from which he be go to serve as a means of escape . after all , that interval of hope and plain - sewing , intermix though it be with tuition , be not disagreeable . her wedding - dress be secure . her former pupil at the Towers be go to present she with that ; they be to dress she from head to foot on the auspicious day . Lord Cumnor , as have be say , have give she a hundred pound for her trousseau , and have send Mr. Preston a carte - blanche order for the wedding - breakfast in the old hall in Ashcombe Manor - house . Lady Cumnor a little put out by the marriage not be defer till her grandchild 's Christmas holiday have nevertheless give Mrs. Kirkpatrick an excellent English - make watch and chain ; more clumsy but more serviceable than the little foreign elegance that have hang at her side so long , and mislead she so often . 

 her preparation be thus in a very considerable state of forwardness , while Mr. Gibson have do nothing as yet towards any new arrangement or decoration of his house for his intended bride . he know he ought to do something . but what ? where to begin , when so much be out of order , and he have so little time for superintendence ? at length he come to the wise decision of ask one of the Miss Brownings , for old friendship 's sake , to take the trouble of prepare what be immediately requisite ; and resolve to leave all the more ornamental decoration that he propose , to the taste of his future wife . but before make his request to the Miss Brownings , he have to tell they of his engagement , which have hitherto be keep a secret from the townspeople , who have set down his frequent visit at the tower to the score of the countess 's health . he feel how he should have laugh in his sleeve at any middle - aged widower who come to he with a confession of the kind he have now to make to Miss Brownings , and dislike the idea of the necessary call : but it be to be do , so one evening he go in " promiscuous , " as they call it , and tell they his story . at the end of the first chapter that be to say , at the end of the story of Mr. Coxe 's calf - love , Miss Browning hold up her hand in surprise . 

 " to think of Molly , as I have hold in long - clothe , come to have a lover ! well , to be sure ! Sister Phobe "   she be just come into the room , " here be a piece of news ! molly Gibson have get a lover ! one may almost say she be have an offer ! Mr. Gibson , may not one ? and she be but sixteen ! " 

 " Seventeen , sister , " say Miss Phobe , who pique herself on know all about dear Mr. Gibson 's domestic affair . " Seventeen , the 22nd of last June . " 

 " well , have it your own way . seventeen , if you like to call she so ! " say Miss Browning , impatiently . " the fact be still the same she be get a lover ; and it seem to I she be in long - clothe only yesterday . " 

 " I be sure I hope her course of true love will run smooth , " say Miss Phobe . 

 now Mr. Gibson come in ; for his story be not half tell , and he do not want they to run away too far with the idea of Molly 's love - affair . 

 " molly know nothing about it . I have not   even name it to any one but you two , and to one other friend . I trounce Coxe well , and do my good to keep his attachment as he call it in bound . but I be sadly puzzle what to do about Molly . Miss Eyre be away , and I could not   leave they in the house together without any old woman . " 

 " oh , Mr. Gibson ! why do you not send she to we ? " break in Miss Browning . " we would have do anything in our power for you ; for your sake , as well as her poor dear mother 's . " 

 " thank you . I know you would , but it would not   have do to have have she in Hollingford , just at the time of Coxe 's effervescence . he be well now . his appetite have come back with double force , after the fasting he think it right to exhibit . he have three helping of black - currant dumpling yesterday . " 

 " I be sure you be most liberal , Mr. Gibson . three helping ! and , I daresay , butcher 's meat in proportion ? " 

 " oh ! I only name it because , with such very young man , it be generally see - saw between appetite and love , and I think the third help a very good sign . but still , you know , what have happen once , may happen again . " 

 " I do not   know . Phobe have an offer of marriage once " say Miss Browning . 

 " hush ! sister . it might hurt his feeling to have it speak about . " 

 " nonsense , child ! it be five - and - twenty year ago ; and his eld daughter be married herself . " 

 " I own he have not be constant , " plead Miss Phobe , in her tender , pip voice . " all man be not like you , Mr. Gibson faithful to the memory of their first - love . " 

 Mr. Gibson wince . Jeannie be his first love ; but her name have never be breathe in Hollingford . his wife good , pretty , sensible , and belove as she have be be not his second ; no , nor his third love . and now he be come to make a confidence about his second marriage . 

 " well , well , " say he ; " at any rate , I think I must do something to protect molly from such affair while she be so young , and before I have give my sanction . Miss Eyre 's little nephew fall ill of scarlet fever " 

 " ah ! by - the - by , how careless of I not to inquire . how be the poor little fellow ? " 

 " worse well . it do not   signify to what I have   get to say now ; the fact be , Miss Eyre could not   come back to my house for some time , and I can not leave molly altogether at Hamley . " 

 " ah ! I see now , why there be that sudden visit to Hamley . upon my word , it be quite a romance . " 

 " I do like hearing of a love - affair , " murmur Miss Phobe . 

 " then if you will let I get on with my story , you shall hear of mine , " say Mr. Gibson , quite beyond his patience with their constant interruption . 

 " your ! " say Miss Phobe , faintly . 

 " bless we and save we ! " say Miss Browning , with less sentiment in her tone ; " what next ? " 

 " my marriage , I hope , " say Mr. Gibson , choose to take her expression of intense surprise literally . " and that be what I come to speak to you about . " 

 a little hope dart up in Miss Phobe 's breast . she have often say to her sister , in the confidence of curling - time   lady wear curl in those day , " that the only man who could ever bring she to think of matrimony be Mr. Gibson ; but that if he ever propose , she should feel bound to accept he , for poor dear Mary 's sake ; " never explain what exact style of satisfaction she imagine she should give to her dead friend by marry her late husband . Phobe play nervously with the string of her black silk apron . like the Caliph in the eastern story , a whole lifetime of possibility pass through her mind in an instant , of which possibilitie the question of question be , could she leave her sister ? Attend , Phobe , to the present moment , and listen to what be be say before you distress yourself with a perplexity which will never arise . 

 " of course it have be an anxious thing for I to decide who I should ask to be the mistress of my family , the mother of my girl ; but I think I have   decide rightly at last . the lady I have choose " 

 " tell we at once who she be , there be a good man , " say straight - forward Miss Browning . 

 " Mrs. Kirkpatrick , " say the bridegroom elect . 

 " what ! the governess at the Towers , that the countess make so much of ? " 

 " yes ; she be much value by they and deservedly so . she keep a school now at Ashcombe , and be accustom to housekeeping . she have bring up the young lady at the Towers , and have a daughter of her own , therefore it be probable she will have a kind , motherly feeling towards Molly . " 

 " she be a very elegant - look woman , " say Miss Phobe , feel it incumbent upon she to say something laudatory , by way of conceal the thought that have just be pass through her mind . " I have   see she in the carriage , rid backwards with the countess : a very pretty woman , I should say . " 

 " Nonsense , sister , " say Miss Browning . " what have her elegance or prettiness to do with the affair ? do you ever know a widower marry again for such trifle as those ? it be always from a sense of duty of one kind or another be not   it , Mr. Gibson ? they want a housekeeper ; or they want a mother for their child ; or they think their last wife would have like it . " 

 perhaps the thought have pass through the eld sister 's mind that Phobe might have be choose , for there be a sharp acrimony in her tone ; not unfamiliar to Mr. Gibson , but with which he do not choose to cope at this present moment . 

 " you must have it your own way , Miss Browning . settle my motif for I . I do not   pretend to be quite clear about they myself . but I be clear in wish heartily to keep my old friend , and for they to love my future wife for my sake . I do not   know any two woman in the world , except Molly and Mrs. Kirkpatrick , I regard as much as I do you . besides , I want to ask you if you will let molly come and stay with you till after my marriage ? " 

 " you might have ask we before you ask Madam Hamley , " say Miss Browning , only half mollify . " we be your old friend ; and we be her mother 's friend , too ; though we be not county folk . " 

 " that be unjust , " say Mr. Gibson . " and you know it be . " 

 " I do not   know . you be always with Lord Hollingford , when you can get at he , much more than you ever be with Mr. Goodenough , or Mr. Smith . and you be always go over to Hamley . " 

 Miss Browning be not one to give in all at once . 

 " I seek Lord Hollingford as I should seek such a man , whatever his rank or position might be : usher to a school , carpenter , shoemaker , if it be possible for they to have have a similar character of mind develop by similar advantage . Mr. Goodenough be a very clever attorney , with strong local interest and not a thought beyond . " 

 " well , well , do not   go on argue , it always give I a headache , as Phobe know . I do not   mean what I say , that be enough , be not   it ? I will retract anything soon than be reason with . where be we before you begin your argument ? " 

 " about dear little molly come to pay we a visit , " say Miss Phobe . 

 " I should have ask you at first , only Coxe be so rampant with his love . I do not   know what he might do , or how troublesome he might be both to Molly and you . but he have cool down now . absence have have a very tranquillizing effect , and I think molly may be in the same town with he , without any consequence beyond a few sigh every time she be bring to his mind by meet she . and I have   get another favour to ask of you , so you see it would never do for I to argue with you , Miss Browning , when I ought to be a humble suppliant . something must be do to the house to make it all ready for the future Mrs. Gibson . it want paint and paper shamefully , and I should think some new furniture , but I be sure I do not   know what . would you be so very kind as to look over the place , and see how far a hundred pound will go ? the dining - room wall must be paint ; we will keep the drawing - room paper for her choice , and I have   a little spare money for that room for she to lay out ; but all the rest of the house I will leave to you , if you will only be kind enough to help an old friend . " 

 this be a commission which exactly gratify Miss Browning 's love of power . the disposal of money involve patronage of trade people , such as she have exercise in her father 's lifetime , but have have very little chance of show since his death . her usual good - humour be quite restore by this proof of confidence in her taste and economy , while Miss Phobe 's imagination dwelt rather on the pleasure of a visit from Molly . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIII . 

 MOLLY GIBSON 's new friend . 
 

 Time be speed on ; it be now the middle of August , if anything be to be do to the house , it must be do at once . indeed , in several way Mr. Gibson 's arrangement with Miss Browning have not be make too soon . the squire have hear that Osborne might probably return home for a few day before go abroad ; and , though the grow intimacy between Roger and Molly do not alarm he in the least , yet he be possess by a very hearty panic lest the heir might take a fancy to the surgeon 's daughter ; and he be in such a fidget for she to leave the house before Osborne come home , that his wife live in constant terror lest he should make it too obvious to their visitor . 

 every young girl of seventeen or so , who be at all thoughtful , be very apt to make a Pope out of the first person who present to she a new or large system of duty than that by which she have be unconsciously guide hitherto . such a Pope be Roger to Molly ; she look to his opinion , to his authority on almost every subject , yet he have only say one or two thing in a terse manner which give they the force of precept stable guide to her conduct and have show the natural superiority in wisdom and knowledge which be sure to exist between a highly educate young man of no common intelligence , and an ignorant girl of seventeen , who yet be well capable of appreciation . still , although they be draw together in this very pleasant relationship , each be imagine some one very different for the future owner of their whole heart their high and completest love . Roger look to find a grand woman , his equal , and his empress ; beautiful in person , serene in wisdom , ready for counsel , as be Egeria . Molly 's little waver maiden fancy dwelt on the unseen Osborne , who be now a troubadour , and now a knight , such as he write about in one of his own poem ; some one like Osborne , perhaps , rather than Osborne himself , for she shrink from give a personal form and name to the hero that be to be . the squire be not unwise in wish she well out of the house before Osborne come home , if he be consider her peace of mind . yet , when she go away from the hall he miss she constantly ; it have be so pleasant to have she there fulfil all the pretty office of a daughter ; cheer the meal , so often tete - a - tete betwixt he and Roger , with her innocent wise question , her lively interest in their talk , her merry reply to his banter . 

 and Roger miss she too . sometimes her remark have probe into his mind , and excite he to the deep thought in which he delight ; at other time he have feel himself of real help to she in her hour of need , and in make she take an interest in book , which treat of high thing than the continual fiction and poetry which she have hitherto read . he feel something like an affectionate tutor suddenly deprive of his most promising pupil ; he wonder how she would go on without he ; whether she would be puzzle and dishearten by the book he have lend she to read ; how she and her stepmother would get along together ? she occupy his thought a good deal those first few day after she leave the hall . Mrs. Hamley regret she more , and long than do the other two . she have give she the place of a daughter in her heart ; and now she miss the sweet feminine companionship , the playful caress , the never - cease attention ; the very need of sympathy in her sorrow , that Molly have show so openly from time to time ; all these thing have extremely endear she to the tender - hearted Mrs. Hamley . 

 molly , too , feel the change of atmosphere keenly ; and she blame herself for so feeling even more keenly still . but she could not help have a sense of refinement , which have make she appreciate the whole manner of be at the Hall . by her dear old friend the Miss Brownings she be pet and caress so much that she become ashamed of notice the coarser and loud tone in which they speak , the provincialism of their pronunciation , the absence of interest in thing , and their greediness of detail about person . they ask her question which she be puzzle enough to answer about her future stepmother ; her loyalty to her father forbid she to reply fully and truthfully . she be always glad when they begin to make inquiry as to every possible affair at the Hall . she have be so happy there ; she have like they all , down to the very dog , so thoroughly , that it be easy work reply : she do not mind tell they everything , even to the style of Mrs. Hamley 's invalid dress ; nor what wine the squire drink at dinner . indeed , talk about these thing help she to recall the happy time in her life . but one evening , as they be all sit together after tea in the little upstairs drawing - room , look into the High Street Molly discourse away on the various pleasure of Hamley Hall , and just then tell of all Roger 's wisdom in natural science , and some of the curiosity he have show she , she be suddenly pull up by this little speech , 

 " you seem to have see a great deal of Mr. Roger , Molly ! " say Miss Browning , in a way intend to convey a great deal of meaning to her sister and none at all to Molly . but 

 the man recover of the bite ; 
 the dog it be that die . 
 Molly be perfectly aware of Miss Browning 's emphatic tone , though at first she be perplex as to its cause ; while Miss Phobe be just then too much absorb in knit the heel of her stocking to be fully alive to her sister 's nod and wink . 

 " yes ; he be very kind to I , " say Molly , slowly , ponder over Miss Browning 's manner , and unwilling to say more until she have satisfy herself to what the question tend . 

 " I daresay you will soon be go to Hamley Hall again ? he be not the eld son , you know , Phobe ! do not   make my head ache with your eternal ' eighteen , nineteen , ' but attend to the conversation . molly be tell we how much she see of Mr. Roger , and how kind he be to she . I have   always hear he be a very nice young man , my dear . tell we some more about he ! now , Phobe , attend ! how be he kind to you , molly ? " 

 " oh , he tell I what book to read ; and one day he make I notice how many bee I see " 

 " bee , child ! what do you mean ? either you or he must have be crazy ! " 

 " no , not at all . there be more than two hundred kind of bee in England , and he want I to notice the difference between they and fly . Miss Browning , I can not   help see what you fancy , " say Molly , as red as fire , " but it be very wrong ; it be all a mistake . I will not   speak another word about Mr. Roger or Hamley at all , if it put such silly notion into your head . " 

 " Highty - tighty ! here be a young lady to be lecture her elder ! silly notion indeed ! they be in your head , it seem . and let I tell you , molly , you be too young to let your mind be run on lover . " 

 molly have be once or twice call saucy and impertinent , and certainly a little sauciness come out now . 

 " I never say what the ' silly notion ' be , Miss Browning ; do I now , Miss Phobe ? do not   you see , dear Miss Phobe , it be all her own interpretation , and accord to her own fancy , this foolish talk about lover ? " 

 molly be flame with indignation ; but she have appeal to the wrong person for justice . Miss Phobe try to make peace after the fashion of weak - minded people , who would cover over the unpleasant sight of a sore , instead of try to heal it . 

 " I be sure I do not   know anything about it , my dear . it seem to I that what Dorothy be say be very true very true indeed ; and I think , love , you misunderstood she ; or , perhaps , she misunderstood you ; or I may be misunderstand it altogether ; so we would well not talk any more about it . what price do you say you be go to give for the drugget in Mr. Gibson 's dining - room , sister ? " 

 so Miss Browning and Molly go on till evening , each chafed and angry with the other . they wish each other good - night , go through the usual form in the cool manner possible . molly go up to her little bedroom , clean and neat as a bedroom could be , with drapery of small delicate patchwork bed - curtain , window - curtain , and counterpane ; a japanned toilette - table , full of little box , with a small look - glass affix to it , that distort every face that be so unwise as to look in it . this room have be to the child one of the most dainty and luxurious place ever see , in comparison with her own bare , white - dimity bedroom ; and now she be sleep in it , as a guest , and all the quaint adornment she have once peep at as a great favour , as they be carefully wrap up in cap - paper , be set out for her use . and yet how little she have deserve this hospitable care ; how impertinent she have be ; how cross she have feel ever since ! she be cry tear of penitence and youthful misery when there come a low tap to the door . molly open it , and there stand Miss Browning , in a wonderful erection of a nightcap , and scantily attire in a coloured calico jacket over her scrimpy and short white petticoat . 

 " I be afraid you be asleep , child , " say she , come in and shut the door . " but I want to say to you we have   get wrong to - day , somehow ; and I think it be perhaps my doing . it be as well Phobe should not   know , for she think I perfect ; and when there be only two of we , we get along well if one of we think the other can do no wrong . but I rather think I be a little cross . we will not say any more about it , molly ; only we will go to sleep friend , and friend we will always be , child , will not   we ? now give I a kiss , and do not   cry and swell your eye up ; and put out your candle carefully . " 

 " I be wrong it be my fault , " say Molly , kiss she . 

 " Fiddlestick - end ! do not   contradict I ! I say it be my fault , and I will not   hear another word about it . " 

 the next day molly go with Miss Browning to see the change go on in her father 's house . to she they be but dismal improvement . the faint grey of the dining - room wall , which have harmonize well enough with the deep crimson of the moreen curtain , and which when well clean look thinly coat rather than dirty , be now exchange for a pink salmon - colour of a very glowing hue ; and the new curtain be of that pale sea - green just come into fashion . " very bright and pretty , " Miss Browning call it ; and in the first renewing of their love molly could not bear to contradict she . she could only hope that the green and brown drugget would tone down the brightness and prettiness . there be scaffold here , scaffold there , and Betty scold everywhere . 

 " come up now , and see your papa 's bedroom . he be sleep upstairs in your , that everything may be do up afresh in his . " 

 molly could just remember , in faint clear line of distinctness , the being take into this very room to bid farewell to her die mother . she could see the white linen , the white muslin , surround the pale , wan wistful face , with the large , long eye , yearn for one more touch of the little soft warm child , whom she be too feeble to clasp in her arm , already grow numb in death . many a time when Molly have be in this room since that sad day , have she see in vivid fancy that same wan wistful face lie on the pillow , the outline of the form beneath the clothe ; and the girl have not shrink from such vision , but rather cherish they , as preserve to she the remembrance of her mother 's outward semblance . her eye be full of tear , as she follow Miss Browning into this room to see it under its new aspect . nearly everything be change the position of the bed and the colour of the furniture ; there be a grand toilette - table now , with a glass upon it , instead of the primitive substitute of the top of a chest of drawer , with a mirror above upon the wall , slop downward ; these latter thing have serve her mother during her short married life . 

 " you see , we must have all in order for a lady who have pass so much of her time in the countess 's mansion , " say Miss Browning , who be now quite reconcile to the marriage , thank to the pleasant employment of furnish that have devolve upon she in consequence . " Cromer , the upholsterer , want to persuade I to have a sofa and a writing - table . these man will say anything be the fashion , if they want to sell an article . I say , ' no , no , cromer : bedroom be for sleep in , and sitting - room be for sit in . keep everything to its right purpose , and do not   try and delude I into nonsense . ' why , my mother would have give we a fine scolding if she have ever catch we in our bedroom in the daytime . we keep our out - door thing in a closet downstairs ; and there be a very tidy place for wash our hand , which be as much as one want in the daytime . stuff up a bedroom with sofas and table ! I never hear of such a thing . besides , a hundred pound will not   last for ever . I sha'n't   be able to do anything for your room , Molly ! " 

 " I be right down glad of it , " say Molly . " nearly everything in it be what mamma have when she live with my great - uncle . I would not   have have it change for the world ; I be so fond of it . " 

 " well , there be no danger of it , now the money be run out . by the way , Molly , who be to buy you a bridesmaid 's dress ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say molly ; " I suppose I be to be a bridesmaid ; but no one have speak to I about my dress . " 

 " then I shall ask your papa . " 

 " please , do not . he must have to spend a great deal of money just now . besides , I would rather not be at the wedding , if they will let I stay away . " 

 " nonsense , child . why , all the town would be talk of it . you must go , and you must be well dress , for your father 's sake . " 

 but Mr. Gibson have think of Molly 's dress , although he have say nothing about it to she . he have commission his future wife to get she what be requisite ; and presently a very smart dressmaker come over from the county - town to try on a dress , which be both so simple and so elegant as at once to charm Molly . when it come home all ready to put on , Molly have a private dressing - up for the Miss Brownings ' benefit ; and she be almost startled when she look into the glass , and see the improvement in her appearance . " I wonder if I be pretty , " think she . " I almost think I be in this kind of dress I mean , of course . Betty would say , ' fine feather make fine bird . ' " 

 when she go downstairs in her bridal attire , and with shy blush present herself for inspection , she be greet with a burst of admiration . 

 " well , upon my word ! I should not   have know you . "   " fine feather , " think molly , and check her rise vanity . 

 " you be really beautiful be not   she , sister ? " say Miss Phobe . " why , my dear , if you be always dress , you would be pretty than your dear mamma , whom we always reckon so very personable . " 

 " you be not a bit like she . you favour your father , and white always set off a brown complexion . " 

 " but be not   she beautiful ? " persevere Miss Phobe . 

 " well ! and if she be , Providence make she , and not she herself . besides , the dressmaker must go share . what a fine India muslin it be ! it will have cost a pretty penny ! " 

 Mr. Gibson and Molly drive over to Ashcombe , the night before the wedding , in the one yellow post - chaise that Hollingford possess . they be to be Mr. Preston 's , or , rather , my lord 's guest at the Manor - house . the Manor - house come up to its name , and delight Molly at first sight . it be build of stone , have many gable and mullione window , and be cover over with virginian creeper and late - blow rose . molly do not know Mr. Preston , who stand in the doorway to greet her father . she take stand with he as a young lady at once , and it be the first time she have meet with the kind of behaviour half complimentary , half flirt which some man think it necessary to assume with every woman under five - and - twenty . Mr. Preston be very handsome , and know it . he be a fair man , with light - brown hair and whisker ; grey , roving , well - shape eye , with lash dark than his hair ; and a figure render easy and supple by the athletic exercise in which his excellence be famous , and which have procure he admission into much high society than he be otherwise entitle to enter . he be a capital cricketer ; be so good a shot , that any house desirous of reputation for its bag on the 12th or the 1st , be glad to have he for a guest . he teach young lady to play billiard on a wet day , or go in for the game in serious earnest when require . he know half the private theatrical play off by heart , and be invaluable in arrange impromptu charade and tableaux . he have his own private reason for wish to get up a flirtation with Molly just at this time ; he have amuse himself so much with the widow when she first come to Ashcombe , that he fancy that the sight of he , stand by her less polished , less handsome , middle - aged husband , might be too much of a contrast to be agreeable . besides , he have really a strong passion for some one else ; some one who would be absent ; and that passion it be necessary for he to conceal . so that , altogether , he have resolve , even have " the little Gibson - girl "   as he call she   be less attractive than she be , to devote himself to she for the next sixteen hour . 

 they be take by their host into a wainscoted parlour , where a wood fire crackle and burn , and the crimson curtain shut out the wan day and the outer chill . here the table be lay for dinner ; snowy table - linen , bright silver , clear sparkling glass , wine and an autumnal dessert on the sideboard . yet Mr. Preston keep apologize to Molly for the rudeness of his bachelor home , for the smallness of the room , the great dining - room be already appropriate by his housekeeper , in preparation for the morrow 's breakfast . and then he ring for a servant to show Molly to her room . she be take into a most comfortable chamber ; a wood fire on the hearth , candle light on the toilette - table , dark woollen curtain surround a snow - white bed , great vas of china stand here and there . 

 " this be my Lady Harriet 's room when her ladyship come to the Manor - house with my lord the earl , " say the housemaid , strike out thousand of brilliant spark by a well - direct blow at a smoulder log . " shall I help you to dress , miss ? I always help her ladyship . " 

 molly , quite aware of the fact that she have but her white muslin gown for the wedding besides that she have on , dismiss the good woman , and be thankful to be leave to herself . 

 " Dinner " be it call ? why , it be nearly eight o'clock ; and preparation for bed seem a more natural employment than dress at this hour of night . all the dressing she could manage be the placing of a red damask rise or two in the band of her grey stuff gown , there be a great nosegay of choice autumnal flower on the toilette - table . she do try the effect of another crimson rise in her black hair , just above her ear ; it be very pretty , but too coquettish , and so she put it back again . the dark - oak panel and wainscote of the whole house seem to glow in warm light ; there be so many fire in different room , in the hall , and even one on the landing of the staircase . Mr. Preston must have hear her step , for he meet she in the hall , and lead she into a small drawing - room , with closed folding - door on one side , open into the large drawing - room , as he tell she . this room into which she enter remind she a little of Hamley yellow - satin upholstery of seventy or a hundred year ago , all delicately keep and scrupulously clean ; great indian cabinet , and china jar , emit spicy odour ; a large blaze fire , before which her father stand in his morning dress , grave and thoughtful , as he have be all day . 

 " this room be that which Lady Harriet use when she come here with her father for a day or two , " say Mr. Preston . and molly try to save her father by be ready to talk herself . 

 " do she often come here ? " 

 " not often . but I fancy she like be here when she do . perhaps she find it an agreeable change after the more formal life she lead at the Towers . " 

 " I should think it be a very pleasant house to stay at , " say Molly , remember the look of warm comfort that pervade it . but a little to she dismay Mr. Preston seem to take it as a compliment to himself . 

 " I be afraid a young lady like you might perceive all the incongruity of a bachelor 's home . I be very much oblige to you , Miss Gibson . in general I live pretty much in the room in which we shall dine ; and I have   a sort of agent 's office in which I keep book and paper , and receive caller on business . " 

 then they go in to dinner . molly think everything that be serve be delicious , and cook to the point of perfection ; but they do not seem to satisfy Mr. Preston , who apologize to his guest several time for the bad cooking of this dish , or the omission of a particular sauce to that ; always refer to bachelor 's housekeeping , bachelor 's this and bachelor 's that , till molly grow quite impatient at the word . her father 's depression , which be still continue and render he very silent , make she uneasy ; yet she wish to conceal it from Mr. Preston ; and so she talk away , try to obviate the sort of personal bearing which their host would give to everything . she do not know when to leave the gentleman , but her father make a sign to she ; and she be conduct back to the yellow drawing - room by Mr. Preston , who make many apology for leave she there alone . she enjoy herself extremely , however , feel at liberty to prowl about , and examine all the curiosity the room contain . among other thing be a Louis Quinze cabinet with lovely miniature in enamel let into the fine woodwork . she carry a candle to it , and be look intently at these face when her father and Mr. Preston come in . her father still look care - worn and anxious ; he come up and pat she on the back , look at what she be look at , and then go off to silence and the fire . Mr. Preston take the candle out of her hand , and throw himself into her interest with an air of ready gallantry . 

 " that be say to be Mademoiselle de St. Quentin , a great beauty at the French Court . this be Madame du Barri . do you see any likeness in Mademoiselle de St. Quentin to any one you know ? " he have lower his voice a little as he ask this question . 

 " no ! " say Molly , look at it again . " I never see any one half so beautiful . " 

 " but do not   you see a likeness in the eye particularly ? " he ask again , with some impatience . 

 molly try hard to find out a resemblance , and be again unsuccessful . 

 " it constantly remind I of of Miss Kirkpatrick . " 

 " do it ? " say Molly , eagerly . " oh ! I be so glad I have   never see she , so of course I could not   find out the likeness . you know she , then , do you ? please tell I all about she . " 

 he hesitate a moment before speak . he smile a little before reply . 

 " she be very beautiful ; that of course be understand when I say that this miniature do not come up to she for beauty . " 

 " and besides ? go on , please . " 

 " what do you mean by ' beside ' ? " 

 " oh ! I suppose she be very clever and accomplish ? " 

 that be not in the least what molly want to ask ; but it be difficult to word the vague vastness of her unspoken inquiry . 

 " she be clever naturally ; she have pick up accomplishment . but she have such a charm about she , one forget what she herself be in the halo that surround she . you ask I all this , Miss Gibson , and I answer truthfully ; or else I should not entertain one young lady with my enthusiastic praise of another . " 

 " I do not   see why not , " say Molly . " besides , if you would not   do it in general , I think you ought to do it in my case ; for you , perhaps , do not   know , but she be come to live with we when she leave school , and we be very nearly the same age ; so it will be almost like have a sister . " 

 " she be to live with you , be she ? " say Mr. Preston , to whom this intelligence be news . " and when be she to leave school ? I think she would surely have be at this wedding ; but I be tell she be not to come . when be she to leave school ? " 

 " I think it be to be at Easter . you know she be at Boulogne , and it be a long journey for she to come alone ; or else papa wish for she to be at the marriage very much indeed . " 

 " and her mother prevent it ? I understand . " 

 " no , it be not   her mother ; it be the french schoolmistress , who do not   think it desirable . " 

 " it come to pretty much the same thing . and she be to return and live with you after Easter ? " 

 " I believe so . be she a grave or a merry person ? " 

 " never very grave , as far as I have see of she . Sparkling would be the word for she , I think . do you ever write to she ? if you do , pray remember I to she , and tell she how we have be talk about she you and I. " 

 " I never write to she , " say Molly , rather shortly . 

 Tea come in ; and after that they all go to bed . molly hear her father exclaim at the fire in his bedroom , and Mr. Preston 's reply 

 " I pique myself on my keen relish for all creature comfort , and also on my power of do without they , if need be . my lord 's wood be ample , and I indulge myself with a fire in my bedroom for nine month in the year ; yet I could travel in Iceland without wince from the cold . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIV . 

 MOLLY find HERSELF PATRONIZED . 
 

 the wedding go off much as such affair do . Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet drive over from the tower , so the hour for the ceremony be as late as possible . Lord Cumnor come in order to officiate as the bride 's father , and be in more open glee than either bride or bridegroom , or any one else . Lady Harriet come as a sort of amateur bridesmaid , to ' share Molly 's duty , " as she call it . they go from the Manor - house in two carriage to the church in the park , Mr. Preston and Mr. Gibson in one , and Molly , to her dismay , shut up with Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet in the other . Lady Harriet 's gown of white muslin have see one or two garden - party , and be not in the fresh order ; it have be rather a freak of the young lady 's at the last moment . she be very merry , and very much inclined to talk to Molly , by way of find out what sort of a little personage Clare be to have for her future daughter . she begin : 

 " we must not   crush this pretty muslin dress of your . put it over papa 's knee ; he do not   mind it in the least . " 

 " what , my dear , a white dress ! no , to be sure not . I rather like it . besides , go to a wedding , who mind anything ? it would be different if we be go to a funeral . " 

 molly conscientiously strove to find out the meaning of this speech ; but before she have do so , Lady Harriet speak again , go to the point , as she always pique herself on do : 

 " I daresay it be something of a trial to you , this second marriage of your father 's ; but you will find Clare the most amiable of woman . she always let I have my own way , and I have   no doubt she will let you have your . " 

 " I mean to try and like she , " say Molly , in a low voice , strive hard to keep down the tear that would keep rise to her eye this morning . " I have   see very little of she yet . " 

 " why , it be the very good thing for you that could have happen , my dear , " say Lord Cumnor . " you be grow up into a young lady and a very pretty young lady , too , if you will allow an old man to say so and who so proper as your father 's wife to bring you out , and show you off , and take you to ball , and that kind of thing ? I always say this match that be go to come off to - day be the most suitable thing I ever know ; and it be even a well thing for you than for the people themselves . " 

 " poor child ! " say Lady Harriet , who have catch a sight of Molly 's troubled face , " the thought of ball be too much for she just now ; but you will like have Cynthia Kirkpatrick for a companion , shall not   you , dear ? " 

 " very much , " say Molly , cheer up a little . " do you know she ? " 

 " oh , I have   see she over and over again when she be a little girl , and once or twice since . she be the prettiest creature that you ever see ; and with eye that mean mischief , if I be not mistaken . but Clare keep her spirit under pretty well when she be stay with we , afraid of she be troublesome , I fancy . " 

 before molly could shape she next question , they be at the church ; and she and Lady Harriet go into a pew near the door to wait for the bride , in whose train they be to proceed to the altar . the earl drive on alone to fetch she from her own house , not a quarter of a mile distant . it be pleasant to she to be lead to the hymeneal altar by a belted earl , and pleasant to have his daughter as a volunteer bridesmaid . Mrs. Kirkpatrick in this flush of small gratification , and on the brink of matrimony with a man whom she like , and who would be bind to support she without any exertion of her own , look beamingly happy and handsome . a little cloud come over her face at the sight of Mr. Preston , the sweet perpetuity of her smile be rather disturb as he follow in Mr. Gibson 's wake . but his face never change ; he bow to she gravely , and then seem absorb in the service . ten minute , and all be over . the bride and bridegroom be drive together to the Manor - house , Mr. Preston be walk thither by a short cut , and Molly be again in the carriage with my lord , rub his hand and chuckle , and Lady Harriet , try to be kind and consolatory , when her silence would have be the good comfort . 

 molly find out , to her dismay , that the plan be for she to return with Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet when they go back to the tower in the evening . in the meantime Lord Cumnor have business to do with Mr. Preston , and after the happy couple have drive off on their week 's holiday tour , she be to be leave alone with the formidable Lady Harriet . when they be by themselves after all the other have be thus dispose of , Lady Harriet sate still over the drawing - room fire , hold a screen between it and her face , but gaze intently at Molly for a minute or two . molly be fully conscious of this prolonged look , and be try to get up her courage to return the stare , when Lady Harriet suddenly say , 

 " I like you ; you be a little wild creature , and I want to tame you . come here , and sit on this stool by I . what be your name ? or what do they call you ? as north - country people would express it . " 

 " Molly Gibson . my real name be Mary . " 

 " molly be a nice , soft - sound name . People in the last century be not   afraid of homely name ; now we be all so smart and fine : no more ' Lady Bettys ' now . I almost wonder they have not   re - christen all the worsted and knitting - cotton that bear her name . Fancy Lady Constantia 's cotton , or Lady Anna - Maria 's worst . " 

 " I do not   know there be a Lady Betty 's cotton , " say Molly . 

 " that prove you do not   do fancy - work ! you will find Clare will set you to it , though . she use to set I at piece after piece : knight kneel to lady ; impossible flower . but I must do she the justice to add that when I get tired of they she finish they herself . I wonder how you will get on together ? " 

 " so do I ! " sigh out molly , under her breath . 

 " I use to think I manage she , till one day an uncomfortable suspicion arise that all the time she have be manage I . still it be easy work to let oneself be manage ; at any rate till one waken up to the consciousness of the process , and then it may become amusing , if one take it in that light . " 

 " I should hate to be manage , " say Molly , indignantly . " I will try and do what she wish for papa 's sake , if she will only tell I outright ; but I should dislike to be trap into anything . " 

 " now I , " say Lady Harriet , " be too lazy to avoid trap ; and I rather like to remark the cleverness with which they be set . but then , of course , I know that if I choose to exert myself , I can break through the withe of green flax with which they try to bind I . now , perhaps , you will not   be able . " 

 " I do not   quite understand what you mean , " say Molly . 

 " oh , well never mind ; I daresay it be as well for you that you should not . the moral of all I have be say be , ' be a good girl , and suffer yourself to be lead , and you will find your new stepmother the sweetest creature imaginable . ' you will get on capitally with she , I make no doubt . how you will get on with her daughter be another affair ; but I daresay very well . now we will ring for tea ; for I suppose that heavy breakfast be to stand for our lunch . " 

 Mr. Preston come into the room just at this time , and Molly be a little surprised at Lady Harriet 's cool manner of dismiss he , remember as she do how Mr. Preston have imply his intimacy with her ladyship the evening before at dinner - time . 

 " I can not bear that sort of person , " say Lady Harriet , almost before he be out of hearing ; " give himself air of gallantry towards one to whom his simple respect be all his duty . I can talk to one of my father 's labourer with pleasure , while with a man like that underbred fop I be all over thorn and nettle . what be it the irish call that style of creature ? they have   some capital word for it , I know . what be it ? " 

 " I do not   know I never hear it , " say Molly , a little ashamed of her ignorance . 

 " oh ! that show you have   never read Miss Edgeworth 's tale ; now , have you ? if you have , you would have recollect that there be such a word , even if you do not   remember what it be . if you have   never read those story , they would be just the thing to beguile your solitude vastly improve and moral , and yet quite sufficiently interesting . I will lend they to you while you be all alone . " 

 " I be not alone . I be not at home , but on a visit to Miss Brownings . " 

 " then I will bring they to you . I know the Miss Brownings ; they use to come regularly on the school - day to the Towers . Pecksy and Flapsy I use to call they . I like the Miss Brownings ; one get enough of respect from they at any rate ; and I have   always want to see the kind of mťnage of such people . I will bring you a whole pile of Miss Edgeworth 's story , my dear . " 

 molly sate quite silent for a minute or two ; then she muster up courage to speak out what be in her mind . 

 " your ladyship "   the title be the firstfruit of the lesson , as Molly take it , on pay due respect   " your ladyship keep speak of the sort of the class of people to which I belong as if it be a kind of strange animal you be talk about ; yet you talk so openly to I that " 

 " well , go on I like to hear you . " 

 still silence . 

 " you think I in your heart a little impertinent now , do not   you ? " say Lady Harriet , almost kindly . 

 molly hold her peace for two or three moment ; then she lift her beautiful , honest eye to Lady Harriet 's face , and say , 

 " yes ! a little . but I think you a great many other thing . " 

 " we will leave the ' other thing ' for the present . do not   you see , little one , I talk after my kind , just as you talk after your kind . it be only on the surface with both of we . why , I daresay some of your good Hollingford lady talk of the poor people in a manner which they would consider as impertinent in their turn , if they could hear it . but I ought to be more considerate when I remember how often my blood have boil at the mode of speech and behaviour of one of my aunt , mamma 's sister , Lady No ! I will not   name name . any one who earn his livelihood by any exercise of head or hand , from professional people and rich merchant down to labourer , she call ' person . ' she would never in her most slip - slop talk accord they even the conventional title of ' gentleman ; ' and the way in which she take possession of human being , ' my woman , ' ' my people , ' but , after all , it be only a way of speak . I ought not to have use it to you ; but somehow I separate you from all these Hollingford people . " 

 " but why ? " persevere molly . " I be one of they . " 

 " yes , you be . but now do not   reprove I again for impertinence most of they be so unnatural in their exaggerated respect and admiration when they come up to the Towers , and put on so much pretence by way of fine manner , that they only make themselves object of ridicule . you at least be simple and truthful , and that be why I separate you in my own mind from they , and have talk unconsciously to you as I would well ! now here be another piece of impertinence as I would to my equal in rank , I mean ; for I do not   set myself up in solid thing as any well than my neighbour . here 's tea , however , come in time to stop I from grow too humble . " 

 it be a very pleasant little tea in the fading September twilight . 

 just as it be end , in come Mr. Preston again : 

 " Lady Harriet , will you allow I the pleasure of show you some alteration I have make in the flower - garden in which I have try to consult your taste before it grow dark ? " 

  Unwelcome Attentions . 
 Unwelcome Attentions . 
 click to enlarge 
 " thank you , Mr. Preston . I will ride over with papa some day , and we will see if we approve of they . " 

 Mr. Preston 's brow flush . but he affect not to perceive Lady Harriet 's haughtiness , and , turn to Molly , he say , 

 " will not you come out , Miss Gibson , and see something of the garden ? you have not   be out at all , I think , except to church . " 

 molly do not like the idea of go out for a walk with only Mr. Preston ; yet she pin for a little fresh air , would have be glad to see the garden , and look at the Manor - house from different aspect ; and , besides this , much as she recoil from Mr. Preston , she feel sorry for he under the repulse he have just receive . 

 while she be hesitate , and slowly tend towards consent , Lady Harriet speak , 

 " I can not spare Miss Gibson . if she would like to see the place , I will bring she over some day myself . " 

 when he have leave the room , Lady Harriet say , " I daresay it be my own lazy selfishness have keep you indoor all day against your will . but , at any rate , you be not to go out walk with that man . I have   an instinctive aversion to he ; not entirely instinctive either ; it have some foundation in fact ; and I desire you do not   allow he ever to get intimate with you . he be a very clever land - agent , and do his duty by papa , and I do not   choose to be take up for libel ; but remember what I say ! " 

 then the carriage come round , and after numberless last word from the earl who appear to have put off every possible direction to the moment when he stand , like an awkward Mercury , balance himself on the step of the carriage they drive back to the Towers . 

 " would you rather come in and dine with we we should send you home , of course or go home straight ? " ask Lady Harriet of Molly . she and her father have both be sleep till they draw up at the bottom of the flight of step . 

 " tell the truth , now and evermore . truth be generally amusing , if it be nothing else ! " 

 " I would rather go back to Miss Brownings ' at once , please , " say Molly , with a nightmare - like recollection of the last , the only evening she have spend at the Towers . 

 Lord Cumnor be stand on the step , wait to hand his daughter out of the carriage . Lady Harriet stop to kiss molly on the forehead , and to say , 

 " I shall come some day soon , and bring you a load of Miss Edgeworth 's tale , and make further acquaintance with Pecksy and Flapsy . " 

 " no , do not , please , " say Molly , take hold of she , to detain she . " you must not come indeed you must not . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because I would rather not because I think that I ought not to have any one come to see I who laugh at the friend I be stay with , and call they name . " Molly 's heart beat very fast , but she mean every word that she say . 

 " my dear little woman ! " say Lady Harriet , bend over she and speak quite gravely . " I be very sorry to have call they name very , very sorry to have hurt you . if I promise you to be respectful to they in word and in deed and in very thought , if I can you will let I then , will not   you ? " 

 molly hesitate . " I would well go home at once ; I shall only say wrong thing and there be Lord Cumnor wait all this time . " 

 " let he alone ; he be very well amused hear all the news of the day from Brown . then I shall come under promise ? " 

 so molly drive off in solitary grandeur ; and Miss Brownings ' knocker be loosen on its venerable hinge by the never - end peal of Lord Cumnor 's footman . 

 they be full of welcome , full of curiosity . all through the long day they have be miss their bright young visitor , and three or four time in every hour they have be wonder and settle what everybody be do at that exact minute . what have become of Molly during all the afternoon , have be a great perplexity to they ; and they be very much oppress with a sense of the great honour she have receive in be allow to spend so many hour alone with Lady Harriet . they be , indeed , more excited by this one fact than by all the detail of the wedding , most of which they have know of beforehand , and talk over with much perseverance during the day . molly begin to feel as if there be some foundation for Lady Harriet 's inclination to ridicule the worship pay by the good people of Hollingford to their liege lord , and to wonder with what token of reverence they would receive Lady Harriet if she come to pay her promise visit . she have never think of conceal the probability of this call until this evening ; but now she feel as if it would be well not to speak of the chance , as she be not at all sure that the promise would be fulfil . 

 before Lady Harriet 's call be pay , molly receive another visit . 

 Roger Hamley come rid over one day with a note from his mother , and a wasps'-n as a present from himself . molly hear his powerful voice come sound up the little staircase , as he ask if Miss Gibson be at home from the servant - maid at the door ; and she be half amuse and half annoy as she think how this call of his would give colour to Miss Browning 's fancy . " I would rather never be marry at all , " think she , " than marry an ugly man , and dear good Mr. Roger be really ugly ; I do not   think one could even call he plain . " yet Miss Brownings , who do not look upon young man as if their natural costume be a helmet and a suit of armour , think Mr. Roger Hamley a very personable young fellow , as he come into the room , his face flush with exercise , his white tooth show pleasantly in the courteous bow and smile he give to all around . he know the Miss Brownings slightly , and talk pleasantly to they while molly read Mrs. Hamley 's little missive of sympathy and good wish relate to the wedding ; then he turn to she , and though Miss Brownings listen with all their ear , they could not find out anything remarkable either in the word he say or the tone in which they be speak . 

 " I have   bring you the wasps'-n I promise you , Miss Gibson . there have be no lack of such thing this year ; we have   take seventy - four on my father 's land alone ; and one of the labourer , a poor fellow who eke out his wage by bee - keeping , have have a sad misfortune the wasp have turn the bee out of his seven hive , take possession , and eat up the honey . " 

 " what greedy little vermin ! " say Miss Browning . 

 molly see Roger 's eye twinkle at the misapplication of the word ; but though he have a strong sense of humour , it never appear to diminish his respect for the people who amuse he . 

 " I be sure they deserve fire and brimstone more than the poor dear innocent bee , " say Miss Phobe . " and then it seem so ungrateful of mankind , who be go to feast on the honey ! " she sigh over the thought , as if it be too much for she . 

 while molly finish read her note , he explain its content to Miss Browning . 

 " my brother and I be go with my father to an agricultural meeting at Canonbury on Thursday , and my mother desire I to say to you how very much oblige she should be if you would spare her Miss Gibson for the day . she be very anxious to ask for the pleasure of your company , too , but she really be so poorly that we persuade she to be content with Miss Gibson , as she would not   scruple leave a young lady to amuse herself , which she would be unwilling to do if you and your sister be there . " 

 " I be sure she be very kind ; very . nothing would have give we more pleasure , " say Miss Browning , draw herself up in gratified dignity . " oh , yes , we quite understand , Mr. Roger ; and we fully recognize Mrs. Hamley 's kind intention . we will take the will for the deed , as the common people express it . I believe that there be an intermarriage between the Brownings and the Hamleys , a generation or two ago . " 

 " I daresay there be , " say Roger . " my mother be very delicate , and oblige to humour her health , which have make she keep aloof from society . " 

 " then I may go ? " say Molly , sparkle with the idea of see her dear Mrs. Hamley again , yet afraid of appear too desirous of leave her kind old friend . 

 " to be sure , my dear . write a pretty note , and tell Mrs. Hamley how much oblige to she we be for thinking of we . " 

 " I be afraid I can not   wait for a note , " say Roger . " I must take a message instead , for I have to meet my father at one o'clock , and it be close upon it now . " 

 when he be go , Molly feel so light - hearted at the thought of Thursday that she could hardly attend to what the Miss Brownings be say . one be talk about the pretty muslin gown which molly have send to the wash only that morning , and contrive how it could be have back again in time for she to wear ; and the other , Miss Phobe , totally inattentive to her sister 's speak for a wonder , be pip out a separate strain of her own , and sing Roger Hamley 's praise . 

 " such a fine - look young man , and so courteous and affable . like the young man of our youth now , be he not , sister ? and yet they all say Mr. Osborne be the handsome . what do you think , child ? " 

 " I have   never see Mr. Osborne , " say Molly , blushing , and hat herself for do so . why be it ? she have never see he as she say . it be only that her fancy have dwell on he so much . 

 he be go all the gentleman be go before the carriage , which come to fetch molly on Thursday , reach Hamley Hall . but Molly be almost glad , she be so much afraid of be disappoint . besides , she have her dear Mrs. Hamley the more to herself ; the quiet sit in the morning - room , talk poetry and romance ; the midday saunter into the garden , brilliant with autumnal flower and glitter dew - drop on the gossamer webs that stretch from scarlet to blue , and thence to purple and yellow petal . as they be sit at lunch , a strange man 's voice and step be hear in the hall ; the door be open , and a young man come in , who could be no other than Osborne . he be beautiful and languid - look , almost as frail in appearance as his mother , whom he strongly resemble . this seeming delicacy make he appear old than he be . he be dress to perfection , and yet with easy carelessness . he come up to his mother , and stand by she , hold her hand , while his eye seek molly , not boldly or impertinently , but as if appraise she critically . 

 " yes ! I be back again . bullock , I find , be not in my line . I only disappoint my father in not be able to appreciate their merit , and , I be afraid , I do not   care to learn . and the smell be insufferable on such a hot day . " 

 " my dear boy , do not   make apology to I ; keep they for your father . I be only too glad to have you back . Miss Gibson , this tall fellow be my son Osborne , as I daresay you have guess . osborne Miss Gibson . now , what will you have ? " 

 he look round the table as he sate down . " nothing here , " say he . " be not   there some cold game - pie ? I will ring for that . " 

 Molly be try to reconcile the ideal with the real . the ideal be agile , yet powerful , with greek feature and an eagle - eye , capable of endure long fasting , and indifferent as to what he eat . the real be almost effeminate in movement , though not in figure ; he have the greek feature , but his blue eye have a cold , weary expression in they . he be dainty in eating , and have anything but a homeric appetite . however , Molly 's hero be not to eat more than Ivanhoe , when he be Friar Tuck 's guest ; and , after all , with a little alteration , she begin to think Mr. Osborne Hamley might turn out a poetical , if not a chivalrous hero . he be extremely attentive to his mother , which please Molly , and , in return , Mrs. Hamley seem charm with he to such a degree that molly once or twice fancy that mother and son would have be happy in her absence . yet , again , it strike on the shrewd , if simple girl , that Osborne be mentally squint at she in the conversation which be direct to his mother . there be little turn and ' fioriture ' of speech which molly could not help feel be graceful antic of language not common in the simple daily intercourse between mother and son . but it be flattering rather than otherwise to perceive that a very fine young man , who be a poet to boot , should think it worth while to talk on the tight rope for her benefit . and before the afternoon be end , without there have be any direct conversation between Osborne and Molly , she have reinstate he on his throne in her imagination ; indeed , she have almost feel herself disloyal to her dear Mrs. Hamley when , in the first hour after her introduction , she have question his claim on his mother 's idolatry . his beauty come out more and more , as he become animate in some discussion with she ; and all his attitude , if a little study , be graceful in the extreme . before molly leave , the squire and Roger return from Canonbury . 

 " Osborne here ! " say the Squire , red and panting . " why the deuce could not   you tell we you be come home ? I look about for you everywhere , just as we be go into the ordinary . I want to introduce you to Grantley , and Fox , and Lord Forrest man from the other side of the county , whom you ought to know ; and Roger there miss above half his dinner hunt about for you ; and all the time you would stole away , and be quietly sit here with the woman . I wish you would let I know the next time you make off . I have   lose half my pleasure in look at as fine a lot of cattle as I ever see , with think you might be have one of your old attack of faintness . " 

 " I should have have one , I think , if I have stay long in that atmosphere . but I be sorry if I have   cause you anxiety . " 

 " well ! well ! " say the Squire , somewhat mollified . " and Roger , too , there I have   be send he here and send he there all the afternoon . " 

 " I do not   mind it , sir . I be only sorry you be so uneasy . I think Osborne have go home , for I know it be not   much in his way , " say Roger . 

 molly intercept a glance between the two brother a look of true confidence and love , which suddenly make she like they both under the aspect of relationship new to her observation . 

 Roger come up to she , and sit down by she . 

 " well , and how be you get on with Huber ; do not   you find he very interesting ? " 

 " I be afraid , " say Molly , penitently , " I have not   read much . Miss Brownings like I to talk ; and , besides , there be so much to do at home before papa come back ; and Miss Browning do not   like I to go without she . I know it sound nothing , but it do take up a great deal of time . " 

 " when be your father come back ? " 

 " Next Tuesday , I believe . he can not stay long away . " 

 " I shall ride over and pay my respect to Mrs. Gibson , " say he . " I shall come as soon as I may . your father have be a very kind friend to I ever since I be a boy . and when I come , I shall expect my pupil to have be very diligent , " he conclude , smile his kind , pleasant smile at idle Molly . 

 then the carriage come round , and she have the long solitary drive back to Miss Brownings ' . it be dark out of door when she get there ; but Miss Phobe be stand on the stair , with a light candle in her hand , peer into the darkness to see molly come in . 

 " oh , Molly ! I think you would never come back . such a piece of news ! Sister have go to bed ; she be have a headache with the excitement , I think ; but she say it be new bread . come upstairs softly , my dear , and I will tell you what it be ! who do you think have be here , drink tea with we , too , in the most condescending manner ? " 

 " Lady Harriet ? " say Molly , suddenly enlighten by the word " condescend . " 

 " yes . why , how do you guess it ? but , after all , her call , at any rate in the first instance , be upon you . oh , dear Molly ! if you be not in a hurry to go to bed , let I sit down quietly and tell you all about it ; for my heart jump into my mouth still when I think of how I be catch . she that be , her ladyship leave the carriage at ' the George , ' and take to her foot to go shop just as you or I may have do many a time in our life . and sister be take she forty wink ; and I be sit with my gown up above my knee and my foot on the fender , pull out my grandmother 's lace which I have be wash . the bad have yet to be tell . I would take off my cap , for I think it be get dusk and no one would come , and there be I in my black silk skull - cap , when Nancy put her head in , and whisper , ' there be a lady downstairs a real grand one , by her talk ; ' and in there come my Lady Harriet , so sweet and pretty in her way , it be some time before I remember I have never a cap on . Sister never waken ; or never rouse up , so to say . she say she think it be Nancy bring in the tea when she hear some one move ; for her ladyship , as soon as she see the state of the case , come and kneel down on the rug by I , and beg my pardon so prettily for have follow Nancy upstairs without wait for permission ; and be so take by my old lace , and want to know how I wash it , and where you be , and when you would be back , and when the happy couple would be back : till sister waken she be always a little bit put out , you know , when she first waken from her afternoon nap , and , without turn her head to see who it be , she say , quite sharp , ' buzz , buzz , buzz ! when will you learn that whispering be more fidgeting than talk out loud ? I have   not be able to sleep at all for the chatter you and Nancy have be keep up all this time . ' you know that be a little fancy of sister 's , for she have be snore away as naturally as could be . so I go to she , and leant over she , and say in a low voice , 

 " ' Sister , it be her ladyship and I that have be converse . ' 

 " ' ladyship here , ladyship there ! have you lose your wit , Phobe , that you talk such nonsense and in your skull - cap , too ! ' 

 " by this time she be sit up and , look round she , she see Lady Harriet , in her velvet and silk , sit on our rug , smile , her bonnet off , and her pretty hair all bright with the blaze of the fire . my word ! sister be up on her foot directly ; and she drop her curtsey , and make her excuse for sleep , as fast as might be , while I go off to put on my good cap , for sister might well say I be out of my wit to go on chat to an earl 's daughter in an old black silk skull - cap . black silk , too ! when , if I would only know she be come , I might have put on my new brown silk one , lie idle in my top drawer . and when I come back , sister be order tea for her ladyship , our tea , I mean . so I take my turn at talk , and sister slip out to put on her Sunday silk . but I do not   think we be quite so much at our ease with her ladyship as when I sit pull out my lace in my skull - cap . and she be quite strike with our tea , and ask where we get it , for she have never taste any like it before ; and I tell she we give only 3s . 4d . a pound for it , at Johnson 's   sister say I ought to have tell she the price of our company - tea , which be 5s . a pound , only that be not what we be drink ; for , as ill - luck would have it , we have none of it in the house   and she say she would send we some of her , all the way from Russia or Prussia , or some out - of - the - way place , and we be to compare and see which we like well ; and if we like hers well , she could get it for we at 3s . a pound . and she leave her love for you ; and , though she be go away , you be not to forget she . Sister think such a message would set you up too much , and tell I she would not be chargeable for the give it you . ' but , ' I say , ' a message be a message , and it be on Molly 's own shoulder if she be set up by it . let we show she an example of humility , sister , though we have be sit cheek - by - jowl in such company . ' so sister humphe , and say she have a headache , and go to bed . and now you may tell I your news , my dear . " 

 so Molly tell her small event ; which , interesting as they might have be at other time to the gossip - love and sympathetic Miss Phobe , be rather pale in the strong light reflect from the visit of an earl 's daughter . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 the NEW MAMMA . 
 

 Illustrationn Tuesday afternoon Molly return home to the home which be already strange , and what Warwickshire people would call " unked , " to she . new paint , new paper , new colour ; grim servant dress in their good , and object to every change from their master 's marriage to the new oilcloth in the hall , " which trip them up , and throw them down , and be cold to the foot , and smell just abominable . " all these complaint molly have to listen to , and it be not a cheerful preparation for the reception which she already feel to be so formidable . 

 the sound of their carriage - wheel be hear at last , and Molly go to the front door to meet they . her father get out first , and take her hand and hold it while he help his bride to alight . then he kiss she fondly , and pass she on to his wife ; but her veil be so securely   and becomingly   fasten down , that it be some time before Mrs. Gibson could get her lip clear to greet her new daughter . then there be luggage to be see about ; and both the traveller be occupy in this , while molly stand by tremble with excitement , unable to help , and only conscious of Betty 's rather cross look , as heavy box after heavy box jam up the passage . 

 " molly , my dear , show your mamma to her room ! " 

 Mr. Gibson have hesitate , because the question of the name by which Molly be to call her new relation have never occur to he before . the colour flash into Molly 's face . be she to call she " mamma ? " the name long appropriate in her mind to some one else to her own dead mother . the rebellious heart rise against it , but she say nothing . she lead the way upstairs , Mrs. Gibson turn round , from time to time , with some fresh direction as to which bag or trunk she need most . she hardly speak to Molly till they be both in the newly - furnish bedroom , where a small fire have be light by Molly 's order . 

 " now , my love , we can embrace each other in peace . o dear , how tired I be ! "   after the embrace have be accomplish . " my spirit be so easily affect with fatigue ; but your dear papa have be kindness itself . dear ! what an old - fashioned bed ! and what a but it do not   signify . by - and - by we will renovate the house will not   we , my dear ? and you will be my little maid to - night , and help I to arrange a few thing , for I be just wear out with the day 's journey . " 

 " I have   order a sort of tea - dinner to be ready for you , " say Molly . " shall I go and tell they to send it in ? " 

 " I be not sure if I can go down again to - night . it would be very comfortable to have a little table bring in here , and sit in my dressing - gown by this cheerful fire . but , to be sure , there be your dear papa ? I really do not   think he would eat anything if I be not there . one must not think about oneself , you know . yes , I will come down in a quarter of an hour . " 

 but Mr. Gibson have find a note await he , with an immediate summon to an old patient , dangerously ill ; and , snatch a mouthful of food while his horse be be saddle , he have to resume at once his old habit of attention to his profession above everything . 

 as soon as Mrs. Gibson find that he be not likely to miss her presence he have eat a very tolerable lunch of bread and cold meat in solitude , so her fear about his appetite in her absence be not well found she desire to have her meal upstairs in her own room ; and poor Molly , not dare to tell the servant of this whim , have to carry up first a table , which , however small , be too heavy for she ; and afterwards all the choice portion of the meal , which she have take great pain to arrange on the table , as she have see such thing do at Hamley , intermix with fruit and flower that have that morning be send in from various great house where Mr. Gibson be respect and value . how pretty molly have think her handiwork an hour or two before ! how dreary it seem as , at last release from Mrs. Gibson 's conversation , she sate down in solitude to cold tea and the drumstick of the chicken ! no one to look at her preparation , and admire her deft - handedness and taste ! she have think that her father would be gratify by it , and then he have never see it . she have mean her care as an offering of good - will to her stepmother , who even now be ring her bell to have the tray take away , and Miss Gibson summon to her bedroom . 

 molly hastily finish her meal , and go upstairs again . 

 " I feel so lonely , darling , in this strange house ; do come and be with I , and help I to unpack . I think your dear papa might have put off his visit to Mr. Craven Smith for just this one evening . " 

 " Mr. Craven Smith could not   put off his dying , " say Molly , bluntly . 

 " you droll girl ! " say Mrs. Gibson , with a faint laugh . " but if this Mr. Smith be die , as you say , what be the use of your father 's go off to he in such a hurry ? do he expect any legacy , or anything of that kind ? " 

 molly bite her lip to prevent herself from say something disagreeable . she only answer , 

 " I do not   quite know that he be die . the man say so ; and papa can sometimes do something to make the last struggle easy . at any rate , it be always a comfort to the family to have he . " 

 " what dreary knowledge of death you have learn for a girl of your age ! really , if I have hear all these detail of your father 's profession , I doubt if I could have bring myself to have he ! " 

 " he do not   make the illness or the death ; he do his good against they . I call it a very fine thing to think of what he do or try to do . and you will think so , too , when you see how he be watch for , and how people welcome he ! " 

 " well , do not   let we talk any more of such gloomy thing , to - night ! I think I shall go to bed at once , I be so tired , if you will only sit by I till I get sleepy , darling . if you will talk to I , the sound of your voice will soon send I off . " 

 molly get a book , and read her stepmother to sleep , prefer that to the hard task of keep up a continual murmur of speech . 

 then she steal down and go into the dining - room , where the fire be go out ; purposely neglect by the servant , to mark their displeasure at their new mistress 's have have her tea in her own room . molly manage to light it , however , before her father come home , and collect and re - arrange some comfortable food for he . then she kneel down again on the hearth - rug , gaze into the fire in a dreamy reverie , which have enough of sadness about it to cause the tear to drop unnoticed from her eye . but she jump up , and shake herself into brightness at the sound of her father 's step . 

 " how be Mr. Craven Smith ? " say she . 

 " dead . he just recognize I . he be one of my first patient on come to Hollingford . " 

 Mr. Gibson sate down in the arm - chair make ready for he , and warm his hand at the fire , seem neither to need food nor talk , as he go over a train of recollection . then he rouse himself from his sadness , and look round the room , he say briskly enough , 

 " and where be the new mamma ? " 

 " she be tired , and go to bed early . oh , papa ! must I call she ' mamma ? ' " 

 " I should like it , " reply he , with a slight contraction of the brow . 

 molly be silent . she put a cup of tea near he ; he stir it , and sip it , and then he recur to the subject . 

 " why should not   you call she ' mamma ? ' I be sure she mean to do the duty of a mother to you . we all may make mistake , and her way may not be quite all at once our way ; but at any rate let we start with a family bond between we . " 

 what would Roger say be right ? that be the question that rise to Molly 's mind . she have always speak of her father 's new wife as Mrs. Gibson , and have once burst out at Miss Brownings with a protestation that she never would call she " mamma . " she do not feel draw to her new relation by their intercourse that evening . she keep silence , though she know her father be expect an answer . at last he give up his expectation , and turn to another subject ; tell about their journey , question she as to the Hamleys , the Brownings , Lady Harriet , and the afternoon they have pass together at the Manor - house . but there be a certain hardness and constraint in his manner , and in hers a heaviness and absence of mind . all at once she say , 

 " Papa , I will call she ' mamma ! ' " 

 he take her hand , and grasp it tight ; but for an instant or two he do not speak . then he say , 

 " you will not   be sorry for it , Molly , when you come to lie as poor Craven Smith do to - night . " 

 for some time the murmur and grumbling of the two eld servant be confine to Molly 's ear , then they spread to her father 's , who , to Molly 's dismay , make summary work with they . 

 " you do not   like Mrs. Gibson 's ring her bell so often , do not   you ? you have   be spoil , I be afraid ; but if you do not   conform to my wife 's desire , you have the remedy in your own hand , you know . " 

 what servant ever resist the temptation to give warning after such a speech as that ? Betty tell Molly she be go to leave , in as indifferent a manner as she could possibly assume towards the girl whom she have tend and be about for the last sixteen year . molly have hitherto consider her former nurse as a fixture in the house ; she would almost as soon have think of her father 's propose to sever the relationship between they ; and here be Betty coolly talk over whether her next place should be in town or country . but a great deal of this be assume hardness . in a week or two Betty be in flood of tear at the prospect of leave her nursling , and would fain have stay and answer all the bell in the house once every quarter of an hour . even Mr. Gibson 's masculine heart be touch by the sorrow of the old servant , which make itself obvious to he every time he come across she by her broken voice and her swollen eye . 

 one day he say to Molly , " I wish you would ask your mamma if Betty might not stay , if she make a proper apology , and all that sort of thing . " 

 " I do not   much think it will be of any use , " say Molly , in a mournful voice . " I know she be write , or have write , about some under - housemaid at the Towers . " 

 " well ! all I want be peace and a decent quantity of cheerfulness when I come home . I see enough of tear at other people 's house . after all , Betty have be with we sixteen year a sort of service of the antique world . but the woman may be happy elsewhere . do as you like about ask mamma ; only if she agree , I shall be quite willing . " 

 so molly try her hand at make a request to that effect to Mrs. Gibson . her instinct tell she she would be unsuccessful ; but surely favour be never refuse in so soft a tone . 

 " my dear girl , I should never have think of send an old servant away , one who have have the charge of you from your birth , or nearly so . I could not have have the heart to do it . she might have stay for ever for I , if she have only attend to all my wish ; and I be not unreasonable , be I ? but , you see , she complain ; and when your dear papa speak to she , she give warning ; and it be quite against my principle ever to take an apology from a servant who have give warning . " 

 " she be so sorry , " plead molly ; ' she say she will do anything you wish , and attend to all your order , if she may only stay . " 

 " but , sweet one , you seem to forget that I can not go against my principle , however much I may be sorry for Betty . she should not have give way to ill - temper . as I say before , although I never like she , and consider she a most inefficient servant , thoroughly spoil by have have no mistress for so long , I should have bear with she at least , I think I should as long as I could . now I have all but engaged Maria , who be under - housemaid at the tower , so do not   let I hear any more of Betty 's sorrow , or anybody else 's sorrow , for I be sure , what with your dear papa 's sad story and other thing , I be get quite low . " 

 molly be silent for a moment or two . 

 " have you quite engaged Maria ? " ask she . 

 " no I say ' all but engage . ' sometimes one would think you do not hear thing , dear Molly ! " reply Mrs. Gibson , petulantly . " Maria be live in a place where they do not   give she as much wage as she deserve . perhaps they can not   afford it , poor thing ! I be always sorry for poverty , and would never speak hardly of those who be not rich ; but I have offer she two pound more than she get at present , so I think she will leave . at any rate , if they increase her wage , I shall increase my offer in proportion ; so I think I be sure to get she . such a genteel girl ! always bring in a letter on a salver ! " 

 " Poor Betty ! " say Molly , softly . 

 " poor old soul ! I hope she will profit by the lesson , I be sure , " sigh out Mrs. Gibson ; " but it be a pity we have not   Maria before the county family begin to call . " 

 Mrs. Gibson have be highly gratified by the circumstance of so many call " from county family . " her husband be much respect ; and many lady from various hall , court , and house , who have profit by his service towards themselves and their family , think it right to pay his new wife the attention of a call when they drive into Hollingford to shop . the state of expectation into which these call throw Mrs. Gibson rather diminish Mr. Gibson 's domestic comfort . it be awkward to be carry hot , savoury - smell dish from the kitchen to the dining - room at the very time when high - bear lady , with nose of aristocratic refinement , might be call . still more awkward be the accident which happen in consequence of clumsy Betty 's haste to open the front door to a lofty footman 's ran - tan , which cause she to set down the basket contain the dirty plate right in his mistress 's way , as she step gingerly through the comparative darkness of the hall ; and then the young man , leave the dining - room quietly enough , but burst with long - repressed giggle , or no long restrain their tendency to practical joking , no matter who might be in the passage when they make their exit . the remedy propose by Mrs. Gibson for all these distressing grievance be a late dinner . the luncheon for the young man , as she observe to her husband , might be send into the surgery . a few elegant cold trifle for herself and Molly would not scent the house , and she would always take care to have some little dainty ready for he . he accede , but unwillingly , for it be an innovation on the habit of a lifetime , and he feel as if he should never be able to arrange his round aright with this new - fangle notion of a six o'clock dinner . 

 " do not   get any dainty for I , my dear ; bread - and - cheese be the chief of my diet , like it be that of the old woman 's . " 

 " I know nothing of your old woman , " reply his wife ; " but really I can not allow cheese to come beyond the kitchen . " 

 " then I will eat it there , " say he . " it be close to the stable - yard , and if I come in in a hurry I can get it in a moment . " 

 " really , Mr. Gibson , it be astonishing to compare your appearance and manner with your taste . you look such a gentleman , as dear Lady Cumnor use to say . " 

 then the cook leave ; also an old servant , though not so old a one as Betty . the cook do not like the trouble of late dinner ; and , be a Methodist , she object on religious ground to try any of Mrs. Gibson 's new receipt for french dish . it be not scriptural , she say . there be a deal of mention of food in the Bible ; but it be of sheep ready dress , which mean mutton , and of wine , and of bread - and - milk , and fig and raisin , of fat calf , a good well - brown fillet of veal , and such like ; but it have always go against her conscience to cook swine - flesh and make raise pork - pie , and now if she be to be set to cook heathen dish after the fashion of the Papists , she would soon give it all up together . so the cook follow in Betty 's track , and Mr. Gibson have to satisfy his healthy english appetite on badly - make omelette , rissole , vol - au - vent , croquet , and timbale ; never be exactly sure what he be eat . 

 he have make up his mind before his marriage to yield in trifle , and be firm in great thing . but the difference of opinion about trifle arise every day , and be perhaps more annoying than if they have relate to thing of more consequence . molly know her father 's look as well as she know her alphabet ; his wife do not ; and be an unperceptive person , except when her own interest be dependent upon another person 's humour , never find out how he be worry by all the small daily concession which he make to her will or her whim . he never allow himself to put any regret into shape , even in his own mind ; he repeatedly remind himself of his wife 's good quality , and comfort himself by think they should work together well as time roll on ; but he be very angry at a bachelor great - uncle of Mr. Coxe 's , who , after take no notice of his red - headed nephew for year , suddenly send for he , after the old man have partially recover from a serious attack of illness , and appoint he his heir , on condition that his great - nephew remain with he during the rest of his life . this have happen almost directly after Mr. and Mrs. Gibson 's return from their wedding journey , and once or twice since that time Mr. Gibson have find himself wonder why the deuce old Benson could not have make up his mind soon , and so have rid his house of the unwelcome presence of the young lover . to do Mr. Coxe justice , in the very last conversation he have as a pupil with Mr. Gibson he say , with hesitate awkwardness , that perhaps the new circumstance in which he should be place might make some difference with regard to Mr. Gibson 's opinion on 

 " not at all , " say Mr. Gibson , quickly . " you be both of you too young to know your own mind ; and if my daughter be silly enough to be in love , she should never have to calculate her happiness on the chance of an old man 's death . I dare say he will disinherit you after all . he may do , and then you would be bad off than ever . no ! go away , and forget all this nonsense ; and when you have   do , come back and see we ! " 

 so Mr. Coxe go away , with an oath of unalterable faithfulness in his heart ; and Mr. Gibson have unwillingly to fulfil an old promise make to a gentleman farmer in the neighbourhood a year or two before , and to take the second son of Mr. Browne in young Coxe 's place . he be to be the last of the race of pupil , and as he be rather more than a year young than Molly , Mr. Gibson trust that there would be no repetition of the Coxe romance . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVI . 

 the BRIDE AT HOME . 
 

 among the " county people "   as Mrs. Gibson term they   who call upon she as a bride , be the two young Mr. Hamleys . the Squire , their father , have do his congratulation , as far as he ever intend to do they , to Mr. Gibson himself when he come to the hall ; but Mrs. Hamley , unable to go and pay visit herself , anxious to show attention to her kind doctor 's new wife , and with perhaps a little sympathetic curiosity as to how molly and her stepmother get on together , make her son ride over to Hollingford with her card and apology . they come into the newly - furnish drawing - room , look bright and fresh from their ride : osborne first , as usual , perfectly dress for the occasion , and with the sort of fine manner which sate so well upon he ; Roger , look like a strong - build , cheerful , intelligent country farmer , follow in his brother 's train . Mrs. Gibson be dress for receive caller , and make the effect she always intend to produce , of a very pretty woman , no long in first youth , but with such soft manner and such a caressing voice , that people forgot to wonder what her real age might be . molly be well dress than formerly ; her stepmother see after that . she dislike anything old or shabby , or out of taste about she ; it hurt her eye ; and she have already fidget molly into a new amount of care about the manner in which she put on her clothe , arrange her hair , and be gloved and shod . Mrs. Gibson have try to put she through a course of rosemary wash and cream in order to improve her tan complexion ; but about that Molly be either forgetful or rebellious , and Mrs. Gibson could not well come up to the girl 's bedroom every night and see that she daub her face and neck over with the cosmetic so carefully provide for she . still her appearance be extremely improve , even to Osborne 's critical eye . Roger seek rather to discover in her look and expression whether she be happy or not ; his mother have especially charge he to note all these sign . 

 Osborne and Mrs. Gibson make themselves agreeable to each other accord to the approved fashion when a young man call on a middle - aged bride . they talk of the " Shakspeare and musical glass " of the day , each vie with the other in their knowledge of London topic . molly hear fragment of their conversation in the pause of silence between Roger and herself . her hero be come out in quite a new character ; no long literary or poetical , or romantic , or critical , he be now full of the last new play , the singer at the opera . he have the advantage over Mrs. Gibson , who , in fact , only speak of these thing from hearsay , from listen to the talk at the tower , while Osborne have run up from Cambridge two or three time to hear this , or to see that wonder of the season . but she have the advantage over he in great boldness of invention to eke out her fact ; and besides she have more skill in the choice and arrangement of her word , so as to make it appear as if the opinion that be in reality quotation , be form by herself from actual experience or personal observation ; such as , in speak of the mannerism of a famous italian singer , she would ask , 

  Shakspeare and the Musical Glasses . 
 Shakspeare and the Musical Glasses . 
 click to enlarge 
 " do you observe her constant trick of heave her shoulder and clasp her hand together before she take a high note ? " which be so say as to imply that Mrs. Gibson herself have notice this trick . molly , who have a pretty good idea by this time of how her stepmother have pass the last year of her life , listen with no small bewilderment to this conversation ; but at length decide that she must misunderstand what they be say , as she could not gather up the miss link for the necessity of reply to Roger 's question and remark . Osborne be not the same Osborne he be when with his mother at the Hall . 

 Roger see molly glance at his brother . 

 " you think my brother look ill ? " say he , lower his voice . 

 " no not exactly . " 

 " he be not well . both my father and I be anxious about he . that run on the continent do he harm , instead of good ; and his disappointment at his examination have tell upon he , I be afraid . " 

 " I be not think he look ill ; only change somehow . " 

 " he say he must go back to Cambridge soon . possibly it may do he good ; and I shall be off next week . this be a farewell visit to you , as well as one of congratulation to Mrs. Gibson . " 

 " your mother will feel your both go away , will not   she ? but of course young man will always have to live away from home . " 

 " yes , " he reply . " still she feel it a good deal ; and I be not satisfied about her health either . you will go out and see she sometimes , will you ? she be very fond of you . " 

 " if I may , " say Molly , unconsciously glance at her stepmother . she have an uncomfortable instinct that , in spite of Mrs. Gibson 's own perpetual flow of word , she could , and do , hear everything that fall from Molly 's lip . 

 " do you want any more book ? " say he . " if you do , make a list out , and send it to my mother before I leave , next Tuesday . after I be go , there will be no one to go into the library and pick they out . " 

 as soon as they have leave , Mrs. Gibson begin her usual comment on the depart visitor . 

 " I do like that Osborne Hamley ! what a nice fellow he be ! somehow , I always do like eld son . he will have the estate , will not   he ? I shall ask your dear papa to encourage he to come about the house . he will be a very good , very pleasant acquaintance for you and Cynthia . the other be but a loutish young fellow , to my mind ; there be no aristocratic bearing about he . I suppose he take after his mother , who be but a parvenue , I have   hear they say at the Towers . " 

 molly be spiteful enough to have great pleasure in say , 

 " I think I have   hear her father be a russian merchant , and import tallow and hemp . Mr. Osborne Hamley be extremely like she . " 

 " indeed ! but there be no calculate these thing . anyhow , he be the perfect gentleman in appearance and manner . the estate be entail , be it not ? " 

 " I know nothing about it , " say Molly . 

 a short silence ensue . then Mrs. Gibson say , 

 " do you know , I almost think I must get dear papa to give a little dinner - party , and ask Mr. Osborne Hamley ? I should like to have he feel at home in this house . it would be something cheerful for he after the dulness and solitude of Hamley Hall . for the old people do not   visit much , I believe ? " 

 " he be go back to Cambridge next week , " say Molly . 

 " be he ? well , then , we will put off our little dinner till Cynthia come home . I should like to have some young society for she , poor darling , when she return . " 

 " when be she come ? " say Molly , who have always a longing curiosity for this same Cynthia 's return . 

 " oh ! I be not sure ; perhaps at the new year perhaps not till Easter . I must get this drawing - room all new furnish first ; and then I mean to fit up her room and yours just alike . they be just the same size , only on opposite side of the passage . " 

 " be you go to new - furnish that room ? " say Molly , in astonishment at the never - end change . 

 " yes ; and your , too , darling ; so do not   be jealous . " 

 " oh , please , mamma , not mine , " say Molly , take in the idea for the first time . 

 " yes , dear ! you shall have yours do as well . a little french bed , and a new paper , and a pretty carpet , and a dress - up toilet - table and glass , will make it look quite a different place . " 

 " but I do not   want it to look different . I like it as it be . pray do not   do anything to it . " 

 " what nonsense , child ! I never hear anything more ridiculous ! Most girl would be glad to get rid of furniture only fit for the lumber - room . " 

 " it be my own mamma 's before she be marry , " say Molly , in a very low voice ; bring out this last plea unwillingly , but with a certainty that it would not be resist . 

 Mrs. Gibson pause for a moment before she reply : 

 " it be very much to your credit that you should have such feeling , I be sure . but do not   you think sentiment may be carry too far ? why , we should have no new furniture at all , and should have to put up with worm - eat horror . besides , my dear , Hollingford will seem very dull to Cynthia , after pretty , gay France , and I want to make the first impression attractive . I have   a notion I can settle she down near here ; and I want she to come in a good temper ; for , between ourselves , my dear , she be a little , leetle wilful . you need not mention this to your papa . " 

 " but can not   you do Cynthia 's room , and not mine ? please let mine alone . " 

 " no , indeed ! I could not   agree to that . only think what would be say of I by everybody ; pet my own child and neglect my husband 's ! I could not   bear it . " 

 " no one need know . " 

 " in such a tittle - tattle place as Hollingford ! really , Molly , you be either very stupid or very obstinate , or else you do not   care what hard thing may be say about I : and all for a selfish fancy of your own ! no ! I owe myself the justice of act in this matter as I please . every one shall know I be not a common stepmother . every penny I spend on Cynthia I shall spend on you too ; so it be no use talk any more about it . " 

 so Molly 's little white dimity bed , her old - fashioned chest of drawer , and her other cherished relic of her mother 's maiden - day , be consign to the lumber - room ; and after a while , when Cynthia and her great french box have come home , the old furniture that have fill up the space require for the fresh importation of trunk , disappear likewise into the same room . 

 all this time the family at the tower have be absent ; Lady Cumnor have be order to Bath for the early part of the winter , and her family be with she there . on dull rainy day , Mrs. Gibson use to bethink she of miss " the Cumnors , " for so she have take to call they since her position have become more independent of theirs . it mark a distinction between her intimacy in the family , and the reverential manner in which the townspeople be accustom to speak of " the earl and the countess . " both Lady Cumnor and Lady Harriet write to their " dear Clare " from time to time . the former have generally some commission that she wish to have execute at the tower , or in the town ; and no one could do they so well as Clare , who be acquaint with all the taste and way of the countess . these commission be the cause of various bill for fly and car from the George Inn . Mr. Gibson point out this consequence to his wife ; but she , in return , bid he remark that a present of game be pretty sure to follow upon the satisfactory execution of Lady Cumnor 's wish . somehow , Mr. Gibson do not quite like this consequence either ; but he be silent about it , at any rate . Lady Harriet 's letter be short and amusing . she have that sort of regard for her old governess which prompt she to write from time to time , and to feel glad when the half - voluntary task be accomplish . so there be no real outpouring of confidence , but enough news of the family and gossip of the place she be in , as she think would make Clare feel that she be not forget by her former pupil , intermix with moderate but sincere expression of regard . how those letter be quote and refer to by Mrs. Gibson in her conversation with the Hollingford lady ! she have find out their effect at Ashcombe ; and it be not less at Hollingford . but she be rather perplexed at kindly message to Molly , and at inquiry as to how the Miss Brownings like the tea she have send ; and Molly have first to explain , and then to narrate at full length , all the occurrence of the afternoon at Ashcombe Manor - house , and Lady Harriet 's subsequent call upon she at Miss Brownings ' . 

 " what nonsense ! " say Mrs. Gibson , with some annoyance . " Lady Harriet only go to see you out of a desire of amusement . she would only make fun of Miss Brownings , and those two will be quote she and talk about she , just as if she be their intimate friend . " 

 " I do not   think she do make fun of they . she really seem as if she have be very kind . " 

 " and you suppose you know her way well than I do who have know she these fifteen year ? I tell you she turn every one into ridicule who do not belong to her set . why , she use always to speak of Miss Brownings as ' Pecksy and Flapsy . ' " 

 " she promise I she would not , " say Molly drive to bay . 

 " promise you ! Lady Harriet ? what do you mean ? " 

 " only she speak of they as Pecksy and Flapsy and when she talk of come to call on I at their house , I ask she not to come if she be go to to make fun of they . " 

 " upon my word ! with all my long acquaintance with Lady Harriet , I should never have venture on such impertinence . " 

 " I do not   mean it as impertinence , " say Molly sturdily . " and I do not   think Lady Harriet take it as such . " 

 " you can not   know anything about it . she can put on any kind of manner . " 

 just then Squire Hamley come in . it be his first call ; and Mrs. Gibson give he a graceful welcome , and be quite ready to accept his apology for its tardiness , and to assure he that she quite understand the pressure of business on every land - owner who farm his own estate . but no such apology be make . he shake her hand heartily , as a mark of congratulation on her good fortune in have secure such a prize as his friend Gibson , but say nothing about his long neglect of duty . molly , who by this time know the few strong expression of his countenance well , be sure that something be the matter , and that he be very much disturbed . he hardly attend to Mrs. Gibson 's fluent opening of conversation , for she have already determine to make a favourable impression on the father of the handsome young man who be heir to an estate , besides his own personal agreeableness ; but he turn to Molly and , address she , say almost in a low voice , as if he be make a confidence to she that he do not intend Mrs. Gibson to hear , 

 " molly , we be all wrong at home ! Osborne have lose the fellowship at Trinity he go back to try for . then he have go and fail miserably in his degree , after all that he say , and that his mother say ; and I , like a fool , go and boast about my clever son . I can not   understand it . I never expect anything extraordinary from Roger ; but Osborne ! and then it have throw madam into one of her bad fit of illness ; and she seem to have a fancy for you , child ! your father come to see she this morning . poor thing , she be very poorly , I be afraid ; and she tell he how she should like to have you about she , and he say I might fetch you . you will come , will not   you , my dear ? she be not a poor woman , such as many people think it be the only charity to be kind to , but she be just as forlorn of woman 's care as if she be poor bad , I daresay . " 

 " I will be ready in ten minute , " say molly , much touch by the squire 's word and manner , never think of ask her stepmother 's consent , now that she have hear that her father have give his . as she rise to leave the room , Mrs. Gibson , who have only half hear what the Squire have say , and be a little affronted at the exclusiveness of his confidence , say , " my dear , where be you go ? " 

 " Mrs. Hamley want I , and papa say I may go , " say molly ; and almost at the same time the squire reply , 

 " my wife be ill , and as she be very fond of your daughter , she beg Mr. Gibson to allow she to come to the Hall for a little while , and he kindly say she might , and I be come to fetch she . " 

 " stop a minute , darling , " say Mrs. Gibson to Molly a slight cloud over her countenance , in spite of her caress word . " I be sure dear papa quite forget that you be to go out with I to - night , to visit people , " continue she , address herself to the squire , " with whom I be quite unacquainted and it be very uncertain if Mr. Gibson can return in time to accompany I so , you see , I can not allow Molly to go with you . " 

 " I should not   have think it would have signify . bride be always bride , I suppose ; and it be their part to be timid ; but I should not   have think it in this case . and my wife set her heart on thing , as sick people do . well , Molly "   in a loud tone , for these foregoing sentence be speak sotto voce , " we must put it off till to - morrow : and it be our loss , not your , " he continue , as he see the reluctance with which she slowly return to her place . " you will be as gay as can be to - night , I daresay " 

 " no , I shall not , " break in Molly . " I never want to go , and now I shall want it less than ever . " 

 " Hush , my dear , " say Mrs. Gibson ; and , address the squire , she add , " the visit here be not all one could wish for so young a girl no young people , no dance , nothing of gaiety ; but it be wrong in you , molly , to speak against such kind friend of your father 's as I understand these Cockerells be . do not   give so bad an impression of yourself to the kind squire . " 

 " let she alone ! let she alone ! " quoth he . " I see what she mean . she would rather come and be in my wife 's sick - room than go out for this visit to - night . be there no way of get she off ? " 

 " none whatever , " say Mrs. Gibson . " an engagement be an engagement with I ; and I consider that she be not only engage to Mrs. Cockerell , but to I bind to accompany I , in my husband 's absence . " 

 the Squire be put out ; and when he be put out he have a trick of place his hand on his knee and whistle softly to himself . molly know this phase of his displeasure , and only hop he would confine himself to this wordless expression of annoyance . it be pretty hard work for she to keep the tear out of her eye ; and she endeavour to think of something else , rather than dwell on regret and annoyance . she hear Mrs. Gibson talk on in a sweet monotone , and wish to attend to what she be say , but the Squire 's visible annoyance strike sharper on her mind . at length , after a pause of silence , he start up , and say , 

 " well ! it be no use . poor madam ; she will not   like it . she will be disappoint ! but it be but for one evening ! but for one evening ! she may come to - morrow , may not   she ? or will the dissipation of such an evening as she describe , be too much for she ? " 

 there be a touch of savage irony in his manner which frighten Mrs. Gibson into good behaviour . 

 " she shall be ready at any time you name . I be so sorry : my foolish shyness be in fault , I believe ; but still you must acknowledge that an engagement be an engagement . " 

 " do I ever say an engagement be an elephant , madam ? however , there be no use say any more about it , or I shall forget my manner . I be an old tyrant , and she lie there in bed , poor girl have always give I my own way . so you will excuse I , Mrs. Gibson , will not   you ; and let molly come along with I at ten to - morrow morning ? " 

 " certainly , " say Mrs. Gibson , smile . but when his back be turn , she say to Molly , 

 " now , my dear , I must never have you expose I to the ill - manner of such a man again ! I do not   call he a squire ; I call he a boor , or a yeoman at well . you must not go on accept or reject invitation as if you be an independent young lady , Molly . pay I the respect of a reference to my wish another time , if you please , my dear ! " 

 " Papa have say I might go , " say Molly , choke a little . 

 " as I be now your mamma , your reference must be to I , for the future . but as you be to go you may as well look well dressed . I will lend you my new shawl for this visit , if you like it , and my set of green ribbon . I be always indulgent when proper respect be pay to I . and in such a house as Hamley Hall , no one can tell who may be come and go , even if there be sickness in the family . " 

 " thank you . but I do not   want the shawl and the ribbon , please : there will be nobody there except the family . there never be , I think ; and now that she be so ill " Molly be on the point of cry at the thought of her friend lie ill and lonely , and look for her arrival . moreover , she be sadly afraid lest the Squire have go off with the idea that she do not want to come that she prefer that stupid , stupid party at the Cockerells ' . Mrs. Gibson , too , be sorry ; she have an uncomfortable consciousness of have give way to temper before a stranger , and a stranger , too , whose good opinion she have mean to cultivate ; and she be also annoy at Molly 's tearful face . 

 " what can I do for you , to bring you back into good temper ? " she say . " first , you insist upon your know Lady Harriet well than I do I , who have know she for eighteen or nineteen year at least . then you jump at invitation without ever consult I , or think of how awkward it would be for I to go stump into a drawing - room all by myself ; follow my new name , too , which always make I feel uncomfortable , it be such a sad come - down after Kirkpatrick ! and then , when I offer you some of the prettiest thing I have get , you say it do not signify how you be dress . what can I do to please you , molly ? I , who delight in nothing more than peace in a family , to see you sit there with despair upon your face ? " 

 molly could stand it no long ; she go upstairs to her own room her own smart new room , which hardly yet seem a familiar place ; and begin to cry so heartily and for so long a time , that she stop at length for very weariness . she think of Mrs. Hamley weary for she ; of the old Hall whose very quietness might become oppressive to an ail person ; of the trust the Squire have have in she that she would come off directly with he . and all this oppress she much more than the querulousness of her stepmother 's word . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVII . 

 TROUBLE at HAMLEY HALL . 
 

 if molly think that peace dwelt perpetually at Hamley Hall she be sorely mistaken . something be out of tune in the whole establishment ; and , for a very unusual thing , the common irritation seem to have produce a common bond . all the servant be old in their place , and be tell by some one of the family , or gather , from the unheeded conversation carry on before they , everything that affect master or mistress or either of the young gentleman . any one of they could have tell Molly that the grievance which lie at the root of everything , be the amount of the bill run up by Osborne at Cambridge , and which , now that all chance of his obtain a fellowship be over , come pour down upon the squire . but molly , confident of be tell by Mrs. Hamley herself anything which she wish she to hear , encourage no confidence from any one else . 

 she be strike with the change in " madam 's " look as soon as she catch sight of she in the darken room , lie on the sofa in her dressing - room , all dress in white , which almost rival the white wanness of her face . the squire usher Molly in with , 

 " here she be at last ! " and Molly have scarcely imagine that he have so much variety in the tone of his voice the beginning of the sentence be speak in a loud congratulatory manner , while the last word be scarcely audible . he have see the death - like pallor on his wife 's face ; not a new sight , and one which have be present to he gradually enough , but which be now always give he a fresh shock . it be a lovely tranquil winter 's day ; every branch and every twig on the tree and shrub be glitter with drop of the sun - melt hoar - frost ; a robin be perch on a holly - bush , pip cheerily ; but the blind be down , and out of Mrs. Hamley 's window nothing of all this be to be see . there be even a large screen place between she and the wood - fire , to keep off that cheerful blaze . Mrs. Hamley stretch out one hand to Molly , and hold hers firm ; with the other she shade her eye . 

 " she be not so well this morning , " say the Squire , shake his head . " but never fear , my dear one ; here be the doctor 's daughter , nearly as good as the doctor himself . have you have your medicine ? your beef - tea ? " he continue , go about on heavy tiptoe and peep into every empty cup and glass . then he return to the sofa ; look at she for a minute or two , and then softly kiss she , and tell Molly he would leave she in charge . 

 as if Mrs. Hamley be afraid of Molly 's remark or question , she begin in her turn a hasty system of interrogatory . 

 " now , dear child , tell I all ; it be no breach of confidence , for I shall not   mention it again , and I shall not   be here long . how do it all go on the new mother , the good resolution ? let I help you if I can . I think with a girl I could have be of use a mother do not know boy . but tell I anything you like and will ; do not   be afraid of detail . " 

 even with Molly 's small experience of illness she see how much of restless fever there be in this speech ; and instinct , or some such gift , prompt she to tell a long story of many thing the wedding - day , her visit to Miss Brownings ' , the new furniture , Lady Harriet ,   c. , all in an easy flow of talk which be very soothing to Mrs. Hamley , inasmuch as it give she something to think about beyond her own immediate sorrow . but Molly do not speak of her own grievance , nor of the new domestic relationship . Mrs. Hamley notice this . 

 " and you and Mrs. Gibson get on happily together ? " 

 " not always , " say Molly . " you know we do not   know much of each other before we be put to live together . " 

 " I do not   like what the Squire tell I last night . he be very angry . " 

 that sore have not yet heal over ; but molly resolutely keep silence , beat her brain to think of some other subject of conversation . 

 " ah ! I see , molly , " say Mrs. Hamley ; " you will not   tell I your sorrow , and yet , perhaps , I could have do you some good . " 

 " I do not   like , " say Molly , in a low voice . " I think papa would not   like it . and , besides , you have help I so much you and Mr. Roger Hamley . I often think of the thing he say ; they come in so usefully , and be such a strength to I . " 

 " ah , Roger ! yes . he be to be trust . oh , Molly ! I have   a great deal to say to you myself , only not now . I must have my medicine and try to go to sleep . good girl ! you be strong than I be , and can do without sympathy . " 

 molly be take to another room ; the maid who conduct she to it tell she that Mrs. Hamley have not wish she to have her night disturb , as they might very probably have be if she have be in her former sleeping - room . in the afternoon Mrs. Hamley send for she , and with the want of reticence common to invalid , especially to those suffer from long and depressing malady , she tell Molly of the family distress and disappointment . 

 she make molly sit down near she on a little stool , and , hold her hand , and look into her eye to catch her speak sympathy from their expression quick than she could from her word , she say , 

 " Osborne have so disappoint we ! I can not understand it yet . and the squire be so terribly angry ! I can not think how all the money be spend advance through money - lender , besides bill . the squire do not show I how angry he be now , because he be afraid of another attack ; but I know how angry he be . you see he have be spend ever so much money in reclaim that land at Upton Common , and be very hard press himself . but it would have double the value of the estate , and so we never think anything of economy which would benefit Osborne in the long run . and now the Squire say he must mortgage some of the land ; and you can not   think how it cut he to the heart . he sell a great deal of timber to send the two boy to college . osborne oh ! what a dear , innocent boy he be : he be the heir , you know ; and he be so clever , every one say he be sure of honour and a fellowship , and I do not   know what all ; and he do get a scholarship , and then all go wrong . I do not   know how . that be the bad . perhaps the Squire write too angrily , and that stop up confidence . but he might have tell I . he would have do , I think , Molly , if he have be here , face to face with I . but the squire , in his anger , tell he not to show his face at home till he have pay off the debt he have incur out of his allowance . out of two hundred and fifty a year to pay off more than nine hundred , one way or another ! and not to come home till then ! perhaps Roger will have debt too ! he have but two hundred ; but , then , he be not the eld son . the Squire have give order that the man be to be turn off the draining - work ; and I lie awake thinking of their poor family this wintry weather . but what shall we do ? I have   never be strong , and , perhaps , I have   be extravagant in my habit ; and there be family tradition as to expenditure , and the reclaiming of this land . oh ! molly , Osborne be such a sweet little baby , and such a love boy : so clever , too ! you know I read you some of his poetry : now , could a person who write like that do anything very wrong ? and yet I be afraid he have . " 

 " do not   you know , at all , how the money have go ? " ask Molly . 

 " no ! not at all . that be the sting . there be tailor ' bill , and bill for book - bind and wine and picture those come to four or five hundred ; and though this expenditure be extraordinary inexplicable to such simple folk as we be yet it may be only the luxury of the present day . but the money for which he will give no account , of which , indeed , we only hear through the squire 's London agent , who find out that certain disreputable attorney be make inquiry as to the entail of the estate ; oh ! molly , bad than all I do not   know how to bring myself to tell you as to the age and health of the Squire , his dear father "   she begin to sob almost hysterically ; yet she would go on talk , in spite of Molly 's effort to stop she   " who hold he in his arm , and bless he , even before I have kiss he ; and think always so much of he as his heir and first - bear darling . how he have love he ! how I have love he ! I sometimes have think of late that we have   almost do that good Roger injustice . " 

 " no ! I be sure you have   not : only look at the way he love you . why , you be his first thought : he may not speak about it , but any one may see it . and dear , dear Mrs. Hamley , " say Molly , determine to say out all that be in her mind now that she have once get the word , " do not   you think that it would be well not to misjudge Mr. Osborne Hamley ? we do not   know what he have do with the money : he be so good   be he not ?   that he may have want it to relieve some poor person some tradesman , for instance , press by creditor some " 

 " you forget , dear , " say Mrs. Hamley , smile a little at the girl 's impetuous romance , but sigh the next instant , " that all the other bill come from tradesman , who complain piteously of be keep out of their money . " 

 molly be nonplus for the moment ; but then she say , 

 " I daresay they impose upon he . I be sure I have   hear story of young man be make regular victim of by the shopkeeper in great town . " 

 " you be a great darling , child , " say Mrs. Hamley , comfort by Molly 's strong partisanship , unreasonable and ignorant though it be . 

 " and , besides , " continue Molly , ' some one must be act wrongly in Osborne 's Mr. Osborne Hamley 's , I mean I can not   help say Osborne sometimes , but , indeed , I always think of he as Mr. Osborne " 

 " never mind , Molly , what you call he ; only go on talk . it seem to do I good to hear the hopeful side take . the squire have be so hurt and displease : strange - look man come into the neighbourhood , too , question the tenant , and grumble about the last fall of timber , as if they be calculate on the squire 's death . " 

 " that be just what I be go to speak about . do not   it show that they be bad man ? and would bad man scruple to impose upon he , and to tell lie in his name , and to ruin he ? " 

 " do not   you see , you only make he out weak , instead of wicked ? " 

 " yes ; perhaps I do . but I do not   think he be weak . you know yourself , dear Mrs. Hamley , how very clever he really be . besides , I would rather he be weak than wicked . weak people may find themselves all at once strong in heaven , when they see thing quite clearly ; but I do not   think the wicked will turn themselves into virtuous people all at once . " 

 " I think I have   be very weak , molly , " say Mrs. Hamley , stroke Molly 's curl affectionately . " I have   make such an idol of my beautiful Osborne ; and he turn out to have foot of clay , not strong enough to stand firm on the ground . and that be the good view of his conduct , too ! " 

 what with his anger against his son , and his anxiety about his wife ; the difficulty of raise the money immediately require , and his irritation at the scarce - conceal inquiry make by stranger as to the value of his property , the poor squire be in a sad state . he be angry and impatient with every one who come near he ; and then be depressed at his own violent temper and unjust word . the old servant , who , perhaps , cheat he in many small thing , be beautifully patient under his upbraiding . they could understand burst of passion , and know the cause of his variable mood as well as he do himself . the butler , who be accustomed to argue with his master about every fresh direction as to his work , now nudge Molly at dinner - time to make her eat of some dish which she have just be decline , and explain his conduct afterwards as follow : 

 " you see , miss , I and cook have plan a dinner as would tempt master to eat ; but when you say , ' no , thank you , ' when I hand you anything , master never so much as look at it . but if you take a thing , and eat with a relish , why first he wait , and then he look , and by - and - by he smell ; and then he find out as he be hungry , and fall to eat as natural as a kitten take to mewing . that be the reason , miss , as I give you a nudge and a wink , which no one know well nor I be not manner . " 

 Osborne 's name be never mention during these cheerless meal . the squire ask Molly question about Hollingford people , but do not seem much to attend to her answer . he use also to ask she every day how she think that his wife be ; but if molly tell the truth that every day seem to make she weak and weak he be almost savage with the girl . he could not bear it ; and he would not . Nay , once he be on the point of dismiss Mr. Gibson because he insist on a consultation with Dr. Nicholls , the great physician of the county . 

 " it be nonsense think she so ill as that you know it be only the delicacy she be have for year ; and if you can not   do she any good in such a simple case no pain only weakness and nervousness it be a simple case , eh ? do not   look in that puzzled way , man ! you would well give she up altogether , and I will take she to Bath or Brighton , or somewhere for change , for in my opinion it be only moping and nervousness . " 

 but the Squire 's bluff florid face be pinch with anxiety , and wear with the effort of be deaf to the footstep of fate as he say these word which belie his fear . 

 Mr. Gibson reply very quietly , 

 " I shall go on come to see she , and I know you will not forbid my visit . but I shall bring Dr. Nicholls with I the next time I come . I may be mistake in my treatment ; and I wish to God he may say I be mistaken in my apprehension . " 

 " do not   tell I they ! I can not bear they ! " cry the squire . " of course we must all die ; and she must too . but the clever doctor in England shall not   go about coolly mete out the life of such as she . I daresay I shall die first . I hope I shall . but I will knock any one down who speak to I of death sit within I . and , besides , I think all doctor be ignorant quack , pretend to knowledge they have not   get . ay , you may smile at I . I do not   care . unless you can tell I I shall die first , neither you nor your Dr. Nicholls shall come prophesy and croak about this house . " 

 Mr. Gibson go away , heavy at heart from the thought of Mrs. Hamley 's approach death , but think little enough of the squire 's speech . he have almost forget they , in fact , when about nine o'clock that evening , a groom ride in from Hamley Hall in hot haste , with a note from the squire . 
 

 Dear Gibson , 

 for God 's sake forgive I if I be rude to - day . she be much bad . come and spend the night here . write for Nicholls , and all the physician you want . write before you start off . they may give her ease . there be Whitworth doctor much talk of in my youth for cure people give up by the regular doctor ; can not   you get one of they ? I put myself in your hand . sometimes I think it be the turning point , and she will rally after this bout . I trust all to you . 

 your ever , 

 R. Hamley . 

 P.S. molly be a treasure . God help I ! 
 

 of course Mr. Gibson go ; for the first time since his marriage cut short Mrs. Gibson 's querulous lamentation over her life , as involve in that of a doctor call out at all hour of day and night . 

 he bring Mrs. Hamley through this attack ; and for a day or two the Squire 's alarm and gratitude make he docile in Mr. Gibson 's hand . then he return to the idea of its be a crisis through which his wife have pass ; and that she be now on the way to recovery . but the day after the consultation with Dr. Nicholls , Mr. Gibson say to Molly , 

 " molly ! I have   write to Osborne and Roger . do you know Osborne 's address ? " 

 " no , papa . he be in disgrace . I do not   know if the squire know ; and she have be too ill to write . " 

 " never mind . I will enclose it to Roger ; whatever those lad may be to other , there be as strong brotherly love as ever I see , between the two . Roger will know . and , Molly , they be sure to come home as soon as they hear my report of their mother 's state . I wish you would tell the squire what I have   do . it be not a pleasant piece of work ; and I will tell madam myself in my own way . I would have tell he if he have be at home ; but you say he be oblige to go to Ashcombe on business . " 

 " quite oblige . he be so sorry to miss you . but , papa , he will be so angry ! you do not   know how mad he be against Osborne . " 

 molly dread the squire 's anger when she give he her father 's message . she have see quite enough of the domestic relation of the Hamley family to understand that , underneath his old - fashioned courtesy , and the pleasant hospitality he show to she as a guest , there be a strong will , and a vehement passionate temper , along with that degree of obstinacy in prejudice   or " opinion , " as he would have call they   so common to those who have , neither in youth nor in manhood , mix largely with their kind . she have listen , day after day , to Mrs. Hamley 's plaintive murmur as to the deep disgrace in which Osborne be be hold by his father the prohibition of his come home ; and she hardly know how to begin to tell he that the letter summon Osborne have already be send off . 

 their dinner be tete - a - tete . the Squire try to make they pleasant to Molly , feel deeply grateful to she for the soothe comfort she be to his wife . he make merry speech , which sink away into silence , and at which they each forget to smile . he order up rare wine , which she do not care for , but taste out of complaisance . he notice that one day she have eat some brown beurrť pear as if she like they ; and as his tree have not produce many this year , he give direction that this particular kind should be seek for through the neighbourhood . molly feel that , in many way , he be full of good - will towards she ; but it do not diminish her dread of touch on the one sore point in the family . however , it have to be do , and that without delay . 

 the great log be place on the after - dinner fire , the hearth sweep up , the ponderous candle snuff , and then the door be shut and Molly and the Squire be leave to their dessert . she sit at the side of the table in her old place . that at the head be vacant ; yet , as no order have be give to the contrary , the plate and glass and napkin be always arrange as regularly and methodically as if Mrs. Hamley would come in as usual . indeed , sometimes , when the door by which she use to enter be open by any chance , molly catch herself look round as if she expect to see the tall , languid figure in the elegant drapery of rich silk and soft lace , which Mrs. Hamley be will not to wear of an evening . 

 this evening , it strike she , as a new thought of pain , that into that room she would come no more . she have fix to give her father 's message at this very point of time ; but something in her throat choke she , and she hardly know how to govern her voice . the squire get up and go to the broad fireplace , to strike into the middle of the great log , and split it up into blaze , sparkle piece . his back be towards she . molly begin , " when papa be here to - day , he bid I tell you he have write to Mr. Roger Hamley to say that that he think he have well come home ; and he enclose a letter to Mr. Osborne Hamley to say the same thing . " 

 the Squire put down the poker , but he still keep his back to Molly . 

 " he send for Osborne and Roger ? " he ask , at length . 

 molly answer , " yes . " 

 then there be a dead silence , which molly think would never end . the Squire have place his two hand on the high chimney - piece , and stand lean over the fire . 

 " Roger would have be down from Cambridge on the 18th , " say he . " and he have send for Osborne , too ! do he know , " he continue , turn round to Molly , with something of the fierceness she have anticipate in voice and look . in another moment he have drop his voice . " it be right , quite right . I understand . it have come at length . come ! come ! Osborne have bring it on , though , " with a fresh access of anger in his tone . " she might have "   some word molly could not hear she think it sound like " linger "   " but for that . I can not   forgive he ; I can not . " 

 and then he suddenly leave the room . while molly sit there still , very sad in her sympathy with all , he put his head in again : 

 " go to she , my dear ; I can not not just yet . but I will soon . just this bit ; and after that I will not   lose a moment . you be a good girl . God bless you ! " 

 it be not to be suppose that Molly have remain all this time at the Hall without interruption . once or twice her father have bring she a summon home . molly think she could perceive that he have bring it unwillingly ; in fact , it be Mrs. Gibson that have send for she , almost , as it be , to preserve a " right of way " through her action . 

 " you shall come back to - morrow , or the next day , " her father have say . " but mamma seem to think people will put a bad construction on your be so much away from home so soon after our marriage . " 

 " oh , papa , I be afraid Mrs. Hamley will miss I ! I do so like be with she . " 

 " I do not   think it be likely she will miss you as much as she would have do a month or two ago . she sleep so much now , that she be scarcely conscious of the lapse of time . I will see that you come back here again in a day or two . " 

 so out of the silence and the soft melancholy of the Hall Molly return into the all - pervade element of chatter and gossip at Hollingford . Mrs. Gibson receive she kindly enough . once she have a smart new winter bonnet ready to give she as a present ; but she do not care to hear any particular about the friend whom Molly have just leave ; and her few remark on the state of affair at the Hall jar terribly on the sensitive Molly . 

 " what a time she linger ! your papa never expect she would last half so long after that attack . it must be very wear work to they all ; I declare you look quite another creature since you be there . one can only wish it may not   last , for their sake . " 

 " you do not   know how the Squire value every minute , " say Molly . 

 " why , you say she sleep a great deal , and do not   talk much when she be awake , and there be not the slight hope for she . and yet , at such time , people be keep on the tenter - hook with watch and wait . I know it by my dear Kirkpatrick . there really be day when I think it never would end . but we will not   talk any more of such dismal thing ; you have   have quite enough of they , I be sure , and it always make I melancholy to hear of illness and death ; and yet your papa seem sometimes as if he could talk of nothing else . I be go to take you out to - night , though , and that will give you something of a change ; and I have   be get Miss Rose to trim up one of my old gown for you ; it be too tight for I . there be some talk of dancing , it be at Mrs. Edwards ' . " 

 " oh , mamma , I can not go ! " cry molly . " I have   be so much with she ; and she may be suffer so , or even die and I to be dance ! " 

 " nonsense ! you be no relation , so you need not feel it so much . I would not   urge you , if she be likely to know about it and be hurt ; but as it be , it be all fix that you be to go ; and do not   let we have any nonsense about it . we might sit twirl our thumb , and repeat hymn all our life long , if we be to do nothing else when people be die . " 

 " I can not go , " repeat molly . and , act upon impulse , and almost to her own surprise , she appeal to her father , who come into the room at this very time . he contract his dark eyebrow , and look annoyed as both wife and daughter pour their different side of the argument into his ear . he sit down in desperation of patience . when his turn come to pronounce a decision , he say , 

 " I suppose I can have some lunch ? I go away at six this morning , and there be nothing in the dining - room . I have to go off again directly . " 

 molly start to the door ; Mrs. Gibson make haste to ring the bell . 

 " where be you go , molly ? " say she , sharply . 

 " only to see about papa 's lunch . " 

 " there be servant to do it ; and I do not   like your go into the kitchen . " 

 " Come , molly ! sit down and be quiet , " say her father . " one come home want peace and quietness and food too . if I be to be appeal to , which I beg I may not be another time , I settle that molly stop at home this evening . I shall come back late and tired . see that I have something ready to eat , goosey , and then I will dress myself up in my good , and go and fetch you home , my dear . I wish all these wedding festivity be well over . ready , be it ? then I will go into the dining - room and gorge myself . a doctor ought to be able to eat like a camel , or like Major Dugald Dalgetty . " 

 it be well for Molly that caller come in just at this time , for Mrs. Gibson be extremely annoyed . they tell she some little local piece of news , however , which fill up her mind ; and Molly find that , if she only express wonder enough at the engagement they have both hear of from the depart caller , the previous discussion as to she accompany her stepmother or not might be entirely pass over . not entirely though ; for the next morning she have to listen to a very brilliantly touch - up account of the dance and the gaiety which she have miss ; and also to be tell that Mrs. Gibson have change her mind about give she the gown , and think now that she should reserve it for Cynthia , if only it be long enough ; but Cynthia be so tall quite overgrown , in fact . the chance seem equally balanced as to whether molly might not have the gown after all . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 MR . OSBORNE 'S SECRET . 
 

 Illustrationsborne and Roger come to the Hall ; Molly find Roger establish there when she return after this absence at home . she gather that Osborne be come ; but very little be say about he in any way . the Squire scarcely ever leave his wife 's room ; he sit by she , watch she , and now and then moan to himself . she be so much under the influence of opiate that she do not often rouse up ; but when she do , she almost invariably ask for Molly . on these rare occasion , she would ask after Osborne where he be , if he have be tell , and if he be come ? in her weakened and confused state of intellect she seem to have retain two strong impression one , of the sympathy with which Molly have receive her confidence about Osborne ; the other , of the anger which her husband entertain against he . before the squire she never mention Osborne 's name ; nor do she seem at her ease in speak about he to Roger ; while , when she be alone with Molly , she hardly speak of any one else . she must have have some sort of wandering idea that Roger blame his brother , while she remember Molly 's eager defence , which she have think hopelessly improbable at the time . at any rate , she make molly her confidante about her first - bear . she send she to ask Roger how soon he would come , for she seem to know perfectly well that he be come . 

 " tell I all Roger say . he will tell you . " 

 but it be several day before molly could ask Roger any question ; and meanwhile Mrs. Hamley 's state have materially alter . at length molly come upon Roger sit in the library , his head bury in his hand . he do not hear her footstep till she be close beside he . then he lift up his face , red , and stain with tear , his hair all ruffle up and in disorder . 

 " I have   be want to see you alone , " she begin . " your mother do so want some news of your brother Osborne . she tell I last week to ask you about he , but I do not like to speak of he before your father . " 

 " she have hardly ever name he to I . " 

 " I do not   know why ; for to I she use to talk of he perpetually . I have see so little of she this week , and I think she forget a great deal now . still , if you do not   mind , I should like to be able to tell she something if she ask I again . " 

 he put his head again between his hand , and do not answer she for some time . 

 " what do she want to know ? " say he , at last . " do she know that Osborne be come soon any day ? " 

 " yes . but she want to know where he be . " 

 " I can not   tell you . I do not   exactly know . I believe he be abroad , but I be not sure . " 

 " but you have   send papa 's letter to he ? " 

 " I have   send it to a friend of his who will know well than I do where he be to be find . you must know that he be not   free from creditor , molly . you can not   have be one of the family , like a child of the house almost , without know that much . for that and for other reason I do not   exactly know where he be . " 

 " I will tell she so . you be sure he will come ? " 

 " quite sure . but , Molly , I think my mother may live some time yet ; do not   you ? Dr. Nicholls say so yesterday when he be here with your father . he say she have rally more than he have ever expect . you be not afraid of any change that make you so anxious for Osborne 's come ? " 

 " no . it be only for she that I ask . she do seem so to crave for news of he . I think she dream of he ; and then when she waken it be a relief to she to talk about he to I . she always seem to associate I with he . we use to speak so much of he when we be together . " 

 " I do not   know what we should any of we have do without you . you have   be like a daughter to my mother . " 

 " I do so love she , " say Molly , softly . 

 " yes ; I see . have you ever notice that she sometimes call you ' fanny ? ' it be the name of a little sister of our who die . I think she often take you for she . it be partly that , and partly that at such a time as this one can not   stand on formality , that make I call you molly . I hope you do not   mind it ? " 

 " no ; I like it . but will you tell I something more about your brother ? she really hunger for news of he . " 

 " she would well ask I herself . yet , no ! I be so involve by promise of secrecy , Molly , that I could not   satisfy she if she once begin to question I . I believe he be in Belgium , and that he go there about a fortnight ago , partly to avoid his creditor . you know my father have refuse to pay his debt ? " 

 " yes : at least , I know something like it . " 

 " I do not   believe my father could raise the money all at once without have recourse to step which he would exceedingly recoil from . yet for the time it place Osborne in a very awkward position . " 

 " I think what vexe your father a good deal be some mystery as to how the money be spend . " 

 " if my mother ever say anything about that part of the affair , " say Roger , hastily , " assure she from I that there be nothing of vice or wrong - do about it . I can not   say more : I be tie . but set her mind at ease on that point . " 

 " I be not sure if she remember all her painful anxiety about this , " say Molly . " she use to speak a great deal to I about he before you come , when your father seem so angry . and now , whenever she see I she want to talk on the old subject ; but she do not   remember so clearly . if she be to see he , I do not   believe she would recollect why she be uneasy about he while he be absent . " 

 " he must be here soon . I expect he every day , " say Roger , uneasily . 

 " do you think your father will be very angry with he ? " ask Molly , with as much timidity as if the squire 's displeasure might be direct against she . 

 " I do not   know , " say Roger . " my mother 's illness may alter he ; but he do not   easily forgive we formerly . I remember once but that be nothing to the purpose . I can not   help fancy that he have put himself under some strong restraint for my mother 's sake , and that he will not   express much . but it do not   follow that he will forget it . my father be a man of few affection , but what he have be very strong ; he feel anything that touch he on these point deeply and permanently . that unlucky valuing of the property ! it have give my father the idea of post - obits " 

 " what be they ? " ask Molly . 

 " raise money to be pay on my father 's death , which , of course , involve calculation as to the duration of his life . " 

 " how shocking ! " say she . 

 " I be as sure as I be of my own life that Osborne never do anything of the kind . but my father express his suspicion in language that irritated Osborne ; and he do not   speak out , and will not   justify himself even as much as he might ; and , much as he love I , I have   but little influence over he , or else he would tell my father all . well , we must leave it to time , " he add , sigh . " my mother would have bring we all right , if she have be what she once be . " 

 he turn away , leave molly very sad . she know that every member of the family she care for so much be in trouble , out of which she see no exit ; and her small power of help they be diminish day by day as Mrs. Hamley sink more and more under the influence of opiate and stupefy illness . her father have speak to she only this very day of the desirableness of her return home for good . Mrs. Gibson want she for no particular reason , but for many small fragment of reason . Mrs. Hamley have cease to want she much , only occasionally appear to remember her existence . her position   her father think the idea have not enter her head   in a family of which the only woman be an invalid confine to bed , be become awkward . but Molly have beg hard to remain two or three day long only that only till Friday . if Mrs. Hamley should want she   she argue , with tear in her eye , and should hear that she have leave the house , she would think she so unkind , so ungrateful ! 

 " my dear child , she be get past want any one ! the keenness of earthly feeling be deaden . " 

 " Papa , that be bad of all . I can not bear it . I will not   believe it . she may not ask for I again , and may quite forget I ; but I be sure , to the very last , if the medicine do not   stupefy she , she will look round for the squire and her child . for poor Osborne most of all ; because he be in sorrow . " 

 Mr. Gibson shake his head , but say nothing in reply . in a minute or two he ask , 

 " I do not   like to take you away while you even fancy you can be of use or comfort to one who have be so kind to you ; but , if she have not   want you before Friday , will you be convince , will you come home willingly ? " 

 " if I go then , I may see she once again , even if she have not   ask for I ? " inquire Molly . 

 " yes , of course . you must make no noise , no step ; but you may go in and see she . I must tell you , I be almost certain she will not   ask for you . " 

 " but she may , papa . I will go home on Friday , if she do not . I think she will . " 

 so molly hang about the house , try to do all she could out of the sick - room , for the comfort of those in it . they only come out for meal , or for necessary business , and find little time for talk to she , so her life be solitary enough , wait for the call that never come . the evening of the day on which she have have the above conversation with Roger , Osborne arrive . he come straight into the drawing - room , where Molly be seat on the rug , read by firelight , as she do not like to ring for candle merely for her own use . Osborne come in , with a kind of hurry , which almost make he appear as if he would trip himself up , and fall down . molly rise . he have not notice she before ; now he come forwards , and take hold of both her hand , lead she into the full flickering light , and strain his eye to look into her face . 

 " how be she ? you will tell I you must know the truth ! I have   travel day and night since I get your father 's letter . " 

 before she could frame her answer , he have sate down in the near chair , cover his eye with his hand . 

 " she be very ill , " say Molly . " that you know ; but I do not   think she suffer much pain . she have want you sadly . " 

 he groan aloud . " my father forbid I to come . " 

 " I know ! " say Molly , anxious to prevent his self - reproach . " your brother be away , too . I think no one know how ill she be she have be an invalid for so long . " 

 " you know yes ! she tell you a great deal she be very fond of you . and God know how I love she . if I have not be forbid to come home , I should have tell she all . do my father know of my come now ? " 

 " yes , " say molly ; " I tell he papa have send for you . " 

 just at that moment the squire come in . he have not hear of Osborne 's arrival , and be seek molly to ask she to write a letter for he . 

 Osborne do not stand up when his father enter . he be too much exhausted , too much oppress by his feeling , and also too much estranged by his father 's angry , suspicious letter . if he have come forward with any manifestation of feeling at this moment , everything might have be different . but he wait for his father to see he before he utter a word . all that the squire say when his eye fall upon he at last be , 

 " you here , sir ! " 

 and , break off in the direction he be give to Molly , he abruptly leave the room . all the time his heart be yearn after his first - bear ; but mutual pride keep they asunder . yet he go straight to the butler , and ask of he when Mr. Osborne have arrive , and how he have come , and if he have have any refreshment dinner or what since his arrival ? 

 " for I think I forget everything now ! " say the poor squire , put his hand up to his head . " for the life of I , I can not   remember whether we have   have dinner or not ; these long night , and all this sorrow and watching , quite bewilder I . " 

 " perhaps , sir , you will take some dinner with Mr. Osborne . Mrs. Morgan be send up his directly . you hardly sate down at dinner - time , sir , you think my mistress want something . " 

 " ay ! I remember now . no ! I will not   have any more . give Mr. Osborne what wine he choose . perhaps he can eat and drink . " so the Squire go away upstairs with bitterness as well as sorrow in his heart . 

 when light be bring , Molly be strike with the change in Osborne . he look haggard and worn ; perhaps with travelling and anxiety . not quite such a dainty gentleman either , as Molly have think he , when she have last see he call on her stepmother , two month before . but she like he well now . the tone of his remark please she more . he be simple , and less ashamed of show his feeling . he ask after Roger in a warm , long kind of way . Roger be out : he have ride to Ashcombe to transact some business for the Squire . Osborne evidently wish for his return ; and hang about restlessly in the drawing - room after he have din . 

 " you be sure I may not   see she to - night ? " he ask Molly , for the third or fourth time . 

 " no , indeed . I will go up again if you like it . but Mrs. Jones , the nurse Dr. Nicholls send , be a very decide person . I go up while you be at dinner , and Mrs. Hamley have just take her drop , and be on no account to be disturb by see any one , much less by any excitement . " 

 Osborne keep walk up and down the long drawing - room , half talk to himself , half to Molly . 

 " I wish Roger would come . he seem to be the only one to give I a welcome . do my father always live upstairs in my mother 's room , Miss Gibson ? " 

 " he have do since her last attack . I believe he reproach himself for not have be enough alarmed before . " 

 " you hear all the word he say to I ; they be not much of a welcome , be they ? and my dear mother , who always whether I be to blame or not I suppose Roger be sure to come home to - night ? " 

 " quite sure . " 

 " you be stay here , be you not ? do you often see my mother , or do this omnipotent nurse keep you out too ? " 

 " Mrs. Hamley have not   ask for I for three day now , and I do not   go into her room unless she ask . I be leave on Friday , I believe . " 

 " my mother be very fond of you , I know . " 

 after a while he say , in a voice that have a great deal of sensitive pain in its tone , 

 " I suppose do you know whether she be quite conscious quite herself ? " 

 " not always conscious , " say Molly , tenderly . " she have to take so many opiate . but she never wander , only forget , and sleep . " 

 " oh , mother , mother ! " say he , stop suddenly , and hang over the fire , his hand on the chimney - piece . 

 when Roger come home , Molly think it time to retire . poor girl ! it be get to be time for she to leave this scene of distress in which she could be of no use . she sob herself to sleep this Tuesday night . two day more , and it would be Friday ; and she would have to wrench up the root she have shoot down into this ground . the weather be bright the next morning ; and morning and sunny weather cheer up young heart . molly sate in the dining - room make tea for the gentleman as they come down . she could not help hop that the Squire and Osborne might come to a well understanding before she leave ; for after all , in the dissension between father and son , lie a bitterer sting than in the illness send by God . but though they meet at the breakfast - table , they purposely avoid address each other . perhaps the natural subject of conversation between the two , at such a time , would have be Osborne 's long journey the night before ; but he have never speak of the place he have come from , whether north , south , east , or west , and the squire do not choose to allude to anything that might bring out what his son wish to conceal . again , there be an unexpressed idea in both their mind that Mrs. Hamley 's present illness be much aggravate , if not entirely bring on , by the discovery of Osborne 's debt ; so , many inquiry and answer on that head be taboo . in fact , their attempt at easy conversation be limit to local subject , and principally address to Molly or Roger . such intercourse be not productive of pleasure , or even of friendly feeling , though there be a thin outward surface of politeness and peace . long before the day be over , Molly wish that she have accede to her father 's proposal , and go home with he . no one seem to want she . Mrs. Jones , the nurse , assure her time after time that Mrs. Hamley have never name her name ; and her small service in the sick - room be not require since there be a regular nurse . Osborne and Roger seem all in all to each other ; and Molly now feel how much the short conversation she have have with Roger have serve to give she something to think about , all during the remainder of her solitary day . Osborne be extremely polite , and even express his gratitude to she for her attention to his mother in a very pleasant manner ; but he appear to be unwilling to show she any of the deep feeling of his heart , and almost ashamed of his exhibition of emotion the night before . he speak to she as any agreeable young man speak to any pleasant young lady ; but molly almost resent this . it be only the squire who seem to make she of any account . he give her letter to write , small bill to reckon up ; and she could have kiss his hand for thankfulness . 

 the last afternoon of her stay at the Hall come . Roger have go out on the squire 's business . molly go into the garden , think over the last summer , when Mrs. Hamley 's sofa use to be place under the old cedar - tree on the lawn , and when the warm air seem to be scented with rose and sweetbriar . now , the tree leafless , there be no sweet odour in the keen frosty air ; and look up at the house , there be the white sheet of blind , shut out the pale winter sky from the invalid 's room . then she think of the day her father have bring she the news of his second marriage : the thicket be tangle with dead weed and rime and hoar - frost ; and the beautiful fine articulation of branch and bough and delicate twig be all intertwine in leafless distinctness against the sky . could she ever be so passionately unhappy again ? be it goodness , or be it numbness , that make she feel as though life be too short to be trouble much about anything ? Death seem the only reality . she have neither energy nor heart to walk far or briskly ; and turn back towards the house . the afternoon sun be shin brightly on the window ; and , stir up to unusual activity by some unknown cause , the housemaid have open the shutter and window of the generally unused library . the middle window be also a door ; the white - paint wood go halfway up . molly turn along the little flag - paved path that lead past the library window to the gate in the white railing at the front of the house , and go in at the open door . she have have leave give to choose out any book she wish to read , and to take they home with she ; and it be just the sort of half - dawdle employment suit to her taste this afternoon . she mount on the ladder to get to a particular shelf high up in a dark corner of the room ; and find there some volume that look interesting , she sit down on the step to read part of it . there she sit , in her bonnet and cloak , when Osborne suddenly come in . he do not see she at first ; indeed , he seem in such a hurry that he probably might not have notice she at all , if she have not speak . 

 " be I in your way ? I only come here for a minute to look for some book . " she come down the step as she speak , still hold the book in her hand . 

 " not at all . it be I who be disturb you . I must just write a letter for the post , and then I shall be go . be not this open door too cold for you ? " 

 " oh , no . it be so fresh and pleasant . " 

 she begin to read again , sit on the low step of the ladder ; he to write at the large old - fashioned writing - table close to the window . there be a minute or two of profound silence , in which the rapid scratching of Osborne 's pen upon the paper be the only sound . then come a click of the gate , and Roger stand at the open door . his face be towards Osborne , sit in the light ; his back to Molly , crouch up in her corner . he hold out a letter , and say in hoarse breathlessness 

 " here be a letter from your wife , Osborne . I go past the post - office and think " 

 Osborne stand up , angry dismay upon his face : 

 " Roger ! what have you do ! do not   you see she ? " 

 Roger look round , and molly stand up in her corner , red , trembling , miserable , as though she be a guilty person . Roger enter the room . all three seem to be equally dismayed . molly be the first to speak ; she come forward and say 

 " I be so sorry ! I do not   wish to hear it , but I could not   help it . you will trust I , will not   you ? " and turn to Roger she say to he with tear in her eye " please say you know I shall not tell . " 

 " we can not   help it , " say Osborne , gloomily . " only Roger , who know of what importance it be , ought to have look round he before speak . " 

 " so I should , " say Roger . " I be more vexed with myself than you can conceive . not but what I be as sure of you as of myself , " continue he , turn to Molly . 

 " yes ; but , " say Osborne , " you see how many chance there be that even the well - mean person may let out what it be of such consequence to I to keep secret . " 

 " I know you think it so , " say Roger . 

 " well , do not   let we begin that old discussion again at any rate , before a third person . " 

 molly have have hard work all this time to keep from cry . now that she be allude to as the third person before whom conversation be to be restrain , she say 

 " I be go away . perhaps I ought not to have be here . I be very sorry very . but I will try and forget what I have   hear . " 

 " you can not   do that , " say Osborne , still ungraciously . " but will you promise I never to speak about it to any one not even to I , or to Roger ? will you try to act and speak as if you have never hear it ? I be sure , from what Roger have tell I about you , that if you give I this promise I may rely upon it . " 

 " yes ; I will promise , " say Molly , put out her hand as a kind of pledge . Osborne take it , but rather as if the action be superfluous . she add , " I think I should have do so , even without a promise . but it be , perhaps , well to bind oneself . I will go away now . I wish I would never come into this room . " 

 she put down her book on the table very softly , and turn to leave the room , choke down her tear until she be in the solitude of her own chamber . but Roger be at the door before she , hold it open for she , and read she feel that he be read her face . he hold out his hand for her , and his firm grasp express both sympathy and regret for what have occur . 

 she could hardly keep back her sob till she reach her bedroom . her feeling have be overwrought for some time past , without find the natural vent in action . the leave Hamley Hall have seem so sad before ; and now she be trouble with have to bear away a secret which she ought never to have know , and the knowledge of which have bring out a very uncomfortable responsibility . then there would arise a very natural wonder as to who Osborne 's wife be . molly have not stay so long and so intimately in the Hamley family without be well aware of the manner in which the future lady of Hamley be plan for . the Squire , for instance , partly in order to show that Osborne , his heir , be above the reach of Molly Gibson , the doctor 's daughter , in the early day before he know Molly well , have often allude to the grand , the high , and the wealthy marriage which Hamley of Hamley , as represent by his clever , brilliant , handsome son Osborne , might be expect to make . Mrs. Hamley , too , unconsciously on her part , show the project that she be constantly devise for the reception of the unknown daughter - in - law that be to be . 

 " the drawing - room must be refurnish when Osborne marrie " or " Osborne 's wife will like to have the west suite of room to herself ; it will perhaps be a trial to she to live with the old couple ; but we must arrange it so that she will feel it as little as possible . " " of course , when Mrs. Osborne come we must try and give she a new carriage ; the old one do well enough for we . " these , and similar speech have give molly the impression of the future Mrs. Osborne as of some beautiful grand young lady , whose very presence would make the old Hall into a stately , formal mansion , instead of the pleasant , unceremonious home that it be at present . Osborne , too , who have speak with such languid criticism to Mrs. Gibson about various country belle , and even in his own home be apt to give himself air only at home his air be poetically fastidious , while with Mrs. Gibson they have be socially fastidious what unspeakably elegant beauty have he choose for his wife ? who have satisfy he ; and yet satisfy he , have to have her marriage keep in concealment from his parent ? at length molly tear herself up from her wondering . it be of no use : she could not find out ; she might not even try . the blank wall of her promise block up the way . perhaps it be not even right to wonder , and endeavour to remember slight speech , casual mention of a name , so as to piece they together into something coherent . molly dread see either of the brother again ; but they all meet at dinner - time as if nothing have happen . the squire be taciturn , either from melancholy or displeasure . he have never speak to Osborne since his return , except about the commonest trifle , when intercourse could not be avoid ; and his wife 's state oppress he like a heavy cloud come over the light of his day . Osborne put on an indifferent manner to his father , which molly feel sure be assume ; but it be not conciliatory for all that . Roger , quiet , steady , and natural , talk more than all the other ; but he too be uneasy , and in distress on many account . to - day he principally address himself to Molly ; enter into rather long narration of late discovery in natural history , which keep up the current of talk without require much reply from any one . molly have expect Osborne to look something different from usual conscious , or ashamed , or resentful , or even " married " but he be exactly the Osborne of the morning handsome , elegant , languid in manner and in look ; cordial with his brother , polite towards she , secretly uneasy at the state of thing between his father and himself . she would never have guess the conceal romance which lie perdu under that every - day behaviour . she have always wish to come into direct contact with a love - story : here she have , and she only find it very uncomfortable ; there be a sense of concealment and uncertainty about it all ; and her honest straightforward father , her quiet life at Hollingford , which , even with all its drawback , be above - board , and where everybody know what everybody be do , seem secure and pleasant in comparison . of course she feel great pain at quit the Hall , and at the mute farewell she have take of her sleeping and unconscious friend . but leave Mrs. Hamley now be a different thing to what it have be a fortnight ago . then she be want at any moment , and feel herself to be of comfort . now her very existence seem forget by the poor lady whose body appear to be live so long after her soul . 

 she be send home in the carriage , load with true thank from every one of the family . Osborne ransack the greenhouse for flower for she ; Roger have choose she out book of every kind . the squire himself keep shake her hand , without be able to speak his gratitude , till at last he take she in his arm , and kiss she as he would have do a daughter . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIX . 

 CYNTHIA 's ARRIVAL . 
 

 Molly 's father be not at home when she return ; and there be no one to give she a welcome . Mrs. Gibson be out pay call , the servant tell Molly . she go upstairs to her own room , mean to unpack and arrange her borrow book . rather to her surprise she see the chamber , correspond to her own , be dust ; water and towel too be be carry in . 

 " be any one come ? " she ask of the housemaid . 

 " Missus 's daughter from France . Miss Kirkpatrick be come to - morrow . " 

 be Cynthia come at last ? oh , what a pleasure it would be to have a companion , a girl , a sister of her own age ! Molly 's depressed spirit spring up again with bright elasticity . she long for Mrs. Gibson 's return , to ask she all about it : it must be very sudden , for Mr. Gibson have say nothing of it at the Hall the day before . no quiet reading now ; the book be hardly put away with Molly 's usual neatness . she go down into the drawing - room , and could not settle to anything . at last Mrs. Gibson come home , tired out with her walk and her heavy velvet cloak . until that be take off , and she have rest herself for a few minute , she seem quite unable to attend to Molly 's question . 

 " oh , yes ! Cynthia be come home to - morrow , by the ' Umpire , ' which pass through at ten o'clock . what an oppressive day it be for the time of the year ! I really be almost ready to faint . Cynthia hear of some opportunity , I believe , and be only too glad to leave school a fortnight early than we plan . she never give I the chance of write to say I do , or do not , like she come so much before the time ; and I shall have to pay for she just the same as if she have stop . and I mean to have ask she to bring I a french bonnet ; and then you could have have one make after mine . but I be very glad she be come , poor dear . " 

 " be anything the matter with she ? " ask Molly . 

 " oh , no ! why should there be ? " 

 " you call she ' poor dear , ' and it make I afraid lest she might be ill . " 

 " oh , no ! it be only a way I get into , when Mr. Kirkpatrick die . a fatherless girl you know one always do call they ' poor dear . ' oh , no ! Cynthia never be ill . she be as strong as a horse . she never would have feel to - day as I have do . could you get I a glass of wine and a biscuit , my dear ? I be really quite faint . " 

 Mr. Gibson be much more excited about Cynthia 's arrival than her own mother be . he anticipate she come as a great pleasure to Molly , on whom , in spite of his recent marriage and his new wife , his interest principally centre . he even find time to run upstairs and see the bedroom of the two girl ; for the furniture of which he have pay a pretty round sum . 

 " well , I suppose young lady like their bedroom deck out in this way ! it be very pretty certainly , but " 

 " I like my own old room well , papa ; but perhaps Cynthia be accustom to such decking up . " 

 " perhaps ; at any rate , she will see we have   try to make it pretty . your be like her . that be right . it might have hurt she , if hers have be smart than your . now , good - night in your fine flimsy bed . " 

 molly be up betime almost before it be light arrange her pretty hamley flower in Cynthia 's room . she could hardly eat her breakfast that morning . she run upstairs and put on her thing , think that Mrs. Gibson be quite sure to go down to the " George Inn , " where the " Umpire " stop , to meet her daughter after a two year ' absence . but , to her surprise , Mrs. Gibson have arrange herself at her great worst - work frame , just as usual ; and she , in her turn , be astonish at Molly 's bonnet and cloak . 

 " where be you go so early , child ? the fog have not   clear away yet . " 

 " I think you would go and meet Cynthia ; and I want to go with you . " 

 " she will be here in half an hour ; and dear papa have tell the gardener to take the wheelbarrow down for her luggage . I be not sure if he be not go himself . " 

 " then be not you go ? " ask Molly , with a good deal of disappointment . 

 " no , certainly not . she will be here almost directly . and , besides , I do not   like to expose my feeling to every passer - by in High Street . you forget I have not see she for two year , and I hate scene in the market - place . " 

 she settle herself to her work again ; and molly , after some consideration , give up her own going , and employ herself in look out of the downstairs window which command the approach from the town . 

 " here she be here she be ! " she cry out at last . her father be walk by the side of a tall young lady ; William the gardener be wheel along a great cargo of baggage . molly fly to the front - door , and have it wide open to admit the new - comer some time before she arrive . 

 " well ! here she be . molly , this be Cynthia . Cynthia , Molly . you be to be sister , you know . " 

 molly see the beautiful , tall , sway figure , against the light of the open door , but could not see any of the feature that be , for the moment , in shadow . a sudden gush of shyness have come over she just at the instant , and quench the embrace she would have give a moment before . but Cynthia take she in her arm , and kiss she on both cheek . 

 " here 's mamma , " she say , look beyond Molly on to the stair where Mrs. Gibson stand , wrap up in a shawl , and shiver in the cold . she run past Molly and Mr. Gibson , who rather avert their eye from this first greeting between mother and child . 

 Mrs. Gibson say 

 " why , how you be grow , darling ! you look quite a woman . " 

 " and so I be , " say Cynthia . " I be before I go away ; I have   hardly grow since , except , it be always to be hop , in wisdom . " 

 " yes ! that we will hope , " say Mrs. Gibson , in rather a meaning way . indeed there be evidently hide allusion in their seem commonplace speech . when they all come into the full light and repose of the drawing - room , Molly be absorb in the contemplation of Cynthia 's beauty . perhaps her feature be not regular ; but the change in her expressive countenance give one no time to think of that . her smile be perfect ; her pout charming ; the play of the face be in the mouth . her eye be beautifully shape , but their expression hardly seem to vary . in colour she be not unlike her mother ; only she have not so much of the red - haired tint in her complexion ; and her long - shape , serious grey eye be fringe with dark lash , instead of her mother 's insipid flaxen one . molly fall in love with she , so to speak , on the instant . she sate there warm her foot and hand , as much at her ease as if she have be there all her life ; not particularly attend to her mother who , all the time , be study either her or her dress measure Molly and Mr. Gibson with grave observant look , as if guess how she should like they . 

 " there be hot breakfast ready for you in the dining - room , when you be ready for it , " say Mr. Gibson . " I be sure you must want it after your night journey . " he look round at his wife , at Cynthia 's mother , but she do not seem inclined to leave the warm room again . 

 " molly will take you to your room , darling , " say she ; " it be near her , and she have get her thing to take off . I will come down and sit in the dining - room while you be have your breakfast , but I really be afraid of the cold now . " 

 Cynthia rise and follow Molly upstairs . 

 " I be so sorry there be not   a fire for you , " say Molly , " but I suppose it be not   order ; and , of course , I do not   give any order . here be some hot water , though . " 

 " stop a minute , " say Cynthia , get hold of both Molly 's hand , and look steadily into her face , but in such a manner that she do not dislike the inspection . 

 " I think I shall like you . I be so glad ! I be afraid I should not . we be all in a very awkward position together , be not   we ? I like your father 's look , though . " 

  First Impressions . 
 First Impressions . 
 click to ENLARGE 
 Molly could not help smile at the way this be say . Cynthia reply to her smile . 

 " ah , you may laugh . but I do not   know that I be easy to get on with ; mamma and I do not   suit when we be last together . but perhaps we be each of we wise now . now , please leave I for a quarter of an hour . I do not   want anything more . " 

 molly go into her own room , wait to show Cynthia down to the dining - room . not that , in the moderate - sized house , there be any difficulty in find the way . a very little trouble in conjecture would enable a stranger to discover any room . but Cynthia have so captivate molly , that she want to devote herself to the new - comer 's service . ever since she have hear of the probability of she have a sister   she call she a sister , but whether it be a Scotch sister , or a sister a la mode de Brťtagne , would have puzzle most people   molly have allow her fancy to dwell much on the idea of Cynthia 's come ; and in the short time since they have meet , Cynthia 's unconscious power of fascination have be exercise upon she . some people have this power . of course , its effect be only manifest in the susceptible . a school - girl may be find in every school who attract and influence all the other , not by her virtue , nor her beauty , nor her sweetness , nor her cleverness , but by something that can neither be describe nor reason upon . it be the something allude to in the old line : 

 love I not for comely grace , 
 for my pleasing eye and face ; 
 no , nor for my constant heart , 
 for these may change , and turn to ill , 
 and thus true love may sever . 
 but love I on , and know not why , 
 so hast thou the same reason still 
 to dote upon I ever . 
 a woman will have this charm , not only over man but over her own sex ; it can not be define , or rather it be so delicate a mixture of many gift and quality that it be impossible to decide on the proportion of each . perhaps it be incompatible with very high principle ; as its essence seem to consist in the most exquisite power of adaptation to vary people and still more various mood ; " be all thing to all man . " at any rate , molly might soon have be aware that Cynthia be not remarkable for unflinche morality ; but the glamour throw over she would have prevent molly from any attempt at penetrate into and judge her companion 's character , even have such process be the least in accordance with her own disposition . 

 Cynthia be very beautiful , and be so well aware of this fact that she have forget to care about it ; no one with such loveliness ever appear so little conscious of it . molly would watch she perpetually as she move about the room , with the free stately step of some wild animal of the forest move almost , as it be , to the continual sound of music . her dress , too , though now to our idea it would be consider ugly and disfiguring , be suit to her complexion and figure , and the fashion of it subdue within due bound by her exquisite taste . it be inexpensive enough , and the change in it be but few . Mrs. Gibson profess herself shocked to find that Cynthia have but four gown , when she might have stock herself so well , and bring over so many useful french pattern , if she have but patiently wait for her mother 's answer to the letter which she have send , announce her return by the opportunity madame have find for she . molly be hurt for Cynthia at all these speech ; she think they imply that the pleasure which her mother feel in see she a fortnight soon after her two year ' absence be inferior to that which she would have receive from a bundle of silver - paper pattern . but Cynthia take no apparent notice of the frequent recurrence of these small complaint . indeed , she receive much of what her mother say with a kind of complete indifference , that make Mrs. Gibson hold she rather in awe ; and she be much more communicative to molly than to her own child . with regard to dress , however , Cynthia soon show that she be her mother 's own daughter in the manner in which she could use her deft and nimble finger . she be a capital workwoman ; and , unlike Molly , who excel in plain sewing , but have no notion of dressmaking or millinery , she could repeat the fashion she have only see in pass along the street of Boulogne , with one or two pretty rapid movement of her hand , as she turn and twist the ribbon and gauze her mother furnish she with . so she refurbish Mrs. Gibson 's wardrobe ; do it all in a sort of contemptuous manner , the source of which Molly could not quite make out . 

 Day after day the course of these small frivolity be break in upon by the news Mr. Gibson bring of Mrs. Hamley 's near approach to death . molly very often sit by Cynthia , and surround by ribbon , and wire , and net hear the bulletin like the toll of a funeral bell at a marriage feast . her father sympathize with she . it be the loss of a dear friend to he too ; but he be so accustomed to death , that it seem to he but as it be , the natural end of all thing human . to Molly , the death of some one she have know so well and love so much , be a sad and gloomy phenomenon . she loathe the small vanity with which she be surround , and would wander out into the frosty garden , and pace the walk , which be both shelter and conceal by evergreen . 

 at length and yet it be not so long , not a fortnight since molly have leave the Hall the end come . Mrs. Hamley have sink out of life as gradually as she have sink out of consciousness and her place in this world . the quiet wave close over she , and her place know she no more . 

 " they all send their love to you , molly , " say her father . " Roger say he know how you would feel it . " 

 Mr. Gibson have come in very late , and be have a solitary dinner in the dining - room . molly be sit near he to keep he company . Cynthia and her mother be upstairs . the latter be try on a head - dress which Cynthia have make for she . 

 molly remain downstairs after her father have go out afresh on his final round among his town patient . the fire be grow very low , and the light be wan . Cynthia come softly in , and take Molly 's listless hand , that hang down by her side , sit at her foot on the rug , chafe her chilly finger without speak . the tender action thaw the tear that have be gather heavily at Molly 's heart , and they come drop down her cheek . 

 " you love she dearly , do you not , molly ? " 

 " yes , " sob Molly ; and then there be a silence . 

 " have you know she long ? " 

 " no , not a year . but I have see a great deal of she . I be almost like a daughter to she ; she say so . yet I never bid her good - by , or anything . her mind become weak and confused . " 

 " she have only son , I think ? " 

 " no ; only Mr. Osborne and Mr. Roger Hamley . she have a daughter once ' Fanny . ' sometimes , in her illness , she use to call I ' Fanny . ' " 

 the two girl be silent for some time , both gaze into the fire . Cynthia speak first : 

 " I wish I could love people as you do , molly ! " 

 " do not   you ? " say the other , in surprise . 

 " no . a good number of people love I , I believe , or at least they think they do ; but I never seem to care much for any one . I do believe I love you , little Molly , whom I have only know for ten day , well than any one . " 

 " not than your mother ? " say Molly , in grave astonishment . 

 " yes , than my mother ! " reply Cynthia , half - smile . " it be very shocking , I daresay ; but it be so . now , do not   go and condemn I . I do not   think love for one 's mother quite come by nature ; and remember how much I have be separate from mine ! I love my father , if you will , " she continue , with the force of truth in her tone , and then she stop ; " but he die when I be quite a little thing , and no one believe that I remember he . I hear mamma say to a caller , not a fortnight after his funeral , ' oh , no , Cynthia be too young ; she have quite forget he ' and I bite my lip , to keep from cry out , ' papa ! papa ! have I ? ' but it be of no use . well , then mamma have to go out as a governess ; she could not   help it , poor thing ! but she do not   much care for part with I . I be a trouble , I daresay . so I be send to school at four year old ; first one school , and then another ; and in the holiday , mamma go to stay at grand house , and I be generally leave with the schoolmistress . once I go to the Towers ; and mamma lecture I continually , and yet I be very naughty , I believe . and so I never go again ; and I be very glad of it , for it be a horrid place . " 

 " that it be ! " say Molly , who remember her own day of tribulation there . 

 " and once I go to London , to stay with my uncle Kirkpatrick . he be a lawyer , and get on now ; but then he be poor enough , and have six or seven child . it be winter - time , and we be all shut up in a small house in Doughty Street . but , after all , that be not   so bad . " 

 " but then you live with your mother when she begin school at Ashcombe . Mr. Preston tell I that , when I stay that day at the Manor - house . " 

 " what do he tell you ? " ask Cynthia , almost fiercely . 

 " nothing but that . oh , yes ! he praise your beauty , and want I to tell you what he have say . " 

 " I should have hat you if you have , " say Cynthia . 

 " of course I never think of do such a thing , " reply molly . " I do not   like he ; and Lady Harriet speak of he the next day , as if he be not   a person to be like . " 

 Cynthia be quite silent . at length she say , 

 " I wish I be good ! " 

 " so do I , " say Molly , simply . she be think again of Mrs. Hamley , 

 only the action of the just 
 smell sweet and blossom in the dust , 
 and " goodness " just then seem to she to be the only endure thing in the world . 

 " Nonsense , Molly ! you be good . at least , if you be not good , what be I ? there be a rule - of - three sum for you to do ! but it be no use talk ; I be not good , and I never shall be now . perhaps I might be a heroine still , but I shall never be a good woman , I know . " 

 " do you think it easy to be a heroine ? " 

 " yes , as far as one know of heroine from history . I be capable of a great jerk , an effort , and then a relaxation but steady , every - day goodness be beyond I . I must be a moral kangaroo ! " 

 molly could not follow Cynthia 's idea ; she could not distract herself from the thought of the sorrow group at the Hall . 

 " how I should like to see they all ! and yet one can do nothing at such a time ! Papa say the funeral be to be on Tuesday , and that , after that , Roger Hamley be to go back to Cambridge . it will seem as if nothing have happen ! I wonder how the squire and Mr. Osborne Hamley will get on together . " 

 " he be the eld son , be he not ? why should not   he and his father get on well together ? " 

 " oh ! I do not   know . that be to say , I do know , but I think I ought not to tell . " 

 " do not   be so pedantically truthful , Molly . besides , your manner show when you speak truth and when you speak falsehood , without trouble yourself to use word . I know exactly what your ' I do not   know ' meant . I never consider myself bind to be truthful , so I beg we may be on equal term . " 

 Cynthia might well say she do not consider herself bind to be truthful ; she literally say what come uppermost , without care very much whether it be accurate or not . but there be no ill - nature , and , in a general way , no attempt at procure any advantage for herself in all her deviation ; and there be often such a latent sense of fun in they that molly could not help be amuse with they in fact , though she condemn they in theory . Cynthia 's playfulness of manner glossed such failing over with a kind of charm ; and yet , at time , she be so soft and sympathetic that molly could not resist she , even when she affirm the most startling thing . the little account she make of her own beauty please Mr. Gibson extremely ; and her pretty deference to he win his heart . she be restless too , till she have attack Molly 's dress , after she have remodelle her mother 's . 

 " now for you , sweet one , " say she as she begin upon one of Molly 's gown . " I have   be work as connoisseur until now ; now I begin as amateur . " 

 she bring down her pretty artificial flower , pluck out of her own good bonnet to put into Molly 's , say they would suit her complexion , and that a knot of ribbon would do well enough for she . all the time she work , she sing ; she have a sweet voice in singing , as well as in speak , and use to run up and down her gay french chanson without any difficulty ; so flexible in the art be she . yet she do not seem to care for music . she rarely touch the piano , on which molly practise with daily conscientiousness . Cynthia be always willing to answer question about her previous life , though , after the first , she rarely allude to it of herself ; but she be a most sympathetic listener to all Molly 's innocent confidence of joy and sorrow : sympathize even to the extent of wonder how she could endure Mr. Gibson 's second marriage , and why she do not take some active step of rebellion . 

 in spite of all this agreeable and pungent variety of companionship at home , molly yearn after the Hamleys . if there have be a woman in that family she would probably have receive many little note , and hear numerous detail which be now lose to she , or sum up in condense account of her father 's visit at the Hall , which , since his dear patient be dead , be only occasional . 

 " yes ! the squire be a good deal change ; but he be well than he be . there be an unspoken estrangement between he and Osborne ; one can see it in the silence and constraint of their manner ; but outwardly they be friendly civil at any rate . the squire will always respect Osborne as his heir , and the future representative of the family . Osborne do not   look well ; he say he want change . I think he be weary of the domestic dullness , or domestic dissension . but he feel his mother 's death acutely . it be a wonder that he and his father be not draw together by their common loss . Roger 's away at Cambridge too examination for the mathematical tripos . altogether the aspect of both people and place be change ; it be but natural ! " 

 such be perhaps the summing - up of the news of the Hamleys , as contain in many bulletin . they always end in some kind message to Molly . 

 Mrs. Gibson generally say , as a comment upon her husband 's account of Osborne 's melancholy , 

 " my dear ! why do not   you ask he to dinner here ? a little quiet dinner , you know . Cook be quite up to it ; and we would all of we wear black and lilac ; he could not   consider that as gaiety . " 

 Mr. Gibson take no more notice of these suggestion than by shake his head . he have grow accustomed to his wife by this time , and regard silence on his own part as a great preservative against long inconsequential argument . but every time that Mrs. Gibson be strike by Cynthia 's beauty , she think it more and more advisable that Mr. Osborne Hamley should be cheer up by a quiet little dinner - party . as yet no one but the lady of Hollingford and Mr. Ashton , the vicar that hopeless and impracticable old bachelor have see Cynthia ; and what be the good of have a lovely daughter , if there be none but old woman to admire she ? 

 Cynthia herself appear extremely indifferent upon the subject , and take very little notice of her mother 's constant talk about the gaiety that be possible , and the gaiety that be impossible , in Hollingford . she exert herself just as much to charm the two Miss Brownings as she would have do to delight Osborne Hamley , or any other young heir . that be to say , she use no exertion , but simply follow her own nature , which be to attract every one of those she be throw amongst . the exertion seem rather to be to refrain from do so , and to protest , as she often do , by slight word and expressive look against her mother 's word and humour alike against her folly and her caress . molly be almost sorry for Mrs. Gibson , who seem so unable to gain influence over her child . one day Cynthia read Molly 's thought . 

 " I be not good , and I tell you so . somehow , I can not forgive she for her neglect of I as a child , when I would have clung to she . besides , I hardly ever hear from she when I be at school . and I know she put a stop to my come over to her wedding . I see the letter she write to Madame Lefevre . a child should be bring up with its parent , if it be to think they infallible when it grow up . " 

 " but though it may know that there must be fault , " reply Molly , " it ought to cover they over and try to forget their existence . " 

 " it ought . but do not   you see I have grow up outside the pale of duty and ' ought . ' love I as I be , sweet one , for I shall never be well . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XX . 

 MRS . GIBSON 's visitors . 
 

 one day , to Molly 's infinite surprise , Mr. Preston be announce as a caller . Mrs. Gibson and she be sit together in the drawing - room ; Cynthia be out go into the town a - shopping when the door be open , the name give , and in walk the young man . his entrance seem to cause more confusion than molly could well account for . he come in with the same air of easy assurance with which he have receive she and her father at Ashcombe Manor - house . he look remarkably handsome in his riding - dress , and with the open - air exercise he have just have . but Mrs. Gibson 's smooth brow contract a little at the sight of he , and her reception of he be much cool than that which she usually give to visitor . yet there be a degree of agitation in it , which surprise molly a little . Mrs. Gibson be at her everlasting worst - work frame when Mr. Preston enter the room ; but somehow in rise to receive he , she throw down her basket of crewel , and , decline Molly 's offer to help she , she would pick up all the reel herself , before she ask her visitor to sit down . he stand there , hat in hand , affect an interest in the recovery of the worst which molly be sure he do not feel ; for all the time his eye be glance round the room , and take note of the detail in the arrangement . 

 at length they be seat , and conversation begin . 

 " it be the first time I have be in Hollingford since your marriage , Mrs. Gibson , or I should certainly have call to pay my respect soon . " 

 " I know you be very busy at Ashcombe . I do not expect you to call . be Lord Cumnor at the tower ? I have not hear from her ladyship for more than a week ! " 

 " no ! he seem still detain at Bath . but I have a letter from he give I certain message for Mr. Sheepshanks . Mr. Gibson be not at home , I be afraid ? " 

 " no . he be a great deal out almost constantly , I may say . I have no idea that I should see so little of he . a doctor 's wife lead a very solitary life , Mr. Preston ! " 

 " you can hardly call it solitary , I should think , when you have such a companion as Miss Gibson always at hand , " say he , bow to Molly . 

 " oh , but I call it solitude for a wife when her husband be away . poor Mr. Kirkpatrick be never happy unless I always go with he ; all his walk , all his visit , he like I to be with he . but , somehow , Mr. Gibson feel as if I should be rather in his way . " 

 " I do not   think you could ride pillion behind he on Black Bess , mamma , " say Molly . " and unless you could do that , you could hardly go with he in his round up and down all the rough lane . " 

 " oh ! but he might keep a brougham ! I have   often say so . and then I could use it for visit in the evening . really it be one reason why I do not   go to the Hollingford Charity Ball . I could not   bring myself to use the dirty fly from the ' George . ' we really must stir papa up against next winter , Molly ; it will never do for you and " 

 she pull herself up suddenly , and look furtively at Mr. Preston to see if he have take any notice of her abruptness . of course he have , but he be not go to show it . he turn to Molly , and say , 

 " have you ever be to a public ball yet , Miss Gibson ? " 

 " no ! " say Molly . 

 " it will be a great pleasure to you when the time come . " 

 " I be not sure . I shall like it if I have plenty of partner ; but I be afraid I shall not   know many people . " 

 " and you suppose that young man have not   their own way and mean of be introduce to pretty girl ? " 

 it be exactly one of the speech molly have dislike he for before ; and deliver , too , in that kind of underbred manner which show that it be mean to convey a personal compliment . molly take great credit to herself for the unconcerned manner with which she go on with her tatting exactly as if she have never hear it . 

 " I only hope I may be one of your partner at the first ball you go to . pray , remember my early application for that honour , when you be overwhelm with request for dance . " 

 " I do not   choose to engage myself beforehand , " say Molly , perceiving , from under her drop eyelid , that he be lean forward and look at she as though he be determined to have an answer . 

 " young lady be always very cautious in fact , however modest they may be in profession , " he reply , address himself in a nonchalant manner to Mrs. Gibson . " in spite of Miss Gibson 's apprehension of not have many partner , she decline the certainty of have one . I suppose Miss Kirkpatrick will have return from France before then ? " 

 he say these last word exactly in the same tone as he have use before ; but Molly 's instinct tell she that he be make an effort to do so . she look up . he be play with his hat , almost as if he do not care to have any answer to his question . yet he be listen acutely , and with a half smile on his face . 

 Mrs. Gibson redden a little , and hesitate , 

 " yes ; certainly . my daughter will be with we next winter , I believe ; and I daresay she will go out with we . " 

 " why can not   she say at once that Cynthia be here now ? " ask Molly of herself , yet glad that Mr. Preston 's curiosity be baffle . 

 he still smile ; but this time he look up at Mrs. Gibson , as he ask , " you have good news from she , I hope ? " 

 " yes ; very . by the way , how be our old friend the Robinsons ? how often I think of their kindness to I at Ashcombe ! dear good people , I wish I could see they again . " 

 " I will certainly tell they of your kind inquiry . they be very well , I believe . " 

 just at this moment , Molly hear the familiar sound of the click and opening of the front door . she know it must be Cynthia ; and , conscious of some mysterious reason which make Mrs. Gibson wish to conceal her daughter 's whereabouts from Mr. Preston , and maliciously desirous to baffle he , she rise to leave the room , and meet Cynthia on the stair ; but one of the lose crewel of worst have entangle itself in her gown and foot , and before she have free herself of the encumbrance , Cynthia have open the drawing - room door , and stand in it , look at her mother , at Molly , at Mr. Preston , but not advance one step . her colour , which have be brilliant the first moment of her entrance , fade away as she gaze ; but her eye her beautiful eye usually so soft and grave , seem to fill with fire , and her brow to contract , as she take the resolution to come forward and take her place among the three , who be all look at she with different emotion . she move calmly and slowly forwards ; Mr. Preston go a step or two to meet she , his hand hold out , and the whole expression of his face that of eager delight . 

 but she take no notice of the outstretched hand , nor of the chair that he offer she . she sate down on a little sofa in one of the window , and call molly to she . 

 " look at my purchase , " say she . " this green ribbon be fourteen - pence a yard , this silk three shilling , " and so she go on , force herself to speak about these trifle as if they be all the world to she , and she have no attention to throw away on her mother and her mother 's visitor . 

 Mr. Preston take his cue from she . he , too , talk of the news of the day , the local gossip but Molly , who glance up at he from time to time , be almost alarm by the bad expression of suppressed anger , almost amount to vindictiveness , which entirely mar his handsome look . she do not wish to look again ; and try rather to back up Cynthia 's effort at maintain a separate conversation . yet she could not help overhear Mrs. Gibson 's strain after increase civility , as if to make up for Cynthia 's rudeness , and , if possible , to deprecate his anger . she talk perpetually , as though her object be to detain he ; whereas , previous to Cynthia 's return , she have allow frequent pause in the conversation , as though to give he the opportunity to take his leave . 

 in the course of the conversation between they the Hamleys come up . Mrs. Gibson be never unwilling to dwell upon Molly 's intimacy with this county family ; and when the latter catch the sound of her own name , her stepmother be say , 

 " Poor Mrs. Hamley could hardly do without molly ; she quite look upon she as a daughter , especially towards the last , when , I be afraid , she have a good deal of anxiety . Mr. Osborne Hamley I daresay you have hear he do not do so well at college , and they have expect so much parent will , you know ; but what do it signify ? for he have not to earn his living ! I call it a very foolish kind of ambition when a young man have not to go into a profession . " 

 " well , at any rate , the squire must be satisfied now . I see this morning 's time , with the Cambridge examination list in it . be not   the second son call after his father , Roger ? " 

 " yes , " say Molly , start up , and come nearer . 

 " he be senior wrangler , that be all , " say Mr. Preston , almost as though he be vex with himself for have anything to say that could give her pleasure . molly go back to her seat by Cynthia . 

 " Poor Mrs. Hamley , " say she , very softly , as if to herself . Cynthia take her hand , in sympathy with Molly 's sad and tender look , rather than because she understand all that be pass in her mind , nor do she quite understand it herself . a death that have come out of time ; a wonder whether the dead know what pass upon the earth they have leave the brilliant Osborne 's failure , Roger 's success ; the vanity of human wish , all these thought , and what they suggest , be inextricably mingle up in her mind . she come to herself in a few minute . Mr. Preston be say all the unpleasant thing he could think of about the Hamleys in a tone of false sympathy . 

 " the poor old squire not the wise of man have woefully mismanage his estate . and Osborne Hamley be too fine a gentleman to understand the mean by which to improve the value of the land even if he have the capital . a man who have practical knowledge of agriculture , and some thousand of ready money , might bring the rental up to eight thousand or so . of course , Osborne will try and marry some one with money ; the family be old and well - establish , and he must not   object to commercial descent , though I daresay the Squire will for he ; but then the young fellow himself be not the man for the work . no ! the family be go down fast ; and it be a pity when these old Saxon house vanish off the land ; but it be ' kismet ' with the Hamleys . even the senior wrangler if it be that Roger Hamley he will have spend all his brain in one effort . you never hear of a senior wrangler be worth anything afterwards . he will be a fellow of his college , of course that will be a livelihood for he at any rate . " 

 " I believe in senior wrangler , " say Cynthia , her clear high voice ring through the room . " and from all I have   ever hear of Mr. Roger Hamley , I believe he will keep up the distinction he have earn . and I do not   believe that the house of Hamley be so near extinction in wealth and fame , and good name . " 

 " they be fortunate in have Miss Kirkpatrick 's good word , " say Mr. Preston , rise to take his leave . 

 " Dear Molly , " say Cynthia , in a whisper , " I know nothing about your friend the Hamleys , except that they be your friend , and what you have tell I about they . but I will not   have that man speak of they so and your eye fill with tear all the time . I would soon swear to their have all the talent and good fortune under the sun . " 

 the only person of whom Cynthia appear to be wholesomely afraid be Mr. Gibson . when he be present she be more careful in speak , and show more deference to her mother . her evident respect for he , and desire to win his good opinion , make she curb herself before he ; and in this manner she earn his favour as a lively , sensible girl , with just so much knowledge of the world as make she a very desirable companion to Molly . indeed , she make something of the same kind of impression on all man . they be first strike with her personal appearance ; and then with her pretty deprecating manner , which appeal to they much as if she have say , " you be wise , and I be foolish have mercy on my folly . " it be a way she have ; it mean nothing really ; and she be hardly conscious of it herself ; but it be very captivate all the same . even old Williams , the gardener , feel it ; he say to his confidante , molly 

 " eh , miss , but that be a rare young lady ! she do have such pretty coax way . I be to teach she to bud rose come the season and I will warrant ye she will learn sharp enough , for all she say she be so stupid . " 

 if Molly have not have the sweetest disposition in the world she might have become jealous of all the allegiance lay at Cynthia 's foot ; but she never think of compare the amount of admiration and love which they each receive . yet once she do feel a little as if Cynthia be poach on her manor . the invitation to the quiet dinner have be send to Osborne Hamley , and decline by he . but he think it right to call soon afterwards . it be the first time molly have see any of the family since she leave the Hall , just before Mrs. Hamley 's death ; and there be so much that she want to ask . she try to wait patiently till Mrs. Gibson have exhaust the first gush of her infinite nothing ; and then Molly come in with her modest question . how be the squire ? have he return to his old habit ? have his health suffer ? put each inquiry with as light and delicate a touch as if she have be dress a wound . she hesitate a little , a very little , before speak of Roger ; for just one moment the thought flit across her mind , that Osborne might feel the contrast between his own and his brother 's college career too painfully to like to have it refer to ; but then she remember the generous brotherly love that have always exist between the two , and have just enter upon the subject , when Cynthia in obedience to her mother 's summon , come into the room , and take up her work . no one could have be quieter she hardly utter a word ; but Osborne seem to fall under her power at once . he no long give his undivided attention to Molly . he cut short his answer to her question ; and by - and - by , without Molly 's rightly understand how it be , he have turn towards Cynthia , and be address himself to she . molly see the look of content on Mrs. Gibson 's face ; perhaps it be her own mortification at not have hear all she wish to know about Roger , which give she a keener insight than usual , but certain it be that all at once she perceive that Mrs. Gibson would not dislike a marriage between Osborne and Cynthia , and consider the present occasion as an auspicious beginning . remember the secret which she have be let into so unwillingly , molly watch his behaviour , almost as if she have be retain in the interest of the absent wife ; but , after all , think as much of the possibility of his attract Cynthia as of the unknown and mysterious Mrs. Osborne Hamley . his manner be expressive of great interest and of strong prepossession in favour of the beautiful girl to whom he be talk . he be in deep mourning , which show off his slight figure and delicate refined face . but there be nothing of flirt , as far as molly understand the meaning of the word , in either look or word . Cynthia , too , be extremely quiet ; she be always much quieter with man than with woman ; it be part of the charm of her soft allurement that she be so passive . they be talk of France . Mrs. Gibson herself have pass two or three year of her girlhood there ; and Cynthia 's late return from Boulogne make it a very natural subject of conversation . but Molly be throw out of it ; and with her heart still unsatisfie as to the detail of Roger 's success , she have to stand up at last , and receive Osborne 's good - by , scarcely long or more intimate than his farewell to Cynthia . as soon as he be go , Mrs. Gibson begin in his praise . 

 " well , really , I begin to have some faith in long descent . what a gentleman he be ! how agreeable and polite ! so different from that forward Mr. Preston , " she continue , look a little anxiously at Cynthia . Cynthia , quite aware that her reply be be watch for , say , coolly , 

 " Mr. Preston do not   improve on acquaintance . there be a time , mamma , when I think both you and I think he very agreeable . " 

 " I do not   remember . you have   a clear memory than I have . but we be talk of this delightful Mr. Osborne Hamley . why , Molly , you be always talk of his brother it be Roger this , and Roger that I can not   think how it be you so seldom mention this young man . " 

 " I do not   know I have mention Mr. Roger Hamley so often , " say Molly , blush a little . " but I see much more of he he be more at home . " 

 " well , well ! it be all right , my dear . I daresay he suit you well . but really , when I see Osborne Hamley close to my Cynthia , I could not   help think but perhaps I would well not tell you what I be think of . only they be each of they so much above the average in appearance ; and , of course , that suggest thing . " 

 " I perfectly understand what you be think of , mamma , " say Cynthia , with the great composure ; " and so do molly , I have no doubt . " 

 " well ! there be no harm in it , I be sure . do you hear he say that , though he do not like to leave his father alone just at present , yet that when his brother Roger come back from Cambridge , he should feel more at liberty ! it be quite as much as to say , ' if you will ask I to dinner then , I shall be delighted to come . ' and chicken will be so much cheap , and cook have such a nice way of bone they , and do they up with forcemeat . everything seem to be fall out so fortunately . and molly , my dear , you know I will not   forget you . by - and - by , when Roger Hamley have take his turn at stop at home with his father , we will ask he to one of our little quiet dinner . " 

 molly be very slow at take this in ; but in about a minute the sense of it have reach her brain , and she go all over very red and hot ; especially as she see that Cynthia be watch the light come into her mind with great amusement . 

 " I be afraid Molly be not   properly grateful , mamma . if I be you , I would not   exert myself to give a dinner - party on her account . Bestow all your kindness upon I . " 

 Molly be often puzzle by Cynthia 's speech to her mother ; and this be one of these occasion . but she be more anxious to say something for herself ; she be so much annoyed at the implication in Mrs. Gibson 's last word . 

 " Mr. Roger Hamley have be very good to I ; he be a great deal at home when I be there , and Mr. Osborne Hamley be very little there : that be the reason I speak so much more of one than the other . if I have if he have , " lose her coherence in the difficulty of find word , " I do not   think I should , oh , Cynthia , instead of laugh at I , I think you might help I to explain myself ! " 

 instead , Cynthia give a diversion to the conversation . 

 " Mamma 's paragon give I an idea of weakness . I can not   quite make out whether it be in body or mind . which be it , molly ? " 

 " he be not strong , I know ; but he be very accomplished and clever . every one say that , even papa , who do not   generally praise young man . that make the puzzle the great when he do so badly at college . " 

 " then it be his character that be weak . I be sure there be weakness somewhere ; but he be very agreeable . it must have be very pleasant , stay at the Hall . " 

 " yes ; but it be all over now . " 

 " oh , nonsense ! " say Mrs. Gibson , waken up from count the stitch in her pattern . " we shall have the young man come to dinner pretty often , you will see . your father like they , and I shall always make a point of welcome his friend . they can not   go on mourning for a mother for ever . I expect we shall see a great deal of they ; and that the two family will become very intimate . after all , these good Hollingford people be terribly behindhand , and I should say , rather commonplace . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXI . 

 the HALF - sister . 
 

 Illustrationt appear as if Mrs. Gibson 's prediction be likely to be verify ; for Osborne Hamley find his way to her drawing - room pretty frequently . to be sure , sometimes prophet can help on the fulfilment of their own prophecy ; and Mrs. Gibson be not passive . 

 Molly be altogether puzzle by his manner and way . he speak of occasional absence from the Hall , without exactly say where he have be . but that be not her idea of the conduct of a married man ; who , she imagine , ought to have a house and servant , and pay rent and taxis , and live with his wife . who this mysterious wife might be fade into insignificance before the wonder of where she be . London , Cambridge , Dover , nay , even France , be mention by he as place to which he have be on these different little journey . these fact come out quite casually , almost as if he be unaware of what he be betray . sometimes he drop out such sentence as these : " ah , that would be the day I be cross ! it be stormy indeed ! instead of our be only two hour , we be nearly five . " or , " I meet Lord Hollingford at Dover last week , and he say , "   c. " the cold now be nothing to what it be in London on Thursday the thermometer be down at 15į . " perhaps , in the rapid flow of conversation , these small revelation be notice by no one but Molly ; whose interest and curiosity be always hover over the secret she have become possess of , in spite of all her self - reproach for allow her thought to dwell on what be still to be keep as a mystery . 

 it be also evident to she that Osborne be not too happy at home . he have lose the slight touch of cynicism which he have affect when he be expect to do wonder at college ; and that be one good result of his failure . if he do not give himself the trouble of appreciate other people , and their performance , at any rate his conversation be not so amply sprinkle with critical pepper . he be more absent , not so agreeable , Mrs. Gibson think , but do not say . he look ill in health ; but that might be the consequence of the real depression of spirit which molly occasionally see peep out through all his pleasant surface - talk . now and then , when he be talk directly to she , he refer to " the happy day that be go , " or , " to the time when my mother be alive ; " and then his voice sink , and a gloom come over his countenance , and Molly long to express her own deep sympathy . he do not often mention his father ; and molly think she could read in his manner , when he do , that something of the painful restraint she have notice when she be last at the Hall still exist between they . nearly every particular she know of the family interior she have hear from Mrs. Hamley , and she be uncertain how far her father be acquaint with they ; so she do not like to question he too closely ; nor be he a man to be so question as to the domestic affair of his patient . sometimes she wonder if it be a dream that short half - hour in the library at Hamley Hall when she have learn a fact which seem so all - important to Osborne , yet which make so little difference in his way of life either in speech or action . during the twelve or fourteen hour that she have remain at the Hall afterwards , no further allusion have be make to his marriage , either by himself or by Roger . it be , indeed , very like a dream . probably molly would have be render much more uncomfortable in the possession of her secret if Osborne have strike she as particularly attentive in his devotion to Cynthia . she evidently amuse and attract he , but not in any lively or passionate kind of way . he admire her beauty , and seem to feel her charm ; but he would leave her side , and come to sit near Molly , if anything remind he of his mother , about which he could talk to she , and to she alone . yet he come so often to the Gibsons , that Mrs. Gibson might be excuse for the fancy she have take into her head , that it be for Cynthia 's sake . he like the lounge , the friendliness , the company of two intelligent girl of beauty and manner above the average ; one of whom stand in a peculiar relation to he , as have be especially belove by the mother whose memory he cherish so fondly . know himself to be out of the category of bachelor , he be , perhaps , too indifferent as to other people 's ignorance , and its possible consequence . 

 somehow , Molly do not like to be the first to introduce Roger 's name into the conversation , so she lose many an opportunity of hear intelligence about he . Osborne be often so languid or so absent that he only follow the lead of talk ; and as an awkward fellow , who have pay she no particular attention , and as a second son , Roger be not pre - eminent in Mrs. Gibson 's thought ; Cynthia have never see he , and the freak do not take she often to speak about he . he have not come home since he have obtain his high place in the mathematical list : that molly know ; and she know , too , that he be work hard for something she suppose a fellowship and that be all . Osborne 's tone in speak of he be always the same : every word , every inflection of the voice breathe out affection and respect nay , even admiration ! and this from the nil admirari brother , who seldom carry his exertion so far . 

 " ah , Roger ! " he say one day . molly catch the name in an instant , though she have not hear what have go before . " he be a fellow in a thousand in a thousand , indeed ! I do not   believe there be his match anywhere for goodness and real solid power combine . " 

 " molly , " say Cynthia , after Mr. Osborne Hamley have go , " what sort of a man be this Roger Hamley ? one can not   tell how much to believe of his brother 's praise ; for it be the one subject on which Osborne Hamley become enthusiastic . I have   notice it once or twice before . " 

 while molly hesitate on which point of the large round to begin her description , Mrs. Gibson strike in , 

 " it just show what a sweet disposition Osborne Hamley be of that he should praise his brother as he do . I daresay he be a senior wrangler , and much good may it do he ! I do not   deny that ; but as for conversation , he be as heavy as heavy can be . a great awkward fellow to boot , who look as if he do not know two and two make four , for all he be such a mathematical genius . you would hardly believe he be Osborne Hamley 's brother to see he ! I should not think he have a profile at all . " 

 " what do you think of he , molly ? " say the persevere Cynthia . 

 " I like he , " say Molly . " he have be very kind to I . I know he be not   handsome like Osborne . " 

 it be rather difficult to say all this quietly , but molly manage to do it , quite aware that Cynthia would not rest till she have extract some kind of an opinion out of she . 

 " I suppose he will come home at Easter , " say Cynthia , " and then I shall see he for myself . " 

 " it be a great pity that their be in mourning will prevent their go to the Easter charity ball , " say Mrs. Gibson , plaintively . " I shall not   like to take you two girl , if you be not to have any partner . it will put I in such an awkward position . I wish we could join on to the Towers party . that would secure you partner , for they always bring a number of dancing man , who might dance with you after they have do their duty by the lady of the house . but really everything be so changed since dear Lady Cumnor have be an invalid that , perhaps , they will not   go at all . " 

 this Easter ball be a great subject of conversation with Mrs. Gibson . she sometimes speak of it as her first appearance in society as a bride , though she have be visit once or twice a week all winter long . then she shift her ground , and say she feel so much interest in it , because she would then have the responsibility of introduce both her own and Mr. Gibson 's daughter to public notice , though the fact be that pretty nearly every one who be go to this ball have see the two young lady though not their ball dress before . but , ape the manner of the aristocracy as far as she know they , she intend to " bring out " Molly and Cynthia on this occasion , which she regard in something of the light of a presentation at Court . " they be not out yet , " be her favourite excuse when either of they be invite to any house to which she do not wish they to go , or they be invite without she . she even make a difficulty about their " not be out " when Miss Browning that old friend of the Gibson family come in one morning to ask the two girl to come to a friendly tea and a round game afterwards ; this mild piece of gaiety be design as an attention to three of Mrs. Goodenough 's grandchild two young lady and their schoolboy brother who be stay on a visit to their grand - mamma . 

 " you be very kind , Miss Browning , but , you see , I hardly like to let they go they be not out , you know , till after the Easter ball . " 

 " till when we be invisible , " say Cynthia , always ready with her mockery to exaggerate any pretension of her mother 's . " we be so high in rank that our sovereign must give we her sanction before we can play a round game at your house . " 

 Cynthia enjoy the idea of her own full - grow size and stately gait , as contrast with that of a meek , half - fledge girl in the nursery ; but Miss Browning be half puzzled and half affront . 

 " I do not   understand it at all . in my day girl go wherever it please people to ask they , without this farce of burst out in all their new fine clothe at some public place . I do not   mean but what the gentry take their daughter to York , or Matlock , or Bath , to give they a taste of gay society when they be grow up ; and the quality go up to London , and their young lady be present to Queen Charlotte , and go to a birthday ball , perhaps . but for we little Hollingford people why , we know every child amongst we from the day of its birth ; and many a girl of twelve or fourteen have I see go out to a card - party , and sit quiet at her work , and know how to behave as well as any lady there . there be no talk of ' come out ' in those day for any one under the daughter of a squire . " 

 " after Easter , Molly and I shall know how to behave at a card - party , but not before , " say Cynthia , demurely . 

 " you be always fond of your quip and your crank , my dear , " say Miss Browning , " and I would not   quite answer for your behaviour : you sometimes let your spirit carry you away . but I be quite sure molly will be a little lady as she always be , and always be , and I have know she from a babe . " 

 Mrs. Gibson take up arm on behalf of her own daughter , or , rather , she take up arm against Molly 's praise . 

 " I do not   think you would have call molly a lady the other day , Miss Browning , if you have find she where I do : sit up in a cherry - tree , six foot from the ground at least , I do assure you . " 

 " oh ! but that be not   pretty , " say Miss Browning , shake her head at Molly . " I think you would leave off those tom - boy way . " 

 " she want the refinement which good society give in several way , " say Mrs. Gibson , return to the attack on poor Molly . " she be very apt to come upstairs two step at a time . " 

 " only two , Molly ! " say Cynthia . " why , to - day I find I could manage four of these broad shallow step . " 

 " my dear child , what be you say ? " 

 " only confessing that I , like Molly , want the refinement which good society give ; therefore , please do let we go to Miss Brownings ' this evening . I will pledge myself for Molly that she shall not   sit in a cherry - tree ; and molly shall see that I do not   go upstairs in an unladylike way . I will go upstairs as meekly as if I be a come - out young lady , and have be to the Easter ball . " 

 so it be agree that they should go . if Mr. Osborne Hamley have be name as one of the probable visitor , there would have be none of this difficulty about the affair . 

 but though he be not there , his brother Roger be . molly see he in a minute when she enter the little drawing - room ; but Cynthia do not . 

 " and see , my dear , " say Miss Phobe Browning , turn they round to the side where Roger stand wait for his turn of speak to Molly , " we have   get a gentleman for you after all ! be not   it fortunate ? just as sister say that you might find it dull you , Cynthia , she mean , because you know you come from France then , just as if he have be send from heaven , Mr. Roger come in to call ; and I will not   say we lay violent hand on he , because he be too good for that ; but really we should have be near it , if he have not stay of his own accord . " 

 the moment Roger have do his cordial greeting to Molly , he ask she to introduce he to Cynthia . 

  Roger be introduce and enslave . 
 Roger be introduce and enslave . 
 click to enlarge 
 " I want to know she your new sister , " he add , with the kind smile Molly remember so well since the very first day she have see it direct towards she , as she sate cry under the weep ash . Cynthia be stand a little behind Molly when Roger ask for this introduction . she be generally dress with careless grace . molly , who be delicate neatness itself , use sometimes to wonder how Cynthia 's tumbled gown , toss away so untidily , have the art of look so well , and fall in such graceful fold . for instance , the pale lilac muslin gown she wear this evening have be wear many time before , and have look unfit to wear again till Cynthia put it on . then the limpness become softness , and the very crease take the line of beauty . molly , in a daintily clean pink muslin , do not look half so elegantly dress as Cynthia . the grave eye that the latter raise when she have to be present to Roger have a sort of child - like innocence and wonder about they , which do not quite belong to Cynthia 's character . she put on her armour of magic that evening involuntarily as she always do ; but , on the other side , she could not help try her power on stranger . molly have always feel that she should have a right to a good long talk with Roger when she next see he ; and that he would tell she , or she should gather from he all the detail she so long to hear about the Squire about the Hall about Osborne about himself . he be just as cordial and friendly as ever with she . if Cynthia have not be there , all would have go on as she have anticipate ; but of all the victim to Cynthia 's charm he fall most prone and abject . molly see it all , as she be sit next to Miss Phobe at the tea - table , act right - hand , and pass cake , cream , sugar , with such busy assiduity that every one besides herself think that her mind , as well as her hand , be fully occupy . she try to talk to the two shy girl , as in virtue of her two year ' seniority she think herself bind to do ; and the consequence be , she go upstairs with the twain clinging to her arm , and willing to swear an eternal friendship . nothing would satisfy they but that she must sit between they at vingt - un ; and they be so desirous of her advice in the important point of fix the price of the counter that she could not ever have join in the animate conversation go on between Roger and Cynthia . or , rather , it would be more correct to say that Roger be talk in a most animate manner to Cynthia , whose sweet eye be fix upon his face with a look of great interest in all he be say , while it be only now and then she make her low reply . molly catch a few word occasionally in interval of business . 

 " at my uncle 's , we always give a silver threepence for three dozen . you know what a silver threepence be , do not   you , dear Miss Gibson ? " 

 " the three class be publish in the Senate House at nine o'clock on the Friday morning , and you can not   imagine " 

 " I think it will be think rather shabby to play at anything less than sixpence . that gentleman "   this in a whisper   " be at Cambridge , and you know they always play very high there , and sometimes ruin themselves , do not   they , dear Miss Gibson ? " 

 " oh , on this occasion the Master of Arts who precede the candidate for honour when they go into the Senate House be call the Father of the College to which he belong . I think I mention that before , do not   I ? " 

 so Cynthia be hear all about Cambridge , and the very examination about which Molly have feel such keen interest , without have ever be able to have her question answer by a competent person ; and Roger , to whom she have always look as the final and most satisfactory answerer , be tell the whole of what she want to know , and she could not listen . it take all her patience to make up little packet of counter , and settle , as the arbiter of the game , whether it would be well for the round or the oblong counter to be reckon as six . and when all be do , and every one sate in their place round the table , Roger and Cynthia have to be call twice before they come . they stand up , it be true , at the first sound of their name ; but they do not move Roger go on talk , Cynthia listen till the second call ; when they hurry to the table and try to appear , all on a sudden , quite interested in the great question of the game namely , the price of three dozen counter , and whether , all thing consider , it would be well to call the round counter or the oblong half - a - dozen each . Miss Browning , drum the pack of card on the table , and quite ready to begin deal , decide the matter by say , " round be six , and three dozen counter cost sixpence . pay up , if you please , and let we begin at once . " Cynthia sate between Roger and William Orford , the young schoolboy , who bitterly resent on this occasion his sister ' habit of call he " Willie , " as he think it be this boyish sobriquet which prevent Cynthia from attend as much to he as to Mr. Roger Hamley ; he also be charm by the charmer , who find leisure to give he one or two of her sweet smile . on his return home to his grand - mamma 's , he give out one or two very decide and rather original opinion , quite oppose as be natural to his sister ' . one be 

 " that , after all , a senior wrangler be no great shake . any man might be one if he like , but there be a lot of fellow that he know who would be very sorry to go in for anything so slow . " 

 molly think the game never would end . she have no particular turn for gambling in she ; and whatever her card might be , she regularly put on two counter , indifferent as to whether she win or lose . Cynthia , on the contrary , stake high , and be at one time very rich , but end by be in debt to molly something like six shilling . she have forget her purse , she say , and be oblige to borrow from the more provident Molly , who be aware that the round game of which Miss Browning have speak to she be likely to require money . if it be not a very merry affair for all the individual concern , it be a very noisy one on the whole . molly think it be go to last till midnight ; but punctually , as the clock strike nine , the little maid - servant stagger in under the weight of a tray load with sandwich , cake , and jelly . this bring on a general move ; and Roger , who appear to have be on the watch for something of the kind , come and take a chair by Molly . 

 " I be so glad to see you again it seem such a long time since Christmas , " say he , drop his voice , and not allude more exactly to the day when she have leave the Hall . 

 " it be a long time , " she reply ; " we be close to Easter now . I have so want to tell you how glad I be to hear about your honour at Cambridge . I once think of send you a message through your brother , but then I think it might be make too much fuss , because I know nothing of mathematic , or of the value of a senior wranglership ; and you be sure to have so many congratulation from people who do know . " 

 " I miss yours though , Molly , " say he , kindly . " but I feel sure you be glad for I . " 

 " glad and proud too , " say she . " I should so like to hear something more about it . I hear you tell Cynthia " 

 " yes . what a charming person she be ! I should think you must be happy than we expect long ago . " 

 " but tell I something about the senior wranglership , please , " say Molly . 

 " it be a long story , and I ought to be help the Miss Brownings to hand sandwich besides , you would not   find it very interesting , it be so full of technical detail . " 

 " Cynthia look very much interested , " say Molly . 

 " well ! then I refer you to she , for I must go now . I can not   for shame go on sit here , and let those good lady have all the trouble . but I shall come and call on Mrs. Gibson soon . be you walk home to - night ? " 

 " yes , I think so , " reply molly , eagerly foresee what be to come . 

 " then I shall walk home with you . I leave my horse at the ' George , ' and that be half - way . I suppose old Betty will allow I to accompany you and your sister ? you use to describe she as something of a dragon . " 

 " Betty have leave we , " say Molly , sadly . " she be go to live at a place at Ashcombe . " 

 he make a face of dismay , and then go off to his duty . the short conversation have be very pleasant , and his manner have have just the brotherly kindness of old time ; but it be not quite the manner he have to Cynthia ; and molly half think she would have prefer the latter . he be now hover about Cynthia , who have decline the offer of refreshment from Willie Orford . Roger be tempt she , and with playful entreaty urge she to take some thing from he . every word they say could be hear by the whole room ; yet every word be say , on Roger 's part at least , as if he could not have speak it in that peculiar manner to any one else . at length , and rather more because she be weary of be entreat , than because it be his wish , Cynthia take a macaroon , and Roger seem as happy as though she have crown he with flower . the whole affair be as trifle and commonplace as could be in itself ; hardly worth noticing ; and yet molly do notice it , and feel uneasy ; she could not tell why . as it turn out , it be a rainy night , and Mrs. Gibson send a fly for the two girl instead of old Betty 's substitute . both Cynthia and Molly think of the possibility of their take the two Orford girl back to their grandmother 's , and so save they a wet walk ; but Cynthia get the start in speak about it ; and the thank and the imply praise for thoughtfulness be her . 

 when they get home Mr. and Mrs. Gibson be sit in the drawing - room , quite ready to be amuse by any detail of the evening . 

 Cynthia begin , 

 " oh ! it be not   very entertaining . one do not   expect that , " and she yawn wearily . 

 " who be there ? " ask Mr. Gibson . " quite a young party be not   it ? " 

 " they would only ask Lizzie and Fanny Orford , and their brother ; but Mr. Roger Hamley have ride over and call on Miss Brownings , and they keep he to tea . no one else . " 

 " Roger Hamley there ! " say Mr. Gibson . " he be come home then . I must make time to ride over and see he . " 

 " you would much well ask he here , " say Mrs. Gibson . " suppose you invite he and his brother to dine here on Friday , my dear . it would be a very pretty attention , I think . " 

 " my dear ! these young Cambridge man have a very good taste in wine , and do not   spare it . my cellar will not   stand many of their attack . " 

 " I do not   think you be so inhospitable , Mr. Gibson . " 

 " I be not inhospitable , I be sure . if you will put ' bitter beer ' in the corner of your note of invitation , just as the smart people put ' quadrille ' as a sign of the entertainment offer , we will have Osborne and Roger to dinner any day you like . and what do you think of my favourite , Cynthia ? you have not   see he before , I think ? " 

 " oh ! he be nothing like so handsome as his brother ; nor so polished ; nor so easy to talk to . he entertain I for more than an hour with a long account of some examination or other ; but there be something one like about he . " 

 " well and Molly , " say Mrs. Gibson , who pique herself on be an impartial stepmother , and who always try hard to make molly talk as much as Cynthia , " what sort of an evening have you have ? " 

 " very pleasant , thank you . " her heart a little belie she as she say this . she have not care for the round game ; and she would have care for Roger 's conversation . she have have what she be indifferent to , and not have what she would have like . 

 " we have   have our unexpected visitor , too , " say Mr. Gibson . " just after dinner , who should come in but Mr. Preston . I fancy he be have more of the management of the Hollingford property than formerly . sheepshank be get an old man . and if so , I suspect we shall see a good deal of Preston . he be ' no blate , ' as they use to say in Scotland , and make himself quite at home to - night . if I have ask he to stay , or , indeed , if I have do anything but yawn , he would have be here now . but I defy any man to stay when I have   a fit of yawning . " 

 " do you like Mr. Preston , papa ? " ask Molly . 

 " about as much as I do half the man I meet . he talk well , and have see a good deal . I know very little of he , though , except that he be my lord 's steward , which be a guarantee for a good deal . " 

 " Lady Harriet speak pretty strongly against he that day I be with she at the Manor - house . " 

 " Lady Harriet 's always full of fancy : she like person to - day , and dislike they to - morrow , " say Mrs. Gibson , who be touch on her sore point whenever molly quote Lady Harriet , or say anything to imply ever so transitory an intimacy with she . 

 " you must know a good deal about Mr. Preston , my dear . I suppose you see a good deal of he at Ashcombe ? " 

 Mrs. Gibson colour , and look at Cynthia before she reply . Cynthia 's face be set into a determination not to speak , however much she might be refer to . 

 " yes ; we see a good deal of he at one time , I mean . he be changeable , I think . but he always send we game , and sometimes fruit . there be some story against he , but I never believe they . " 

 " what kind of story ? " say Mr. Gibson , quickly . 

 " oh , vague story , you know : scandal , I daresay . no one ever believe they . he could be so agreeable if he choose ; and my lord , who be so very particular , would never have keep he as agent if they be true ; not that I ever know what they be , for I consider all scandal as abominable gossip . " 

 " I be very glad I yawn in his face , " say Mr. Gibson . " I hope he will take the hint . " 

 " if it be one of your giant - gape , papa , I should call it more than a hint , " say Molly . " and if you want a yawning chorus the next time he come , I will join in ; will not   you , Cynthia ? " 

 " I do not   know , " reply the latter , shortly , as she light her bed - candle . the two girl have usually some nightly conversation in one or other of their bed - room ; but to - night Cynthia say something or other about be terribly tired , and hastily shut her door . 

 the very next day , Roger come to pay his promise call . molly be out in the garden with Williams , plan the arrangement of some new flower - bed , and deep in her employment of place peg upon the lawn to mark out the different situation , when , stand up to mark the effect , her eye be catch by the figure of a gentleman , sit with his back to the light , lean forwards and talk , or listen , eagerly . molly know the shape of the head perfectly , and hastily begin to put off her brown - holland gardening apron , empty the pocket as she speak to Williams . 

 " you can finish it now , I think , " say she . " you know about the bright - colour flower be against the privet - hedge , and where the new rose - bed be to be ? " 

 " I can not   justly say as I do , " say he . " Mebbe , you will just go o'er it all once again , Miss Molly . I be not so young as I oncst be , and my head be not so clear now - a - day , and I would be loath to make mistake when you be so set upon your plan . " 

 molly give up her impulse in a moment . she see that the old gardener be really perplexed , yet that he be as anxious as he could be to do his good . so she go over the ground again , peg and explain till the wrinkle brow be smooth again , and he keep say , " I see , miss . all right , Miss Molly , i'se get it in my head as clear as patchwork now . " 

 so she could leave he , and go in . but just as she be close to the garden door , Roger come out . it really be for once a case of virtue its own reward , for it be far pleasanter to she to have he in a tete - a - tete , however short , than in the restraint of Mrs. Gibson 's and Cynthia 's presence . 

 " I only just find out where you be , molly . Mrs. Gibson say you have go out , but she do not   know where ; and it be the great chance that I turn round and see you . " 

 " I see you some time ago , but I could not   leave Williams . I think he be unusually slow to - day ; and he seem as if he could not   understand my plan for the new flower - bed . " 

 " be that the paper you have   get in your hand ? let I look at it , will you ? ah , I see ! you have   borrow some of your idea from our garden at home , have not   you ? this bed of scarlet geranium , with the border of young oak , peg down ! that be a fancy of my dear mother 's . " 

 they be both silent for a minute or two . then Molly say , 

 " how be the squire ? I have   never see he since . " 

 " no , he tell I how much he want to see you , but he could not   make up his mind to come and call . I suppose it would never do now for you to come and stay at the Hall , would it ? it would give my father so much pleasure : he look upon you as a daughter , and I be sure both Osborne and I shall always consider you be like a sister to we , after all my mother 's love for you , and your tender care of she at last . but I suppose it would not   do . " 

 " no ! certainly not , " say Molly , hastily . 

 " I fancy if you could come it would put we a little to right . you know , as I think I once tell you , Osborne have behave differently to what I should have do , though not wrongly , only what I call an error of judgment . but my father , I be sure , have take up some notion of never mind ; only the end of it be that he hold Osborne still in tacit disgrace , and be miserable himself all the time . Osborne , too , be sore and unhappy , and estrange from my father . it be just what my mother would have put right very soon , and perhaps you could have do it unconsciously , I mean for this wretched mystery that Osborne preserve about his affair be at the root of it all . but there be no use talk about it ; I do not   know why I begin . " then , with a wrench , change the subject , while molly still think of what he have be tell she , he break out , " I can not   tell you how much I like Miss Kirkpatrick , Molly . it must be a great pleasure to you have such a companion ! " 

 " yes , " say molly , half smile . " I be very fond of she ; and I think I like she well every day I know she . but how quickly you have find out her virtue ! " 

 " I do not   say ' virtue , ' do I ? " ask he , redden , but put the question in all good faith . " yet I do not   think one could be deceive in that face . and Mrs. Gibson appear to be a very friendly person , she have ask Osborne and I to dine here on Friday . " 

 " bitter beer " come into Molly 's mind ; but what she say be , " and be you come ? " 

 " certainly , I be , unless my father want I ; and I have   give Mrs. Gibson a conditional promise for Osborne , too . so I shall see you all very soon again . but I must go now . I have to keep an appointment seven mile from here in half - an - hour 's time . good luck to your flower - garden , Molly . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXII . 

 the OLD SQUIRE 's trouble . 
 

 Affairs be go on bad at the Hall than Roger have like to tell . moreover , very much of the discomfort there arise from " mere manner , " as people express it , which be always indescribable and indefinable . quiet and passive as Mrs. Hamley have always be in appearance , she be the rule spirit of the house as long as she live . the direction to the servant , down to the most minute particular , come from her sitting - room , or from the sofa on which she lay . her child always know where to find she ; and to find she , be to find love and sympathy . her husband , who be often restless and angry from one cause or another , always come to she to be smooth down and put right . he be conscious of her pleasant influence over he , and become at peace with himself when in her presence ; just as a child be at ease when with some one who be both firm and gentle . but the keystone of the family arch be go , and the stone of which it be compose begin to fall apart . it be always sad when a sorrow of this kind seem to injure the character of the mourning survivor . yet , perhaps , this injury may be only temporary or superficial ; the judgment so constantly pass upon the way in which people bear the loss of those whom they have deeply love , appear to be even more cruel , and wrongly mete out , than human judgment generally be . to careless observer , for instance , it would seem as though the squire be render more capricious and exact , more passionate and authoritative , by his wife 's death . the truth be , that it occur at a time when many thing come to harass he , and some to bitterly disappoint he ; and she be no long there to whom he use to carry his sore heart for the gentle balm of her sweet word . so the sore heart ache and smart intensely ; and often , when he see how his violent conduct affect other , he could have cry out for their pity , instead of their anger and resentment : " have mercy upon I , for I be very miserable . " how often have such dumb thought go up from the heart of those who have take hold of their sorrow by the wrong end , as prayer against sin ! and when the Squire see that his servant be learn to dread he , and his first - bear to avoid he , he do not blame they . he know he be become a domestic tyrant ; it seem as if all circumstance conspire against he , and as if he be too weak to struggle with they ; else , why do everything in door and out of door go so wrong just now , when all he could have do , have thing be prosperous , be to have submit , in very imperfect patience , to the loss of his wife ? but just when he need ready money to pacify Osborne 's creditor , the harvest have turn out remarkably plentiful , and the price of corn have sink down to a level it have not touch for year . the Squire have insure his life at the time of his marriage for a pretty large sum . it be to be a provision for his wife , if she survive he , and for their young child . Roger be the only representative of these interest now ; but the squire be unwilling to lose the insurance by cease to pay the annual sum . he would not , if he could , have sell any part of the estate which he inherit from his father ; and , besides , it be strictly entail . he have sometimes think how wise a step it would have be could he have sell a portion of it , and with the purchase - money have drain and reclaim the remainder ; and at length , learn from some neighbour that Government would make certain advance for drainage ,   c. , at a very low rate of interest , on condition that the work be do , and the money repay , within a give time , his wife have urge he to take advantage of the proffered loan . but now that she be no long there to encourage he , and take an interest in the progress of the work , he grow indifferent to it himself , and care no more to go out on his stout roan cob , and sit square on his seat , watch the labourer on the marshy land all overgrown with rush ; speak to they from time to time in their own strong nervous country dialect : but the interest to Government have to be pay all the same , whether the man work well or ill . then the roof of the Hall let in the melted snow - water this winter ; and , on examination , it turn out that a new roof be absolutely require . the man who have come about the advance make to Osborne by the London money - lender , have speak disparagingly of the timber on the estate " very fine tree sound , perhaps , too , fifty year ago , but go to rot now ; have want lop and clearing . be there no wood - ranger or forester ? they be nothing like the value young Mr. Hamley have represent they to be . " the remark have come round to the squire 's ear . he love the tree he have play under as a boy as if they be live creature ; that be on the romantic side of his nature . merely look at they as represent so many pound sterling , he have esteem they highly , and have have , until now , no opinion of another by which to correct his own judgment . so these word of the valuer cut he sharp , although he affect to disbelieve they , and try to persuade himself that he do so . but , after all , these care and disappointment do not touch the root of his deep resentment against Osborne . there be nothing like wounded affection for give poignancy to anger . and the squire believe that Osborne and his adviser have be make calculation , base upon his own death . he hat the idea so much it make he so miserable that he would not face it , and define it , and meet it with full inquiry and investigation . he choose rather to cherish the morbid fancy that he be useless in this world bear under an unlucky star that all thing go badly under his management . but he do not become humble in consequence . he put his misfortune down to the score of fate not to his own ; and he imagine that Osborne see his failure , and that his first - bear grudge he his natural term of life . all these fancy would have be set to right could he have talk they over with his wife ; or even have he be accustom to mingle much in the society of those whom he esteem his equal ; but , as have be state , he be inferior in education to those who should have be his mate ; and perhaps the jealousy and mauvaise honte that this inferiority have call out long ago , extend itself in some measure to the feeling he entertain towards his son less to Roger than to Osborne , though the former be turn out by far the most distinguished man . but Roger be practical ; interested in all out - of - door thing , and he enjoy the detail , homely enough , which his father sometimes give he of the every - day occurrence which the latter have notice in the wood and the field . Osborne , on the contrary , be what be commonly call " fine ; " delicate almost to effeminacy in dress and in manner ; careful in small observance . all this his father have be rather proud of in the day when he look forward to a brilliant career at Cambridge for his son ; he have at that time regard Osborne 's fastidiousness and elegance as another step - stone to the high and prosperous marriage which be to restore the ancient fortune of the Hamley family . but now that Osborne have barely obtain his degree ; that all the boasting of his father have prove vain ; that the fastidiousness have lead to unexpected expense   to attribute the most innocent cause to Osborne 's debt , the poor young man 's way and manner become a subject of irritation to his father . Osborne be still occupy with his book and his writing when he be at home ; and this mode of pass the great part of the day give he but few subject in common with his father when they do meet at meal time , or in the evening . perhaps if Osborne have be able to have more out - of - door amusement it would have be well ; but he be short - sighted , and care little for the carefully observant pursuit of his brother ; he know but few young man of his own standing in the county ; his hunting even , of which he be passionately fond , have be curtail this season , as his father have dispose of one of the two hunter he have be hitherto allow . the whole stable establishment have be reduce ; perhaps because it be the economy which tell most on the enjoyment of both the Squire and Osborne , and which , therefore , the former take a savage pleasure in enforce . the old carriage a heavy family coach buy in the day of comparative prosperity be no long need after madam 's death , and fall to piece in the cobwebbe seclusion of the coach - house . the good of the two carriage - horse be take for a gig , which the squire now set up ; say many a time to all who might care to listen to he that it be the first time for generation that the Hamleys of Hamley have not be able to keep their own coach . the other carriage - horse be turn out to grass ; be too old for regular work . Conqueror use to come whinny up to the park paling whenever he see the Squire , who have always a piece of bread , or some sugar , or an apple for the old favourite ; and would make many a complain speech to the dumb animal , tell he of the change of time since both be in their prime . it have never be the Squire 's custom to encourage his boy to invite their friend to the Hall . perhaps this , too , be owe to his mauvaise honte , and also to an exaggerated consciousness of the deficiency of his establishment as compare with what he imagine these lad be accustom to at home . he explain this once or twice to Osborne and Roger when they be at Rugby . 

 " you see , all you public schoolboy have a kind of freemasonry of your own , and outsider be look on by you much as I look on rabbit and all that be not   game . ay , you may laugh , but it be so ; and your friend will throw their eye askance at I , and never think on my pedigree , which would beat theirs all to shiver , I will be bind . no ; I will have no one here at the Hall who will look down on a Hamley of Hamley , even if he only know how to make a cross instead of write his name . " 

 then , of course , they must not visit at house to whose son the Squire could not or would not return a like hospitality . on all these point Mrs. Hamley have use her utmost influence without avail ; his prejudice be immoveable . as regard his position as head of the old family in three county , his pride be invincible ; as regard himself personally ill at ease in the society of his equal , deficient in manner , and in education his morbid sensitiveness be too sore and too self - conscious to be call humility . 

 take one instance from among many similar scene of the state of feeling between he and his eld son , which , if it could not be call active discord , show at least passive estrangement . 

 it take place on an evening in the March succeed Mrs. Hamley 's death . Roger be at Cambridge . Osborne have also be from home , and he have not volunteer any information as to his absence . the squire believe that Osborne have be either at Cambridge with his brother , or in London ; he would have like to hear where his son have be , what he have be do , and whom he have see , purely as piece of news , and as some diversion from the domestic worry and care which be press he hard ; but he be too proud to ask any question , and Osborne have not give he any detail of his journey . this silence have aggravate the Squire 's internal dissatisfaction , and he come home to dinner weary and sore - hearte a day or two after Osborne 's return . it be just six o'clock , and he go hastily into his own little business - room on the ground - floor , and , after wash his hand , come into the drawing - room feeling as if he be very late , but the room be empty . he glance at the clock over the mantel - piece , as he try to warm his hand at the fire . the fire have be neglect , and have go out during the day ; it be now pile up with half - dry wood , which sputter and smoke instead of do its duty in blaze and warm the room , through which the keen wind be cut its way in all direction . the clock have stop , no one have remember to wind it up , but by the squire 's watch it be already past dinner - time . the old butler put his head into the room , but , see the squire alone , he be about to draw it back , and wait for Mr. Osborne , before announce dinner . he have hop to do this unperceive , but the squire catch he in the act . 

 " why be not   dinner ready ? " he call out sharply . " it be ten minute past six . and , pray , why be you use this wood ? it be impossible to get oneself warm by such a fire as this . " 

 " I believe , sir , that Thomas " 

 " do not   talk to I of Thomas . send dinner in directly . " 

 about five minute elapse , spend by the hungry Squire in all sort of impatient way attack Thomas , who come in to look after the fire ; knock the log about , scatter out spark , but considerably lessen the chance of warmth ; touch up the candle , which appear to he to give a light unusually insufficient for the large cold room . while he be do this , Osborne come in dressed in full evening dress . he always move slowly ; and this , to begin with , irritate the squire . then an uncomfortable consciousness of a black coat , drab trouser , check cotton cravat , and splash boot , force itself upon he as he see Osborne 's point - device costume . he choose to consider it affectation and finery in Osborne , and be on the point of burst out with some remark , when the butler , who have watch Osborne downstairs before make the announcement , come in to say dinner be ready . 

 " it surely be not   six o'clock ? " say Osborne , pull out his dainty little watch . he be scarcely more unaware than it of the storm that be brew . 

 " six o'clock ! it be more than a quarter past , " growl out his father . 

 " I fancy your watch must be wrong , sir . I set mine by the Horse Guards only two day ago . " 

 now , impugn that old steady , turnip - shape watch of the Squire 's be one of the insult which , as it could not reasonably be resent , be not to be forgive . that watch have be give he by his father when watch be watch long ago . it have give the law to house - clock , stable - clock , kitchen - clock nay , even to Hamley Church clock in its day ; and be it now , in its respectable old age , to be look down upon by a little whipper - snapper of a french watch which could go into a man 's waistcoat pocket , instead of have to be extricate , with due effort , like a respectable watch of size and position , from a fob in the waistband ? no ! not if the whipper - snapper be back by all the Horse Guards that ever be , with the Life Guards to boot . poor Osborne might have know well than to cast this slur on his father 's flesh and blood ; for so dear do he hold his watch ! 

 " my watch be like myself , " say the squire , ' girne , ' as the Scotch say " plain , but steady - going . at any rate , it give the law in my house . the King may go by the Horse Guards if he like . " 

 " I beg your pardon , sir , " say Osborne , really anxious to keep the peace , " I go by my watch , which be certainly right by London time ; and I have no idea you be wait for I ; otherwise I could have dress much quick . " 

 " I should think so , " say the Squire , look sarcastically at his son 's attire . " when I be a young man I should have be ashamed to have spend as much time at my look - glass as if I have be a girl . I could make myself as smart as any one when I be go to a dance , or to a party where I be likely to meet pretty girl ; but I should have laugh myself to scorn if I have stand fiddle - faddle at a glass , smirk at my own likeness , all for my own pleasure . " 

 Osborne redden , and be on the point of let fly some caustic remark on his father 's dress at the present moment ; but he content himself with say , in a low voice , 

 " my mother always expect we all to dress for dinner . I get into the habit of do it to please she , and I keep it up now . " indeed , he have a certain kind of feeling of loyalty to her memory in keep up all the little domestic habit and custom she have institute or prefer . but the contrast which the Squire think be imply by Osborne 's remark , put he beside himself . 

 " and I , too , try to attend to her wish . I do ; and in more important thing . I do when she be alive ; and I do so now . " 

 " I never say you do not , " say Osborne , astonish at his father 's passionate word and manner . 

 " yes , you do , sir . you mean it . I could see by your look . I see you look at my morning coat . at any rate , I never neglect any wish of hers in her lifetime . if she have wish I to go to school again and learn my A , B , C , I would . by I would ; and I would not   have go play I , and lounge away my time , for fear of vex and disappoint she . yet some folk old than school - boy " 

 the squire choke here ; but though the word would not come his passion do not diminish . " I will not have you cast up your mother 's wish to I , sir . you , who go near to break her heart at last ! " 

 Osborne be strongly tempt to get up and leave the room . perhaps it would have be well if he have ; it might then have bring about an explanation , and a reconciliation between father and son . but he think he do well in sit still and appear to take no notice . this indifference to what he be say appear to annoy the squire still more , and he keep on grumble and talk to himself till Osborne , unable to bear it any long , say , very quietly , but very bitterly 

 " I be only a cause of irritation to you , and home be no long home to I , but a place in which I be to be control in trifle , and scold about trifle as if I be a child . put I in a way of make a living for myself that much your old son have a right to ask of you I will then leave this house , and you shall be no long vex by my dress , or my want of punctuality . " 

 " you make your request pretty much as another son do long ago : ' give I the portion that falleth to I . ' but I do not   think what he do with his money be much encouragement for I to . " then the thought of how little he could give his son his " portion , " or any part of it , stop the Squire . 

 Osborne take up the speech . 

 " I be as ready as any man to earn my living ; only the preparation for any profession will cost money , and money I have not   get . " 

 " no more have I , " say the squire , shortly . 

 " what be to be do then ? " say Osborne , only half believe his father 's word . 

 " why , you must learn to stop at home , and not take expensive journey ; and you must reduce your tailor 's bill . I do not   ask you to help I in the management of the land you be far too fine a gentleman for that ; but if you can not   earn money , at least you need not   spend it . " 

 " I have   tell you I be willing enough to earn money , " cry Osborne , passionately at last . " but how be I to do it ? you really be very unreasonable , sir . " 

 " be I ? " say the Squire cool in manner , though not in temper , as Osborne grow warm . " but I do not   set up for be reasonable ; man who have to pay away money that they have not   get for their extravagant son be not   likely to be reasonable . there be two thing you have   go and do which put I beside myself , when I think of they ; you have   turn out next door to a dunce at college , when your poor mother think so much of you and when you might have please and gratify she so if you choose and , well ! I will not   say what the other thing be . " 

 " tell I , sir , " say Osborne , almost breathless with the idea that his father have discover his secret marriage ; but the father be think of the money - lender , who be calculate how soon Osborne would come into the estate . 

 " no ! " say the Squire . " I know what I know ; and I be not go to tell you how I know it . only , I will just say this your friend no more know a piece of good timber when they see it than you or I know how you could earn five pound if it be to keep you from starve . now , there be Roger we none of we make an ado about he ; but he will have his fellowship now , I will warrant he , and be a bishop , or a chancellor , or something , before we have   find out he be clever we have   be so much take up think about you . I do not   know what be come over I to speak of ' we ' ' we ' in this way , " say he , suddenly drop his voice , a change of tone as sad as sad could be . " I ought to say ' I ; ' it will be ' I ' for evermore in this world . " 

 he get up and leave the room in quick haste , knock over his chair , and not stop to pick it up . Osborne , who be sit and shade his eye with his hand , as he have be do for some time , look up at the noise , and then rise as quickly and hurry after his father , only in time to hear the study - door lock on the inside the moment he reach it . 

 Osborne return into the dining - room chagrined and sorrowful . but he be always sensitive to any omission of the usual observance , which might excite remark ; and even with his heavy heart he be careful to pick up the fall chair , and restore it to its place near the bottom of the table ; and afterwards so to disturb the dish as to make it appear that they have be touch , before ring for Robinson . when the latter come in , follow by Thomas , Osborne think it necessary to say to he that his father be not well , and have go into the study ; and that he himself want no dessert , but would have a cup of coffee in the drawing - room . the old butler send Thomas out of the room , and come up confidentially to Osborne . 

 " I think master be not   justly himself , Mr. Osborne , before dinner . and , therefore , I make excuse for he I do . he speak to Thomas about the fire , sir , which be a thing I could in nowise put up with , unless by reason of sickness , which I be always ready to make allowance for . " 

 " why should not   my father speak to Thomas ? " say Osborne . " but , perhaps , he speak angrily , I daresay ; for I be sure he be not well . " 

 " no , Mr. Osborne , it be not   that . I myself be give to anger ; and I be bless with as good health as any man in my year . besides , anger 's a good thing for Thomas . he need a deal of it . but it should come from the right quarter and that be I , myself , Mr. Osborne . I know my place , and I know my right and duty as well as any butler that live . and it be my duty to scold Thomas , and not master 's . Master ought to have say , ' Robinson ! you must speak to Thomas about let out the fire , ' and I would ha ' give it he well , as I shall do now , for that matter . but as I say before , I make excuse for master , as be in mental distress and bodily ill - health ; so I have   bring myself round not to give warning , as I should ha ' do , for certain , under happy circumstance . " 

 " really , Robinson , I think it be all great nonsense , " say Osborne , weary of the long story the butler have tell he , and to which he have not half attend . " what in the world do it signify whether my father speak to you or to Thomas ? bring I coffee in the drawing - room , and do not   trouble your head any more about scold Thomas . " 

 Robinson go away offended at his grievance be call nonsense . he keep mutter to himself in the interval of scold Thomas , and say , " thing be a deal change since poor missis go . I do not   wonder master feel it , for I be sure I do . she be a lady who have always a become respect for a butler 's position , and could have understand how he might be hurt in his mind . she would never ha ' call his delicacy of feeling nonsense not she ; no more would Mr. Roger . he be a merry young gentleman , and over fond of bring dirty , slimy creature into the house ; but he be always a kind word for a man who be hurt in his mind . he would cheer up the squire , and keep he from get so cross and wilful . I wish Mr. Roger be here , I do . " 

 the poor squire , shut up with his grief , and his ill - temper as well , in the dingy , dreary study where he daily spend more and more of his indoor life , turn over his care and trouble till he be as bewilder with the process as a squirrel must be in go round in a cage . he have out day - book and ledger , and be calculate up back - rent ; and every time the sum - total come to different amount . he could have cry like a child over his sum ; he be wear out and weary , angry and disappointed . he close his book at last with a bang . 

 " I be get old , " he say , " and my head 's less clear than it use to be . I think sorrow for she have daze I . I never be much to boast on ; but she think a deal of I bless she ! she would never let I call myself stupid ; but , for all that , I be stupid . Osborne ought to help I . he be have money enough spend on his learning ; but , instead , he come down dress like a popinjay , and never trouble his head to think how I be to pay his debt . I wish I have tell he to earn his living as a dancing - master , " say the squire , with a sad smile at his own wit . " he be dress for all the world like one . and how he be spend the money no one know ! perhaps Roger will turn up some day with a heap of creditor at his heel . no , he will not   not Roger ; he may be slow , but he be steady , be old Roger . I wish he be here . he be not the eld son , but he would take an interest in the estate ; and he would do up these weary account for I . I wish Roger be here ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 OSBORNE HAMLEY review his position . 
 

 Osborne have his solitary cup of coffee in the drawing - room . he be very unhappy too , after his fashion . he stand on the hearth - rug pondering over his situation . he be not exactly aware how hardly his father be press for ready - money ; the squire have never speak to he on the subject without be angry ; and many of his loose contradictory statement all of which , however contradictory they might appear , have their basis in truth be set down by his son to the exaggeration of passion . but it be uncomfortable enough to a young man of Osborne 's age to feel himself continually hamper for want of a five - pound note . the principal supply for the liberal almost luxurious table at the Hall , come off the estate ; so that there be no appearance of poverty as far as the household go ; and as long as Osborne be content at home , he have everything he could wish for ; but he have a wife elsewhere he want to see she continually and that necessitate journey . she , poor thing ! have to be support where be the money for the journey and for Aimťe 's modest want to come from ? that be the puzzle in Osborne 's mind just now . while he have be at college his allowance heir of the Hamleys have be three hundred , while Roger have to be content with a hundred less . the payment of these annual sum have give the squire a good deal of trouble ; but he think of it as a merely temporary inconvenience ; perhaps unreasonably think so . Osborne be to do great thing ; take high honour , get a fellowship , marry a long - descend heiress , live in some of the many uninhabited room at the Hall , and help the squire in the management of the estate that would some time be his . Roger be to be a clergyman ; steady , slow Roger be just fit for that , and when he decline enter the Church , prefer a life of more activity and adventure , Roger be to be anything ; he be useful and practical , and fit for all the employment from which Osborne be shut out by his fastidiousness , and his   pseudo   genius ; so it be well he be an eld son , for he would never have do to struggle through the world ; and as for his settle down to a profession , it would be like cut block with a razor ! and now here be Osborne , live at home , but long to be elsewhere ; his allowance stop in reality ; indeed , the punctual payment of it during the last year or two have be owe to his mother 's exertion ; but nothing have be say about its present cessation by either father or son ; money matter be too sore a subject between they . every now and then the Squire throw he a ten - pound note or so ; but the sort of suppress growl with which it be give , and the entire uncertainty as to when he might receive such gift , render any calculation base upon their receipt exceedingly vague and uncertain . 

 " what in the world can I do to secure an income ? " think Osborne , as he stand on the hearth - rug , his back to a blaze fire , his cup of coffee send up in the rare old china that have belong to the Hall for generation ; his dress finish , as dress of Osborne 's could hardly fail to be . one could hardly have think that this elegant young man , stand there in the midst of comfort that verge on luxury , should have be turn over that one great problem in his mind ; but so it be . " what can I do to be sure of a present income ? thing can not go on as they be . I should need support for two or three year , even if I enter myself at the Temple , or Lincoln 's Inn . it would be impossible to live on my pay in the army ; besides , I should hate that profession . in fact , there be evil attend all profession I could not   bring myself to become a member of any I have   ever hear of . perhaps I be more fitted to take ' order ' than anything else ; but to be compel to write weekly sermon whether one have anything to say or not , and , probably , doom only to associate with people below one in refinement and education ! yet poor Aimťe must have money . I can not   bear to compare our dinner here , overload with joint and game and sweet , as Morgan will persist in send they up , with Aimťe 's two little mutton - chop . yet what would my father say if he know I would marry a Frenchwoman ? in his present mood he would disinherit I , if that be possible ; and he would speak about she in a way I could not   stand . a roman Catholic , too ! well , I do not   repent it . I would do it again . only if my mother have be in good health if she could have hear my story , and know Aimťe ! as it be I must keep it secret ; but where to get money ? where to get money ? " 

 then he bethink he of his poem would they sell , and bring he in money ? in spite of Milton , he think they might ; and he go to fetch his MSS . out of his room . he sate down near the fire , try to study they with a critical eye , to represent public opinion as far as he could . he have change his style since the Mrs. Hemans ' day . he be essentially imitative in his poetic faculty ; and of late he have follow the lead of a popular writer of sonnet . he turn his poem over : they be almost equivalent to an autobiographical passage in his life . arrange they in their order , they come as follow : 

 " to Aimťe , walk with a Little child . " 

 " to Aimťe , sing at her work . " 

 " to Aimťe , turn away from I while I tell my love . " 

 " Aimťe 's Confession . " 

 " Aimťe in despair . " 

 " the Foreign Land in which my Aimťe dwell . " 

 " the Wedding Ring . " 

 " the Wife . " 

 when he come to this last sonnet he put down his bundle of paper and begin to think . " the wife . " yes , and a french wife ; and a roman catholic wife and a wife who might be say to have be in service ! and his father 's hatred of the French , both collectively and individually collectively , as tumultuous brutal ruffian , who murder their king , and commit all kind of bloody atrocity individually , as represent by " Boney , " and the various caricature of " Johnny Crapaud " that have be in full circulation about five - and - twenty year before this time , when the squire have be young and capable of receive impression . as for the form of religion in which Mrs. Osborne Hamley have be bring up , it be enough to say that catholic emancipation have begin to be talk about by some politician , and that the sullen roar of the majority of Englishmen , at the bare idea of it , be surge in the distance with ominous threatening ; the very mention of such a measure before the squire be , as Osborne well know , like shake a red flag before a bull . 

 and then he consider that if Aimťe have have the unspeakable , the incomparable blessing of be bear of english parent , in the very heart of England Warwickshire , for instance and have never hear of priest , or mass , or confession , or the Pope , or Guy Fawkes , but have be bear , baptize , and breed in the Church of England , without have ever see the outside of a dissent meeting - house , or a papist chapel even with all these advantage , her have be a   what be the equivalent for " bonne " in English ? ' nursery - governess ' be a term hardly invent   nursery - maid , with wage pay down once a quarter , liable to be dismiss at a month 's warning , and have her tea and sugar dole out to she , would be a shock to his father 's old ancestral pride that he would hardly ever get over . 

 " if he see she ! " think Osborne . " if he could but see she ! " but if the squire be to see Aimťe , he would also hear she speak her pretty broken English precious to her husband , as it be in it that she have confess brokenly with her english tongue , that she love he soundly with her french heart and Squire Hamley pique himself on be a good hater of the French . " she would make such a love , sweet , docile little daughter to my father she would go as near as any one could towards fill up the blank void in this house , if he would but have she ; but he will not ; he never would ; and he sha'n't   have the opportunity of scout she . yet if I call she ' Lucy ' in these sonnet ; and if they make a great effect be praise in Blackwood and the Quarterly and all the world be agog to find out the author ; and I tell he my secret I could if I be successful I think then he would ask who Lucy be , and I could tell he all then . if how I hate ' if . ' ' if I no ifs . ' my life have be base on ' when s ; ' and first they have turn to ' if , ' and then they have vanish away . it be ' when Osborne get honours , ' and then ' if Osborne , ' and then a failure altogether . I say to Aimťe , ' when my mother see you , ' and now it be ' if my father see she , ' with a very faint prospect of its ever come to pass . " so he let the evening hour flow on and disappear in revery like these ; wind up with a sudden determination to try the fate of his poem with a publisher , with the direct expectation of get money for they , and an ulterior fancy that , if successful , they might work wonder with his father . 

 when Roger come home Osborne do not let a day pass before tell his brother of his plan . he never do conceal anything long from Roger ; the feminine part of his character make he always desirous of a confidant , and as sweet sympathy as he could extract . but Roger 's opinion have no effect on Osborne 's action ; and Roger know this full well . so when Osborne begin with " I want your advice on a plan I have get in my head , " Roger reply : " some one tell I that the Duke of Wellington 's maxim be never to give advice unless he could enforce its be carry into effect ; now I can not   do that ; and you know , old boy , you do not   follow out my advice when you have   get it . " 

 " not always , I know . not when it do not   agree with my own opinion . you be think about this concealment of my marriage ; but you be not up in all the circumstance . you know how fully I mean to have do it , if there have not   be that row about my debt ; and then my mother 's illness and death . and now you have   no conception how my father be change how irritable he have become ! wait till you have   be at home a week ! Robinson , Morgan it be the same with they all ; but bad of all with I . " 

 " poor fellow ! " say Roger ; " I think he look terribly change : shrunken , and his ruddiness of complexion alter . " 

 " why , he hardly take half the exercise he use to do , so it be no wonder . he have turn away all the man off the new work , which use to be such an interest to he ; and because the roan cob stumble with he one day , and nearly throw he , he will not   ride it ; and yet he will not   sell it and buy another , which would be the sensible plan ; so there be two old horse eat their head off , while he be constantly talk about money and expense . and that bring I to what I be go to say . I be desperately hard up for money , and so I have   be collect my poem weed they well , you know go over they quite critically , in fact ; and I want to know if you think Deighton would publish they . you have   a name in Cambridge , you know ; and I daresay he would look at they if you offer they to he . " 

 " I can but try , " say Roger ; " but I be afraid you will not   get much by they . " 

 " I do not   expect much . I be a new man , and must make my name . I should be content with a hundred . if I have a hundred pound I would set myself to do something . I might keep myself and Aimťe by my writing while I study for the bar ; or , if the bad come to the bad , a hundred pound would take we to Australia . " 

 " Australia ! why , Osborne , what could you do there ? and leave my father ! I hope you will never get your hundred pound , if that be the use you be to make of it ! why , you would break the squire 's heart . " 

 " it might have do once , " say Osborne , gloomily , " but it would not   now . he look at I askance , and shy away from conversation with I . let I alone for notice and feel this kind of thing . it be this very susceptibility to outward thing that give I what faculty I have ; and it seem to I as if my bread , and my wife 's too , be to depend upon it . you will soon see for yourself the term which I be on with my father ! " 

 Roger do soon see . his father have slip into a habit of silence at meal - time a habit which Osborne , who be troubled and anxious enough for his own part , have not strive to break . Father and son sate together , and exchange all the necessary speech connect with the occasion civilly enough ; but it be a relief to they when their intercourse be over , and they separate the father to brood over his sorrow and his disappointment , which be real and deep enough , and the injury he have receive from his boy , which be exaggerate in his mind by his ignorance of the actual step Osborne have take to raise money . if the money - lender have calculate the chance of his father 's life or death in make their bargain , Osborne himself have think only of how soon and how easily he could get the money requisite for clear he from all imperious claim at Cambridge , and for enable he to follow Aimťe to her home in Alsace , and for the subsequent marriage . as yet , Roger have never see his brother 's wife ; indeed , he have only be take into Osborne 's full confidence after all be decide in which his advice could have be useful . and now , in the enforced separation , Osborne 's whole thought , both the poetical and practical side of his mind , run upon the little wife who be pass her lonely day in farmhouse lodging , wonder when her bridegroom husband would come to she next . with such an engrossing subject , it be , perhaps , no wonder that he unconsciously neglect his father ; but it be none the less sad at the time , and to be regret in its consequence . 

 " I may come in and have a pipe with you , sir , may not   I ? " say Roger , that first evening , push gently against the study - door , which his father hold only half open . 

 " you will not like it , " say the squire , still hold the door against he , but speak in a relent tone . " the tobacco I use be not   what young man like . well go and have a cigar with Osborne . " 

 " no . I want to sit with you , and I can stand pretty strong tobacco . " 

 Roger push in , the resistance slowly give way before he . 

 " it will make your clothe smell . you will have to borrow Osborne 's scent to sweeten yourself , " say the Squire , grimly , at the same time push a short smart amber - mouthed pipe to his son . 

 " no ; I will have a churchwarden . why , father , do you think I be a baby to put up with a doll 's head like this ? " look at the carving upon it . 

 the Squire be pleased in his heart , though he do not choose to show it . he only say , " Osborne bring it I when he come back from Germany . that be three year ago . " and then for some time they smoke in silence . but the voluntary companionship of his son be very soothing to the squire , though not a word might be say . 

 the next speech he make show the direction of his thought ; indeed , his word be always a transparent medium through which the current might be see . 

 " a deal of a man 's life come and go in three year I have   find that out ; " and he puff away at his pipe again . while Roger be turn over in his mind what answer to make to this truism , the squire again stop his smoking and speak . 

 " I remember when there be all that fuss about the Prince of Wales be make regent , I read somewhere I daresay it be in a newspaper that king and their heir - apparent be always on bad term . Osborne be quite a little chap then : he use to go out rid with I on White Surrey ; you will not   remember the pony we call White Surrey ? " 

 " I remember it ; but I think it a tall horse in those day . " 

 " ah ! that be because you be such a small lad , you know . I have seven horse in the stable then not count the farm - horse . I do not   recollect have a care then , except she be always delicate , you know . but what a beautiful boy Osborne be ! he be always dress in black velvet it be a foppery , but it be not   my doing , and it be all right , I be sure . he be a handsome fellow now , but the sunshine have go out of his face . " 

 " he be a good deal trouble about this money , and the anxiety he have give you , " say Roger , rather take his brother 's feeling for grant . 

 " not he , " say the Squire , take the pipe out of his mouth , and hit the bowl so sharply against the hob that it break in piece . " there ! but never mind ! I say , not he , Roger ! he be none trouble about the money . it be easy get money from Jews if you be the eld son , and the heir . they just ask , ' how old be your father , and have he have a stroke , or a fit ? ' and it be settle out of hand , and then they come prowl about a place , and run down the timber and land do not   let we speak of he ; it be no good , Roger . he and I be out of tune , and it seem to I as if only God Almighty could put we to right . it be think of how he grieve she at last that make I so bitter with he . and yet there be a deal of good in he ! and he be so quick and clever , if only he would give his mind to thing . now , you be always slow , Roger all your master use to say so . " 

 Roger laugh a little 

 " yes ; I would many a nickname at school for my slowness , " say he . 

 " never mind ! " say the Squire , consolingly . " I be sure I do not . if you be a clever fellow like osborne yonder , you would be all for care for book and writing , and you would perhaps find it as dull as he do to keep company with a bumpkin - squire Jones like I . yet , I daresay , they think a deal of you at Cambridge , " say he , after a pause , ' since you have   get this fine wranglership ; I would nearly forget that the news come at such a miserable time . " 

 " well , yes ! they be always proud of the senior wrangler of the year up at Cambridge . next year I must abdicate . " 

 the Squire sit and gaze into the ember , still hold his useless pipe - stem . at last he say , in a low voice , as if scarcely aware he have get a listener , " I use to write to she when she be away in London , and tell she the home news . but no letter will reach she now ! nothing reach she ! " 

 Roger start up . 

 " where be the tobacco - box , father ? let I fill you another pipe ! " and when he have do so , he stoop over his father and stroke his cheek . the squire shake his head . 

 " you have   only just come home , lad . you do not   know I , as I be now - a - day ! ask Robinson I will not   have you ask Osborne , he ought to keep it to himself but any of the servant will tell you I be not like the same man for get into passion with they . I use to be reckon a good master , but that be past now ! Osborne be once a little boy , and she be once alive and I be once a good master a good master yes ! it be all past now . " 

 he take up his pipe , and begin to smoke afresh , and Roger , after a silence of some minute , begin a long story about some Cambridge man 's misadventure on the hunting - field , tell it with such humour that the squire be beguile into hearty laughing . when they rise to go to bed his father say to Roger , 

 " well , we have   have a pleasant evening at least , I have . but perhaps you have not ; for I be but poor company now , I know . " 

 " I do not   know when I have   pass a happy evening , father , " say Roger . and he speak truly , though he do not trouble himself to find out the cause of his happiness . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 MRS . GIBSON be little dinner . 
 

 Illustrationll this have take place before Roger 's first meeting with Molly and Cynthia at Miss Brownings ' ; and the little dinner on the Friday at Mr. Gibson 's , which follow in due sequence . 

 Mrs. Gibson intend the Hamleys to find this dinner pleasant ; and they do . Mr. Gibson be fond of the two young man , both for their parent ' sake and their own , for he have know they since boyhood ; and to those whom he like Mr. Gibson could be remarkably agreeable . Mrs. Gibson really give they a welcome and cordiality in a hostess be a very become mantle for any other deficiency there may be . Cynthia and Molly look their good , which be all the duty Mrs. Gibson absolutely require of they , as she be willing enough to take her full share in the conversation . Osborne fall to her lot , of course , and for some time he and she prattle on with all the ease of manner and commonplaceness of meaning which go far to make the " art of polite conversation . " Roger , who ought to have make himself agreeable to one or the other of the young lady , be exceedingly interested in what Mr. Gibson be tell he of a paper on comparative osteology in some foreign journal of science , which Lord Hollingford be in the habit of forwarding to his friend the country surgeon . yet , every now and then while he listen , he catch his attention wander to the face of Cynthia , who be place between his brother and Mr. Gibson . she be not particularly occupy with attend to anything that be go on ; her eyelid be carelessly drop , as she crumble her bread on the tablecloth , and her beautiful long eyelash be see on the clear tint of her oval cheek . she be think of something else ; Molly be try to understand with all her might . suddenly Cynthia look up , and catch Roger 's gaze of intent admiration too fully for she to be unaware that he be star at she . she colour a little ; but , after the first moment of rosy confusion at his evident admiration of she , she fly to the attack , divert his confusion at thus be catch , to the defence of himself from her accusation . 

 " it be quite true ! " she say to he . " I be not attend : you see I do not   know even the A b c of science . but , please , do not   look so severely at I , even if I be a dunce ! " 

 " I do not   know I do not   mean to look severely , I be sure , " reply he , not know well what to say . 

 " Cynthia be not a dunce either , " say Mrs. Gibson , afraid lest her daughter 's opinion of herself might be take seriously . " but I have always observe that some people have a talent for one thing and some for another . now Cynthia 's talent be not for science and the severer study . do you remember , love , what trouble I have to teach you the use of the globe ? " 

 " yes ; and I do not   know longitude from latitude now ; and I be always puzzle as to which be perpendicular and which be horizontal . " 

 " yet , I do assure you , " her mother continue , rather address herself to Osborne , " that her memory for poetry be prodigious . I have hear she repeat the ' Prisoner of Chillon ' from begin to end . " 

 " it would be rather a bore to have to hear she , I think , " say Mr. Gibson , smile at Cynthia , who give he back one of her bright look of mutual understanding . 

 " ah , Mr. Gibson , I have find out before now that you have no soul for poetry ; and molly there be your own child . she read such deep book all about fact and figure : she will be quite a blue - stocking by - and - by . " 

 " Mamma , " say Molly , redden , " you think it be a deep book because there be the shape of the different cell of bee in it ! but it be not at all deep . it be very interesting . " 

 " never mind , molly , " say Osborne . " I stand up for blue - stocking . " 

 " and I object to the distinction imply in what you say , " say Roger . " it be not deep , ergo , it be very interesting . now , a book may be both deep and interesting . " 

 " oh , if you be go to chop logic and use latin word , I think it be time for we to leave the room , " say Mrs. Gibson . 

 " do not   let we run away as if we be beat , mamma , " say Cynthia . " though it may be logic , I , for one , can understand what Mr. Roger Hamley say just now ; and I read some of Molly 's book ; and whether it be deep or not I find it very interesting more so than I should think the ' Prisoner of Chillon ' now - a - day . I have   displace the Prisoner to make room for Johnnie Gilpin as my favourite poem . " 

 " how could you talk such nonsense , Cynthia ! " say Mrs. Gibson , as the girl follow her upstairs . " you know you be not a dunce . it be all very well not to be a blue - stocking , because gentle - people do not   like that kind of woman ; but run yourself down , and contradict all I say about your liking for Byron , and poet and poetry to Osborne Hamley of all man , too ! " 

 Mrs. Gibson speak quite crossly for she . 

 " but , mamma , " Cynthia reply , " I be either a dunce , or I be not . if I be , I do right to own it ; if I be not , he be a dunce if he do not   find out I be joke . " 

 " well , " say Mrs. Gibson , a little puzzled by this speech , and want some elucidatory addition . 

 " only that if he be a dunce his opinion of I be worth nothing . so , any way , it do not   signify . " 

 " you really bewilder I with your nonsense , child . molly be worth twenty of you . " 

 " I quite agree with you , mamma , " say Cynthia , turn round to take Molly 's hand . 

 " yes ; but she ought not to be , " say Mrs. Gibson , still irritated . " think of the advantage you have   have . " 

 " I be afraid I have rather be a dunce than a blue - stocking , " say molly ; for the term have a little annoyed she , and the annoyance be rankle still . 

 " Hush ; here they be come : I hear the dining - room door ! I never mean you be a blue - stocking , dear , so do not   look vex . Cynthia , my love , where do you get those lovely flower anemone , be they ? they suit your complexion so exactly . " 

 " Come , Molly , do not   look so grave and thoughtful , " exclaim Cynthia . " do not   you perceive mamma want we to be smile and amiable ? " 

 Mr. Gibson have have to go out to his evening round ; and the young man be all too glad to come up into the pretty drawing - room ; the bright little wood - fire ; the comfortable easy - chair which , with so small a party , might be draw round the hearth ; the good - natured hostess ; the pretty , agreeable girl . Roger saunter up to the corner where Cynthia be stand , play with a hand - screen . 

 " there be a charity ball in Hollingford soon , be not   there ? " ask he . 

 " yes ; on Easter Tuesday , " she reply . 

 " be you go ? I suppose you be ? " 

 " yes ; mamma be go to take Molly and I . " 

 " you will enjoy it very much go together ? " 

 for the first time during this little conversation she glance up at he real honest pleasure shin out of her eye . 

 " yes ; go together will make the enjoyment of the thing . it would be dull without she . " 

 " you be great friend , then ? " he ask . 

 " I never think I should like any one so much , any girl I mean . " 

 she put in the final reservation in all simplicity of heart ; and in all simplicity do he understand it . he come ever so little near , and drop his voice a little . 

 " I be so anxious to know . I be so glad . I have often wonder how you two be get on . " 

 " have you ? " say she , look up again . " at Cambridge ? you must be very fond of Molly ! " 

 " yes , I be . she be with we so long ; and at such a time ! I look upon she almost as a sister . " 

 " and she be very fond of all of you . I seem to know you all from hear her talk about you so much . all of you ! " say she , lay an emphasis on " all " to show that it include the dead as well as the living . Roger be silent for a minute or two . 

 " I do not   know you , even by hearsay . so you must not   wonder that I be a little afraid . but as soon as I see you I know how it must be ; and it be such a relief ! " 

 " Cynthia , " say Mrs. Gibson , who think that the young son have have quite his share of low , confidential conversation , " come here , and sing that little french ballad to Mr. Osborne Hamley . " 

 " which do you mean , mamma ? ' Tu t'en repentiras , Colin ? ' " 

 " yes ; such a pretty , playful little warning to young man , " say Mrs. Gibson , smile up at Osborne . " the refrain be 

 Tu t'en repentiras , Colin , 
 Tu t'en repentiras , 
 car si tu prend une femme , Colin , 
 Tu t'en repentiras . 
 the advice may apply very well when there be a french wife in the case ; but not , I be sure , to an Englishman who be think of an english wife . " 

  " Tu t'en repentiras , Colin . " 
 " Tu t'en repentiras , Colin . " 
 click to enlarge 
 this choice of a song be exceedingly mal - apropos , have Mrs. Gibson but know it . Osborne and Roger know that the wife of the former be a Frenchwoman , and , conscious of each other 's knowledge , feel doubly awkward ; while molly be as much confused as though she herself be secretly marry . however , Cynthia carol the saucy ditty out , and her mother smile at it , in total ignorance of any application it might have . Osborne have instinctively go to stand behind Cynthia , as she sate at the piano , so as to be ready to turn over the leaf of her music if she require it . he keep his hand in his pocket and his eye fix on her finger ; his countenance cloud with gravity at all the merry quip which she so playfully sing . Roger look grave as well , but be much more at his ease than his brother ; indeed , he be half - amuse by the awkwardness of the situation . he catch Molly 's troubled eye and heighten colour , and he see that she be feel this contretemp more seriously than she need to do . he move to a seat by she , and half whisper , " too late a warning , be it not ? " 

 molly look up at he as he leant towards she , and reply in the same tone " oh , I be so sorry ! " 

 " you need not be . he will not   mind it long ; and a man must take the consequence when he put himself in a false position . " 

 molly could not tell what to reply to this , so she hang her head and keep silence . yet she could see that Roger do not change his attitude or remove his hand from the back of his chair , and , impel by curiosity to find out the cause of his stillness , she look up at he at length , and see his gaze fix on the two who be near the piano . Osborne be say something eagerly to Cynthia , whose grave eye be upturned to he with soft intentness of expression , and her pretty mouth half - open , with a sort of impatience for he to cease speak , that she might reply . 

 " they be talk about France , " say Roger , in answer to Molly 's unspoken question . " Osborne know it well , and Miss Kirkpatrick have be at school there , you know . it sound very interesting ; shall we go near and hear what they be say ? " 

 it be all very well to ask this civilly , but molly think it would have be well to wait for her answer . instead of wait , however , Roger go to the piano , and , lean on it , appear to join in the light merry talk , while he feast his eye as much as he dare by look at Cynthia . molly suddenly feel as if she could scarcely keep from cry a minute ago he have be so near to she , and talk so pleasantly and confidentially ; and now he almost seem as if he have forget her existence . she think that all this be wrong ; and she exaggerate its wrongness to herself ; " mean , " and " envious of Cynthia , " and " ill - natured , " and ' selfish , " be the term she keep apply to herself ; but it do no good , she be just as naughty at the last as at the first . 

 Mrs. Gibson break into the state of thing which molly think be to endure for ever . her work have be intricate up to this time , and have require a great deal of counting ; so she have have no time to attend to her duty , one of which she always take to be to show herself to the world as an impartial stepmother . Cynthia have play and sing , and now she must give molly her turn of exhibition . Cynthia 's singing and playing be light and graceful , but anything but correct ; but she herself be so charming , that it be only fanatic for music who care for false chord and omit note . molly , on the contrary , have an excellent ear , if she have ever be well teach ; and both from inclination and conscientious perseverance of disposition , she would go over an incorrect passage for twenty time . but she be very shy of play in company ; and when force to do it , she go through her performance heavily , and hat her handiwork more than any one . 

 " now , you must play a little , molly , " say Mrs. Gibson ; " play we that beautiful piece of Kalkbrenner 's , my dear . " 

 molly look up at her stepmother with beseech eye ; but it only bring out another form of request , still more like a command . 

 " go at once , my dear . you may not play it quite rightly ; and I know you be very nervous ; but you be quite amongst friend . " 

 so there be a disturbance make in the little group at the piano , and molly sate down to her martyrdom . 

 " please , go away ! " say she to Osborne , who be stand behind her ready to turn over . " I can quite well do it for myself . and oh ! if you would but talk ! " 

 Osborne remain where he be in spite of her appeal , and give she what little approval she get ; for Mrs. Gibson , exhaust by her previous labour of count her stitch , fall asleep in her comfortable sofa - corner near the fire ; and Roger , who begin at first to talk a little in compliance with Molly 's request , find his conversation with Cynthia so agreeable , that molly lose her place several time in try to catch a sudden glimpse of Cynthia sit at her work , and Roger by she , intent on catch her low reply to what he be say . 

 " there , now I have   do ! " say Molly , stand up quickly as soon as she have finish the eighteen dreary page ; " and I think I will never sit down to play again ! " 

 Osborne laugh at her vehemence . Cynthia begin to take some part in what be be say , and thus make the conversation general . Mrs. Gibson waken up gracefully , as be her way of do all thing , and slide into the subject they be talk about so easily , that she almost succeed in make they believe she have never be asleep at all . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXV . 

 hollingford in a BUSTLE . 
 

 all Hollingford feel as if there be a great deal to be do before Easter this year . there be Easter proper , which always require new clothing of some kind , for fear of certain consequence from little bird , who be suppose to resent the impiety of those that do not wear some new article of dress on Easter - day . and most lady consider it wiser that the little bird should see the new article for themselves , and not have to take it upon trust , as they would have to do if it be merely a pocket - handkerchief , or a petticoat , or any article of under - clothing . so piety demand a new bonnet , or a new gown ; and be barely satisfied with an Easter pair of glove . Miss Rose be generally very busy just before Easter in Hollingford . then this year there be the charity ball . Ashcombe , Hollingford , and Coreham be three neighbouring town , of about the same number of population , lie at the three equidistant corner of a triangle . in imitation of great city with their festival , these three town have agree to have an annual ball for the benefit of the county hospital to be hold in turn at each place ; and Hollingford be to be the place this year . 

 it be a fine time for hospitality , and every house of any pretension be as full as it could hold , and fly be engage long month before . 

 if Mrs. Gibson could have ask Osborne , or in default , Roger Hamley to go to the ball with they and to sleep at their house , or if , indeed , she could have pick up any stray scion of a " county family " to whom such an offer would have be a convenience , she would have restore her own dressing - room to its former use as the spare - room , with pleasure . but she do not think it be worth she while to put herself out for any of the humdrum and ill - dress woman who have be her former acquaintance at Ashcombe . for Mr. Preston it might have be worth while to give up her room , consider he in the light of a handsome and prosperous young man , and a good dancer besides . but there be more light in which he be to be view . Mr. Gibson , who really want to return the hospitality show to he by Mr. Preston at the time of his marriage , have yet an instinctive distaste to the man , which no wish of free himself from obligation , nor even the more worthy feeling of hospitality , could overcome . Mrs. Gibson have some old grudge of her own against he , but she be not one to retain angry feeling , or be very active in her retaliation ; she be afraid of Mr. Preston , and admire he at the same time . it be awkward too so she say to go into a ball - room without any gentleman at all , and Mr. Gibson be so uncertain ! on the whole partly for this last - give reason , and partly because conciliation be the good policy , Mrs. Gibson be slightly in favour of invite Mr. Preston to be their guest . but as soon as Cynthia hear the question discuss or rather , as soon as she hear it discuss in Mr. Gibson 's absence , she say that if Mr. Preston come to be their visitor on the occasion , she for one would not go to the ball at all . she do not speak with vehemence or in anger ; but with such quiet resolution that molly look up in surprise . she see that Cynthia be keep her eye fix on her work , and that she have no intention of meet any one 's gaze , or give any further explanation . Mrs. Gibson , too , look perplexed , and once or twice seem on the point of ask some question ; but she be not angry as Molly have fully expect . she watch Cynthia furtively and in silence for a minute or two , and then say that , after all , she could not conveniently give up her dressing - room ; and , altogether , they have well say no more about it . so no stranger be invite to stay at Mr. Gibson 's at the time of the ball ; but Mrs. Gibson openly speak of her regret at the unavoidable inhospitality , and hop that they might be able to build an addition to their house before the next triennial Hollingford ball . 

 another cause of unusual bustle at Hollingford this Easter be the expected return of the family to the tower , after their unusually long absence . Mr. Sheepshanks might be see trot up and down on his stout old cob , speak to attentive mason , plasterer , and glazier about put everything on the outside at least about the cottage belong to " my lord , " in perfect repair . Lord Cumnor own the great part of the town ; and those who live under other landlord , or in house of their own , be stir up by the dread of contrast to do up their dwelling . so the ladder of whitewasher and painter be sadly in the way of the lady trip daintily along to make their purchase , and hold their gown up in a bunch behind , after a fashion quite go out in these day . the housekeeper and steward from the tower might also be see come in to give order at the various shop ; and stop here and there at those keep by favourite , to avail themselves of the eagerly - tender refreshment . 

 Lady Harriet come to call on her old governess the day after the arrival of the family at the tower . molly and Cynthia be out walk when she come do some errand for Mrs. Gibson , who have a secret idea that Lady Harriet would call at the particular time she do , and have a not uncommon wish to talk to her ladyship without the corrective presence of any member of her own family . 

 Mrs. Gibson do not give molly the message of remembrance that Lady Harriet have leave for she ; but she impart various piece of news relate to the tower with great animation and interest . the Duchess of Menteith and her daughter , Lady Alice , be come to the tower ; would be there the day of the ball ; would come to the ball ; and the Menteith diamond be famous . that be piece of news the first . the second be that ever so many gentleman be come to the tower some English , some French . this piece of news would have come first in order of importance have there be much probability of their be dance man , and , as such , possible partner at the come ball . but Lady Harriet have speak of they as Lord Hollingford 's friend , useless scientific man in all probability . then , finally , Mrs. Gibson be to go to the tower next day to lunch ; Lady Cumnor have write a little note by Lady Harriet to beg she to come ; if Mrs. Gibson could manage to find her way to the Towers , one of the carriage in use should bring she back to her own home in the course of the afternoon . 

 " the dear countess ! " say Mrs. Gibson , with soft affection . it be a soliloquy , utter after a minute 's pause , at the end of all this information . 

 and all the rest of that day her conversation have an aristocratic perfume hang about it . one of the few book she have bring with she into Mr. Gibson 's house be bind in pink , and in it she study " Menteith , Duke of , Adolphus George , "   c. ,   c. , till she be fully up in all the duchess 's connection , and probable interest . Mr. Gibson make his mouth up into a droll whistle when he come home at night , and find himself in a tower ' atmosphere . molly see the shade of annoyance through the drollery ; she be begin to see it oftener than she like , not that she reason upon it , or that she consciously trace the annoyance to its source ; but she could not help feel uneasy in herself when she know her father be in the least put out . 

 of course a fly be order for Mrs. Gibson . in the early afternoon she come home . if she have be disappoint in her interview with the countess she never tell her woe , nor reveal the fact that when she first arrive at the tower she have to wait for an hour in Lady Cumnor 's morning - room , uncheered by any companionship save that of her old friend , Mrs. Bradley , till suddenly , Lady Harriet come in , she exclaim , " why , Clare ! you dear woman ! be you here all alone ? do mamma know ? " and , after a little more affectionate conversation , she rush to find her ladyship , who be perfectly aware of the fact , but too deep in give the duchess the benefit of her wisdom and experience in trousseaux to be at all aware of the length of time Mrs. Gibson have be pass in patient solitude . at lunch Mrs. Gibson be secretly hurt by my lord 's suppose it to be her dinner , and call out his urgent hospitality from the very bottom of the table , give as a reason for it , that she must remember it be her dinner . in vain she pip out in her soft , high voice , " oh , my lord ! I never eat meat in the middle of the day ; I can hardly eat anything at lunch . " her voice be lose , and the duchess might go away with the idea that the Hollingford doctor 's wife din early ; that be to say , if her grace ever condescend to have any idea on the subject at all ; which presuppose that she be cognizant of the fact of there be a doctor at Hollingford , and that he have a wife , and that his wife be the pretty , faded , elegant - look woman send away her plate of untasted food food which she long to eat , for she be really desperately hungry after her drive and her solitude . 

 and then after lunch there do come a tete - a - tete with Lady Cumnor , which be conduct after this wise : 

 " well , Clare ! I be really glad to see you . I once think I should never get back to the tower , but here I be ! there be such a clever man at Bath a Doctor Snape he cure I at last quite set I up . I really think if ever I be ill again I shall send for he : it be such a thing to find a really clever medical man . oh , by the way , I always forget you have   marry Mr. Gibson of course he be very clever , and all that .   the carriage to the door in ten minute , Brown , and desire Bradley to bring my thing down .   what be I ask you ? oh ! how do you get on with the stepdaughter ? she seem to I to be a young lady with a pretty stubborn will of her own . I put a letter for the post down somewhere , and I can not think where ; do help I look for it , there be a good woman . just run to my room , and see if Brown can find it , for it be of great consequence . " 

 Off go Mrs. Gibson , rather unwillingly ; for there be several thing she want to speak about , and she have not hear half of what she have expect to learn of the family gossip . but all chance be go ; for when she come back from her fruitless errand , Lady Cumnor and the duchess be in full talk , Lady Cumnor with the miss letter in her hand , which she be use something like a baton to enforce her word . 

 " every iota from Paris ! every i - o - ta ! " 

 Lady Cumnor be too much of a lady not to apologize for useless trouble , but they be nearly the last word she speak to Mrs. Gibson , for she have to go out and drive with the duchess ; and the brougham to take " Clare "   as she persist in call Mrs. Gibson   back to Hollingford follow the carriage to the door . Lady Harriet come away from her entourage of young man and young lady , all prepare for some walking expedition , to wish Mrs. Gibson good - by . 

 " we shall see you at the ball , " she say . " you will be there with your two girl , of course , and I must have a little talk with you there ; with all these visitor in the house , it have be impossible to see anything of you to - day , you know . " 

 such be the fact , but rose - colour be the medium through which they be see by Mrs. Gibson 's household listener on her return . 

 " there be many visitor stay at the tower oh , yes ! a great many : the duchess and Lady Alice , and Mr. and Mrs. Grey , and Lord Albert Monson and his sister , and my old friend Captain James of the Blues many more , in fact . but , of course , I prefer go to Lady Cumnor 's own room , where I could see she and Lady Harriet quietly , and where we be not disturb by the bustle downstairs . of course we be oblige to go down to lunch , and then I see my old friend , and renew pleasant acquaintance . but I really could hardly get any connected conversation with any one . Lord Cumnor seem so delighted to see I there again : though there be six or seven between we , he be always interrupt with some civil or kind speech especially address to I . and after lunch Lady Cumnor ask I all sort of question about my new life with as much interest as if I have be her daughter . to be sure , when the duchess come in we have to leave off , and talk about the trousseau she be prepare for Lady Alice . Lady Harriet make such a point of our meeting at the ball ; she be such a good , affectionate creature , be Lady Harriet ! " 

 this last be say in a tone of meditative appreciation . 

 the afternoon of the day on which the ball be to take place , a servant ride over from Hamley with two lovely nosegay , " with the Mr. Hamleys ' compliment to Miss Gibson and Miss Kirkpatrick . " Cynthia be the first to receive they . she come dance into the drawing - room , flourish the flower about in either hand , and dance up to Molly , who be try to settle to her reading , by way of pass the time away till the evening come . 

 " look , Molly , look ! here be bouquet for we ! long life to the giver ! " 

 " who be they from ? " ask Molly , take hold of one , and examine it with tender delight at its beauty . 

 " who from ? why , the two paragon of Hamleys , to be sure . be it not a pretty attention ? " 

 " how kind of they ! " say Molly . 

 " I be sure it be Osborne who think of it . he have be so much abroad , where it be such a common compliment to send bouquet to young lady . " 

 " I do not   see why you should think it be Osborne 's thought ! " say Molly , redden a little . " Mr. Roger Hamley use to gather nosegay constantly for his mother , and sometimes for I . " 

 " well , never mind whose think it be , or who gather they ; we have   get the flower , and that be enough . molly , I be sure these red flower will just match your coral necklace and bracelet , " say Cynthia , pull out some camellia , then a rare kind of flower . 

 " oh , please , do not ! " exclaim Molly . " do not   you see how carefully the colour be arrange they have take such pain ; please , do not . " 

 " nonsense ! " say Cynthia , continue to pull they out ; ' see , here be quite enough . I will make you a little coronet of they sew on black velvet , which will never be see just as they do in France ! " 

 " oh , I be so sorry ! it be quite spoil , " say Molly . 

 " never mind ! I will take this spoilt bouquet ; I can make it up again just as prettily as ever ; and you shall have this , which have never be touch . " Cynthia go on arrange the crimson bud and flower to her taste . molly say nothing , but keep watch Cynthia 's nimble finger tie up the wreath . 

 " there ! " say Cynthia , at last , " when that be sew on black velvet , to keep the flower from die , you will see how pretty it will look . and there be enough red flower in this untouched nosegay to carry out the idea ! " 

 " thank you "   very slowly . " but sha'n't   you mind have only the wreck of the other ? " 

 " not i ; red flower would not go with my pink dress . " 

 " but I daresay they arrange each nosegay so carefully ! " 

 " perhaps they do . but I never would allow sentiment to interfere with my choice of colour ; and pink do tie one down . now you , in white muslin , just tip with crimson , like a daisy , may wear anything . " 

 Cynthia take the utmost pain in dress Molly , leave the clever housemaid to her mother 's exclusive service . Mrs. Gibson be more anxious about her attire than be either of the girl ; it have give her occasion for deep thought and not a few sigh . her deliberation have end in she wear her pearl - grey satin wedding - gown , with a profusion of lace , and white and coloured lilac . Cynthia be the one who take the affair most lightly . molly look upon the ceremony of dress for a first ball as rather a serious ceremony ; certainly as an anxious proceeding . Cynthia be almost as anxious as herself ; only molly want her appearance to be correct and unnoticed ; and Cynthia be desirous of set off Molly 's rather peculiar charm her cream - colour skin , her profusion of curly black hair , her beautiful long - shape eye , with their shy , love expression . Cynthia take up so much time in dress molly to her mind , that she herself have to perform she toilette in a hurry . molly , ready dress , sate on a low chair in Cynthia 's room , watch the pretty creature 's rapid movement , as she stand in her petticoat before the glass , do up her hair , with quick certainty of effect . at length , Molly heave a long sigh , and say , 

 " I should like to be pretty ! " 

 " why , Molly , " say Cynthia , turn round with an exclamation on the tip of her tongue ; but when she catch the innocent , wistful look on Molly 's face , she instinctively check what she be go to say , and , half - smile to her own reflection in the glass , she say , " the french girl would tell you , to believe that you be pretty would make you so . " 

 molly pause before reply , 

 " I suppose they would mean that if you know you be pretty , you would never think about your look ; you would be so certain of be like , and that it be care " 

 " listen ! that be eight o'clock striking . do not   trouble yourself with try to interpret a french girl 's meaning , but help I on with my frock , there be a dear one . " 

 the two girl be dress , and be stand over the fire wait for the carriage in Cynthia 's room , when Maria   Betty 's successor   come hurry into the room . Maria have be officiate as maid to Mrs. Gibson , but she have have interval of leisure , in which she have rush upstairs , and , under the pretence of offer her service , have see the young lady ' dress , and the sight of so many nice clothe have send she into a state of excitement which make she think nothing of rush upstairs for the twentieth time , with a nosegay still more beautiful than the two previous one . 

 " here , Miss Kirkpatrick ! no , it be not for you , miss ! " as Molly , be near to the door , offer to take it and pass it to Cynthia . " it be for Miss Kirkpatrick ; and there be a note for her beside ! " 

 Cynthia say nothing , but take the note and the flower . she hold the note so that molly could read it at the same time she do . 
 

 I send you some flower ; and you must allow I to claim the first dance after nine o'clock , before which time I fear I can not arrive . R. P. 
 

 " who be it ? " ask Molly . 

 Cynthia look extremely irritated , indignant , perplex what be it turn she cheek so pale , and make her eye so full of fire ? 

 " it be Mr. Preston , " say she , in answer to Molly . " I shall not dance with he ; and here go his flower " 

 into the very middle of the ember , which she immediately stir down upon the beautiful shrivel petal as if she wish to annihilate they as soon as possible . her voice have never be raise ; it be as sweet as usual ; nor , though her movement be prompt enough , be they hasty or violent . 

 " oh ! " say Molly , " those beautiful flower ! we might have put they in water . " 

 " no , " say Cynthia ; " it be good to destroy they . we do not   want they ; and I can not   bear to be remind of that man . " 

 " it be an impertinent familiar note , " say Molly . " what right have he to express himself in that way no beginning , no end , and only initial ! do you know he well when you be at Ashcombe , Cynthia ? " 

 " oh , do not   let we think any more about he , " reply Cynthia . " it be quite enough to spoil any pleasure at the ball to think that he will be there . but I hope I shall get engage before he come , so that I can not   dance with he and do not   you , either ! " 

 " there ! they be call for we , " exclaim Molly , and with quick step , yet careful of their drapery , they make their way downstairs to the place where Mr. and Mrs. Gibson await they . yes ; Mr. Gibson be go , even if he have to leave they afterwards to attend to any professional call . and Molly suddenly begin to admire her father as a handsome man , when she see he now , in full evening attire . Mrs. Gibson , too how pretty she be ! in short , it be true that no well - look a party than these four people enter the Hollingford ball - room that evening . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 a CHARITY ball . 
 

 at the present time there be few people at a public ball besides the dancer and their chaperone , or relation in some degree interested in they . but in the day when molly and Cynthia be young before railroad be , and before their consequence , the excursion - train , which take every one up to London now - a - day , there to see their fill of gay crowd and fine dress to go to an annual charity - ball , even though all thought of dancing have pass by year ago , and without any of the responsibility of a chaperone , be a very allowable and favourite piece of dissipation to all the kindly old maid who throng the country town of England . they air their old lace and their good dress ; they see the aristocratic magnate of the country side ; they gossippe with their coeval , and speculate on the romance of the young around they in a curious yet friendly spirit . the Miss Brownings would have think themselves sadly defraud of the gay event of the year , if anything have prevent their attend the charity ball , and Miss Browning would have be indignant , Miss Phobe aggrieve , have they not be ask to Ashcombe and Coreham , by friend at each place , who have , like they , go through the dancing - stage of life some five - and - twenty year before , but who like still to haunt the scene of their former enjoyment , and see a young generation dance on " regardless of their doom . " they have come in one of the two sedan - chair that yet linger in use at Hollingford ; such a night as this bring a regular harvest of gain to the two old man who , in what be call the " town 's livery , " trot backwards and forwards with their many load of lady and finery . there be some postchaise , and some " fly , " but after mature deliberation Miss Browning have decide to keep to the more comfortable custom of the sedan - chair ; " which , " as she say to Miss Piper , one of her visitor , " come into the parlour , and get full of the warm air , and nip you up , and carry you tight and cosy into another warm room , where you could walk out without have to show your leg by go up step , or down step . " of course only one could go at a time ; but here again a little of Miss Browning 's good management arrange everything so very nicely , as Miss Hornblower   their other visitor   remark . she go first , and remain in the warm cloak - room until her hostess follow ; and then the two lady go arm - in - arm into the ball - room , find out convenient seat whence they could watch the arrival and speak to their pass friend , until Miss Phobe and Miss Piper enter , and come to take possession of the seat reserve for they by Miss Browning 's care . these two young lady come in , also arm - in - arm , but with a certain timid flurry in look and movement very different from the compose dignity of their senior   by two or three year . when all four be once more assemble together , they take breath , and begin to converse . 

 " upon my word , I really do think this be a well room than our Ashcombe Court - house ! " 

 " and how prettily it be decorate ! " pip out Miss Piper . " how well the rose be make ! but you all have such taste at Hollingford . " 

 " there be Mrs. Dempster , " cry Miss Hornblower ; ' she say she and her two daughter be ask to stay at Mr. Sheepshanks ' . Mr. Preston be to be there , too ; but I suppose they could not all come at once . look ! and there be young Roscoe , our new doctor . I declare it seem as if all Ashcombe be here . Mr. Roscoe ! Mr. Roscoe ! come here and let I introduce you to Miss Browning , the friend we be stay with . we think very highly of our young doctor , I can assure you , Miss Browning . " 

 Mr. Roscoe bow , and simper at hear his own praise . but Miss Browning have no notion of have any doctor praise , who have come to settle on the very verge of Mr. Gibson 's practice , so she say to Miss Hornblower , 

 " you must be glad , I be sure , to have somebody you can call in , if you be in any sudden hurry , or for thing that be too trifle to trouble Mr. Gibson about ; and I should think Mr. Roscoe would feel it a great advantage to profit , as he will naturally have the opportunity of do , by witness Mr. Gibson 's skill ! " 

 probably Mr. Roscoe would have feel more aggrieved by this speech than he really be , if his attention have not be call off just then by the entrance of the very Mr. Gibson who be be speak of . almost before Miss Browning have end her severe and depreciatory remark , he have ask his friend Miss Hornblower , 

 " who be that lovely girl in pink , just come in ? " 

 " why , that be Cynthia Kirkpatrick ! " say Miss Hornblower , take up a ponderous gold eyeglass to make sure of her fact . " how she have grow ! to be sure , it be two or three year since she leave Ashcombe she be very pretty then people do say Mr. Preston admire she very much ; but she be so young ! " 

 " can you introduce I ? " ask the impatient young surgeon . " I should like to ask she to dance . " 

 when Miss Hornblower return from her greeting to her former acquaintance , Mrs. Gibson , and have accomplish the introduction which Mr. Roscoe have request , she begin her little confidence to Miss Browning . 

 " well , to be sure ! how condescend we be ! I remember the time when Mrs. Kirkpatrick wear old black silk , and be thankful and civil as become her place as a schoolmistress , and as have to earn her bread . and now she be in a satin ; and she speak to I as if she just could recollect who I be , if she try very hard ! it be not   so long ago since Mrs. Dempster come to consult I as to whether Mrs. Kirkpatrick would be offend , if she send she a new breadth for her lilac silk - gown , in place of one that have be spoil by Mrs. Dempster 's servant spill the coffee over it the night before ; and she take it and be thankful , for all she be dress in pearl - grey satin now ! and she would have be glad enough to marry Mr. Preston in those day . " 

 " I think you say he admire her daughter , " put in Miss Browning to her irritated friend . 

 " well ! perhaps I do , and perhaps it be so ; I be sure I can not   tell ; he be a great deal at the house . Miss Dixon keep a school in the same house now , and I be sure she do it a great deal well . " 

 " the earl and the countess be very fond of Mrs. Gibson , " say Miss Browning . " I know , for Lady Harriet tell we when she come to drink tea with we last autumn ; and they desire Mr. Preston to be very attentive to she when she live at Ashcombe . " 

 " for goodness ' sake do not   go and repeat what I have   be say about Mr. Preston and Mrs. Kirkpatrick to her ladyship . one may be mistake , and you know I only say ' people talk about it . ' " 

 Miss Hornblower be evidently alarmed lest her gossip should be repeat to the Lady Harriet , who appear to be on such an intimate footing with her Hollingford friend . nor do Miss Browning dissipate the illusion . Lady Harriet have drunk tea with they , and might do it again ; and , at any rate , the little fright she have put her friend into be not a bad return for that praise of Mr. Roscoe , which have offend Miss Browning 's loyalty to Mr. Gibson . 

 meanwhile Miss Piper and Miss Phobe , who have not the character of esprit - fort to maintain , talk of the dress of the people present , begin by compliment each other . 

 " what a lovely turban you have get on , Miss Piper , if I may be allow to say so : so become to your complexion ! " 

 " do you think so ? " say Miss Piper , with ill - conceal gratification ; it be something to have a " complexion " at forty - five . " I get it at Brown 's , at Somerton , for this very ball . I think I must have something to set off my gown , which be not   quite so new as it once be ; and I have no handsome jewellery like you " look with admire eye at a large miniature set round with pearl , which serve as a shield to Miss Phobe 's breast . 

 " it be handsome , " that lady reply . " it be a likeness of my dear mother ; Dorothy have get my father on . the miniature be both take at the same time ; and just about then my uncle die and leave we each a legacy of fifty pound , which we agree to spend on the setting of our miniature . but because they be so valuable Dorothy always keep they lock up with the good silver , and hide the box somewhere ; she never will tell I where , because she say I have   such weak nerve , and that if a burglar , with a loaded pistol at my head , be to ask I where we keep our plate and jewel , I should be sure to tell he ; and she say , for her part , she would never think of reveal under any circumstance .   I be sure I hope she will not   be try .   but that be the reason I do not   wear it often ; it be only the second time I have   have it on ; and I can not   even get at it , and look at it , which I should like to do . I should not   have have it on to - night , but that Dorothy give it out to I , say it be but a proper compliment to pay to the Duchess of Menteith , who be to be here in all her diamond . " 

 " dear - ah - I ! be she really ! do you know I never see a duchess before . " and Miss Piper draw herself up and crane her neck , as if resolve to " behave herself properly , " as she have be teach to do at boarding - school thirty year before , in the presence of " her grace . " by - and - by she say to Miss Phobe , with a sudden jerk out of position , " look , look ! that be our Mr. Cholmley , the magistrate "   he be the great man of Coreham , " and that be Mrs. Cholmley in red satin , and Mr. George and Mr. Harry from Oxford , I do declare ; and Miss Cholmley , and pretty Miss Sophy . I should like to go and speak to they , but then it be so formidable cross a room without a gentleman . and there be Coxe the butcher and his wife ! why all Coreham seem to be here ! and how Mrs. Coxe can afford such a gown I can not   make out for one , for I know Coxe have some difficulty in pay for the last sheep he buy of my brother . " 

 just at this moment the band , consist of two violin , a harp , and an occasional clarionet , have finish their tuning , and bring themselves as nearly into accord as be possible , strike up a brisk country - dance , and partner quickly take their place . Mrs. Gibson be secretly a little annoyed at Cynthia 's be one of those to stand up in this early dance , the performer in which be principally the punctual plebeian of Hollingford , who , when a ball be fix to begin at eight , have no notion of be later , and so lose part of the amusement for which they have pay their money . she impart some of her feeling to Molly , sit by she , long to dance , and beat time to the spirited music with one of her pretty little foot . 

 " your dear papa be always so very punctual ! to - night it seem almost a pity , for we really be here before there be any one come that we know . " 

 " oh ! I see so many people here that I know . there be Mr. and Mrs. Smeaton , and that nice good - temper daughter . " 

 " oh ! bookseller and butcher if you will . " 

 " Papa have find a great many friend to talk to . " 

 " patient , my dear hardly friend . there be some nice - look people here , " catch her eye on the Cholmleys ; " but I daresay they have drive over from the neighbourhood of Ashcombe or Coreham , and have hardly calculate how soon they would get here . I wonder when the tower ' party will come . ah ! there be Mr. Ashton , and Mr. Preston . Come , the room be begin to fill . " 

 so it be , for this be to be a very good ball , people say ; and a large party from the Towers be come , and a duchess in diamond among the number . every great house in the district be expect to be full of guest on these occasion ; but at this early hour , the townspeople have the floor almost entirely to themselves ; the county magnate come drop in later ; and chief among they all be the lord - lieutenant from the tower . but to - night they be unusually late , and the aristocratic ozone be absent from the atmosphere , there be a flatness about the dancing of all those who consider themselves above the plebeian rank of the tradespeople . they , however , enjoy themselves thoroughly , and sprang and bound till their eye sparkle and their cheek glow with exercise and excitement . some of the more prudent parent , mindful of the next day 's duty , begin to consider at what hour they ought to go home ; but with all there be an expressed or unexpressed curiosity to see the duchess and her diamond ; for the Menteith diamond be famous in high circle than that now assemble ; and their fame have trickle down to it through the medium of ladies'-maid and housekeeper . Mr. Gibson have have to leave the ball - room for a time , as he have anticipate , but he be to return to his wife as soon as his duty be accomplish ; and , in his absence , Mrs. Gibson keep herself a little aloof from the Miss Brownings and those of her acquaintance who would willingly have enter into conversation with she , with the view of attach herself to the skirt of the Towers ' party , when they should make their appearance . if Cynthia would not be so very ready in engage herself to every possible partner who ask she to dance , there be sure to be young man stay at the tower who would be on the look - out for pretty girl : and who could tell to what a dance might lead ? molly , too , though not so good a dancer as Cynthia , and , from her timidity , less graceful and easy , be become engage pretty deeply ; and , it must be confess , she be long to dance every dance , no matter with whom . even she might not be available for the more aristocratic partner Mrs. Gibson anticipate . she be feel very much annoyed with the whole proceeding of the evening when she be aware of some one stand by she ; and , turn a little to one side , she see Mr. Preston keep guard , as it be , over the seat which molly and Cynthia have just quit . he be look so black that , if their eye have not meet , Mrs. Gibson would have prefer not speak to he ; as it be , she think it unavoidable . 

 " the room be not well - light to - night , be they , Mr. Preston ? " 

 " no , " say he ; " but who could light such dingy old paint as this , load with evergreen , too , which always darken a room ? " 

 " and the company , too ! I always think that freshness and brilliancy of dress go as far as anything to brighten up a room . look what a set of people be here : the great part of the woman be dress in dark silk , really only fit for a morning . the place will be quite different , by - and - by , when the county family be in a little more force . " 

 Mr. Preston make no reply . he have put his glass in his eye , apparently for the purpose of watch the dancer . if its exact direction could have be ascertain , it would have be find that he be look intently and angrily at a fly figure in pink muslin : many a one be gaze at Cynthia with intentness besides himself , but no one in anger . Mrs. Gibson be not so fine an observer as to read all this ; but here be a gentlemanly and handsome young man , to whom she could prattle , instead of either join herself on to objectionable people , or sit all forlorn until the Towers ' party come . so she go on with her small remark . 

 " you be not dance , Mr. Preston ! " 

 " no ! the partner I have engage have make some mistake . I be wait to have an explanation with she . " 

 Mrs. Gibson be silent . an uncomfortable tide of recollection appear to come over she ; she , like Mr. Preston , watch Cynthia ; the dance be end , and she be walk round the room in easy unconcern as to what might await she . presently her partner , Mr. Harry Cholmley , bring she back to her seat . she take that vacant next to Mr. Preston , leave the one by her mother for Molly 's occupation . the latter return a moment afterwards to her place . Cynthia seem entirely unconscious of Mr. Preston 's neighbourhood . Mrs. Gibson lean forwards , and say to her daughter , 

 " your last partner be a gentleman , my dear . you be improve in your selection . I really be ashamed of you before , figure away with that attorney 's clerk . molly , do you know whom you have be dance with ? I have find out he be the Coreham bookseller . " 

 " that account for his be so well up in all the book I have   be want to hear about , " say Molly , eagerly , but with a spice of malice in her mind . " he really be very pleasant , mamma , " she add ; " and he look quite a gentleman , and dance beautifully ! " 

 " very well . but remember if you go on this way you will have to shake hand over the counter to - morrow morning with some of your partner of to - night , " say Mrs. Gibson , coldly . 

 " but I really do not   know how to refuse when people be introduce to I and ask I , and I be long to dance . you know to - night it be a charity ball , and papa say everybody dance with everybody , " say Molly , in a plead tone of voice ; for she could not quite thoroughly enjoy herself if she be out of harmony with any one . what reply Mrs. Gibson would have make to this speech can not now be ascertain ; for , before she could answer , Mr. Preston step a little forwards , and say , in a tone which he mean to be icily indifferent , but which tremble with anger , 

 " if Miss Gibson find any difficulty in refuse a partner , she have only to apply to Miss Kirkpatrick for instruction . " 

 Cynthia lift up her beautiful eye , and , fix they on Mr. Preston 's face , say , very quietly , as if only state a matter of fact , 

 " you forget , I think , Mr. Preston : Miss Gibson imply that she wish to dance with the person who ask she that make all the difference . I can not   instruct she how to act in that difficulty . " 

 and to the rest of this little conversation , Cynthia appear to lend no ear ; and she be almost directly claim by her next partner . Mr. Preston take the seat now leave empty much to Molly 's annoyance . at first she fear lest he might be go to ask she to dance ; but , instead , he put out his hand for Cynthia 's nosegay , which she have leave on rise , entrust to Molly . it have suffer considerably from the heat of the room , and be no long full and fresh ; not so much so as Molly 's , which have not , in the first instance , be pull to piece in pick out the scarlet flower which now adorn Molly 's hair , and which have since be cherish with more care . enough , however , remain of Cynthia 's to show very distinctly that it be not the one Mr. Preston have send ; and it be perhaps to convince himself of this , that he rudely ask to examine it . but molly , faithful to what she imagine would be Cynthia 's wish , refuse to allow he to touch it ; she only hold it a little nearer . 

 " Miss Kirkpatrick have not do I the honour of wear the bouquet I send she , I see . she receive it , I suppose , and my note ? " 

 " yes , " say Molly , rather intimidate by the tone in which this be say . " but we have already accept these two nosegay . " 

 Mrs. Gibson be just the person to come to the rescue with her honey word on such an occasion as the present . she evidently be rather afraid of Mr. Preston , and wish to keep at peace with he . 

 " oh , yes , we be so sorry ! of course , I do not   mean to say we could be sorry for any one 's kindness ; but two such lovely nosegay have be send from Hamley Hall you may see how beautiful from what molly hold in her hand and they have come before your , Mr. Preston . " 

 " I should have feel honour if you have accept of mine , since the young lady be so well provide for . I be at some pain in select the flower at Green 's ; I think I may say it be rather more recherchť than that of Miss Kirkpatrick 's , which Miss Gibson hold so tenderly and securely in her hand . " 

 " oh , because Cynthia would take out the most effective flower to put in my hair ! " exclaim molly , eagerly . 

 " do she ? " say Mr. Preston , with a certain accent of pleasure in his voice , as though he be glad she set so little store by the nosegay ; and he walk off to stand behind Cynthia in the quadrille that be be dance ; and molly see he make her reply to he against her will , Molly be sure . but , somehow , his face and manner imply power over she . she look grave , deaf , indifferent , indignant , defiant ; but , after a half - whisper speech to Cynthia , at the conclusion of the dance , she evidently throw he an impatient consent to what he be ask , for he walk off with a disagreeable smile of satisfaction on his handsome face . 

 all this time the murmur be spread at the lateness of the party from the tower , and person after person come up to Mrs. Gibson as if she be the accredited authority as to the earl and countess 's plan . in one sense this be flattering ; but then the acknowledgment of common ignorance and wonder reduce she to the level of the inquirer . Mrs. Goodenough feel herself particularly aggrieve ; she have have her spectacle on for the last hour and a half , in order to be ready for the sight the very first minute any one from the tower appear at the door . 

 " I have a headache , " she complain , " and I should have send my money , and never stir out o ' door to - night ; for I have   see a many of these here ball , and my lord and my lady too , when they be well worth look at nor they be now ; but every one be talk of the duchess , and the duchess and her diamond , and I think I should not   like to be behindhand , and never ha ' see neither the duchess nor her diamond ; so I be here , and coal and candle - light waste away at home , for I tell Sally to sit up for I ; and , above everything , I can not abide waste . I take it from my mother , who be such a one against waste as you never see now - a - day . she be a manager , if ever there be a one ; and bring up nine child on less than any one else could do , I will be bind . why ! she would not   let we be extravagant not even in the matter of cold . whenever any on we have get a pretty bad cold , she take the opportunity and cut our hair ; for she say , say she , it be of no use have two cold when one would do and cut of our hair be sure to give we a cold . but , for all that , I wish the duchess would come . " 

 " ah ! but fancy what it be to I , " sigh out Mrs. Gibson ; ' so long as I have be without see the dear family and see so little of they the other day when I be at the tower   for the duchess would have my opinion on Lady Alice 's trousseau , and keep ask I so many question it take up all the time   and Lady Harriet 's last word be a happy anticipation of our meeting to - night . it be nearly twelve o'clock . " 

 every one of any pretension to gentility be painfully affect by the absence of the family from the tower ; the very fiddler seem unwilling to begin play a dance that might be interrupt by the entrance of the great folk . Miss Phobe Browning have apologize for they Miss Browning have blame they with calm dignity ; it be only the butcher and baker and candlestick - maker who rather enjoy the absence of restraint , and be happy and hilarious . 

 at last , there be a rumble , and a rushing , and a whispering , and the music stop ; so the dancer be oblige to do so too ; and in come Lord Cumnor in his state dress , with a fat , middle - aged woman on his arm ; she be dress almost like a girl in a sprig muslin , with natural flower in her hair , but not a vestige of a jewel or a diamond . yet it must be the duchess ; but what be a duchess without diamond ? and in a dress which farmer Hudson 's daughter might have wear ! be it the duchess ? could it be the duchess ? the little crowd of inquirer around Mrs. Gibson thicken , to hear she confirm their disappointing surmise . after the duchess come Lady Cumnor , look like Lady Macbeth in black velvet a cloud upon her brow , make more conspicuous by the line of age rapidly gather on her handsome face ; and Lady Harriet , and other lady , amongst whom there be one dress so like the duchess as to suggest the idea of a sister rather than a daughter , as far as dress go . there be Lord Hollingford , plain in face , awkward in person , gentlemanly in manner ; and half - a - dozen young man , Lord Albert Monson , Captain James , and other of their age and standing , who come in look anything if not critical . this long - expect party sweep up to the seat reserve for they at the head of the room , apparently regardless of the interruption they cause ; for the dancer stand aside , and almost disperse back to their seat , and when " money - musk " strike up again , not half the former set of people stand up to finish the dance . 

 Lady Harriet , who be rather different to Miss Piper , and no more minded cross the room alone than if the looker - on be so many cabbage , spy the Gibson party pretty quickly out , and come across to they . 

 " here we be at last . how d'ye do , dear ? why , little one "   to Molly , " how nice you be look ! be not   we shamefully late ? " 

 " oh ! it be only just past twelve , " say Mrs. Gibson ; " and I daresay you din very late . " 

 " it be not   that ; it be that ill - mannered woman , who go to her own room after we come out from dinner , and she and Lady Alice stay there invisible , till we think they be put on some splendid attire as they ought to have do and at half - past ten , when mamma send up to they to say the carriage be at the door , the duchess send down for some beef - tea , and at last appear a l'enfant as you see she . Mamma be so angry with she , and some of the other be annoy at not come early , and one or two be give themselves air about come at all . Papa be the only one who be not affect by it . " then turn to Molly Lady Harriet ask , 

 " have you be dance much , Miss Gibson ? " 

 " yes ; not every dance , but nearly all . " 

 it be a simple question enough ; but Lady Harriet 's speak at all to Molly have become to Mrs. Gibson almost like shake a red rag at a bull ; it be the one thing sure to put she out of temper . but she would not have show this to Lady Harriet for the world ; only she contrive to baffle any endeavour at further conversation between the two , by place herself betwixt Lady Harriet and Molly , whom the former ask to sit down in the absent Cynthia 's room . 

 " I will not   go back to those people , I be so mad with they ; and , besides , I hardly see you the other day , and I must have some gossip with you . " so she sit down by Mrs. Gibson , and as Mrs. Goodenough afterwards express it , " look like anybody else . " Mrs. Goodenough say this to excuse herself for a little misadventure she fall into . she have take a deliberate survey of the grandee at the upper end of the room , spectacle on nose , and have inquire , in no very measured voice , who everybody be , from Mr. Sheepshanks , my lord 's agent , and her very good neighbour , who in vain try to check her loud ardour for information by reply to she in whisper . but she be rather deaf as well as blind , so his low tone only bring upon he fresh inquiry . now , satisfied as far as she could be , and on her way to departure , and the extinguishing of fire and candle - light , she stop opposite to Mrs. Gibson , and thus address she by way of renewal of their former subject of conversation : 

 " such a shabby thing for a duchess I never see ; not a bit of a diamond near she ! they be none of them worth look at except the countess , and she be always a personable woman , and not so lusty as she be . but they be not worth wait up for till this time o ' night . " 

 there be a moment 's pause . then Lady Harriet put her hand out , and say , 

 " you do not   remember I , but I know you from have see you at the Towers . Lady Cumnor be a good deal thin than she be , but we hope her health be well for it . " 

 " it be Lady Harriet , " say Mrs. Gibson to Mrs. Goodenough , in reproachful dismay . 

 " deary I , your ladyship ! I hope I have   give no offence ! but , you see that be to say , your ladyship see , that it be late hour for such folk as I , and I only stay out of my bed to see the duchess , and I think she would come in diamond and a coronet ; and it put one out at my age , to be disappoint in the only chance I be like to have of so fine a sight . " 

 " I be put out too , " say Lady Harriet . " I want to have come early , and here we be as late as this . I be so cross and ill - temper , I should be glad to hide myself in bed as soon as you will do . " 

 she say this so sweetly that Mrs. Goodenough relax into a smile , and her crabbedness into a compliment . 

 " I do not   believe as ever your ladyship can be cross and ill - temper with that pretty face . I be an old woman , so you must let I say so . " Lady Harriet stand up , and make a low curtsey . then hold out her hand , she say , 

 " I will not   keep you up any long ; but I will promise one thing in return for your pretty speech : if ever I be a duchess , I will come and show myself to you in all my robe and gewgaw . good night , madam ! " 

 " there ! I know how it would be ! " say she , not resume her seat . " and on the eve of a county election too . " 

 " oh ! you must not take old Mrs. Goodenough as a speciman , dear Lady Harriet . she be always a grumbler ! I be sure no one else would complain of your all be as late as you like , " say Mrs. Gibson . 

 " what do you say , Molly ? " say Lady Harriet , suddenly turn her eye on Molly 's face . " do not   you think we have   lose some of our popularity , which at this time mean vote by come so late . come , answer I ! you use to be a famous little truth - teller . " 

 " I do not   know about popularity or vote , " say Molly , rather unwillingly . " but I think many people be sorry you do not come soon ; and be not   that rather a proof of popularity ? " she add . 

 " that be a very neat and diplomatic answer , " say Lady Harriet , smile , and tap Molly 's cheek with her fan . 

 " molly know nothing about it , " say Mrs. Gibson , a little off her guard . " it would be very impertinent if she or any one else question Lady Cumnor 's perfect right to come when she choose . " 

 " well , all I know be , I must go back to mamma now ; but I shall make another raid into these region by - and - by , and you must keep a place for I . ah ! there be Miss Brownings ; you see I do not   forget my lesson , Miss Gibson . " 

 " molly , I can not have you speak so to Lady Harriet , " say Mrs. Gibson , as soon as she be leave alone with her stepdaughter . " you would never have know she at all if it have not be for I , and do not   be always put yourself into our conversation . " 

 " but I must speak if she ask I question , " plead molly . 

 " well ! if you must , you must , I acknowledge . I be candid about that at any rate . but there be no need for you to set up to have an opinion at your age . " 

 " I do not   know how to help it , " say Molly . 

 " she be such a whimsical person ; look there , if she be not talk to Miss Phobe ; and Miss Phobe be so weak she will be easily lead away into fancy she be hand and glove with Lady Harriet . if there be one thing I hate more than another , it be the try to make out an intimacy with great people . " 

 molly feel innocent enough , so she offer no justification of herself , and make no reply . indeed she be more occupy in watch Cynthia . she could not understand the change that seem to have come over she . she be dance , it be true , with the same lightness and grace as before , but the smooth bound motion , as of a feather blow onwards by the wind , be go . she be converse with her partner , but without the soft animation that usually shine out upon her countenance . and when she be bring back to her seat molly notice her change colour , and her dreamily abstract eye . 

 " what be the matter , Cynthia ? " ask she , in a very low voice . 

 " nothing , " say Cynthia , suddenly look up , and in an accent of what , in she , be sharpness . " why should there be ? " 

 " I do not   know ; but you look different to what you do tired or something . " 

 " there be nothing the matter , or , if there be , do not   talk about it . it be all your fancy . " 

 this be a rather contradictory speech , to be interpret by intuition rather than by logic . molly understand that Cynthia wish for quietness and silence . but what be her surprise , after the speech that have pass before , and the implication of Cynthia 's whole manner to Mr. Preston , to see he come up to she , and , without a word , offer his arm and lead she away to dance . it appear to strike Mrs. Gibson as something remarkable ; for , forget her late passage at arm with Molly , she ask , wonderingly , as if almost distrust the evidence of her sens , 

 " be Cynthia go to dance with Mr. Preston ? " 

 molly have scarcely time to answer before she herself be lead off by her partner . she could hardly attend to he or to the figure of the quadrille for watch for Cynthia among the move form . 

 once she catch a glimpse of her standing still downcast listen to Mr. Preston 's eager speech . again she be walk languidly among the dancer , almost as if she take no notice of those around she . when she and Molly join each other again , the shade on Cynthia 's face have deepen to gloom . but , at the same time , if a physiognomist have study her expression , he would have read in it defiance and anger , and perhaps also a little perplexity . while this quadrille have be go on , Lady Harriet have be speak to her brother . 

 " Hollingford ! " she say , lay her hand on his arm , and draw he a little apart from the well - bear crowd amid which he stand , silent and abstract , " you do not   know how these good people here have be hurt and disappoint with our be so late , and with the duchess 's ridiculous simplicity of dress . " 

 " why should they mind it ? " ask he , take advantage of she be out of breath with eagerness . 

 " oh , do not   be so wise and stupid ; do not   you see , we be a show and a spectacle it be like have a pantomime with harlequin and columbine in plain clothe . " 

 " I do not   understand how " he begin . 

 " then take it upon trust . they really be a little disappoint , whether they be logical or not in be so , and we must try and make it up to they ; for one thing , because I can not   bear our vassal to look dissatisfied and disloyal , and then there be the election in June . " 

 " I really would as soon be out of the House as in it . " 

 " nonsense ; it would grieve papa beyond measure but there be no time to talk about that now . you must go and dance with some of the townspeople , and I will ask Sheepshanks to introduce I to a respectable young farmer . can not   you get Captain James to make himself useful ? there he go with Lady Alice ! if I do not   get he introduce to the ugly tailor 's daughter I can find for the next dance ! " she put her arm in her brother 's as she speak , as if to lead he to some partner . he resist , however resist piteously . 

 " pray do not , Harriet . you know I can not   dance . I hate it ; I always do . I do not   know how to get through a quadrille . " 

 " it be a country dance ! " say she , resolutely . 

 " it be all the same . and what shall I say to my partner ? I have not   a notion : I shall have no subject in common . speak of be disappoint , they will be ten time more disappointed when they find I can neither dance nor talk ! " 

 " I will be merciful ; do not   be so cowardly . in their eye a lord may dance like a bear as some lord not very far from I be if he like , and they will take it for grace . and you shall begin with Molly Gibson , your friend the doctor 's daughter . she be a good , simple , intelligent little girl , which you will think a great deal more of , I suppose , than of the frivolous fact of she be very pretty . Clare ! will you allow I to introduce my brother to Miss Gibson ? he hop to engage she for this dance . Lord Hollingford , Miss Gibson ! " 

 Poor Lord Hollingford ! there be nothing for it but for he to follow his sister 's very explicit lead , and Molly and he walk off to their place , each heartily wish their dance together well over . Lady Harriet fly off to Mr. Sheepshanks to secure her respectable young farmer , and Mrs. Gibson remain alone , wish that Lady Cumnor would send one of her attendant gentleman for she . it would be so much more agreeable to be sit even at the fag - end of nobility than here on a bench with everybody ; hop that everybody would see molly dance away with a lord , yet vex that the chance have so befall that molly instead of Cynthia be the young lady single out ; wonder if simplicity of dress be now become the high fashion , and ponder on the possibility of cleverly induce Lady Harriet to introduce Lord Albert Monson to her own beautiful daughter , Cynthia . 

 molly find Lord Hollingford , the wise and learn Lord Hollingford , strangely stupid in understand the mystery of " cross hand and back again , down the middle and up again . " he be constantly get hold of the wrong hand , and as constantly stop when he have return to his place , quite unaware that the duty of society and the law of the dance require that he should go on caper till he have arrive at the bottom of the room . he perceive that he have perform his part very badly , and apologize to Molly when once they have arrive at that haven of comparative peace ; and he express his regret so simply and heartily that she feel at her ease with he at once , especially when he confide to she his reluctance at have to dance at all , and his only do it under his sister 's compulsion . to molly he be an elderly widower , almost as old as her father , and by - and - by they get into very pleasant conversation . she learn from he that Roger Hamley have just be publish a paper in some scientific periodical , which have excite considerable attention , as it be intend to confute some theory of a great french physiologist , and Roger 's article prove the writer to be possess of a most unusual amount of knowledge on the subject . this piece of news be of great interest to Molly ; and , in her question , she herself evince so much intelligence , and a mind so well prepared for the reception of information , that Lord Hollingford at any rate would have feel his quest of popularity a very easy affair indeed , if he might have go on talk quietly to Molly during the rest of the evening . when he take she back to her place , he find Mr. Gibson there , and fall into talk with he , until Lady Harriet once more come to stir he up to his duty . before very long , however , he return to Mr. Gibson 's side , and begin tell he of this paper of Roger Hamley 's , of which Mr. Gibson have not yet hear . in the midst of their conversation , as they stand close by Mrs. Gibson , Lord Hollingford see Molly in the distance , and interrupt himself to say , " what a charming little lady that daughter of yours be ! Most girl of her age be so difficult to talk to ; but she be intelligent and full of interest in all sort of sensible thing ; well read , too she be up in Le Regne Animal and very pretty ! " 

 Mr. Gibson bow , much pleased at such a compliment from such a man , be he lord or not . it be very likely that if molly have be a stupid listener , Lord Hollingford would not have discover her beauty ; or the converse might be assert if she have not be young and pretty , he would not have exert himself to talk on scientific subject in a manner which she could understand . but in whatever way molly have win his approbation and admiration , there be no doubt that she have earn it somehow . and , when she next return to her place , Mrs. Gibson greet she with soft word and a gracious smile ; for it do not require much reasoning power to discover , that if it be a very fine thing to be mother - in - law to a very magnificent three - tail bashaw , it presuppose that the wife who make the connection between the two party be in harmony with her mother . and so far have Mrs. Gibson 's thought wander into futurity . she only wish that the happy chance have fall to Cynthia 's instead of to Molly 's lot . but Molly be a docile , sweet creature , very pretty , and remarkably intelligent , as my lord have say . it be a pity that Cynthia prefer make millinery to read ; but perhaps that could be rectify . and there be Lord Cumnor come to speak to she , and Lady Cumnor nod to she , and indicate a place by her side . 

 it be not an unsatisfactory ball upon the whole to Mrs. Gibson , although she pay the usual penalty for sit up beyond her ordinary hour in perpetual glare and movement . the next morning she awake irritable and fatigued ; and a little of the same feeling oppress both Cynthia and Molly . the former be lounge in the window - seat , hold a three - days'-old newspaper in her hand , which she be make a pretence of reading , when she be startle by her mother 's saying , 

 " Cynthia ! can not   you take up a book and improve yourself ? I be sure your conversation will never be worth listen to , unless you read something well than newspaper . why do not   you keep up your French ? there be some french book that molly be read Le Regne Animal , I think . " 

 " no ! I never read it ! " say Molly , blushing . " Mr. Roger Hamley sometimes read piece out of it when I be first at the Hall , and tell I what it be about . " 

 " oh ! well . then I suppose I be mistaken . but it come to all the same thing . Cynthia , you really must learn to settle yourself to some improve reading every morning . " 

 rather to Molly 's surprise , Cynthia do not reply a word ; but dutifully go and bring down from among her Boulogne school - book , Le Siecle de Louis XIV . but after a while , Molly see that this " improve reading " be just as much a mere excuse for Cynthia 's think her own thought as the newspaper have be . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 FATHER and son . 
 

 illustrationhing be not go on any well at Hamley Hall . nothing have occur to change the state of dissatisfied feeling into which the Squire and his eld son have respectively fall ; and the long continuance merely of dissatisfaction be sure of itself to deepen the feeling . Roger do all in his power to bring the father and son together ; but sometimes wonder if it would not have be well to leave they alone ; for they be fall into the habit of each make he their confidant , and so define emotion and opinion which would have have less distinctness if they have be unexpresse . there be little enough relief in the daily life at the Hall to help they all to shake off the gloom ; and it even tell on the health of both the Squire and Osborne . the squire become thin , his skin as well as his clothe begin to hang loose about he , and the freshness of his colour turn to red streak , till his cheek look like Eardiston pippin , instead of resemble " a Katherine pear on the side that be next the sun . " Roger think that his father sate indoor and smoke in his study more than be good for he , but it have become difficult to get he far afield ; he be too much afraid of come across some sign of the discontinued drainage work , or be irritated afresh by the sight of his depreciate timber . Osborne be wrapt up in the idea of arrange his poem for the press , and so work out his wish for independence . what with daily writing to his wife take his letter himself to a distant post - office , and receive hers there touch up his sonnet ,   c. , with fastidious care and occasionally give himself the pleasure of a visit to the gibson , and enjoy the society of the two pleasant girl there , he find little time for be with his father . indeed , Osborne be too self - indulgent or ' sensitive , " as he term it , to bear well with the Squire 's gloomy fit , or too frequent querulousness . the consciousness of his secret , too , make osborne uncomfortable in his father 's presence . it be very well for all party that Roger be not ' sensitive , " for , if he have be , there be time when it would have be hard to bear little spurt of domestic tyranny , by which his father strive to assert his power over both his son . one of these occur very soon after the night of the Hollingford charity - ball . 

 Roger have induce his father to come out with he ; and the Squire have , on his son 's suggestion , take with he his long unused spud . the two have wander far afield ; perhaps the eld man have find the unwonted length of exercise too much for he ; for , as he approach the house , on his return , he become what nurse call in child " fractious , " and ready to turn on his companion for every remark he make . Roger understand the case by instinct , as it be , and bear it all with his usual sweetness of temper . they enter the house by the front door ; it lie straight on their line of march . on the old crack yellow - marble slab , there lie a card with Lord Hollingford 's name on it , which Robinson , evidently on the watch for their return , hasten out of his pantry to deliver to Roger . 

 " his lordship be very sorry not to see you , Mr. Roger , and his lordship leave a note for you . Mr. Osborne take it , I think , when he pass through . I ask his lordship if he would like to see Mr. Osborne , who be indoor , as I think . but his lordship say he be press for time , and tell I to make his excuse . " 

 " do not   he ask for I ? " growl the squire . 

 " no , sir ; I can not   say as his lordship do . he would never have think of Mr. Osborne , sir , if I have not   name he . it be Mr. Roger he seem so keen after . " 

 " very odd , " say the Squire . Roger say nothing , although he naturally feel some curiosity . he go into the drawing - room , not quite aware that his father be follow he . osborne sate at a table near the fire , pen in hand , look over one of his poem , and dot the I be , cross the t 's , and now and then pause over the alteration of a word . 

 " oh , Roger ! " he say , as his brother come in , " here be be Lord Hollingford want to see you . " 

 " I know , " reply Roger . 

 " and he be leave a note for you . Robinson try to persuade he it be for my father , so he be add a ' junior '   Roger Hamley , Esq . , junior   in pencil . " the squire be in the room by this time , and what he have overhear rub he up still more the wrong way . Roger take his unopened note and read it . 

 " what do he say ? " ask the Squire . 

 Roger hand he the note . it contain an invitation to dinner to meet M. Geoffroi St. H , whose view on certain subject Roger have be advocate in the article Lord Hollingford have speak about to Molly , when he dance with she at the Hollingford ball . M. Geoffroi St. H be in England now , and be expect to pay a visit at the tower in the course of the following week . he have express a wish to meet the author of the paper which have already attract the attention of the french comparative anatomist ; and Lord Hollingford add a few word as to his own desire to make the acquaintance of a neighbour whose taste be so similar to his own ; and then follow a civil message from Lord and Lady Cumnor . 

 Lord Hollingford 's hand be cramp and rather illegible . the squire could not read it all at once , and be enough put out to decline any assistance in decipher it . at last he make it out . 

 " so my lord lieutenant be take some notice of the Hamleys at last . the election be come on , be it ? but I can tell he we be not to be get so easily . I suppose this trap be set for you , Osborne ? what be this you have   be write that the french mounseer be so take with ? " 

 " it be not I , sir ! " say Osborne . " both note and call be for Roger . " 

 " I do not   understand it , " say the Squire . " these Whig fellow have never do their duty by I ; not that I want it of they . the Duke of Debenham use to pay the Hamleys a respect due to them the old landowner in the county but since he die , and this shabby Whig lord have succeed he , I have   never din at the lord lieutenant 's no , not once . " 

 " but I think , sir , I have   hear you say Lord Cumnor use to invite you , only you do not choose to go , " say Roger . 

 " yes . what d'ye mean by that ? do you suppose I be go to desert the principle of my family , and curry favour with the whig ? no ! leave that to they . they can ask the heir of the Hamleys fast enough when a county election be come on . " 

 " I tell you , sir , " say Osborne , in the irritable tone he sometimes use when his father be particularly unreasonable , " it be not I Lord Hollingford be invite ; it be Roger . Roger be make himself know for what he be , a first - rate fellow , " continue Osborne a sting of self - reproach mingling with his generous pride in his brother " and he be get himself a name ; he be be write about these new french theory and discovery , and this foreign savant very naturally want to make his acquaintance , and so Lord Hollingford ask he to dine . it be as clear as can be , " lower his tone , and address himself to Roger ; " it have nothing to do with politic , if my father would but see it . " 

 of course the Squire hear this little aside with the unlucky uncertainty of hearing which be a characteristic of the beginning of deafness ; and its effect on he be perceptible in the increase acrimony of his next speech . 

 " you young man think you know everything . I tell you it be a palpable Whig trick . and what business have Roger if it be Roger the man want to go curry favour with the French ? in my day we be content to hate them and to lick them . but it be just like your conceit , Osborne , set yourself up to say it be your young brother they be ask , and not you ; I tell you it be you . they think the eld son be sure to be call after his father , Roger Roger Hamley , junior . it be as plain as a pike - staff . they know they can not   catch I with chaff , but they have   get up this french dodge . what business have you to go write about the French , Roger ? I should have think you be too sensible to take any notice of their fancy and theory ; but if it be you they have   ask , I will not have you go and meet these foreigner at a Whig house . they ought to have ask Osborne . he be the representative of the Hamleys , if I be not ; and they can not   get I , let them try ever so . besides , Osborne have get a bit of the mounseer about he , which he catch with be so fond of go off to the continent , instead of come back to his good old English home . " 

 he go on repeat much of what he have say before , till he leave the room . Osborne have keep on reply to his unreasonable grumbling , which have only add to his anger ; and as soon as the squire be fairly go , Osborne turn to Roger , and say , 

 " of course you will go , Roger ? ten to one he will be in another mind to - morrow . " 

 " no , " say Roger , bluntly enough for he be extremely disappointed ; " I will not   run the chance of vex he . I shall refuse . " 

 " do not   be such a fool ! " exclaim Osborne . " really , my father be too unreasonable . you hear how he keep contradict himself ; and such a man as you to be keep under like a child by " 

 " do not   let we talk any more about it , Osborne , " say Roger , write away fast . when the note be write , and send off , he come and put his hand caressingly on Osborne 's shoulder , as he sate pretend to read , but in reality vex with both his father and his brother , though on very different ground . 

 " how go the poem , old fellow ? I hope they be nearly ready to bring out . " 

 " no , they be not ; and if it be not   for the money , I should not   care if they be never publish . what be the use of fame , if one may not   reap the fruit of it ? " 

 " come , now , we will have no more of that ; let us talk about the money . I shall be go up for my Fellowship examination next week , and then we will have a purse in common , for they will never think of not give I a Fellowship now I be senior wrangler . I be short enough myself at present , and I do not   like to bother my father ; but when I be fellow , you shall take I down to Winchester , and introduce I to the little wife . " 

 " it will be a month next Monday since I leave she , " say Osborne , lay down his paper and gaze into the fire , as if by so do he could call up her image . " in her letter this morning she bid I give you such a pretty message . it will not   bear translate into English ; you must read it for yourself , " continue he , point out a line or two in a letter he draw from his pocket . 

 Roger suspect that one or two of the word be wrongly spell ; but their purport be so gentle and loving , and have such a touch of simple , respectful gratitude in they , that he could not help be draw afresh to the little unseen sister - in - law , whose acquaintance Osborne have make by help she to look for some miss article of the child 's , whom she be take for their daily walk in Hyde Park . for Mrs. Osborne Hamley have be nothing more than a french bonne , very pretty , very graceful , and very much tyrannize over by the rough little boy and girl she have in charge . she be a little orphan girl , who have charm the head of a travel English family , as she have bring madame some article of lingerie at an hotel ; and she have be hastily engage by they as bonne to their child , partly as a pet and playthe herself , partly because it would be so good for the child to learn French from a native   of Alsace ! . by - and - by her mistress cease to take any particular notice of Aimťe in the bustle of London and London gaiety ; but though feel more and more forlorn in a strange land every day , the french girl strove hard to do her duty . one touch of kindness , however , be enough to set the fountain gush ; and she and Osborne naturally fall into an ideal state of love , to be rudely disturb by the indignation of the mother , when accident discover to she the attachment exist between her child 's bonne and a young man of an entirely different class . Aimťe answer truly to all her mistress 's question ; but no worldly wisdom , nor any lesson to be learn from another 's experience , could in the least disturb her entire faith in her lover . perhaps Mrs. Townshend do no more than her duty in immediately send Aimťe back to Metz , where she have first meet with she , and where such relation as remain to the girl might be suppose to be reside . but , altogether , she know so little of the kind of people or life to which she be consign her depose protťgťe that Osborne , after listen with impatient indignation to the lecture which Mrs. Townshend give he when he insist on see she in order to learn what have become of his love , that the young man set off straight for Metz in hot haste , and do not let the grass grow under his foot until he have make Aimťe his wife . all this have occur the previous autumn , and Roger do not know of the step his brother have take until it be irrevocable . then come the mother 's death , which , besides the simplicity of its own overwhelming sorrow , bring with it the loss of the kind , tender mediatrix , who could always soften and turn his father 's heart . it be doubtful , however , if even she could have succeed in this , for the squire look high , and over high , for the wife of his heir ; he detest all foreigner , and overmore hold all Roman Catholics in dread and abomination something akin to our ancestor ' hatred of witchcraft . all these prejudice be strengthen by his grief . Argument would always have glance harmless away off his shield of utter unreason ; but a love impulse , in a happy moment , might have soften his heart to what he most detest in the former day . but the happy moment come not now , and the love impulse be tread down by the bitterness of his frequent remorse , not less than by his grow irritability ; so Aimťe live solitary in the little cottage near Winchester in which Osborne have instal she when she first come to England as his wife , and in the dainty furnish of which he have run himself so deeply into debt . for Osborne consult his own fastidious taste in his purchase rather than her simple childlike wish and want , and look upon the little Frenchwoman rather as the future mistress of Hamley Hall than as the wife of a man who be wholly dependent on other at present . he have choose a southern county as be far remove from those midland shire where the name of Hamley of Hamley be well and widely know ; for he do not wish his wife to assume , if only for a time , a name which be not justly and legally her own . in all these arrangement he have willingly strive to do his full duty by she ; and she repay he with passionate devotion and admire reverence . if his vanity have meet with a check , or his worthy desire for college honour have be disappoint , he know where to go for a comforter ; one who pour out praise till her word be choke in her throat by the rapidity of her thought , and who pour out the small vial of her indignation on every one who do not acknowledge and bow down to her husband 's merit . if she ever wish to go to the ch teau that be his home and to be introduce to his family , Aimťe never hint a word of it to he . only she do yearn , and she do plead , for a little more of her husband 's company ; and the good reason which have convince she of the necessity of his be so much away when he be present to urge they , fail in their efficacy when she try to reproduce they to herself in his absence . 

 the afternoon of the day on which Lord Hollingford call Roger be go upstairs , three step at a time , when , at a turn on the landing , he encounter his father . it be the first time he have see he since their conversation about the tower ' invitation to dinner . the squire stop his son by stand right in the middle of the passage . 

 " Thou'rt go to meet the mounseer , my lad ? " say he , half as affirmation , half as question . 

 " no , sir ; I send off James almost immediately with a note decline it . I do not   care about it that be to say , not to signify . " 

 " why do you take I up so sharp , Roger ? " say his father pettishly . " you all take I up so hastily now - a - day . I think it be hard when a man must not   be allow a bit of crossness when he be tired and heavy at heart that I do . " 

 " but , father , I should never like to go to a house where they have slight you . " 

 " Nay , nay , lad , " say the Squire , brighten up a little ; " I think I slight they . they ask I to dinner , after my lord be make lieutenant , time after time , but I never would go near them . I call that my slight they . " 

 and no more be say at the time ; but the next day the Squire again stop Roger . 

 " I have   be make Jem try on his livery - coat that he have not   wear this three or four year , he be get too stout for it now . " 

 " well , he need not   wear it , need he ? and Morgan 's lad will be glad enough of it , he be sadly in want of clothe . " 

 " ay , ay ; but who be to go with you when you call at the tower ? it be but polite to call after Lord What's - his - name have take the trouble to come here ; and I should not   like you to go without a groom . " 

 " my dear father ! I should not   know what to do with a man rid at my back . I can find my way to the stable - yard for myself , or there will be some man about to take my horse . do not   trouble yourself about that . " 

 " well , you be not Osborne , to be sure . perhaps it will not   strike them as strange for you . but you must look up , and hold your own , and remember you be one of the Hamleys , who have   be on the same land for hundred of year , while they be but trumpery Whig folk who only come into the county in Queen Anne 's time . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 RIVALRY . 
 

 for some day after the ball Cynthia seem languid , and be very silent . molly , who have promise herself fully as much enjoyment in talk over the past gaiety with Cynthia as in the evening itself , be disappoint when she find that all conversation on the subject be rather evade than encouraged . Mrs. Gibson , it be true , be ready to go over the ground as many time as any one like ; but her word be always like ready - make clothe , and never fit individual thought . anybody might have use they , and , with a change of proper name , they might have serve to describe any ball . she repeatedly use the same language in speak about it , till Molly know the sentence and their sequence even to irritation . 

 " ah ! Mr. Osborne , you should have be there ! I say to myself many a time how you really should have be there you and your brother , of course . " 

 " I think of you very often during the evening ! " 

 " do you ? now that I call very kind of you . Cynthia , darling ! do you hear what Mr. Osborne Hamley be say ? " as Cynthia come into the room just then . " he think of we all on the evening of the ball . " 

 " he do well than merely remember we then , " say Cynthia , with her soft slow smile . " we owe he thank for those beautiful flower , mamma . " 

 " oh ! " say Osborne , " you must not thank I exclusively . I believe it be my thought , but Roger take all the trouble of it . " 

 " I consider the thought as everything , " say Mrs. Gibson . " thought be spiritual , while action be merely material . " 

 this fine sentence take the speaker herself by surprise ; and in such conversation as be then go on , it be not necessary to accurately define the meaning of everything that be say . 

 " I be afraid the flower be too late to be of much use , though , " continue Osborne . " I meet Preston the next morning , and of course we talk about the ball . I be sorry to find he have be beforehand with we . " 

 " he only send one nosegay , and that be for Cynthia , " say Molly , look up from her work . " and it do not come till after we have receive the flower from Hamley . " molly catch a sight of Cynthia 's face before she bend down again to her sewing . it be scarlet in colour , and there be a flash of anger in her eye . both she and her mother hasten to speak as soon as Molly have finish , but Cynthia 's voice be choke with passion , and Mrs. Gibson have the word . 

 " Mr. Preston 's bouquet be just one of those formal affair any one can buy at a nursery - garden , which always strike I as have no sentiment in they . I would far rather have two or three lily of the valley gather for I by a person I like , than the most expensive bouquet that could be buy ! " 

 " Mr. Preston have no business to speak as if he have forestall you , " say Cynthia . " it come just as we be ready to go , and I put it into the fire directly . " 

 " Cynthia , my dear love ! " say Mrs. Gibson   who have never hear of the fate of the flower until now , " what an idea of yourself you will give to Mr. Osborne Hamley ; but , to be sure , I can quite understand it . you inherit my feel my prejudice sentimental I grant , against buy flower . " 

 Cynthia be silent for a moment ; then she say , " I use some of your flower , Mr. Hamley , to dress Molly 's hair . it be a great temptation , for the colour so exactly match her coral ornament ; but I believe she think it treacherous to disturb the arrangement , so I ought to take all the blame on myself . " 

 " the arrangement be my brother 's , as I tell you ; but I be sure he would have prefer see they in Miss Gibson 's hair rather than in the blaze fire . Mr. Preston come far the bad off . " Osborne be rather amused at the whole affair , and would have like to probe Cynthia 's motif a little far . he do not hear molly say in as soft a voice as if she be talk to herself , " I wear mine just as they be send , " for Mrs. Gibson come in with a total change of subject . 

 " speak of lily of the valley , be it true that they grow wild in Hurst Wood ? it be not the season for they to be in flower yet ; but when it be , I think we must take a walk there with our luncheon in a basket a little picnic in fact . you will join we , will not   you ? " turn to Osborne . " I think it be a charming plan ! you could ride to Hollingford and put up your horse here , and we could have a long day in the wood and all come home to dinner dinner with a basket of lily in the middle of the table ! " 

 " I should like it very much , " say Osborne ; " but I may not be at home . Roger be more likely to be here , I believe , at that time a month hence . " he be think of the visit to London to sell his poem , and the run down to Winchester which he anticipate afterwards the end of May have be the period fix for this pleasure for some time , not merely in his own mind , but in write to his wife . 

 " oh , but you must be with we ! we must wait for Mr. Osborne Hamley , must not we , Cynthia ? " 

 " I be afraid the lily will not   wait , " reply Cynthia . 

 " well , then , we must put it off till dog - rose and honey - suckle time . you will be at home then , will not   you ? or do the London season present too many attraction ? " 

 " I do not   exactly know when dog - rose be in flower ! " 

 " not know , and you a poet ? do not   you remember the line 

 it be the time of rose , 
 we pluck they as we pass ? " 
 " yes ; but that do not   specify the time of year that be the time of rose ; and I believe my movement be guide more by the lunar calendar than the floral . you have well take my brother for your companion ; he be practical in his love of flower , I be only theoretical . " 

 " do that fine word ' theoretical ' imply that you be ignorant ? " ask Cynthia . 

 " of course we shall be happy to see your brother ; but why can not   we have you too ? I confess to a little timidity in the presence of one so deep and learn as your brother be from all account . give I a little charming ignorance , if we must call it by that hard word . " 

 Osborne bow . it be very pleasant to he to be pet and flatter , even though he know all the time that it be only flattery . it be an agreeable contrast to the home that be so dismal to he , to come to this house , where the society of two agreeable girl , and the soothe syrup of their mother 's speech , await he whenever he like to come . to say nothing of the difference that strike upon his sens , poetical though he might esteem himself , of a sitting - room full of flower , and token of woman 's presence , where all the chair be easy , and all the table well cover with pretty thing , to the great drawing - room at home , where the drapery be threadbare , and the seat uncomfortable , and no sign of feminine presence ever now lend a grace to the stiff arrangement of the furniture . then the meal , light and well - cook , suit his taste and delicate appetite so much well than the rich and heavy viand prepare by the servant at the Hall . Osborne be become a little afraid of fall into the habit of pay too frequent visit to the Gibsons   and that , not because he fear the consequence of his intercourse with the two young lady ; for he never think of they except as friend ; the fact of his marriage be constantly present to his mind , and Aimťe too securely enthrone in his heart , for he to remember that he might be look upon by other in the light of a possible husband ; but the reflection force itself upon he occasionally , whether he be not trespass too often on hospitality which he have at present no mean of return . 

 but Mrs. Gibson , in her ignorance of the true state of affair , be secretly exultant in the attraction which make he come so often and lounge away the hour in her house and garden . she have no doubt that it be Cynthia who draw he thither ; and if the latter have be a little more amenable to reason , her mother would have make more frequent allusion than she do to the crisis which she think be approach . but she be restrain by the intuitive conviction that if her daughter become conscious of what be impending , and be make aware of Mrs. Gibson 's cautious and quiet effort to forward the catastrophe , the wilful girl would oppose herself to it with all her skill and power . as it be , Mrs. Gibson trust that Cynthia 's affection would become engaged before she know where she be , and that in that case she would not attempt to frustrate her mother 's delicate scheming , even though she do perceive it . but Cynthia have come across too many variety of flirtation , admiration , and even passionate love , to be for a moment at fault as to the quiet friendly nature of Osborne 's attention . she receive he always as a sister might a brother . it be different when Roger return from his election as Fellow of Trinity . the trembling diffidence , the hardly suppress ardour of his manner , make Cynthia understand before long with what kind of love she have now to deal . she do not put it into so many word no , not even in her secret heart but she recognize the difference between Roger 's relation to she and Osborne 's long before Mrs. Gibson find it out . molly be , however , the first to discover the nature of Roger 's attention . the first time they see he after the ball , it come out to her observant eye . Cynthia have not be look well since that evening ; she go slowly about the house , pale and heavy - eyed ; and , fond as she usually be of exercise and the free fresh air , there be hardly any persuade she now to go out for a walk . molly watch this fade with tender anxiety , but to all her question as to whether she have feel over - fatigued with her dancing , whether anything have occur to annoy she , and all such inquiry , she reply in languid negative . once molly touch on Mr. Preston 's name , and find that this be a subject on which Cynthia be raw ; now , Cynthia 's face light up with spirit , and her whole body show her ill - repressed agitation , but she only say a few sharp word , expressive of anything but kindly feel towards the gentleman , and then bade Molly never name his name to she again . still , the latter could not imagine that he be more than intensely distasteful to her friend , as well as to herself ; he could not be the cause of Cynthia 's present indisposition . but this indisposition last so many day without change or modification , that even Mrs. Gibson notice it , and Molly become positively uneasy . Mrs. Gibson consider Cynthia 's quietness and languor as the natural consequence of " dance with everybody who ask she " at the ball . partner whose name be in the " Red Book " would not have produce half the amount of fatigue , accord to Mrs. Gibson 's judgment apparently , and if Cynthia have be quite well , very probably she would have hit the blot in her mother 's speech with one of her touch of sarcasm . then , again , when Cynthia do not rally , Mrs. Gibson grow impatient , and accuse she of be fanciful and lazy ; at length , and partly at Molly 's instance , there come an appeal to Mr. Gibson , and a professional examination of the suppose invalid , which Cynthia hat more than anything , especially when the verdict be , that there be nothing very much the matter , only a general lowness of tone , and depression of health and spirit , which would soon be remedie by tonic , and meanwhile , she be not to be rouse to exertion . 

 " if there be one thing I dislike , " say Cynthia to Mr. Gibson , after he have pronounce tonic to be the cure for her present state , " it be the way doctor have of give tablespoonful of nauseous mixture as a certain remedy for sorrow and care . " she laugh up in his face as she speak ; she have always a pretty word and smile for he , even in the midst of her loss of spirit . 

 " come ! you acknowledge you have ' sorrow ' by that speech : we will make a bargain : if you will tell I your sorrow and care , I will try and find some other remedy for they than give you what you be pleased to term my nauseous mixture . " 

 " no , " say Cynthia , colour ; " I never say I have sorrow and care ; I speak generally . what should I have a sorrow about ? you and Molly be only too kind to I , " her eye fill with tear . 

 " well , well , we will not talk of such gloomy thing , and you shall have some sweet emulsion to disguise the taste of the bitter I shall be oblige to fall back upon . " 

 " please , do not . if you but know how I dislike emulsion and disguise ! I do want bitter and if I sometimes if I be oblige to if I be not truthful myself , I do like truth in other at least , sometimes . " she end her sentence with another smile , but it be rather faint and watery . 

 now the first person out of the house to notice Cynthia 's change of look and manner be Roger Hamley and yet he do not see she until , under the influence of the nauseous mixture , she be begin to recover . but his eye be scarcely off she during the first five minute he be in the room . all the time he be try to talk to Mrs. Gibson in reply to her civil platitude , he be study Cynthia ; and at the first convenient pause he come and stand before Molly , so as to interpose his person between she and the rest of the room ; for some visitor have come in subsequent to his entrance . 

 " molly , how ill your sister be look ! what be it ? have she have advice ? you must forgive I , but so often those who live together in the same house do not   observe the first approach of illness . " 

 now Molly 's love for Cynthia be fast and unwavering , but if anything try it , it be the habit Roger have fall into of always call Cynthia Molly 's sister in speak to the latter . from any one else it would have be a matter of indifference to she , and hardly to be notice ; it vex both ear and heart when Roger use the expression ; and there be a curtness of manner as well as of word in her reply . 

 " oh ! she be over - tired by the ball . Papa have see she , and say she will be all right very soon . " 

 " I wonder if she want change of air ? " say Roger , meditatively . " I wish I do wish we could have she at the Hall ; you and your mother too , of course . but I do not   see how it would be possible or else how charming it would be ! " 

 molly feel as if a visit to the Hall under such circumstance would be altogether so different an affair to all her former one , that she could hardly tell if she should like it or not . 

 Roger go on , 

 " you get our flower in time , do you not ? ah ! you do not   know how often I think of you that evening ! and you enjoy it too , do not   you ? you have plenty of agreeable partner , and all that make a first ball delightful ? I hear that your sister dance every dance . " 

 " it be very pleasant , " say Molly , quietly . " but , after all , I be not sure if I want to go to another just yet ; there seem to be so much trouble connect with a ball . " 

 " ah ! you be think of your sister , and she not be well ? " 

 " no , I be not , " say Molly , rather bluntly . " I be think of the dress , and the dressing , and the weariness the next day . " 

 he might think she unfeele if he like ; she feel as if she have only too much feeling just then , for it be bring on her a strange contraction of heart . but he be too inherently good himself to put any harsh construction on her speech . just before he go away , while he be ostensibly hold her hand and wish her good - by , he say to she in a voice too low to be generally hear , 

 " be there anything I could do for your sister ? we have plenty of book , as you know , if she care for read . " then , receive no affirmative look or word from molly in reply to this suggestion , he go on , " or flower ? she like flower . oh ! and our forced strawberry be just ready I will bring some over to - morrow . " 

 " I be sure she will like they , " say Molly . 

 for some reason or other , unknown to the Gibsons , a long interval than usual occur between Osborne 's visit , while Roger come almost every day , always with some fresh offering by which he openly seek to relieve Cynthia 's indisposition as far as it lie in his power . her manner to he be so gentle and gracious that Mrs. Gibson become alarmed , lest , in spite of his " uncouthness "   as she be pleased to term it , he might come to be prefer to Osborne , who be so strangely neglect his own interest , in Mrs. Gibson 's opinion . in her quiet way , she contrive to pass many slight upon Roger ; but the dart rebound from his generous nature that could not have imagine her motif , and fasten themselves on Molly . she have often be call naughty and passionate when she be a child ; and she think now that she begin to understand that she really have a violent temper . what seem neither to hurt Roger nor annoy Cynthia make Molly 's blood boil ; and now she have once discover Mrs. Gibson 's wish to make Roger 's visit short and less frequent , she be always on the watch for indication of this desire . she read her stepmother 's heart when the latter make allusion to the squire 's loneliness , now that Osborne be absent from the Hall , and that Roger be so often away amongst his friend during the day , 

 " Mr. Gibson and I should be so delighted if you could have stop to dinner ; but , of course , we can not be so selfish as to ask you to stay when we remember how your father would be leave alone . we be say yesterday we wonder how he bear his solitude , poor old gentleman ! " 

 or , as soon as Roger come with his bunch of early rose , it be desirable for Cynthia to go and rest in her own room , while molly have to accompany Mrs. Gibson on some improvise errand or call . still Roger , whose object be to give pleasure to Cynthia , and who have , from his boyhood , be always certain of Mr. Gibson 's friendly regard , be slow to perceive that he be not want . if he do not see Cynthia , that be his loss ; at any rate , he hear how she be , and leave she some little thing which he believe she would like , and be willing to risk the chance of his own gratification by call four or five time in the hope of see she once . at last there come a day when Mrs. Gibson go beyond her usual negative snubbiness , and when , in some unwonted fit of crossness , for she be a very placid - temper person in general , she be guilty of positive rudeness . 

 Cynthia be very much well . tonic have minister to a mind disease , though she hat to acknowledge it ; her pretty bloom and much of her light - heartedness have come back , and there be no cause remain for anxiety . Mrs. Gibson be sit at her embroidery in the drawing - room , and the two girl be at the window , Cynthia laugh at Molly 's earnest endeavour to imitate the french accent in which the former have be read a page of Voltaire . for the duty , or the farce , of settle to " improve reading " in the morning be still keep up , although Lord Hollingford , the unconscious suggestor of the idea , have go back to town without make any of the effort to see Molly again that Mrs. Gibson have anticipate on the night of the ball . that Alnaschar vision have fall to the ground . it be as yet early morning ; a delicious , fresh , lovely June day , the air redolent with the scent of flower - growth and bloom ; and half the time the girl have be ostensibly employ in the french reading they have be lean out of the open window try to reach a cluster of climb rose . they have secure they at last , and the bud lie on Cynthia 's lap , but many of the petal have fall off ; so , though the perfume linger about the window - seat , the full beauty of the flower have pass away . Mrs. Gibson have once or twice reprove they for the merry noise they be make , which hinder she in the business of count the stitch in her pattern ; and she have set herself a certain quantity to do that morning before go out , and be of that nature which attach infinite importance to fulfil small resolution , make about indifferent trifle without any reason whatever . 

 " Mr. Roger Hamley , " be announce . " so tiresome ! " say Mrs. Gibson , almost in his hearing , as she push away her embroidery frame . she put out her cold , motionless hand to he , with a half - murmur word of welcome , still eye her lose embroidery . he take no apparent notice , and pass on to the window . 

 " how delicious ! " say he . " no need for any more Hamley rose now yours be out . " 

 " I agree with you , " say Mrs. Gibson , reply to he before either Cynthia or Molly could speak , though he address his word to they . " you have be very kind in bring we flower so long ; but now our own be out we need not trouble you any more . " 

 he look at she with a little surprise cloud his honest face ; it be perhaps more at the tone than the word . Mrs. Gibson , however , have be bold enough to strike the first blow , and she determine to go on as opportunity offer . molly would perhaps have be more pained if she have not see Cynthia 's colour rise . she wait for she to speak , if need be ; for she know that Roger 's defence , if defence be require , might be safely entrust to Cynthia 's ready wit . 

 he put out his hand for the shattered cluster of rose that lie in Cynthia 's lap . 

 " at any rate , " say he , " my trouble if Mrs. Gibson consider it have be a trouble to I will be over - pay , if I may have this . " 

 " old lamp for new , " say Cynthia , smile as she give it to he . " I wish one could always buy nosegay such as you have bring we , as cheaply . " 

 " you forget the waste of time that , I think , we must reckon as part of the payment , " say her mother . " really , Mr. Hamley , we must learn to shut our door on you if you come so often , and at such early hour ! I settle myself to my own employment regularly after breakfast till lunch - time ; and it be my wish to keep Cynthia and Molly to a course of improve reading and study so desirable for young people of their age , if they be ever to become intelligent , companionable woman ; but with early visitor it be quite impossible to observe any regularity of habit . " 

 all this be say in that sweet , false tone which of late have go through molly like the scraping of a slate - pencil on a slate . Roger 's face change . his ruddy colour grow paler for a moment , and he look grave and not pleased . in another moment the wonte frankness of expression return . why should not he , he ask himself , believe she ? it be early to call ; it do interrupt regular occupation . so he speak , and say , 

 " I believe I have be very thoughtless I will not come so early again ; but I have some excuse to - day : my brother tell I you have make a plan for go to see Hurst Wood when the rose be out , and they be early than usual this year I have   be round to see . he speak of a long day there , go before lunch " 

 " the plan be make with Mr. Osborne Hamley . I could not think of go without he ! " say Mrs. Gibson , coldly . 

 " I have a letter from he this morning , in which he name your wish , and he say he fear he can not be at home till they be out of flower . I daresay they be not much to see in reality , but the day be so lovely I think that the plan of go to Hurst Wood would be a charming excuse for be out of door . " 

 " thank you . how kind you be ! and so good , too , in sacrifice your natural desire to be with your father as much as possible . " 

 " I be glad to say my father be so much well than he be in the winter that he spend much of his time out of door in his field . he have be accustom to go about alone , and I we think that as great a return to his former habit as he can be induce to make be the good for he . " 

 " and when do you return to Cambridge ? " 

 there be some hesitation in Roger 's manner as he reply , 

 " it be uncertain . you probably know that I be a Fellow of Trinity now . I hardly yet know what my future plan may be ; I be think of go up to London soon . " 

 " ah ! London be the true place for a young man , " say Mrs. Gibson , with decision , as if she have reflect a good deal on the question . " if it be not that we really be so busy this morning , I should have be tempt to make an exception to our general rule ; one more exception , for your early visit have make we make too many already . perhaps , however , we may see you again before you go ? " 

 " certainly I shall come , " reply he , rise to take his leave , and still hold the demolish rose in his hand . then , address himself more especially to Cynthia , he add , " my stay in London will not exceed a fortnight or so be there anything I can do for you or you ? " turn a little to Molly . 

 " no , thank you very much , " say Cynthia , very sweetly , and then , act on a sudden impulse , she leant out of the window , and gather he some half - open rose . " you deserve these ; do throw that poor shabby bunch away . " 

 his eye brighten , his cheek glow . he take the offer bud , but do not throw away the other bunch . 

 " at any rate , I may come after lunch be over , and the afternoon and evening will be the most delicious time of day a month hence . " he say this to both Molly and Cynthia , but in his heart he address it to the latter . 

 Mrs. Gibson affect not to hear what he be say , but hold out her limp hand once more to he . 

 " I suppose we shall see you when you return ; and pray tell your brother how we be long to have a visit from he again . " 

 when he have leave the room , Molly 's heart be quite full . she have watch his face , and read something of his feeling : his disappointment at their non - acquiescence in his plan of a day 's pleasure in Hurst Wood , the delay conviction that his presence be not welcome to the wife of his old friend , which have come so slowly upon he perhaps , after all , these thing touch molly more keenly than they do he . his bright look when Cynthia give he the rose - bud indicate a gush of sudden delight more vivid than the pain he have show by his previous increase of gravity . 

 " I can not   think why he will come at such untimely hour , " say Mrs. Gibson , as soon as she hear he fairly out of the house . " it be different from Osborne ; we be so much more intimate with he : he come and make friend with we all the time this stupid brother of his be muddle his brain with mathematic at Cambridge . Fellow of Trinity , indeed ! I wish he would learn to stay there , and not come intrude here , and assume that because I ask Osborne to join in a picnic it be all the same to I which brother come . " 

 " in short , mamma , one man may steal a horse , but another must not look over the hedge , " say Cynthia , pout a little . 

 " and the two brother have always be treat so exactly alike by their friend , and there have be such a strong friendship between they , that it be no wonder Roger think he may be welcome where Osborne be allow to come at all hour , " continue molly , in high dudgeon . " Roger 's ' muddle brain , ' indeed ! Roger , ' stupid ! ' " 

 " oh , very well , my dear ! when I be young it would not   have be think become for girl of your age to fly out because a little restraint be exercise as to the hour at which they should receive the young man 's call . and they would have suppose that there might be good reason why their parent disapprove of the visit of certain gentleman , even while they be proud and pleased to see some member of the same family . " 

 " but that be what I say , mamma , " say Cynthia , look at her mother with an expression of innocent bewilderment on her face . " one man may " 

 " be quiet , child ! all proverb be vulgar , and I do believe that be the vulgar of all . you be really catch Roger Hamley 's coarseness , Cynthia ! " 

 " Mamma , " say Cynthia , rouse to anger , " I do not   mind your abuse I , but Mr. Roger Hamley have be very kind to I while I have   not be well : I can not   bear to hear he disparage . if he be coarse , I have   no objection to be coarse as well , for it seem to I it must mean kindliness and pleasantness , and the bringing of pretty flower and present . " 

 Molly 's tear be brim over at these word ; she could have kiss Cynthia for her warm partisanship , but , afraid of betray emotion , and " make a scene , " as Mrs. Gibson call any sign of warm feeling , she lay down her book hastily , and run upstairs to her room , and lock the door in order to breathe freely . there be trace of tear upon her face when she return into the drawing - room half - an - hour afterwards , walk straight and demurely up to her former place , where Cynthia still sate and gaze idly out of the window , pouting and displeased ; Mrs. Gibson , meanwhile , count her stitch aloud with great distinctness and vigour . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 BUSH - fighting . 
 

 during all the month that have elapse since Mrs. Hamley 's death , Molly have wonder many a time about the secret she have so unwittingly become possessed of that last day in the Hall library . it seem so utterly strange and unheard - of a thing to her inexperienced mind , that a man should be marry , and yet not live with his wife that a son should have enter into the holy state of matrimony without his father 's knowledge , and without be recognize as the husband of some one know or unknown by all those with whom he come in daily contact , that she feel occasionally as if that little ten minute of revelation must have be a vision in a dream . Roger have only slightly refer to it once , and Osborne have keep entire silence on the subject ever since . not even a look , or a pause , betray any allusion to it ; it even seem to have pass out of their thought . there have be the great sad event of their mother 's death to fill their mind on the next occasion of their meeting molly ; and since then long pause of intercourse have take place ; so that she sometimes feel as if both the brother must have forget how she have come to know their important secret . she even find herself often entirely forget it , but perhaps the consciousness of it be present to her unaware , and enable she to comprehend the real nature of Osborne 's feeling towards Cynthia . at any rate , she never for a moment have suppose that his gentle kind manner towards Cynthia be anything but the courtesy of a friend . strange to say , in these latter day molly have look upon Osborne 's relation to herself as pretty much the same as that in which at one time she have regard Roger 's ; and she think of the former as of some one as nearly a brother both to Cynthia and herself , as any young man could well be , whom they have not know in childhood , and who be in nowise relate to they . she think that he be very much improve in manner , and probably in character , by his mother 's death . he be no long sarcastic , or fastidious , or vain , or self - confident . she do not know how often all these style of talk or of behaviour be put on to conceal shyness or consciousness , and to veil the real self from stranger . 

 Osborne 's conversation and way might very possibly have be just the same as before , have he be throw amongst new people ; but molly only see he in their own circle in which he be on term of decided intimacy . still there be no doubt that he be really improve , though perhaps not to the extent for which molly give he credit ; and this exaggeration on her part arise very naturally from the fact , that he , perceive Roger 's warm admiration for Cynthia , withdraw a little out of his brother 's way ; and use to go and talk to Molly in order not to intrude himself between Roger and Cynthia . of the two , perhaps , Osborne preferred Molly ; to she he need not to talk if the mood be not on he they be on those happy term where silence be permissible , and where effort to act against the prevail mood of the mind be not require . sometimes , indeed , when Osborne be in the humour to be critical and fastidious as of yore , he use to vex Roger by insist upon it that molly be pretty than Cynthia . 

 " you mark my word , Roger . five year hence the beautiful Cynthia 's red and white will have become just a little coarse , and her figure will have thicken , while molly 's will only have develop into more perfect grace . I do not   believe the girl have do grow yet ; I be sure she be tall than when I first see she last summer . " 

 " Miss Kirkpatrick 's eye must always be perfection . I can not fancy any could come up to they : soft , grave , appealing , tender ; and such a heavenly colour I often try to find something in nature to compare they to ; they be not like violet that blue in the eye be too like physical weakness of sight ; they be not like the sky that colour have something of cruelty in it . " 

 " come , do not   go on try to match her eye as if you be a draper , and they a bit of ribbon ; say at once ' her eye be load - star , ' and have do with it ! I set up molly 's grey eye and curl black lash , long odd above the other young woman 's ; but , of course , it be all a matter of taste . " 

 and now both Osborne and Roger have leave the neighbourhood . in spite of all that Mrs. Gibson have say about Roger 's visit be ill - timed and intrusive , she begin to feel as if they have be a very pleasant variety , now that they have cease altogether . he bring in a whiff of a new atmosphere from that of Hollingford . he and his brother have be always ready to do numberless little thing which only a man can do for woman ; small service which Mr. Gibson be always too busy to render . for the good doctor 's business grow upon he . he think that this increase be owe to his great skill and experience , and he would probably have be mortify if he could have know how many of his patient be solely biassed in send for he , by the fact that he be employ at the tower . something of this sort must have be contemplate in the low scale of payment adopt long ago by the Cumnor family . of itself the money he receive for go to the tower would hardly have pay he for horse - flesh , but then , as Lady Cumnor in her young day have word it , 

 " it be such a thing for a man just set up in practice for himself to be able to say he attend at this house ! " 

 so the prestige be tacitly sell and pay for ; but neither buyer nor seller define the nature of the bargain . 

 on the whole , it be as well that Mr. Gibson spend so much of his time from home . he sometimes think so himself when he hear his wife 's plaintive fret or pretty babble over totally indifferent thing , and perceive of how flimsy a nature be all her fine sentiment . still , he do not allow himself to repine over the step he have take ; he wilfully shut his eye and wax up his ear to many small thing that he know would have irritate he if he have attend to they ; and , in his solitary ride , he force himself to dwell on the positive advantage that have accrue to he and his through his marriage . he have obtain an unexceptionable chaperone , if not a tender mother , for his little girl ; a skilful manager of his previous disorderly household ; a woman who be graceful and pleasant to look at for the head of his table . moreover , Cynthia reckon for something on the favourable side of the balance . she be a capital companion for Molly ; and the two be evidently very fond of each other . the feminine companionship of the mother and daughter be agreeable to he as well as to his child , when Mrs. Gibson be moderately sensible and not over - sentimental , he mentally add ; and then he check himself , for he would not allow himself to become more aware of her fault and foible by define they . at any rate , she be harmless , and wonderfully just to Molly for a stepmother . she pique herself upon this indeed , and would often call attention to the fact of she be unlike other woman in this respect . just then sudden tear come into Mr. Gibson 's eye , as he remember how quiet and undemonstrative his little Molly have become in her general behaviour to he ; but how once or twice , when they have meet upon the stair , or be otherwise unwitnessed , she have catch he and kiss he hand or cheek in a sad passionateness of affection . but in a moment he begin to whistle an old Scotch air he have hear in his childhood , and which have never recur to his memory since ; and five minute afterwards he be too busily treat a case of white swell in the knee of a little boy , and think how to relieve the poor mother , who go out char all day , and have to listen to the moan of her child all night , to have any thought for his own care , which , if they really exist , be of so trifle a nature compare to the hard reality of this hopeless woe . 

 Osborne come home first . he return , in fact , not long after Roger have go away ; but he be languid and unwell , and , though he do not complain , he feel unequal to any exertion . thus a week or more elapse before any of the Gibsons know that he be at the Hall ; and then it be only by chance that they become aware of it . Mr. Gibson meet he in one of the lane near Hamley ; the acute surgeon notice the gait of the man as he come near , before he recognize who it be . when he overtake he he say , 

 " why , Osborne , be it you ? I think it be an old man of fifty loitering before I ! I do not   know you have come back . " 

  " why , Osborne , be it you ? " 
 " why , Osborne , be it you ? " 
 click to enlarge 
 " yes , " say Osborne , " I have   be at home nearly ten day . I daresay I ought to have call on your people , for I make a half promise to Mrs. Gibson to let she know as soon as I return ; but the fact be , I be feel very good - for - nothing , this air oppress I ; I could hardly breathe in the house , and yet I be already tired with this short walk . " 

 " you would well get home at once ; and I will call and see you as I come back from Rowe 's . " 

 " no , you must not   on any account ! " say Osborne , hastily ; " my father be annoyed enough about my go from home , so often , he say , though I have not   be from it for six week . he put down all my languor to my have be away , he keep the purse - string , you know , " he add , with a faint smile , " and I be in the unlucky position of a penniless heir , and I have   be bring up so in fact , I must leave home from time to time , and , if my father get confirm in this notion of his that my health be bad for my absence , he will stop the supply altogether . " 

 " may I ask where you do spend your time when you be not at Hamley Hall ? " ask Mr. Gibson , with some hesitation in his manner . 

 " no ! " reply Osborne , reluctantly . " I will tell you this : I stay with friend in the country . I lead a life which ought to be conducive to health , because it be thoroughly simple , rational , and happy . and now I have   tell you more about it than my father himself know . he never ask I where I have   be ; and I should not   tell he if he do at least , I think not . " 

 Mr. Gibson ride on by Osborne 's side , not speak for a moment or two . 

 " Osborne , whatever scrape you may have get into , I should advise your tell your father boldly out . I know he ; and I know he will be angry enough at first , but he will come round , take my word for it ; and , somehow or another , he will find money to pay your debt and set you free , if it be that kind of difficulty ; and if it be any other kind of entanglement , why still he be your good friend . it be this estrangement from your father that be tell on your health , I will be bind . " 

 " no , " say Osborne , " I beg your pardon ; but it be not that ; I be really out of order . I daresay my unwillingness to encounter any displeasure from my father be the consequence of my indisposition ; but I will answer for it , it be not the cause of it . my instinct tell I there be something really the matter with I . " 

 " come , do not   be set up your instinct against the profession , " say Mr. Gibson , cheerily . 

 he dismount , and throw the rein of his horse round his arm , he look at Osborne 's tongue and feel his pulse , ask he various question . at the end he say , 

 " we will soon bring you about , though I should like a little more quiet talk with you , without this tug brute for a third . if you will manage to ride over and lunch with we to - morrow , Dr. Nicholls will be with we ; he be come over to see old Rowe ; and you shall have the benefit of the advice of two doctor instead of one . go home now , you have   have enough exercise for the middle of a day as hot as this be . and do not   mope in the house , listen to the maundering of your stupid instinct . " 

 " what else have I to do ? " say Osborne . " my father and I be not companion ; one can not   read and write for ever , especially when there be no end to be gain by it . I do not   mind tell you but in confidence , recollect that I have   be try to get some of my poem publish ; but there be no one like a publisher for take the conceit out of one . not a man among they would have they as a gift . " 

 " Oho ! so that be it , be it , Master Osborne ? I think there be some mental cause for this depression of health . I would not   trouble my head about it , if I be you , though that be always very easily say , I know . try your hand at prose , if you can not   manage to please the publisher with poetry ; but , at any rate , do not   go on fret over spilt milk . but I must not   lose my time here . come over to we to - morrow , as I say ; and what with the wisdom of two doctor , and the wit and folly of three woman , I think we shall cheer you up a bit . " 

 so say , Mr. Gibson remount , and ride away at the long , sling trot so well know to the country people as the doctor 's pace . 

 " I do not   like his look , " think Mr. Gibson to himself at night , as over his daybook he review the event of the day . " and then his pulse . but how often we be all mistaken ; and , ten to one , my own hidden enemy lie close to I than his do to he even take the bad view of the case . " 

 Osborne make his appearance a considerable time before luncheon the next morning ; and no one object to the earliness of his call . he be feel well . there be few sign of the invalid about he ; and what few there be disappear under the bright pleasant influence of such a welcome as he receive from all . molly and Cynthia have much to tell he of the small proceeding since he go away , or to relate the conclusion of half - accomplish project . Cynthia be often on the point of some gay , careless inquiry as to where he have be , and what he have be do ; but Molly , who conjecture the truth , as often interfere to spare he the pain of equivocation a pain that her tender conscience would have feel for he , much more than he would have feel it for himself . 

 Mrs. Gibson 's talk be desultory , complimentary , and sentimental , after her usual fashion ; but still , on the whole , though Osborne smile to himself at much that she say , it be soothe and agreeable . presently , Dr. Nicholls and Mr. Gibson come in ; the former have have some conference with the latter on the subject of Osborne 's health ; and , from time to time , the skilful old physician 's sharp and observant eye give a comprehensive look at Osborne . 

 then there be lunch , when every one be merry and hungry , except the hostess , who be try to train her midday appetite into the genteelest of all way , and think   falsely enough   that Dr. Nicholls be a good person to practise the semblance of ill - health upon , and that he would give she the proper civil amount of commiseration for her ailment , which every guest ought to bestow upon a hostess who complain of her delicacy of health . the old doctor be too cunning a man to fall into this trap . he would keep recommend she to try the coarse viand on the table ; and , at last , he tell she if she could not fancy the cold beef to try a little with pickled onion . there be a twinkle in his eye as he say this , that would have betray his humour to any observer ; but Mr. Gibson , Cynthia , and Molly be all attack Osborne on the subject of some literary preference he have express , and Dr. Nicholls have Mrs. Gibson quite at his mercy . she be not sorry when luncheon be over to leave the room to the three gentleman ; and ever afterwards she speak of Dr. Nicholls as " that bear . " 

 presently , Osborne come upstairs , and , after his old fashion , begin to take up new book , and to question the girl as to their music . Mrs. Gibson have to go out and pay some call , so she leave the three together ; and after a while they adjourn into the garden , Osborne lounge on a chair , while molly employ herself busily in tie up carnation , and Cynthia gather flower in her careless , graceful way . 

 " I hope you notice the difference in our occupation , Mr. Hamley . molly , you see , devote herself to the useful , and I to the ornamental . please , under what head do you class what you be do ? I think you might help one of we , instead of look on like the Grand Seigneur . " 

 " I do not   know what I can do , " say he , rather plaintively . " I should like to be useful , but I do not   know how ; and my day be past for purely ornamental work . you must let I be , I be afraid . besides , I be really rather exhausted by be question and pull about by those good doctor . " 

 " why , you do not   mean to say they have be attack you since lunch ! " exclaim Molly . 

 " yes ; indeed , they have ; and they might have go on till now if Mrs. Gibson have not come in opportunely . " 

 " I think mamma have go out some time ago ! " say Cynthia , catch waft of the conversation as she flit hither and thither among the flower . 

 " she come into the dining - room not five minute ago . do you want she , for I see she cross the hall at this very moment ? " and Osborne half rise . 

 " oh , not at all ! " say Cynthia . " only she seem to be in such a hurry to go out , I fancy she have set off long ago . she have some errand to do for Lady Cumnor , and she think she could manage to catch the housekeeper , who be always in the town on Thursday . " 

 " be the family come to the tower this autumn ? " 

 " I believe so . but I do not   know , and I do not   much care . they do not   take kindly to I , " continue Cynthia , " and so I suppose I be not generous enough to take kindly to they . " 

 " I should have think that such a very unusual blot in their discrimination would have interest you in they as extraordinary people , " say Osborne , with a little air of conscious gallantry . 

 " be not   that a compliment ? " say Cynthia , after a pause of mock meditation . " if any one pay I a compliment , please let it be short and clear . I be very stupid at find out hide meaning . " 

 " then such speech as ' you be very pretty , ' or ' you have charming manner , ' be what you prefer . now , I pique myself on wrap up my sugar - plum delicately . " 

 " then would you please to write they down , and at my leisure I will parse they . " 

 " no ! it would be too much trouble . I will meet you half - way , and study clearness next time . " 

 " what be you two talk about ? " say Molly , rest on her light spade . 

 " it be only a discussion on the good way of administer compliment , " say Cynthia , take up her flower - basket again , but not go out of the reach of the conversation . 

 " I do not   like they at all in any way , " say Molly . " but , perhaps , it be rather sour grape with I , " she add . 

 " nonsense ! " say Osborne . " shall I tell you what I hear of you at the ball ? " 

 " or shall I provoke Mr. Preston , " say Cynthia , " to begin upon you ? it be like turn a tap , such a stream of pretty speech flow out at the moment . " her lip curl with scorn . 

 " for you , perhaps , " say molly ; " but not for I . " 

 " for any woman . it be his notion of make himself agreeable . if you dare I , Molly , I will try the experiment , and you will see with what success . " 

 " no , do not , pray ! " say Molly , in a hurry . " I do so dislike he ! " 

 " why ? " say Osborne , rouse to a little curiosity by her vehemence . 

 " oh ! I do not   know . he never seem to know what one be feel . " 

 " he would not   care if he do know , " say Cynthia . " and he might know he be not want . " 

 " if he choose to stay , he care little whether he be want or not . " 

 " come , this be very interesting , " say Osborne . " it be like the strophe and anti - strophe in a greek chorus . pray , go on . " 

 " do not   you know he ? " ask Molly . 

 " yes , by sight , and I think we be once introduce . but , you know , we be much far from Ashcombe , at Hamley , than you be here , at Hollingford . " 

 " oh ! but he be come to take Mr. Sheepshanks ' place , and then he will live here altogether , " say Molly . 

 " Molly ! who tell you that ? " say Cynthia , in quite a different tone of voice from that in which she have be speak hitherto . 

 " Papa , do not   you hear he ? oh , no ! it be before you be down this morning . Papa meet Mr. Sheepshanks yesterday , and he tell he it be all settle : you know we hear a rumour about it in the spring ! " 

 Cynthia be very silent after this . presently , she say that she have gather all the flower she want , and that the heat be so great she would go indoor . and then Osborne go away . but Molly have set herself a task to dig up such root as have already flower , and to put down some bed - out plant in their stead . tired and heated as she be she finish it , and then go upstairs to rest , and change her dress . accord to she will not , she seek for Cynthia ; there be no reply to her soft knock at the bedroom - door opposite to her own , and , think that Cynthia might have fall asleep , and be lie uncover in the draught of the open window , she go in softly . Cynthia be lie upon the bed as if she have throw herself down on it without care for the ease or comfort of her position . she be very still ; and molly take a shawl , and be go to place it over she , when she open her eye , and speak , 

 " be that you , dear ? do not   go . I like to know that you be there . " 

 she shut her eye again , and remain quite quiet for a few minute long . then she start up into a sit posture , push her hair away from her forehead and burn eye , and gaze intently at Molly . 

 " do you know what I have   be think , dear ? " say she . " I think I have   be long enough here , and that I have well go out as a governess . " 

 " Cynthia ! what do you mean ? " ask Molly , aghast . " you have   be asleep you have   be dream . you be over - tired , " continue she , sit down on the bed , and take Cynthia 's passive hand , and stroke it softly a mode of caressing that have come down to she from her mother whether as an hereditary instinct , or as a linger remembrance of the tender way of the dead woman , Mr. Gibson often wonder within himself when he observe it . 

 " oh , how good you be , molly ! I wonder , if I have be bring up like you , whether I should have be as good . but I have   be toss about so . " 

 " then , do not   go and be toss about any more , " say Molly , softly . 

 " oh , dear ! I have well go . but , you see , no one ever love I like you , and , I think , your father do not   he , molly ? and it be hard to be drive out . " 

 " Cynthia , I be sure you be not well , or else you be not half awake . " 

 Cynthia sate with her arm encircle her knee , and look at vacancy . 

 " well ! " say she , at last , heave a great sigh ; but , then , smile as she catch Molly 's anxious face , " I suppose there be no escape one 's doom ; and anywhere else I should be much more forlorn and unprotected . " 

 " what do you mean by your doom ? " 

 " ah , that be tell , little one , " say Cynthia , who seem now to have recover her usual manner . " I do not   mean to have one , though . I think that , though I be an arrant coward at heart , I can show fight . " 

 " with whom ? " ask Molly , really anxious to probe the mystery if , indeed , there be one to the bottom , in the hope of some remedy be find for the distress Cynthia be in when first molly enter . 

 again Cynthia be lose in thought ; then , catch the echo of Molly 's last word in her mind , she say , 

 " ' with whom ? ' oh ! show fight with whom ? why , my doom , to be sure . be not I a grand young lady to have a doom ? why , Molly , child , how pale and grave you look ! " say she , kiss she all of a sudden . " you ought not to care so much for I ; I be not good enough for you to worry yourself about I . I have   give myself up a long time ago as a heartless baggage ! " 

 " Nonsense ! I wish you would not   talk so , Cynthia ! " 

 " and I wish you would not   always take I ' at the foot of the letter , ' as an english girl at school use to translate it . oh , how hot it be ! be it never go to get cool again ? my child ! what dirty hand you have   get , and face too ; and I have   be kiss you I daresay I be dirty with it , too . now , be not   that like one of mamma 's speech ? but , for all that , you look more like a delve Adam than a spinning Eve . " this have the effect that Cynthia intend ; the daintily clean Molly become conscious of her soiled condition , which she have forget while she have be attend to Cynthia , and she hastily withdraw to her own room . when she have go , Cynthia noiselessly lock the door ; and , take her purse out of her desk , she begin to count over her money . she count it once she count it twice , as if desirous of find out some mistake which should prove it to be more than it be ; but the end of it all be a sigh . 

 " what a fool ! what a fool I be ! " say she , at length . " but even if I do not   go out as a governess , I shall make it up in time . " 

 some week after the time he have anticipate when he have speak of his departure to the Gibsons , Roger return back to the Hall . one morning when he call , Osborne tell they that his brother have be at home for two or three day . 

 " and why have he not come here , then ? " say Mrs. Gibson . " it be not kind of he not to come and see we as soon as he can . tell he I say so pray do . " 

 Osborne have gain one or two idea as to her treatment of Roger the last time he have call . Roger have not complain of it , or even mention it , till that very morning ; when Osborne be on the point of start , and have urge Roger to accompany he , the latter have tell he something of what Mrs. Gibson have say . he speak rather as if he be more amused than annoyed ; but Osborne could read that he be chagrin at those restriction place upon call which be the great pleasure of his life . neither of they let out the suspicion which have enter both their mind the well - ground suspicion arise from the fact that Osborne 's visit , be they pay early or late , have never yet be meet with a repulse . 

 Osborne now reproach himself with have do Mrs. Gibson injustice . she be evidently a weak , but probably a disinterested , woman ; and it be only a little bit of ill - temper on her part which have cause she to speak to Roger as she have do . 

 " I daresay it be rather impertinent of I to call at such an untimely hour , " say Roger . 

 " not at all ; I call at all hour , and nothing be ever say about it . it be just because she be put out that morning . I will answer for it she be sorry now , and I be sure you may go there at any time you like in the future . " 

 still , Roger do not choose to go again for two or three week , and the consequence be that the next time he call the lady be out . once again he have the same ill - luck , and then he receive a little pretty three - cornered note from Mrs. Gibson : 
 

 my dear Sir , 

 how be it that you be become so formal all on a sudden , leave card , instead of await our return ? fie for shame ! if you have see the face of disappointment that I do when the horrid little bit of pasteboard be display to our view , you would not have bear malice against I so long ; for it be really punish other as well as my naughty self . if you will come to - morrow as early as you like and lunch with we , I will own I be cross , and acknowledge myself a penitent . your ever , 

 Hyacinth C. K. Gibson . 
 

 there be no resist this , even if there have not be strong inclination to back up the pretty word . Roger go , and Mrs. Gibson caress and pet he in her sweetest , silky manner . Cynthia look lovely than ever to he for the slight restriction that have be lay for a time on their intercourse . she might be gay and sparkling with Osborne ; with Roger she be soft and grave . instinctively she know her man . she see that Osborne be only interested in she because of her position in a family with whom he be intimate ; that his friendship be without the least touch of sentiment ; and that his admiration be only the warm criticism of an artist for unusual beauty . but she feel how different Roger 's relation to she be . to he she be the one , alone , peerless . if his love be prohibit , it would be long year before he could sink down into tepid friendship ; and to he her personal loveliness be only one of the many charm that make he tremble into passion . Cynthia be not capable of return such feeling ; she have have too little true love in her life , and perhaps too much admiration to do so ; but she appreciate this honest ardour , this loyal worship that be new to her experience . such appreciation , and such respect for his true and affectionate nature , give a serious tenderness to her manner to Roger , which allure he with a fresh and separate grace . molly sate by , and wonder how it would all end , or , rather , how soon it would all end , for she think that no girl could resist such reverent passion ; and on Roger 's side there could be no doubt alas ! there could be no doubt . an old spectator might have look far ahead , and thought of the question of pound , shilling , and penny . where be the necessary income for a marriage to come from ? Roger have his fellowship now , it be true ; but the income of that would be lose if he marry ; he have no profession , and the life interest of the two or three thousand pound that he inherit from his mother , belong to his father . this old spectator might have be a little surprised at the empressement of Mrs. Gibson 's manner to a young son , always suppose this say spectator to have read to the depth of her worldly heart . never have she try to be more agreeable to Osborne ; and though her attempt be a great failure when practise upon Roger , and he do not know what to say in reply to the delicate flattery which he feel to be insincere , he see that she intend he to consider himself henceforward free of the house ; and he be too glad to avail himself of this privilege to examine over - closely into what might be her motif for her change of manner . he shut his eye , and choose to believe that she be now desirous of make up for her little burst of temper on his previous visit . 

 the result of Osborne 's conference with the two doctor have be certain prescription which appear to have do he much good , and which would in all probability have do he yet more , could he have be free of the recollection of the little patient wife in her solitude near Winchester . he go to she whenever he could ; and , thank to Roger , money be far more plentiful with he now than it have be . but he still shrink , and perhaps even more and more , from tell his father of his marriage . some bodily instinct make he dread all agitation inexpressibly . if he have not have this money from Roger , he might have be compel to tell his father all , and to ask for the necessary fund to provide for the wife and the come child . but with enough in hand , and a secret , though remorseful , conviction that as long as Roger have a penny his brother be sure to have half of it , make he more reluctant than ever to irritate his father by a revelation of his secret . " not just yet , not just at present , " he keep say both to Roger and to himself . " by - and - by , if we have a boy , I will call it Roger " and then vision of poetical and romantic reconciliation bring about between father and son , through the medium of a child , the offspring of a forbidden marriage , become still more vividly possible to he , and at any rate it be a staving - off of an unpleasant thing . he atone to himself for take so much of Roger 's Fellowship money by reflect that , if Roger marry , he would lose this source of revenue ; yet Osborne be throw no impediment in the way of this event , rather forward it by promote every possible mean of his brother 's see the lady of his love . Osborne end his reflection by convince himself of his own generosity . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXX . 

 old WAYS and new WAYS . 
 

 Illustrationr . Preston be now instal in his new house at Hollingford ; Mr. Sheepshanks have enter into dignified idleness at the house of his married daughter , who live in the county town . his successor have plunge with energy into all manner of improvement ; and among other , he fall to drain a piece of outlying waste and unreclaimed land of Lord Cumnor 's , which be close to Squire Hamley 's property that very piece for which he have have the Government grant , but which now lie neglect , and only half drain , with stack of mossy tile , and line of upturned furrow tell of abortive plan . it be not often that the Squire ride in this direction now - a - day ; but the cottage of a man who have be the squire 's gamekeeper in those more prosperous day when the Hamleys could afford to " preserve , " be close to the rush - grow ground . this old servant and tenant be ill , and have send a message up to the Hall , ask to see the squire : not to reveal any secret , or to say anything particular , but only from the feudal loyalty , which make it seem to the die man as if it would be a comfort to shake the hand , and look once more into the eye of the lord and master whom he have serve , and whose ancestor his own forbear have serve for so many generation . and the squire be as fully alive as old Silas to the claim of the tie that exist between they . though he hat the thought , and still more , should hate the sight of the piece of land , on the side of which Silas 's cottage stand , the Squire order his horse , and ride off within half - an - hour of receive the message . as he draw near the spot he think he hear the sound of tool , and the hum of many voice , just as he use to hear they a year or two before . he listen with surprise . yes ! instead of the still solitude he have expect , there be the clink of iron , the heavy gradual thud of the fall of barrow - ful of soil the cry and shout of labourer . but not on his land well worth expense and trouble by far than the reedy clay common on which the man be , in fact , employ . he know it be Lord Cumnor 's property ; and he know Lord Cumnor and his family have go up in the world   " the Whig rascal ! " , both in wealth and in station , as the Hamleys have go down . but all the same in spite of long know fact , and in spite of reason the Squire 's ready anger rise high at the sight of his neighbour do what he have be unable to do , and he a Whig , and his family only in the county since Queen Anne 's time . he go so far as to wonder whether they might not the labourer he mean avail themselves of his tile , lie so conveniently close to hand . all these thought , regret , and wonder be in his mind as he ride up to the cottage he be bind to , and give his horse in charge to a little lad , who have hitherto find his morning 's business and amusement in play at " house " with a still young sister , with some of the Squire 's neglect tile . but he be old Silas 's grandson , and he might have batter the rude red earthenware to piece a whole stack one by one , and the squire would have say little or nothing . it be only that he would not spare one to a labourer of Lord Cumnor 's . no ! not one . 

 Old Silas lie in a sort of closet , open out of the family living - room . the small window that give it light look right on to the " moor , " as it be call ; and by day the check curtain be draw aside so that he might watch the progress of the labour . everything about the old man be clean , if coarse ; and , with death , the leveller , so close at hand , it be the labourer who make the first advance , and put out his horny hand to the squire . 

 " I think you would come , Squire . your father come for to see my father as he lie a - dying . " 

 " come , come , my man ! " say the Squire , easily affect , as he always be . " do not   talk of die , we shall soon have you out , never fear . they have   send you up some soup from the Hall , as I bid them , have not   they ? " 

 " ay , ay , I have   have all as I could want for to eat and to drink . the young squire and Master Roger be here yesterday . " 

 " yes , I know . " 

 " but I be a deal near Heaven to - day , I be . I should like you to look after th ' cover in th ' West Spinney , Squire ; they gorse , you know , where th ' old fox have her hole she as give them so many a run . you will mind it , Squire , though you be but a lad . I could laugh to think on her trick yet . " and , with a weak attempt at a laugh , he get himself into a violent fit of coughing , which alarm the squire , who think he would never get his breath again . his daughter - in - law come in at the sound , and tell the squire that he have these cough - bout very frequently , and that she think he would go off in one of they before long . this opinion of hers be speak simply out before the old man , who now lay gasp and exhaust upon his pillow . poor people acknowledge the inevitableness and the approach of death in a much more straightforward manner than be customary among more educate folk . the squire be shock at her hard - heartedness , as he consider it ; but the old man himself have receive much tender kindness from his daughter - in - law ; and what she have just say be no more news to he than the fact that the sun would rise to - morrow . he be more anxious to go on with his story . 

 " they navvy I call them navvy because some on them be stranger , though some on them be th ' man as be turn off your own work , squire , when there come order to stop them last fall they be a - pull up gorse and brush to light their fire for warm up their mess . it be a long way off to their home , and they mostly dine here ; and there will be nothing of a cover leave , if you do not   see after them . I think I should like to tell ye afore I die . Parson 's be here ; but I do na tell he . he be all for the earl 's folk , and he would not ha ' heed . it be the earl as put he into his church , I reckon , for he say what a fine thing it be for to see so much employment a - give to the poor , and he never say nought o ' th ' sort when your work be agait , Squire . " 

 this long speech have be interrupt by many a cough and gasp for breath ; and have deliver himself of what be on his mind , he turn his face to the wall , and appear to be go to sleep . presently he rouse himself with a start : 

 " I know I flog he well , I do . but he be after pheasant ' egg , and I do not   know he be an orphan . Lord , forgive I ! " 

 " he be think on David Morton , the cripple , as use to go about trap vermin , " whisper the woman . 

 " why , he die long ago twenty year , I should think , " reply the squire . 

 " ay , but when grandfather go off I ' this way to sleep after a bout of talk he seem to be dream on old time . he will not waken up yet , sir ; you would well sit down if you would like to stay , " she continue , as she go into the house - place and dust a chair with her apron . " he be very particular in bid I wake he if he be asleep , and you or Mr. Roger be to call . Mr. Roger say he would be come again this morning but he will likely sleep an hour or more , if he be let alone . " 

 " I wish I would say good - by , I should like to have do that . " 

 " he drop off so sudden , " say the woman . " but if you would be well pleased to have say it , Squire , I will waken he up a bit . " 

 " no , no ! " the Squire call out as the woman be go to be as good as her word . " I will come again , perhaps to - morrow . and tell he I be sorry ; for I be indeed . and be sure and send to the Hall for anything you want ! Mr. Roger be come , be he ? he will bring I word how he be , later on . I should like to have bid he good - by . " 

 so , give sixpence to the child who have hold his horse , the squire mount . he sate still a moment , look at the busy work go on before he , and then at his own half - complete drainage . it be a bitter pill . he have object to borrow from Government , in the first instance ; and then his wife have persuade he to the step ; and after it be once take , he be as proud as could be of the only concession to the spirit of progress he ever make in his life . he have read and study the subject pretty thoroughly , if also very slowly , during the time his wife have be influence he . he be tolerably well up in agriculture , if in nothing else ; and at one time he have take the lead among the neighbouring landowner , when he first begin tile - drainage . in those day people use to speak of Squire Hamley 's hobby ; and at market ordinary , or county dinner , they rather dread set he off on long repetition of argument from the different pamphlet on the subject which he have read . and now the proprietor all around he be drain drain ; his interest to Government be run on all the same , though his work be stop , and his tile deteriorate in value . it be not a soothe consideration , and the squire be almost ready to quarrel with his shadow . he want a vent for his ill - humour ; and suddenly remember the devastation on his cover , which he have hear about not a quarter of an hour before , he ride towards the man busy at work on Lord Cumnor 's land . just before he get up to they he encounter Mr. Preston , also on horseback , come to overlook his labourer . the squire do not know he personally , but from the agent 's manner of speak , and the deference that be evidently pay to he , Mr. Hamley see that he be a responsible person . so he address the agent : " I beg your pardon , I suppose you be the manager of these work ? " 

 Mr. Preston reply , " certainly . I be that and many other thing besides , at your service . I have succeed Mr. Sheepshanks in the management of my lord 's property . Mr. Hamley of Hamley , I believe ? " 

 the Squire bow stiffly . he do not like his name to be ask or presume upon in that manner . an equal might conjecture who he be , or recognize he , but , till he announce himself , an inferior have no right to do more than address he respectfully as ' sir . " that be the Squire 's code of etiquette . 

 " I be Mr. Hamley of Hamley . I suppose you be as yet ignorant of the boundary of Lord Cumnor 's land , and so I will inform you that my property begin at the pond yonder just where you see the rise in the ground . " 

 " I be perfectly acquaint with that fact , Mr. Hamley , " say Mr. Preston , a little annoyed at the ignorance attribute to he . " but may I inquire why my attention be call to it just now ? " 

 the squire be begin to boil over ; but he try to keep his temper in . the effort be very much to be respect , for it be a great one . there be something in the handsome and well - dress agent 's tone and manner inexpressibly irritate to the squire , and it be not lessen by an involuntary comparison of the capital roadster on which Mr. Preston be mount with his own ill - groom and aged cob . 

 " I have be tell that your man out yonder do not respect these boundary , but be in the habit of pluck up gorse from my cover to light their fire . " 

 " it be possible they may ! " say Mr. Preston , lift his eyebrow , his manner be more nonchalant than his word . " I daresay they think no great harm of it . however , I will inquire . " 

 " do you doubt my word , sir ? " say the Squire , fret his mare till she begin to dance about . " I tell you I have   hear it only within this last half - hour . " 

 " I do not   mean to doubt your word , Mr. Hamley ; it be the last thing I should think of do . but you must excuse my saying that the argument which you have twice bring up for the authenticity of your statement , ' that you have hear it within the last half - hour , ' be not quite so forcible as to preclude the possibility of a mistake . " 

 " I wish you would only say in plain language that you doubt my word , " say the Squire , clenching and slightly raise his horsewhip . " I can not   make out what you mean you use so many word . " 

 " pray do not   lose your temper , sir . I say I should inquire . you have not see the man pull up gorse yourself , or you would have name it . I , surely , may doubt the correctness of your information until I have make some inquiry ; at any rate , that be the course I shall pursue , and if it give you offence , I shall be sorry , but I shall do it just the same . when I be convinced that harm have be do to your property , I shall take step to prevent it for the future , and of course , in my lord 's name , I shall pay you compensation it may probably amount to half - a - crown . " he add these last word in a low tone , as if to himself , with a slight contemptuous smile on his face . 

 " quiet , mare , quiet , " say the Squire , totally unaware that he be the cause of her impatient movement by the way he be perpetually tighten her rein ; and also , perhaps , he unconsciously address the injunction to himself . 

 neither of they see Roger Hamley , who be just then approach they with long , steady step . he have see his father from the door of old Silas 's cottage , and , as the poor fellow be still asleep , he be come to speak to his father , and be near enough now to hear the next word . 

 " I do not   know who you be , but I have   know land - agent who be gentleman , and I have   know some who be not . you belong to this last set , young man , " say the squire , " that you do . I should like to try my horsewhip on you for your insolence . " 

 " pray , Mr. Hamley , " reply Mr. Preston , coolly , " curb your temper a little , and reflect . I really feel sorry to see a man of your age in such a passion : " move a little far off , however , but really more with a desire to save the irritated man from carry his threat into execution , out of a dislike to the slander and excitement it would cause , than from any personal dread . just at this moment Roger Hamley come close up . he be pant a little , and his eye be very stern and dark ; but he speak quietly enough . 

 " Mr. Preston , I can hardly understand what you mean by your last word . but , remember , my father be a gentleman of age and position , and not accustomed to receive advice as to the management of his temper from young man like you . " 

  the burning of the Gorse . 
 the burning of the Gorse . 
 click to enlarge 
 " I desire he to keep his man off my land , " say the Squire to his son his wish to stand well in Roger 's opinion restrain his temper a little ; but though his word might be a little calm , there be all other sign of passion present the discolour complexion , the trembling hand , the fiery cloud in his eye . " he refuse , and doubt my word . " 

 Mr. Preston turn to Roger , as if appeal from Philip drunk to Philip sober , and speak in a tone of cool explanation , which , though not insolent in word , be excessively irritate in manner . 

 " your father have misunderstand I perhaps it be no wonder , " try to convey , by a look of intelligence at the son , his opinion that the father be in no state to hear reason . " I never refuse to do what be just and right . I only require further evidence as to the past wrong - doing ; your father take offence at this , " and then he shrug his shoulder , and lift his eyebrow in a manner he have formerly learn in France . 

 " at any rate , sir ! I can scarcely reconcile the manner and word to my father , which I hear you use when I first come up , with the deference you ought to have show to a man of his age and position . as to the fact of the trespass " 

 " they be pull up all the gorse , Roger there will be no cover whatever for game soon , " put in the squire . 

 Roger bow to his father , but take up his speech at the point it be at before the interruption . 

 " I will inquire into it myself at a cool moment ; and if I find that such trespass or damage have be commit , of course I shall expect that you will see it put a stop to . come , father ! I be go to see old Silas perhaps you do not   know that he be very ill . " so he endeavour to wile the squire away to prevent further word . he be not entirely successful . 

 Mr. Preston be enrage by Roger 's calm and dignified manner , and throw after they this parting shaft , in the shape of a loud soliloquy , 

 " Position , indeed ! what be we to think of the position of a man who begin work like these without count the cost , and come to a stand - still , and have to turn off his labourer just at the beginning of winter , leave " 

 they be too far off to hear the rest . the squire be on the point of turn back before this , but Roger take hold of the rein of the old mare , and lead she over some of the boggy ground , as if to guide she into sure footing , but , in reality , because he be determined to prevent the renewal of the quarrel . it be well that the cob know he , and be , indeed , old enough to prefer quietness to dancing ; for Mr. Hamley pluck hard at the rein , and at last break out with an oath , " Damn it , Roger ! I be not a child ; I will not   be treat as such . leave go , I say ! " 

 Roger let go ; they be now on firm ground , and he do not wish any watcher to think that he be exercise any constraint over his father ; and this quiet obedience to his impatient command do more to soothe the squire than anything else could have effect just then . 

 " I know I turn they off what could I do ? I have no more money for their weekly wage ; it be a loss to I , as you know . he do not   know , no one know , but I think your mother would , how it cut I to turn them off just before winter set in . I lie awake many a night thinking of it , and I give they what I have I do , indeed . I have not   get money to pay them , but I have three barren cow fatten , and give every scrap of meat to the man , and I let them go into the wood and gather what be fall , and I wink at their break off old branch , and now to have it cast up against I by that cur that servant . but I will go on with the work , by , I will , if only to spite he . I will show he who I be . my position , indeed ! a Hamley of Hamley take a high position than his master . I will go on with the work , see if I do not ! I be pay between one and two hundred a year interest on Government money . I will raise some more if I go to the Jews ; Osborne have show I the way , and Osborne shall pay for it he shall . I will not put up with insult . you should not   have stop I , Roger ! I wish to heaven I would horsewhip the fellow ! " 

 he be lash himself again into an impotent rage , painful to a son to witness ; but just then the little grandchild of old Silas , who have hold the Squire 's horse during his visit to the sick man , come run up , breathless : 

 " please , sir , please , squire , mammy have send I ; grandfather have waken up sudden , and mammy say he be die , and would you please come ; she say he would take it as a kind compliment , she be sure . " 

 so they go to the cottage , the squire speak never a word , but suddenly feel as if lift out of a whirlwind and set down in a still and awful place . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXI . 

 a PASSIVE COQUETTE . 
 

 it be not to be suppose that such an encounter as Mr. Preston have just have with Roger Hamley sweeten the regard in which the two young man henceforward hold each other . they have barely speak to one another before , and but seldom meet ; for the land - agent 's employment have hitherto lain at Ashcombe , some sixteen or seventeen mile from Hamley . he be old than Roger by several year ; but during the time he have be in the county Osborne and Roger have be at school and at college . Mr. Preston be prepared to dislike the Hamleys for many unreasonable reason . Cynthia and Molly have both speak of the brother with familiar regard , imply considerable intimacy ; their flower have be prefer to his on the occasion of the ball ; most people speak well of they ; and Mr. Preston have an animal 's instinctive jealousy and combativeness against all popular young man . their " position " poor as the Hamleys might be be far high than his own in the county ; and , moreover , he be agent to the great Whig lord , whose political interest be diametrically oppose to those of the old Tory squire . not that Lord Cumnor trouble himself much about his political interest . his family have obtain property and title from the whig at the time of the hanoverian succession ; and so , traditionally , he be a Whig , and have belong in his youth to Whig club , where he have lose considerable sum of money to Whig gambler . all this be satisfactory and consistent enough . and if Lord Hollingford have not be return for the county on the Whig interest as his father have be before he , until he have succeed to the title it be quite probable Lord Cumnor would have consider the british constitution in danger , and the patriotism of his ancestor ungratefully ignore . but , except at election , he have no notion of make Whig and Tory a party cry . he have live too much in London , and be of too sociable a nature , to exclude any man who jump with his humour from the hospitality he be always ready to offer , be the agreeable acquaintance Whig , Tory , or Radical . but in the county of which he be lord - lieutenant , the old party distinction be still a shibboleth by which man be test as to their fitness for social intercourse , as well as on the husting . if by any chance a Whig find himself at a Tory dinner - table or vice ver   the food be hard of digestion , and wine and viand be criticize rather than enjoy . a marriage between the young people of the separate party be almost as unheard - of and prohibit an alliance as that of Romeo and Juliet 's . and of course Mr. Preston be not a man in whose breast such prejudice would die away . they be an excitement to he for one thing , and call out all his talent for intrigue on behalf of the party to which he be ally . moreover , he consider it as loyalty to his employer to ' scatter his enemy " by any mean in his power . he have always hat and despise the Tories in general ; and after that interview on the marshy common in front of Silas 's cottage , he hat the Hamleys and Roger especially , with a very choice and particular hatred . " that prig , " as hereafter he always designate Roger " he shall pay for it yet , " he say to himself by way of consolation , after the father and son have leave he . " what a lout it be ! " watch the recede figure , " the old chap have twice as much spunk , " as the squire tug at his bridle rein . " the old mare could make her way well without be lead , my fine fellow . but I see through your dodge . you be afraid of your old father turn back and get into another rage . position indeed ! a beggarly squire a man who do turn off his man just before winter , to rot or starve , for all he care it be just like a brutal old tory . " and , under the cover of sympathy with the dismiss labourer , Mr. Preston indulge his own private pique very pleasantly . 

 Mr. Preston have many cause for rejoice : he might have forget this discomfiture , as he choose to feel it , in the remembrance of an increase of income , and in the popularity he enjoy in his new abode . all Hollingford come forward to do the earl 's new agent honour . Mr. Sheepshanks have be a crabbed , crusty old bachelor , frequent inn - parlour on market day , not unwilling to give dinner to three or four choose friend and familiar , with whom , in return , he din from time to time , and with whom , also , he keep up an amicable rivalry in the matter of wine . but he " do not appreciate female society , " as Miss Browning elegantly word his unwillingness to accept the invitation of the Hollingford lady . he be even unrefined enough to speak of these invitation to his intimate friend aforesaid as " those old woman 's worrying , " but , of course , they never hear of this . little quarter - of - sheet note , without any envelope that invention be unknown in those day but seal in the corner when fold up instead of gum as they be fasten at present occasionally pass between Mr. Sheepshanks and the Miss Brownings , Mrs. Goodenough or other . from the first - mention lady the form run as follow : " Miss Browning and her sister , Miss Phobe Browning , present their respectful compliment to Mr. Sheepshanks , and beg to inform he that a few friend have kindly consent to favour they with their company at tea on Thursday next . Miss Browning and Miss Phobe will take it very kindly if Mr. Sheepshanks will join their little circle . " 

 now for Mrs. Goodenough . 

 " Mrs. Goodenough 's respect to Mr. Sheepshanks , and hop he be in good health . she would be very glad if he would favour she with his company to tea on Monday . my daughter , in Combermere , have send I a couple of guinea - fowl , and Mrs. Goodenough hop Mr. Sheepshanks will stay and take a bit of supper . " 

 no need for the date of the day of the month . the good lady would have think that the world be come to an end if the invitation have be send out a week before the party therein name . but not even guinea - fowl for supper could tempt Mr. Sheepshanks . he remember the make - wine he have taste in former day at Hollingford party , and shudder . bread - and - cheese , with a glass of bitter - beer , or a little brandy - and - water , partake of in his old clothe   which have wear into shape of loose comfort , and smell strongly of tobacco , he like well than roast guinea - fowl and birch - wine , even without throw into the balance the stiff uneasy coat , and the tight neckcloth and tight shoe . so the ex - agent have be seldom , if ever , see at the Hollingford tea - party . he might have have his form of refusal stereotype , it be so invariably the same . 

 " Mr. Sheepshanks ' duty to Miss Browning and her sister "   to Mrs. Goodenough , or to other , as the case might be . " business of importance prevent he from avail himself of their polite invitation ; for which he beg to return his good thank . " 

 but now that Mr. Preston have succeed , and come to live in Hollingford , thing be change . 

 he accept every civility right and leave , and win golden opinion accordingly . party be make in his honour , " just as if he have be a bride , " Miss Phobe Browning say ; and to all of they he go . 

 " what be the man after ? " say Mr. Sheepshanks to himself , when he hear of his successor 's affability , and sociability , and amiability , and a variety of other agreeable " ilitie , " from the friend whom the old steward still retain at Hollingford . " Preston be not a man to put himself out for nothing . he be deep . he will be after something solider than popularity . " 

 the sagacious old bachelor be right . Mr. Preston be " after " something more than mere popularity . he go wherever he have a chance of meet Cynthia Kirkpatrick . 

 it might be that Molly 's spirit be more depressed at this time than they be in general ; or that Cynthia be exultant , unawares to herself , in the amount of attention and admiration she be receive from Roger by day , from Mr. Preston in the evening , but the two girl seem to have part company in cheerfulness . molly be always gentle , but very grave and silent . Cynthia , on the contrary , be merry , full of pretty mockery , and hardly ever silent . when first she come to Hollingford one of her great charm have be that she be such a gracious listener ; now her excitement , by whatever cause , make she too restless to hold her tongue ; yet what she say be too pretty , too witty , not to be a win and sparkle interruption , eagerly welcome by those who be under her sway . Mr. Gibson be the only one who observe this change , and reason upon it . " she be in a mental fever of some kind , " think he to himself . " she be very fascinating , but I do not   quite understand she . " 

 if Molly have not be so entirely loyal to her friend , she might have think this constant brilliancy a little tiresome when bring into every - day life ; it be not the sunshiny rest of a placid lake , it be rather the glitter of the piece of a broken mirror , which confuse and bewilder . Cynthia would not talk quietly about anything now ; subject of thought or conversation seem to have lose their relative value . there be exception to this mood of her , when she sink into deep fit of silence , that would have be gloomy have it not be for the never vary sweetness of her temper . if there be a little kindness to be do to either Mr. Gibson or Molly , Cynthia be just as ready as ever to do it ; nor do she refuse to do anything her mother wish , however fidgety might be the humour that prompt the wish . but in this latter case Cynthia 's eye be not quicken by her heart . 

 Molly be deject , she know not why . Cynthia have drift a little apart ; that be not it . her stepmother have whimsical mood ; and if Cynthia displease she , she would oppress Molly with small kindness and pseudo - affection . or else everything be wrong , the world be out of joint , and Molly have fail in her mission to set it right , and be to be blame accordingly . but Molly be of too steady a disposition to be much move by the changeableness of an unreasonable person . she might be annoy , or irritated , but she be not depressed . that be not it . the real cause be certainly this . as long as Roger be draw to Cynthia , and seek she of his own accord , it have be a sore pain and bewilderment to Molly 's heart ; but it be a straightforward attraction , and one which Molly acknowledge , in her humility and great power of loving , to be the most natural thing in the world . she would look at Cynthia 's beauty and grace , and feel as if no one could resist it . and when she witness all the small sign of honest devotion which Roger be at no pain to conceal , she think , with a sigh , that surely no girl could help relinquish her heart to such tender , strong keeping as Roger 's character ensure . she would have be willing to cut off her right hand , if need be , to forward his attachment to Cynthia ; and the self - sacrifice would have add a strange zest to a happy crisis . she be indignant at what she consider to be Mrs. Gibson 's obtuseness to so much goodness and worth ; and when she call Roger " a country lout , " or any other depreciative epithet , Molly would pinch herself in order to keep silent . but after all , those be peaceful day compare to the present , when she , see the wrong side of the tapestry , after the will not of those who dwell in the same house with a plotter , become aware that Mrs. Gibson have totally change her behaviour to Roger , from some cause unknown to Molly . 

 but he be always exactly the same ; ' steady as old Time , " as Mrs. Gibson call he , with her usual originality ; " a rock of strength , under whose very shadow there be rest , " as Mrs. Hamley have once speak of he . so the cause of Mrs. Gibson 's altered manner lie not in he . yet now he be sure of a welcome , let he come at any hour he would . he be playfully reproved for have take Mrs. Gibson 's word too literally , and for never come before lunch . but he say he consider her reason for such word to be valid , and should respect they . and this be do out of his simplicity , and from no tinge of malice . then in their family conversation at home , Mrs. Gibson be constantly make project for throw Roger and Cynthia together , with so evident a betrayal of her wish to bring about an engagement , that molly chafe at the net spread so evidently , and at Roger 's blindness in come so willingly to be entrap . she forget his previous willingness , his former evidence of manly fondness for the beautiful Cynthia ; she only see plot of which he be the victim , and Cynthia the conscious if passive bait . she feel as if she could not have act as Cynthia do ; no , not even to gain Roger 's love . Cynthia hear and see as much of the domestic background as she do , and yet she submit to the rŰle assign to she ! to be sure , this rŰle would have be play by her unconsciously ; the thing prescribe be what she would naturally have do ; but because they be prescribe by implication only , it be true molly would have resist ; have go out , for instance , when she be expect to stay at home ; or have linger in the garden when a long country walk be plan . at last for she could not help love Cynthia , come what would she determine to believe that Cynthia be entirely unaware of all ; but it be with an effort that she bring herself to believe it . 

 it may be all very pleasant " to sport with Amaryllis in the shade , or with the tangle of Neara 's hair , " but young man at the outset of their independent life have many other care in this prosaic England to occupy their time and their thought . Roger be Fellow of Trinity , to be sure ; and from the outside it certainly appear as if his position , as long as he choose to keep unmarried , be a very easy one . his be not a nature , however , to sink down into inglorious ease , even have his fellowship income be at his disposal . he look forward to an active life ; in what direction he have not yet determine . he know what be his talent and his taste ; and do not wish the former to lie bury , nor the latter , which he regard as gift , fit he for some peculiar work , to be disregard or thwart . he rather like await an object , secure in his own energy to force his way to it , when once he see it clearly . he reserve enough of money for his own personal need , which be small , and for the ready furtherance of any project he might see fit to undertake ; the rest of his income be Osborne 's ; give and accept in the spirit which make the bond between these two brother so rarely perfect . it be only the thought of Cynthia that throw Roger off his balance . a strong man in everything else , about she he be as a child . he know that he could not marry and retain his fellowship ; his intention be to hold himself loose from any employment or profession until he have find one to his mind , so there be no immediate prospect no prospect for many year , indeed , that he would be able to marry . yet he go on seek Cynthia 's sweet company , listen to the music of her voice , bask in her sunshine , and feed his passion in every possible way , just like an unreasone child . he know that it be folly and yet he do it ; and it be perhaps this that make he so sympathetic with Osborne . Roger rack his brain about Osborne 's affair much more frequently than Osborne trouble himself . indeed , he have become so ailing and languid of late , that even the squire make only very faint objection to his desire for frequent change of scene , though formerly he use to grumble so much at the necessary expenditure it involve . 

 " after all , it do not   cost much , " the Squire say to Roger one day . " choose how he do it , he do it cheaply ; he use to come and ask I for twenty , where now he do it for five . but he and I have lose each other 's language , that be what we have ! and my dictionary "   only he call it " dixonary "   " have all get wrong because of those confound debt which he will never explain to I , or talk about he always hold I off at arm 's length when I begin upon it he do , Roger I , his old dad , as be his prime favourite of all , when he be a little bit of a chap ! " 

 the Squire dwell so much upon Osborne 's reserved behaviour to himself , that brood over this one subject perpetually he become more morose and gloomy than ever in his manner to Osborne , resent the want of the confidence and affection that he thus repel . so much so that Roger , who desire to avoid be make the receptacle of his father 's complaint against Osborne and Roger 's passive listening be the sedative his father always seek have often to have recourse to the discussion of the drainage work as a counter - irritant . the squire have feel Mr. Preston 's speech about the dismissal of his work - people very keenly ; it fall in with the reproach of his own conscience , though , as he would repeat to Roger over and over again , " I could not   help it how could I ? I be drain dry of ready money I wish the land be drain as dry as I be , " say he , with a touch of humour that come out before he be aware , and at which he smile sadly enough . " what be I to do , I ask you , Roger ? I know I be in a rage I have   have a deal to make I so and maybe I do not   think as much about consequence as I should ha ' do , when I give order for them to be send off ; but I could not   have do otherwise if I would ha ' thought for a twelvemonth in cool blood . consequence ! I hate consequence ; they have   always be against I ; they have . I be so tie up I can not   cut down a stick more , and that be a ' consequence ' of have the property so deucedly well settle ; I wish I would never have any ancestor . ay , laugh , lad ! it do I good to see thee laugh a bit , after Osborne 's long face , which always grow long at sight o ' I ! " 

 " look here , father ! " say Roger , suddenly , " I will manage somehow about the money for the work . you trust to I ; give I two month to turn myself in , and you shall have some money , at any rate , to begin with . " 

 the Squire look at he , and his face brighten as a child 's doe at the promise of a pleasure make to he by some one on whom he can rely . he become a little graver , however , as he say , " but how will you get it ? it be hard enough work . " 

 " never mind ; I will get it a hundred or so at first I do not   yet know how but remember , father , I be a senior wrangler , and a ' ve ry promise young writer , ' as that review call I . oh , you do not   know what a fine fellow you have   get for a son ! you should have read that review to know all my wonderful merit . " 

 " I do , Roger . I hear Gibson speak of it , and I make he get it for I . I should have understand it well if they could have call the animal by their english name , and not put so much of their french jingo into it . " 

 " but it be an answer to an article by a french writer , " plead Roger . 

 " I would ha ' let he alone ! " say the Squire , earnestly . " we have to beat them , and we do it at Waterloo ; but I would not demean myself by answer any of their lie , if I be you . but I get through the review , for all their Latin and French I do ; and if you doubt I , you just look at the end of the great ledger , turn it upside down , and you will find I have   copy out all the fine word they say of you : ' careful observer , ' ' strong nervous English , ' ' rise philosopher . ' oh ! I can nearly say it all off by heart , for many a time when I be frabbe by bad debt , or Osborne 's bill , or moidere with account , I turn the ledger wrong way up , and smoke a pipe over it , while I read those piece out of the review which speak about you , lad ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXII . 

 come event . 
 

 Roger have turn over many plan in his mind , by which he think that he could obtain sufficient money for the purpose he desire to accomplish . his careful grandfather , who have be a merchant in the city , have so tie up the few thousand he have leave to his daughter , that although , in case of her death before her husband 's , the latter might enjoy the life - interest thereof , yet , in case of both their death , their second son do not succeed to the property until he be five - and - twenty ; and if he die before that age , the money that would then have be his go to one of his cousin on the maternal side . in short , the old merchant have take as many precaution about his legacy as if it have be for ten , instead of unit of thousand . of course Roger might have slip through all these mesh by insure his life until the specify age ; and , probably , if he have consult any lawyer , this course would have be suggest to he . but he dislike take any one into his confidence on the subject of his father 's want of ready money . he have obtain a copy of his grandfather 's will at doctor ' Commons , and he imagine that all the contingency involve in it would be patent to the light of nature and common sense . he be a little mistaken in this , but not the less resolve that money in some way he would have in order to fulfil his promise to his father , and for the ulterior purpose of give the squire some daily interest to distract his thought from the regret and care that be almost weaken his mind . it be " Roger Hamley , senior wrangler and Fellow of Trinity , to the high bidder , no matter what honest employment , " and presently it come down to " any bidder at all . " 

 another perplexity and distress at this time weigh upon Roger . Osborne , heir to the estate , be go to have a child . the Hamley property be entail on " heir male bear in lawful wedlock . " be the " wedlock " lawful ? Osborne never seem to doubt that it be never seem , in fact , to think twice about it . and if he , the husband , do not , how much less do Aimťe , the trustful wife ? yet who could tell how much misery any shadow of illegality might cast into the future ? one evening Roger , sit by the languid , careless , dilettante Osborne , begin to question he as to the detail of the marriage . Osborne know instinctively at what Roger be aim . it be not that he do not desire perfect legality in justice to his wife ; it be that he be so indisposed at the time that he hat to be bother . it be something like the refrain of Gray 's scandinavian Prophetess : " leave I , leave I to repose . " 

 " but do try and tell I how you manage it . " 

 " how tiresome you be , Roger ! " put in Osborne . 

 " well , I daresay I be . go on ! " 

 " I have   tell you Morrison marry we . you remember old Morrison at Trinity ? " 

 " yes ; as good and blunder - head a fellow as ever live . " 

 " well , he be take order ; and the examination for priest 's order fatigue he so much that he get his father to give he a hundred or two for a tour on the continent . he mean to get to Rome , because he hear that there be such pleasant winter there . so he turn up at Metz in August . " 

 " I do not   see why . " 

 " no more do he . he never be great in geography , you know ; and somehow he think that Metz , pronounce french fashion , must be on the road to Rome . some one have tell he so in fun . however , it be very well for I that I meet with he there , for I be determined to be marry , and that without loss of time . " 

 " but Aimťe be a Catholic ? " 

 " that be true ! but you see I be not . you do not   suppose I would do she any wrong , Roger ? " ask Osborne , sit up in his lounging - chair , and speak rather indignantly to Roger , his face suddenly flush red . 

 " no ! I be sure you would not mean it ; but , you see , there be a child come , and this estate be entail on ' heir - male . ' now , I want to know if the marriage be legal or not ? and it seem to I it be a ticklish question . " 

 " oh ! " say Osborne , fall back into repose , " if that be all , I suppose you be next heir - male , and I can trust you as I can myself . you know my marriage be bon   fide in intention , and I believe it to be legal in fact . we go over to Strasbourg ; Aimťe pick up a friend a good middle - aged Frenchwoman who serve half as bridesmaid , half as chaperone , and then we go before the mayor prťfet what do you call they ? I think Morrison rather enjoy the spree . I sign all manner of paper in the prefecture ; I do not read they over , for fear lest I could not sign they conscientiously . it be the safe plan . Aimťe keep tremble so I think she would faint ; and then we go off to the near english chaplaincy , Carlsruhe , and the chaplain be away , so Morrison easily get the loan of the chapel , and we be marry the next day . " 

 " but surely some registration or certificate be necessary ? " 

 " morrison say he would undertake all those form ; and he ought to know his own business . I know I tip he pretty well for the job . " 

 " you must be marry again , " say Roger , after a pause , " and that before the child be bear . have you get a certificate of the marriage ? " 

 " I daresay Morrison have get it somewhere . but I believe I be legally marry accord to the law both of England and France ; I really do , old fellow . I have   get the prťfet 's paper somewhere . " 

 " never mind ! you shall be marry again in England . Aimťe go to the roman catholic chapel at Prestham , do not   she ? " 

 " yes . she be so good I would not   disturb she in her religion for the world . " 

 " then you shall be marry both there and at the church of the parish in which she live as well , " say Roger , decidedly . 

 " it be a great deal of trouble , unnecessary trouble , and unnecessary expense , I should say , " say Osborne . " why can not   you leave well alone ? neither Aimťe nor I be of the sort of stuff to turn scoundrel and deny the legality of our marriage ; and if the child be a boy and my father die , and I die , why I be sure you will do he justice , as sure as I be of myself , old fellow ! " 

 " but if I die into the bargain ? make a hecatomb of the present Hamleys all at once , while you be about it . who succeed as heir - male ? " 

 Osborne think for a moment . " one of the Irish Hamleys , I suppose . I fancy they be needy chap . perhaps you be right . but what need to have such gloomy foreboding ? " 

 " the law make one have foresight in such affair , " say Roger . " so I will go down to Aimťe next week when I be in town , and I will make all necessary arrangement before you come . I think you will be happy if it be all do . " 

 " I shall be happy if I have   a chance of see the little woman , that I grant you . but what be take you up to town ? I wish I would money to run about like you , instead of be shut up for ever in this dull old house . " 

 Osborne be apt occasionally to contrast his position with Roger 's in a tone of complaint , forget that both be the result of character , and also that out of his income Roger give up so large a portion for the maintenance of his brother 's wife . but if this ungenerous thought of Osborne 's have be set clearly before his conscience , he would have smite his breast and cry " Mea culpa " with the good of they ; it be only that he be too indolent to keep an unassisted conscience . 

 " I should not   have think of go up , " say Roger , redden as if he have be accuse of spend another 's money instead of his own , " if I have not   have to go up on business . Lord Hollingford have write for I ; he know my great wish for employment , and have hear of something which he consider suitable ; there be his letter if you care to read it . but it do not tell anything definitely . " 

 Osborne read the letter and return it to Roger . after a moment or two of silence he say , " why do you want money ? be we take too much from you ? it be a great shame of I ; but what can I do ? only suggest a career for I , and I will follow it to - morrow . " he speak as if Roger have be reproach he . 

 " my dear fellow , do not   get those notion into your head ! I must do something for myself sometimes , and I have   be on the look - out . besides , I want my father to go on with his drainage ; it would do good both to his health and his spirit . if I can advance any part of the money requisite , he and you shall pay I interest until you can return the capital . " 

 " Roger , you be the providence of the family , " exclaim Osborne , suddenly strike by admiration at his brother 's conduct , and forget to contrast it with his own . 

 so Roger go up to London and Osborne follow he , and for two or three week the Gibsons see nothing of the brother . but as wave succeed to wave , so interest succeed to interest . " the family , " as they be call , come down for their autumn sojourn at the Towers , and again the house be full of visitor , and the tower ' servant , and carriage , and livery be see in the two street of Hollingford , just as they might have be see for score of autumn past . 

 so run the round of life from day to day . Mrs. Gibson find the chance of intercourse with the tower rather more personally exciting than Roger 's visit , or the rarer call of Osborne Hamley . Cynthia have an old antipathy to the great family who have make so much of her mother and so little of she ; and whom she consider as in some measure the cause why she have see so little of her mother in the day when the little girl have crave for love and find none . moreover , Cynthia miss her slave , although she do not care for Roger one thousandth part of what he do for she ; yet she have find it not unpleasant to have a man whom she thoroughly respect , and whom man in general respected , the subject of her eye , the glad ministrant to each scarce - speak wish , a person in whose sight all her word be pearl or diamond , all her action heavenly graciousness , and in whose thought she reign supreme . she have no modest unconsciousness about she ; and yet she be not vain . she know of all this worship ; and when from circumstance she no long receive it , she miss it . the Earl and the Countess , Lord Hollingford and Lady Harriet , lord and lady in general , livery , dress , bag of game , and rumour of rid party , be as nothing to she compare to Roger 's absence . and yet she do not love he . no , she do not love he . molly know that Cynthia do not love he . molly grow angry with her many and many a time as the conviction of this fact be force upon she . molly do not know her own feeling ; Roger have no overwhelming interest in what they might be ; while his very life - breath seem to depend on what Cynthia feel and think . therefore Molly have keen insight into her ' sister 's " heart ; and she know that Cynthia do not love Roger . molly could have cry with passionate regret at the thought of the unvalued treasure lie at Cynthia 's foot ; and it would have be a merely unselfish regret . it be the old fervid tenderness : " do not wish for the moon , o my darling , for I can not give it thee . " Cynthia 's love be the moon Roger yearn for ; and Molly see that it be far away and out of reach , else would she have strain her heart - cord to give it to Roger . 

 " I be his sister , " she would say to herself . " that old bond be not do away with , though he be too much absorb by Cynthia to speak about it just now . his mother call I ' Fanny ; ' it be almost like an adoption . I must wait and watch , and see if I can do anything for my brother . " 

 one day Lady Harriet come to call on the gibson , or rather on Mrs. Gibson , for the latter retain her old jealousy if any one else in Hollingford be suppose to be on intimate term at the great house , or in the least acquainted with their plan . Mr. Gibson might possibly know as much , but then he be professionally bind to secrecy . out of the house she consider Mr. Preston as her rival , and he be aware that she do so , and delight in tease she by affect a knowledge of family plan and detail of affair of which she be ignorant . indoor she be jealous of the fancy Lady Harriet have evidently take for her step - daughter , and she contrive to place quiet obstacle in the way of a too frequent intercourse between the two . these obstacle be not unlike the shield of the knight in the old story ; only instead of the two side present to the two traveller approach it from opposite quarter , one of which be silver , and one of which be gold , Lady Harriet see the smooth and shin yellow radiance , while poor Molly only perceive a dull and heavy lead . to Lady Harriet it be " molly be go out ; she will be so sorry to miss you , but she be oblige to go to see some old friend of her mother 's whom she ought not to neglect ; as I say to she , constancy be everything . it be Sterne , I think , who say , ' thine own and thy mother 's friend forsake not . ' but , dear Lady Harriet , you will stop till she come home , will not   you ? I know how fond you be of she ; in fact "   with a little surface playfulness   " I sometimes say you come more to see she than your poor old Clare . " 

 to Molly it have previously be , 

 " Lady Harriet be come here this morning . I can not   have any one else come in . tell Maria to say I be not at home . Lady Harriet have always so much to tell I . Dear Lady Harriet ! I have   know all her secret since she be twelve year old . you two girl must keep out of the way . of course she will ask for you , out of common civility ; but you would only interrupt we if you come in , as you do the other day ; " now address molly " I hardly like to say so , but I think it be very forward . " 

 " Maria tell I she have ask for I , " put in Molly , simply . 

 " very forward indeed ! " continue Mrs. Gibson , take no further notice of the interruption , except to strengthen the word to which Molly 's little speech have be intend as a correction . 

 " I think this time I must secure her ladyship from the chance of such an intrusion , by take care that you be out of the house , Molly . you have well go to the Holly Farm , and speak about those damson I order , and which have never be send . " 

 " I will go , " say Cynthia . " it be far too long a walk for Molly ; she be have a bad cold , and be not   as strong as she be a fortnight ago . I delight in long walk . if you want molly out of the way , mamma , send she to the Miss Brownings ' they be always glad to see she . " 

 " I never say I want molly out of the way , Cynthia , " reply Mrs. Gibson . " you always put thing in such an exaggerated I should almost say , so coarse a manner . I be sure , Molly , my love , you could never have so misunderstood I ; it be only on Lady Harriet 's account . " 

 " I do not   think I can walk as far as the Holly Farm ; papa would take the message ; Cynthia need not go . " 

 " well ! I be the last person in the world to tax any one 's strength ; I would soon never see damson preserve again . suppose you do go and see Miss Browning ; you can pay she a nice long call , you know she like that ; and ask after Miss Phobe 's cold from I , you know . they be friend of your mother 's , my dear , and I would not have you break off old friendship for the world . ' constancy above everything ' be my motto , as you know , and the memory of the dead ought always to be cherish . " 

 " now , mamma , where be I to go ? " ask Cynthia . " Though Lady Harriet do not   care for I as much as she do for Molly indeed , quite the contrary I should say yet she might ask after I , and I have well be safely out of the way . " 

 " true ! " say Mrs. Gibson , meditatively , yet unconscious of any satire in Cynthia 's speech . 

 " she be much less likely to ask for you , my dear : I almost think you might remain in the house , or you might go to the Holly Farm ; I really do want the damson ; or you might stay here in the dining - room , you know , so as to be ready to arrange lunch prettily , if she do take a fancy to stay for it . she be very fanciful , be dear Lady Harriet ! I would not like she to think we make any difference in our meal because she stay . ' simple elegance , ' as I tell she , ' always be what we aim at . ' but still you could put out the good service , and arrange some flower , and ask cook what there be for dinner that she could send we for lunch , and make it all look pretty , and impromptu , and natural . I think you have well stay at home , Cynthia , and then you could fetch molly from Miss Brownings ' in the afternoon , you know , and you two could take a walk together . " 

 " after Lady Harriet be fairly go ! I understand , mamma . off with you , molly . make haste , or Lady Harriet may come and ask for you as well as mamma . I will take care and forget where you be go to , so that no one shall learn from I where you be , and I will answer for mamma 's loss of memory . " 

 " child ! what nonsense you talk ; you quite confuse I with be so silly , " say Mrs. Gibson , flutter and annoy as she usually be with the lilliputian dart Cynthia fling at she . she have recourse to her accustomed feckless piece of retaliation bestow some favour on Molly ; and this do not hurt Cynthia one whit . 

 " Molly , darling , there be a very cold wind , though it look so fine . you have well put on my indian shawl ; and it will look so pretty , too , on your grey gown scarlet and grey ; it be not everybody I would lend it to , but you be so careful . " 

 " thank you , " say Molly : and she leave Mrs. Gibson in careless uncertainty as to whether her offer would be accept or not . 

 Lady Harriet be sorry to miss Molly , as she be fond of the girl ; but as she perfectly agree with Mrs. Gibson 's truism about " constancy " and " old friend , " she see no occasion for say any more about the affair , but sit down in a little low chair with her foot on the fender . this say fender be make of bright , bright steel , and be strictly taboo to all household and plebeian foot ; indeed the position , if they assume it , be consider low - breed and vulgar . 

 " that be right , dear Lady Harriet ! you can not   think what a pleasure it be to I to welcome you at my own fireside , into my humble home . " 

 " humble ! now , Clare , that be a little bit of nonsense , beg your pardon . I do not   call this pretty little drawing - room a bit of a ' humble home . ' it be as full of comfort , and of pretty thing too , as any room of its size can be . " 

 " ah ! how small you must feel it ! even I have to reconcile myself to it at first . " 

 " well ! perhaps your schoolroom be large , but remember how bare it be , how empty of anything but deal table , and form , and mat . oh , indeed , Clare , I quite agree with mamma , who always say you have do very well for yourself ; and Mr. Gibson too ! what an agreeable , well - inform man ! " 

 " yes , he be , " say his wife , slowly , as if she do not like to relinquish her rŰle of a victim to circumstance quite immediately . " he be very agreeable , very ; only we see so little of he ; and of course he come home tired and hungry , and not inclined to talk to his own family , and apt to go to sleep . " 

 " come , come ! " say Lady Harriet , " I be go to have my turn now . we have   have the complaint of a doctor 's wife , now hear the moan of a peer 's daughter . our house be so overrun with visitor ! and literally to - day I have come to you for a little solitude . " 

 " Solitude ! " exclaim Mrs. Gibson . " would you rather be alone ? " slightly aggrieve . 

 " no , you dear silly woman ; my solitude require a listener , to whom I may say , ' how sweet be solitude ! ' but I be tired of the responsibility of entertain . Papa be so open - hearted , he ask every friend he meet with to come and pay we a visit . Mamma be really a great invalid , but she do not choose to give up her reputation for good health , have always consider illness a want of self - control . so she get weary and worry by a crowd of people who be all of they open - mouthed for amusement of some kind ; just like a brood of fledgling in a nest ; so I have to be parent - bird , and pop morsel into their yellow leathery bill , to find they swallow down before I can think of where to find the next . oh , it be ' entertain ' in the large , literalist , dreariest sense of the word . so I have tell a few lie this morning , and come off here for quietness and the comfort of complain ! " 

 Lady Harriet throw herself back in her chair , and yawn ; Mrs. Gibson take one of her ladyship 's hand in a soft sympathizing manner , and murmur , 

 " Poor Lady Harriet ! " and then she purr affectionately . 

 after a pause Lady Harriet start up and say " I use to take you as my arbiter of moral when I be a little girl . tell I , do you think it wrong to tell lie ? " 

 " oh , my dear ! how can you ask such question ? of course it be very wrong , very wicked indeed , I think I may say . but I know you be only joke when you say you have tell lie . " 

 " no , indeed , I be not . I tell as plump fat lie as you would wish to hear . I say I ' be oblige to go into Hollingford on business , ' when the truth be there be no obligation in the matter , only an insupportable desire of be free from my visitor for an hour or two , and my only business be to come here , and yawn , and complain , and lounge at my leisure . I really think I be unhappy at have tell a story , as child express it . " 

 " but , my dear Lady Harriet , " say Mrs. Gibson , a little puzzled as to the exact meaning of the word that be tremble on her tongue , " I be sure you think that you mean what you say , when you say it . " 

 " no , I do not , " put in Lady Harriet . 

 " and besides , if you do not , it be the fault of the tiresome people who drive you into such strait yes , it be certainly their fault , not yours and then you know the convention of society ah , what trammel they be ! " 

 Lady Harriet be silent for a minute or two ; then she say , " tell I , Clare ; you have   tell lie sometimes , have not   you ? " 

 " Lady Harriet ! I think you might have know I well ; but I know you do not   mean it , dear . " 

 " yes , I do . you must have tell white lie , at any rate . how do you feel after they ? " 

 " I should have be miserable if I ever have . I should have die of self - reproach . ' the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth , ' have always seem to I such a fine passage . but then I have so much that be unbend in my nature , and in our sphere of life there be so few temptation . if we be humble , we be also simple , and unshackle by etiquette . " 

 " then you blame I very much ? if somebody else will blame I , I sha'n't   be so unhappy at what I say this morning . " 

 " I be sure I never blame you , not in my innermost heart , dear Lady Harriet . blame you , indeed ! that would be presumption in I . " 

 " I think I shall set up a confessor ! and it sha'n't   be you , Clare , for you have always be only too indulgent to I . " 

 after a pause she say , " can you give I some lunch , Clare ? I do not   mean to go home till three . my ' business ' will take I till then , as the people at the tower be duly inform . " 

 " certainly . I shall be delighted ! but you know we be very simple in our habit . " 

 " oh , I only want a little bread - and - butter , and perhaps a slice of cold meat you must not give yourself any trouble , Clare perhaps you dine now ? let I sit down just like one of your family . " 

 " yes , you shall ; I will not   make any alteration ; it will be so pleasant to have you share our family meal , dear Lady Harriet . but we dine late , we only lunch now . how low the fire be get ; I really be forget everything in the pleasure of this tete - a - tete ! " 

 so she ring twice ; with great distinctness , and with a long pause between the ring . Maria bring in coal . 

 but the signal be as well understand by Cynthia as the " Hall of Apollo " be by the servant of Lucullus . the brace of partridge that be to have be for the late dinner be instantly put down to the fire ; and the prettiest china bring out , and the table deck with flower and fruit , arrange with all Cynthia 's usual dexterity and taste . so that when the meal be announce , and Lady Harriet enter the room , she could not but think her hostess 's apology have be quite unnecessary ; and be more and more convinced that Clare have do very well for herself . Cynthia now join the party , pretty and elegant as she always be ; but somehow she do not take Lady Harriet 's fancy ; she only notice she on account of she be her mother 's daughter . her presence make the conversation more general , and Lady Harriet give out several piece of news , none of they of any great importance to she , but as what have be talk about by the circle of visitor assemble at the Towers . 

 " Lord Hollingford ought to have be with we , " she say , amongst other thing ; " but he be oblige , or fancy himself oblige , which be all the same thing , to stay in town about this Crichton legacy ! " 

 " a legacy ? to Lord Hollingford ? I be so glad ! " 

 " do not   be in a hurry to be glad ! it be nothing for he but trouble . do not   you hear of that rich eccentric Mr. Crichton , who die some time ago , and fire by the example of Lord Bridgewater , I suppose leave a sum of money in the hand of trustee , of whom my brother be one , to send out a man with a thousand fine qualification , to make a scientific voyage , with a view to bring back specimen of the fauna of distant land , and so form the nucleus of a museum which be to be call the Crichton Museum , and so perpetuate the founder 's name . such various form do man 's vanity take ! sometimes it stimulate philanthropy ; sometimes a love of science ! " 

 " it seem to I a very laudable and useful object , I be sure , " say Mrs. Gibson , safely . 

 " I daresay it be , take it from the public - good view . but it be rather tiresome to we privately , for it keep Hollingford in town or between it and Cambridge and each place as dull and empty as can be , just when we want he down at the tower . the thing ought to have be decide long ago , and there be some danger of the legacy lapsing . the two other trustee have run away to the continent , feeling , as they say , the utmost confidence in he , but in reality shirk their responsibility . however , I believe he like it , so I ought not to grumble . he think he be go to be very successful in the choice of his man and he belong to this county , too , young Hamley of Hamley , if he can only get his college to let he go , for he be a Fellow of Trinity , senior wrangler or something ; and they be not so foolish as to send their crack man to be eat up by lion and tiger ! " 

 " it must be Roger Hamley ! " exclaim Cynthia , her eye brighten , and her cheek flush . 

 " he be not the eld son ; he can scarcely be call Hamley of Hamley ! " say Mrs. Gibson . 

 " Hollingford 's man be a Fellow of Trinity , as I say before . " 

 " then it be Mr. Roger Hamley , " say Cynthia ; " and he be up in London about some business ! what news for Molly when she come home ! " 

 " why , what have molly to do with it ? " ask Lady Harriet . " be ? " and she look into Mrs. Gibson 's face for an answer . Mrs. Gibson in reply give an intelligent and very expressive glance at Cynthia , who however do not perceive it . 

 " oh , no ! not at all , " and Mrs. Gibson nod a little at her daughter , as much as to say , " if any one , that . " 

 Lady Harriet begin to look at the pretty Miss Kirkpatrick with fresh interest ; her brother have speak in such a manner of this young Mr. Hamley that every one connect with the phonix be worthy of observation . then , as if the mention of Molly 's name have bring her afresh into her mind , Lady Harriet say , " and where be molly all this time ? I should like to see my little mentor . I hear she be very much grow since those day . " 

 " oh ! when she once get gossip with the Miss Brownings , she never know when to come home , " say Mrs. Gibson . 

 " the Miss Brownings ? oh ! I be so glad you name they ! I be very fond of they . Pecksy and Flapsy ; I may call they so in Molly 's absence . I will go and see they before I go home , and then perhaps I shall see my dear little molly too . do you know , Clare , I have   quite take a fancy to that girl ! " 

 so Mrs. Gibson , after all her precaution , have to submit to Lady Harriet 's leave her half - an - hour early than she otherwise would have do in order to " make herself common "   as Mrs. Gibson express it   by call on the Miss Brownings . 

 but Molly have leave before Lady Harriet arrive . 

 molly go the long walk to the Holly Farm , to order the damson , out of a kind of penitence . she have feel conscious of anger at be send out of the house by such a palpable manouvre as that which her stepmother have employ . of course she do not meet Cynthia , so she go alone along the pretty lane , with grassy side and high hedge - bank not at all in the style of modern agriculture . at first she make herself uncomfortable with question herself as to how far it be right to leave unnoticed the small domestic failing the webs , the distortion of truth which have prevail in their household ever since her father 's second marriage . she know that very often she long to protest , but do not do it , from the desire of spar her father any discord ; and she see by his face that he , too , be occasionally aware of certain thing that give he pain , as show that his wife 's standard of conduct be not as high as he would have like . it be a wonder to Molly whether this silence be right or wrong . with a girl 's want of toleration , and want of experience to teach she the force of circumstance , and of temptation , she have often be on the point of tell she stepmother some forcible home truth . but , possibly , her father 's example of silence , and often some piece of kindness on Mrs. Gibson 's part   for after her way , and when in a good temper , she be very kind to Molly , make she hold her tongue . 

 that night at dinner , Mrs. Gibson recount the conversation between herself and Lady Harriet , give it a very strong individual colouring , as be she will not , and tell nearly the whole of what have pass , although imply that there be a great deal say which be so purely confidential , that she be bind in honour not to repeat it . her three auditor listen to she without interrupt her much indeed , without bestow extreme attention on what she be say , until she come to the fact of Lord Hollingford 's absence in London , and the reason for it . 

 " Roger Hamley go off on a scientific expedition ! " exclaim Mr. Gibson , suddenly awaken into vivacity . 

 " yes . at least it be not settle finally ; but as Lord Hollingford be the only trustee who take any interest and be Lord Cumnor 's son it be next to certain . " 

 " I think I must have a voice in the matter , " say Mr. Gibson ; and he relapse into silence , keep his ear open , however , henceforward . 

 " how long will he be away ? " ask Cynthia . " we shall miss he sadly . " 

 Molly 's lip form an acquiescing " yes " to this remark , but no sound be hear . there be a buzzing in her ear as if the other be go on with the conversation , but the word they utter seem indistinct and blur ; they be merely conjecture , and do not interfere with the one great piece of news . to the rest of the party she appear to be eat her dinner as usual , and , if she be silent , there be one listener the more to Mrs. Gibson 's stream of prattle , and Mr. Gibson 's and Cynthia 's remark . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 BRIGHTENING prospect . 
 

 Illustrationt be a day or two afterwards , that Mr. Gibson make time to ride round by Hamley , desirous to learn more exact particular of this scheme for Roger than he could obtain from any extraneous source , and rather puzzle to know whether he should interfere in the project or not . the state of the case be this : Osborne 's symptom be , in Mr. Gibson 's opinion , sign of his have a fatal disease . Dr. Nicholls have differ from he on this head , and Mr. Gibson know that the old physician have have long experience , and be consider very skilful in the profession . still he believe that he himself be right , and , if so , the complaint be one which might continue for year in the same state as at present , or might end the young man 's life in an hour a minute . suppose that Mr. Gibson be right , would it be well for Roger to be away where no sudden call for his presence could reach he away for two year ? yet if the affair be conclude , the interference of a medical man might accelerate the very evil to be fear ; and after all , Dr. Nicholls might be right , and the symptom might proceed from some other cause . might ? yes . probably do ? no . Mr. Gibson could not bring himself to say " yes " to this latter form of sentence . so he ride on , meditate ; his rein slack , his head a little bent . it be one of those still and lovely autumn day when the red and yellow leaf be hang - peg to dewy , brilliant gossamer - webs ; when the hedge be full of trail bramble , load with ripe blackberry ; when the air be full of the farewell whistle and pipe of bird , clear and short not the long full - throate warble of spring ; when the whirr of the partridge 's wing be hear in the stubble - field , as the sharp hoof - blow fall on the paved lane ; when here and there a leaf float and flutter down to the ground , although there be not a single breath of wind . the country surgeon feel the beauty of the season perhaps more than most man . he see more of it by day , by night , in storm and sunshine , or in the still , soft , cloudy weather . he never speak about what he feel on the subject ; indeed , he do not put his feeling into word , even to himself . but if his mood ever approach to the sentimental , it be on such day as this . he ride into the stable - yard , give his horse to a man , and go into the house by a side entrance . in the passage he meet the Squire . 

 " that be capital , Gibson ! what good wind blow you here ? you will have some lunch ? it be on the table , I only just this minute leave the room . " and he keep shake Mr. Gibson 's hand all the time till he have place he , nothing loth , at the well - cover dining - table . 

 " what be this I hear about Roger ? " say Mr. Gibson , plunge at once into the subject . 

 " aha ! so you have   hear , have you ? it be famous , be not   it ? he be a boy to be proud of , be old Roger . Steady Roger ; we use to think he slow , but it seem to I that slow and sure win the race . but tell I ; what have you hear ? how much be know ? Nay , you must have a glass full . it be old ale , such as we do not   brew now - a - day ; it be as old as Osborne . we brew it that autumn , and we call it the young squire 's ale . I think to have tap it on his marriage , but I do not   know when that will come to pass , so we have   tap it now in Roger 's honour . " 

 the old squire have evidently be enjoy the young squire 's ale to the verge of prudence . it be indeed as he say , " as strong as brandy , " and Mr. Gibson have to sip it very carefully as he eat his cold roast beef . 

 " well ! and what have you hear ? there be a deal to hear , and all good news , though I shall miss the lad , I know that . " 

 " I do not know it be settle ; I only hear that it be in progress . " 

 " well , it be only in progress , as you call it , till last Tuesday . he never let I know anything about it , though ; he say he think I might be fidgety with thinking of the pro and con . so I never know a word on't   till I have a letter from my Lord Hollingford where be it ? " pull out a great black leathern receptacle for all manner of paper . and put on his spectacle , he read aloud their heading . 

 " ' Measurement of timber , new railing , ' ' drench for cow , from Farmer Hayes , ' ' Dobson 's account , ' ' um ' um here it be . now read that letter , " hand it to Mr. Gibson . 

 it be a manly , feeling , sensible letter , explain to the old father in very simple language the service which be demand by the term of the will to which he and two or three other be trustee ; the liberal allowance for expense , the still more liberal reward for performance , which have tempt several man of considerable renown to offer themselves as candidate for the appointment . Lord Hollingford then go on to say that , have see a good deal of Roger lately , since the publication of his article in reply to the french osteologist , he have have reason to think that in he the trustee would find unite the various quality require in a great measure than in any of the applicant who have at that time present themselves . Roger have deep interest in the subject ; much acquire knowledge , and at the same time , great natural power of comparison , and classification of fact ; he have show himself to be an observer of a fine and accurate kind ; he be of the right age , in the very prime of health and strength , and unshackle by any family tie . here Mr. Gibson pause for consideration . he hardly care to ascertain by what step the result have be arrive at he already know what that result be ; but his mind be again arrest as his eye catch on the remuneration offer , which be indeed most liberal ; and then he read with attention the high praise bestow on the son in this letter to the father . the squire have be watch Mr. Gibson wait till he come to this part and he rub his hand together as he say , 

 " ay ! you have   come to it at last . it be the good part of the whole , be not   it ? God bless the boy ! and from a Whig , mind you , which make it the more handsome . and there be more to come still . I say , Gibson , I think my luck be turn at last , " pass he on yet another letter to read . " that only come this morning ; but I have   act on it already , I send for the foreman of the drainage work at once , I do ; and to - morrow , please God , they will be at work again . " 

 Mr. Gibson read the second letter , from Roger . to a certain degree it be a modest repetition of what Lord Hollingford have say , with an explanation of how he have come to take so decide a step in life without consult his father . he do not wish he to be in suspense for one reason . another be that he feel , as no one else could feel for he , that by accept this offer , he enter upon the kind of life for which he know himself to be most fit . and then he merge the whole into business . he say that he know well the suffer his father have go through when he have have to give up his drainage work for want of money ; that he , Roger , have be enable at once to raise money upon the remuneration he be to receive on the accomplishment of his two year ' work ; and that he have also insure his life , in order to provide for the repayment of the money he have raise , in case he do not live to return to England . he say that the sum he have borrow on this security would at once be forward to his father . 

 Mr. Gibson lay down the letter without speak a word for some time ; then he say , " he will have to pay a pretty sum for insure his life beyond sea . " 

 " he be get his Fellowship money , " say the Squire , a little depressed at Mr. Gibson 's remark . 

 " yes ; that be true . and he be a strong young fellow , as I know . " 

 " I wish I could tell his mother , " say the Squire in an under - tone 

 " it seem all settle now , " say Mr. Gibson , more in reply to his own thought than to the Squire 's remark . 

 " yes ! " say the squire ; " and they be not go to let the grass grow under his foot . he be to be off as soon as he can get his scientific trap ready . I almost wish he be not   to go . you do not   seem quite to like it , doctor ? " 

 " yes , I do , " say Mr. Gibson in a more cheerful tone than before . " it can not   be help now without do a mischief , " think he to himself . " why , Squire , I think it a great honour to have such a son . I envy you , that be what I do . here be a lad of three or four and twenty distinguish himself in more way than one , and as simple and affectionate at home as any fellow need to be not a bit set up . " 

 " ay , ay ; he be twice as much a son to I as Osborne , who have be all his life set up on nothing at all , as one may say . " 

 " come , Squire , I must not   hear anything against Osborne ; we may praise one , without hit at the other . Osborne have not   have the strong health which have enable Roger to work as he have do . I meet a man who know his tutor at Trinity the other day , and of course we begin crack about Roger it be not every day that one can reckon a senior wrangler amongst one 's friend , and I be nearly as proud of the lad as you be . this Mr. Mason tell I the tutor say that only half of Roger 's success be owe to his mental power ; the other half be owe to his perfect health , which enable he to work hard and more continuously than most man without suffer . he say that in all his experience he have never know any one with an equal capacity for mental labour ; and that he could come again with a fresh appetite to his study after short interval of rest than most . now I , be a doctor , trace a good deal of his superiority to the material cause of a thoroughly good constitution , which Osborne have not   get . " 

 " Osborne might have , if he get out o ' door more , " say the Squire , moodily ; " but except when he can loaf into Hollingford he do not   care to go out at all . I hope , " he continue , with a glance of sudden suspicion at Mr. Gibson , " he be not after one of your girl ? I do not   mean any offence , you know ; but he will have the estate , and it will not   be free , and he must marry money . I do not   think I could allow it in Roger ; but Osborne 's the eld son , you know . " 

 Mr. Gibson redden ; he be offend for a moment . then the partial truth of what the Squire say be present to his mind , and he remember their old friendship , so he speak quietly , if shortly . 

 " I do not   believe there be anything of the kind go on . I be not much at home , you know ; but I have   never hear or see anything that should make I suppose that there be . when I do , I will let you know . " 

 " now , Gibson , do not   go and be offend . I be glad for the boy to have a pleasant house to go to , and I thank you and Mrs. Gibson for make it pleasant . only keep off love ; it can come to no good . that be all . I do not   believe Osborne will ever earn a farthing to keep a wife during my life , and if I be to die to - morrow , she would have to bring some money to clear the estate . and if I do speak as I should not   have do formerly a little sharp or so why , it be because I have   be worry by many a care no one know anything of . " 

 " I be not go to take offence , " say Mr. Gibson , " but let we understand each other clearly . if you do not   want your son to come as much to my house as they do , tell they so yourself . I like the lad , and be glad to see they ; but if they do come , you must take the consequence , whatever they be , and not blame I , or they either , for what may happen from the frequent intercourse between two young man and two young woman ; and what be more , though , as I say , I see nothing whatever of the kind you fear at present , and have promise to tell you of the first symptom I do see , yet far than that I will not   go . if there be an attachment at any future time , I will not   interfere . " 

 " I should not   so much mind if Roger fall in love with your Molly . he can fight for himself , you see , and she be an uncommon nice girl . my poor wife be so fond of she , " answer the Squire . " it be Osborne and the estate I be think of ! " 

 " well , then , tell he not to come near we . I shall be sorry , but you will be safe . " 

 " I will think about it ; but he be difficult to manage . I have   always to get my blood well up before I can speak my mind to he . " 

 Mr. Gibson be leave the room , but at these word he turn and lay his hand on the squire 's arm . 

 " take my advice , squire . as I say , there be no harm do as yet , as far as I know . prevention be well than cure . speak out , but speak gently to Osborne , and do it at once . I shall understand how it be if he do not   show his face for some month in my house . if you speak gently to he , he will take the advice as from a friend . if he can assure you there be no danger , of course he will come just as usual , when he like . " 

 it be all very fine give the squire this good advice ; but as Osborne have already form the very kind of marriage his father most deprecate , it do not act quite as well as Mr. Gibson have hop . the Squire begin the conversation with unusual self - control ; but he grow irritated when Osborne deny his father 's right to interfere in any marriage he might contemplate ; deny it with a certain degree of doggedness and weariness of the subject that drive the squire into one of his passion ; and although , on after reflection , he remember that he have his son 's promise and solemn word not to think of either Cynthia or Molly for his wife , yet the father and son have pass through one of those altercation which help to estrange man for life . each have say bitter thing to the other ; and , if the brotherly affection have not be so true between Osborne and Roger , they too might have become alienate , in consequence of the Squire 's exaggerated and injudicious comparison of their character and deed . but as Roger in his boyhood have love Osborne too well to be jealous of the praise and love which the eld son , the beautiful brilliant lad , have receive , to the disparagement of his own plain awkwardness and slowness , so now osborne strove against any feeling of envy or jealousy with all his might ; but his effort be conscious , Roger 's have be the simple consequence of affection , and the end to poor Osborne be that he become moody and depressed in mind and body ; but both father and son conceal their feeling in Roger 's presence . when he come home just before sailing , busy and happy , the Squire catch his infectious energy , and Osborne look up and be cheerful . 

 there be no time to be lose . he be bind to a hot climate , and must take all advantage possible of the winter month . he be to go first to Paris , to have interview with some of the scientific man there . some of his outfit , instrument ,   c. , be to follow he to Havre , from which port he be to embark , after transact his business in Paris . the Squire learn all his arrangement and plan , and even try in after - dinner conversation to penetrate into the question involve in the research his son be about to make . but Roger 's visit home could not be prolong beyond two day . 

 the last day he ride into Hollingford early than he need to have do to catch the London coach , in order to bid the Gibsons good - by . he have be too actively busy for some time to have leisure to bestow much thought on Cynthia ; but there be no need for fresh meditation on that subject . her image as a prize to be work for , to be serve for seven year , and seven year more , be safe and sacred in his heart . it be very bad , this go away , and wish her good - by for two long year ; and he wonder much during his ride how far he should be justify in tell her mother , perhaps in tell her own sweet self , what his feeling be without expect , nay , indeed reprobate , any answer on her part . then she would know at any rate how dearly she be belove by one who be absent ; how in all difficulty or danger the thought of she would be a polar star , high up in the heaven , and so on , and so on ; for with all a lover 's quickness of imagination and triteness of fancy , he call she a star , a flower , a nymph , a witch , an angel , or a mermaid , a nightingale , a siren , as one or another of her attribute rise up before he . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

 a LOVER 's mistake . 
 

 it be afternoon . molly have go out for a walk . Mrs. Gibson have be pay some call . Lazy Cynthia have decline accompany either . a daily walk be not a necessity to she as it be to Molly . on a lovely day , or with an agreeable object , or when the fancy take she , she could go as far as any one ; but these be exceptional case ; in general , she be not dispose to disturb herself from her in - door occupation . indeed , not one of the lady would have leave the house , have they be aware that Roger be in the neighbourhood ; for they be aware that he be to come down but once before his departure , and that his stay at home then would be but for a short time , and they be all anxious to wish he good - by before his long absence . but they have understand that he be not come to the Hall until the follow week , and therefore they have feel themselves at full liberty this afternoon to follow their own device . 

 molly choose a walk that have be a favourite with she ever since she be a child . something or other have happen just before she leave home that make she begin wonder how far it be right for the sake of domestic peace to pass over without comment the little deviation from right that people perceive in those whom they live with . or whether , as they be place in family for distinct purpose , not by chance merely , there be not duty involve in this aspect of their lot in life , whether by continually pass over failing , their own standard be not lower , the practical application of these thought be a dismal sort of perplexity on Molly 's part as to whether her father be quite aware of her stepmother 's perpetual lapse from truth ; and whether his blindness be wilful or not . then she feel bitterly enough that although she be sure as could be that there be no real estrangement between she and her father , yet there be perpetual obstacle throw in the way of their intercourse ; and she think with a sigh that if he would but come in with authority , he might cut his way clear to the old intimacy with his daughter , and that they might have all the former walk and talk , and quip and crank , and glimpse of real confidence once again ; thing that her stepmother do not value , yet which she , like the dog in the manger , prevent Molly 's enjoying . but after all molly be a girl , not so far remove from childhood ; and in the middle of her grave regret and perplexity , her eye be catch by the sight of some fine ripe blackberry flourish away high up on the hedge - bank among scarlet hip and green and russet leaf . she do not care much for blackberry herself ; but she have hear Cynthia say that she like they ; and besides there be the charm of scramble and gather they ; so she forget all about her trouble , and go climb up the bank , and clutch at her almost inaccessible prize , and slip down again triumphant , to carry they back to the large leaf which be to serve she as a basket . one or two of they she taste , but they be as vapid to her palate as ever . the skirt of her pretty print gown be tear out of the gather , and even with the fruit she have eat " her pretty lip with blackberry be all besmear and dye , " when have gather as many and more than she could possibly carry , she set off home , hop to escape into her room and mend she gown before it have offend Mrs. Gibson 's neat eye . the front door be easily open from the outside , and Molly be out of the clear light of the open air and in the shadow of the hall , when she see a face peep out of the dining - room before she quite recognize whose it be ; and then Mrs. Gibson come softly out , sufficiently at least to beckon she into the room . when Molly have enter Mrs. Gibson close the door . Poor Molly expect a reprimand for her tear gown and untidy appearance , but be soon relieve by the expression of Mrs. Gibson 's face mysterious and radiant . 

 " I have   be watch for you , dear . do not   go upstairs into the drawing - room , love . it might be a little interruption just now . Roger Hamley be there with Cynthia ; and I have   reason to think in fact I do open the door unawares , but I shut it again softly , and I do not   think they hear I . be not   it charming ? young love , you know , ah , how sweet it be ! " 

 " do you mean that Roger have propose to Cynthia ? " ask Molly . 

 " not exactly that . but I do not   know ; of course I know nothing . only I do hear he say that he have mean to leave England without speak of his love , but that the temptation of see she alone have be too great for he . it be symptomatic , be it not , my dear ? and all I want be to let it come to a crisis without interruption . so I have   be watch for you to prevent your go in and disturb they . " 

 " but I may go to my own room , may not   I , " plead molly . 

 " of course , " say Mrs. Gibson , a little testily . " only I have expect sympathy from you at such an interesting moment . " 

 but Molly do not hear these last word . she have escape upstairs , and shut her door . instinctively she have carry her leaf full of blackberry what would blackberry be to Cynthia now ? she feel as if she could not understand it all ; but as for that matter , what could she understand ? nothing . for a few minute her brain seem in too great a whirl to comprehend anything but that she be be carry on in earth 's diurnal course , with rock , and stone , and tree , with as little volition on her part as if she be dead . then the room grow stifle , and instinctively she go to the open casement window , and leant out , gasp for breath . gradually the consciousness of the soft peaceful landscape steal into her mind , and still the buzzing confusion . there , bath in the almost level ray of the autumn sunlight , lie the landscape she have know and love from childhood ; as quiet , as full of low hum life as it have be at this hour for many generation . the autumn flower blaze out in the garden below , the lazy cow be in the meadow beyond , chew their cud in the green aftermath ; the evening fire have just be make up in the cottage beyond , in preparation for the husband 's home - come , and be send up soft curl of blue smoke into the still air ; the child , let loose from school , be shout merrily in the distance , and she just then she hear nearer sound ; an open door , step on the low flight of stair . he could not have go without even see she . he never , never would have do so cruel a thing never would have forget poor little molly , however happy he might be ! no ! there be step and voice , and the drawing - room door be open and shut once more . she lay down her head on her arm that rest upon the window - sill , and cry , she have be so distrustful as to have let the idea enter her mind that he could go without wish her good - by she , whom his mother have so love , and call by the name of his little dead sister . and as she think of the tender love Mrs. Hamley have bear she she cry the more , for the vanishing of such love for she off the face of the earth . suddenly the drawing - room door open , and some one be hear come upstairs ; it be Cynthia 's step . molly hastily wipe her eye , and stand up and try to look unconcerned ; it be all she have time to do before Cynthia , after a little pause at the closed door , have knock ; and on an answer be give , have say , without open the door , " molly ! Mr. Roger Hamley be here , and want to wish you good - by before he go . " then she go downstairs again , as if anxious just at that moment to avoid even so short a tete - a - tete with Molly . with a gulp and a fit of resolution , as a child make up its mind to swallow a nauseous dose of medicine , Molly go instantly downstairs . 

 Roger be talk earnestly to Mrs. Gibson in the bow of the window when molly enter ; Cynthia be stand near , listening , but take no part in the conversation . her eye be downcast , and she do not look up as molly draw shyly near . 

 Roger be say , " I could never forgive myself if I have accept a pledge from she . she shall be free until my return ; but the hope , the word , her sweet goodness , have make I happy beyond description . oh , Molly ! " suddenly become aware of her presence , and turn to she , and take her hand in both of his , " I think you have long guess my secret , have you not ? I once think of speak to you before I leave , and confide it all to you . but the temptation have be too great , I have tell Cynthia how fondly I love she , as far as word can tell ; and she say " then he look at Cynthia with passionate delight , and seem to forget in that gaze that he have leave his sentence to Molly half finish . 

 Cynthia do not seem inclined to repeat her say , whatever it be , but her mother speak for she . 

 " my dear sweet girl value your love as it ought to be value , I be sure . and I believe , " look at Cynthia and Roger with intelligent archness , " I could tell tale as to the cause of her indisposition in the spring . " 

 " Mother , " say Cynthia suddenly , " you know it be no such thing . pray do not   invent story about I . I have engage myself to Mr. Roger Hamley , and that be enough . " 

 " Enough ! more than enough ! " say Roger . " I will not accept your pledge . I be bind , but you be free . I like to feel bound , it make I happy and at peace , but with all the chance involve in the next two year , you must not shackle yourself by promise . " 

 Cynthia do not speak at once ; she be evidently revolve something in her own mind . Mrs. Gibson take up the word . 

 " you be very generous , I be sure . perhaps it will be well not to mention it . " 

 " I would much rather have it keep a secret , " say Cynthia , interrupting . 

 " certainly , my dear love . that be just what I be go to say . I once know a young lady who hear of the death of a young man in America , whom she have know pretty well ; and she immediately say she have be engage to he , and even go so far as to put on weed ; and it be a false report , for he come back well and merry , and declare to everybody he have never so much as think about she . so it be very awkward for she . these thing have much well be keep secret until the proper time have come for divulge they . " 

 even then and there Cynthia could not resist the temptation of say , " Mamma , I will promise you I will not   put on weed , whatever report come of Mr. Roger Hamley . " 

 " Roger , please ! " he put in , in a tender whisper . 

 " and you will all be witness that he have profess to think of I , if he be tempt afterwards to deny the fact . but at the same time I wish it to be keep a secret until his return and I be sure you will all be so kind as to attend to my wish . please , Roger ! please , Molly ! Mamma , I must especially beg it of you ! " 

 Roger would have grant anything when she ask he by that name , and in that tone . he take her hand in silent pledge of his reply . molly feel as if she could never bring herself to name the affair as a common piece of news . so it be only Mrs. Gibson that answer aloud , 

 " my dear child ! why ' especially ' to poor I ? you know I be the most trustworthy person alive ! " 

 the little pendule on the chimney - piece strike the half - hour . 

 " I must go ! " say Roger , in dismay . " I have no idea it be so late . I shall write from Paris . the coach will be at the George by this time , and will only stay five minute . dearest Cynthia " he take her hand , and then , as if the temptation be irresistible , he draw she to he and kiss she . " only remember you be free ! " say he , as he release she and pass on to Mrs. Gibson . 

 " if I have consider myself free , " say Cynthia , blush a little , but ready with her repartee to the last , " if I have think myself free , do you think I would have allow that ? " 

 then Molly 's turn come , and the old brotherly tenderness come back into his look , his voice , his bearing . 

 " molly ! you will not   forget I , I know ; I shall never forget you , nor your goodness to she . " his voice begin to quiver , and it be good to be go . Mrs. Gibson be pour out , unheard and unheeded , word of farewell ; Cynthia be re - arrange some flower in a vase on the table , the defect in which have catch her artistic eye , without the consciousness penetrate to her mind . molly stand , numb to the heart ; neither glad nor sorry , nor anything but stun . she feel the slacken touch of the warm grasp hand ; she look up for till now her eye have be downcast , as if there be heavy weight to their lid and the place be empty where he have be ; his quick step be hear on the stair , the front door be open and shut ; and then as quick as lightning Molly run up to the front attic the lumber - room , whose window command the street down which he must pass . the window - clasp be unused and stiff , Molly tug at it unless it be open , and her head put out , that last chance would be go . 

 " I must see he again ; I must ! I must ! " she wail out , as she be pull . there he be , run hard to catch the London coach ; his luggage have be leave at the George before he come up to wish the Gibsons good - by . in all his hurry , Molly see he turn round and shade his eye from the level ray of the westere sun , and rake the house with his glance in hope , she know , of catch one more glimpse of Cynthia . but apparently he see no one , not even molly at the attic casement ; for she have draw back when he have turn , and keep herself in shadow ; for she have no right to put herself forward as the one to watch and yearn for farewell sign . none come another moment he be out of sight for year ! 

  the last turning . 
 the last turning . 
 click to enlarge 
 she shut the window softly , and shiver all over . she leave the attic and go to her own room ; but she do not begin to take off her out - of - door thing till she hear Cynthia 's foot on the stair . then she hastily go to the toilet - table , and begin to untie her bonnet - string ; but they be in a knot , and take time to undo . Cynthia 's step stop at Molly 's door ; she open it a little and say , " may I come in , molly ? " 

 " certainly , " say Molly , long to be able to say " no " all the time . molly do not turn to meet she , so Cynthia come up behind she , and put she two hand round Molly 's waist , peep over her shoulder , put out her lip to be kiss . molly could not resist the action the mute entreaty for a caress . but , in the moment before , she have catch the reflection of the two face in the glass ; her own , red - eye , pale , with lip dye with blackberry juice , her curl tangle , her bonnet pull awry , her gown tear and contrast it with Cynthia 's brightness and bloom , and the trim elegance of her dress . " oh ! it be no wonder ! " think poor Molly , as she turn round , and put her arm round Cynthia , and lay her head for an instant on her shoulder the weary , ache head that seek a love pillow in that supreme moment ! the next she have raise herself , and take Cynthia 's two hand , and be hold she off a little , the well to read her face . 

  " oh ! it be no wonder ! " 
 " oh ! it be no wonder ! " 
 click to enlarge 
 " Cynthia ! you do love he dearly , do not   you ? " 

 Cynthia wince a little aside from the penetrate steadiness of those eye . 

 " you speak with all the solemnity of an adjuration , Molly ! " say she , laugh a little at first to cover her nervousness , and then look up at Molly . " do not   you think I have   give a proof of it ? but you know I have   often tell you I have   not the gift of love ; I say pretty much the same thing to he . I can respect , and I fancy I can admire , and I can like , but I never feel carry off my foot by love for any one , not even for you , little Molly , and I be sure I love you more than " 

 " no , do not ! " say Molly , put her hand before Cynthia 's mouth , in almost a passion of impatience . " do not , do not   I will not   hear you I ought not to have ask you it make you tell lie ! " 

 " why , Molly ! " say Cynthia , in her turn seek to read Molly 's face , " what be the matter with you ? one might think you care for he yourself . " 

 " I ? " say Molly , all the blood rush to her heart suddenly ; then it return , and she have courage to speak , and she speak the truth as she believe it , though not the real actual truth . 

 " I do care for he ; I think you have win the love of a prince amongst man . why , I be proud to remember that he have be to I as a brother , and I love he as a sister , and I love you doubly because he have honour you with his love . " 

 " come , that be not complimentary ! " say Cynthia , laughing , but not ill - pleased to hear her lover 's praise , and even willing to depreciate he a little in order to hear more . 

 " he be well enough , I daresay , and a great deal too learned and clever for a stupid girl like I ; but even you must acknowledge he be very plain and awkward ; and I like pretty thing and pretty people . " 

 " Cynthia , I will not   talk to you about he . you know you do not   mean what you be say , and you only say it out of contradiction , because I praise he . he shall not   be run down by you , even in joke . " 

 " well , then , we will not   talk of he at all . I be so surprised when he begin to speak so " and Cynthia look very lovely , blush and dimple up as she remember his word and look . suddenly she recall herself to the present time , and her eye catch on the leaf full of blackberry the broad , green leaf , so fresh and crisp when Molly have gather it an hour or so ago , but now soft and flabby , and die . molly see it , too , and feel a strange kind of sympathetic pity for the poor inanimate leaf . 

 " oh ! what blackberry ! you have   gather they for I , I know ! " say Cynthia , sit down and begin to feed herself daintily , touch they lightly with the end of her taper finger , and drop each ripe berry into her open mouth . when she have eat about half she stop suddenly short . 

 " how I should like to have go as far as Paris with he ! " she exclaim . " I suppose it would not   have be proper ; but how pleasant it would have be ! I remember at Boulogne "   another blackberry , " how I use to envy the English who be go to Paris ; it seem to I then as if nobody stop at Boulogne , but dull , stupid school - girl . " 

 " when will he be there ? " ask Molly . 

 " on Wednesday , he say . I be to write to he there ; at any rate he be go to write to I . " 

 molly go about the adjustment of her dress in a quiet , business - like manner , not speak much ; Cynthia , although sit still , seem very restless . oh ! how much molly wish that she would go . 

 " perhaps , after all , " say Cynthia , after a pause of apparent meditation , " we shall never be marry . " 

 " why do you say that ? " say Molly , almost bitterly . " you have nothing to make you think so . I wonder how you can bear to think you will not , even for a moment . " 

 " oh ! " say Cynthia ; " you must not   go and take I au grand sťrieux . I daresay I do not   mean what I say , but you see everything seem a dream at present . still , I think the chance be equal the chance for and against our marriage , I mean . two year ! it be a long time ! he may change his mind , or I may ; or some one else may turn up , and I may get engage to he : what should you think of that , molly ? I be put such a gloomy thing as death quite on one side , you see ; yet in two year how much may happen ! " 

 " do not   talk so , Cynthia , please do not , " say Molly , piteously . " one would think you do not   care for he , and he care so much for you ! " 

 " why , do I say I do not   care for he ? I be only calculate chance . I be sure I hope nothing will happen to prevent the marriage . only , you know it may , and I think I be take a step in wisdom , in look forward to all the evil that might befall . I be sure all the wise people I have   ever know think it a virtue to have gloomy prognostic of the future . but you be not in a mood for wisdom or virtue , I see ; so I will go and get ready for dinner , and leave you to your vanity of dress . " 

 she take Molly 's face in both her hand , before Molly be aware of her intention , and kiss it playfully . then she leave molly to herself . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXV . 

 the MOTHER 's MANOUVRE . 
 

 Mr. Gibson be not at home at dinner detain by some patient , most probably . this be not an unusual occurrence ; but it be rather an unusual occurrence for Mrs. Gibson to go down into the dining - room , and sit with he as he eat his defer meal when he come in an hour or two later . in general , she prefer her easy - chair , or her corner of the sofa , upstairs in the drawing - room , though it be very rarely that she would allow Molly to avail herself of her stepmother 's neglect privilege . molly would fain have go down and keep her father company every night that he have these solitary meal ; but for peace and quietness she give up her own wish on the matter . 

 Mrs. Gibson take a seat by the fire in the dining - room , and patiently wait for the auspicious moment when Mr. Gibson , have satisfy his healthy appetite , turn from the table , and take his place by her side . she get up , and with unaccustomed attention move the wine and glass so that he could help himself without move from his chair . 

 " there , now ! be you comfortable ? for I have a great piece of news to tell you ! " say she , when all be arrange . 

 " I think there be something on hand , " say he , smile . " now for it ! " 

 " Roger Hamley have be here this afternoon to bid we good - by . " 

 " good - by ! be he go ? I do not   know he be go so soon ! " exclaim Mr. Gibson . 

 " yes : never mind , that be not it . " 

 " but tell I ; have he leave this neighbourhood ? I want to have see he . " 

 " yes , yes . he leave love and regret , and all that sort of thing for you . now let I get on with my story : he find Cynthia alone , propose to she , and be accept . " 

 " Cynthia ? Roger propose to she , and she accept he ? " repeat Mr. Gibson , slowly . 

 " yes , to be sure . why not ? you speak as if it be something so very surprising . " 

 " do I ? but I be surprised . he be a very fine young fellow , and I wish Cynthia joy ; but do you like it ? it will have to be a very long engagement . " 

 " perhaps , " say she , in a knowing manner . 

 " at any rate he will be away for two year , " say Mr. Gibson . 

 " a great deal may happen in two year , " she reply . 

 " yes ! he will have to run many risk , and go into many danger , and will come back no nearer to the power of maintain a wife than when he go out . " 

 " I do not   know that , " she reply , still in the arch manner of one possess superior knowledge . " a little bird do tell I that Osborne 's life be not so very secure ; and then what will Roger be ? heir to the estate . " 

 " who tell you that about Osborne ? " say he , face round upon she , and frightening she with his sudden sternness of voice and manner . it seem as if absolute fire come out of his long dark sombre eye . " who tell you , I say ? " 

 she make a faint rally back into her former playfulness . 

 " why ? can you deny it ? be it not the truth ? " 

 " I ask you again , Hyacinth , who tell you that Osborne Hamley 's life be in more danger than mine or your ? " 

 " oh , do not   speak in that frightening way . my life be not in danger , I be sure ; nor yours either , love , I hope . " 

 he give an impatient movement , and knock a wine - glass off the table . for the moment she feel grateful for the diversion , and busy herself in pick up the fragment : " bit of glass be so dangerous , " she say . but she be startle by a voice of command , such as she have never yet hear from her husband . 

 " never mind the glass . I ask you again , Hyacinth , who tell you anything about Osborne Hamley 's state of health ? " 

 " I be sure I wish no harm to he , and I daresay he be in very good health , as you say , " whisper she , at last . 

 " who tell ? " begin he again , stern than ever . 

 " well , if you will know , and will make such a fuss about it , " say she , drive to extremity , " it be you yourself you or Dr. Nicholls , I be sure I forget which . " 

 " I never speak to you on the subject , and I do not   believe Nicholls do . you would well tell I at once what you be allude to , for I be resolve I will have it out before we leave this room . " 

 " I wish I would never marry again , " she say , now fairly cry , and look round the room , as if in vain search for a mouse - hole in which to hide herself . then , as if the sight of the door into the store - room give her courage , she turn and face he . 

 " you should not talk your medical secret so loud then , if you do not   want people to hear they . I have to go into the store - room that day Dr. Nicholls be here ; cook want a jar of preserve , and stop I just as I be go out I be sure it be for no pleasure of mine , for I be sadly afraid of stickye my glove it be all that you might have a comfortable dinner . " 

 she look as if she be go to cry again , but he gravely motion she to go on , merely say , 

 " well ! you overheard our conversation , I suppose ? " 

 " not much , " she answer eagerly , almost relieve by be thus help out in her forced confession . " only a sentence or two . " 

 " what be they ? " he ask . 

 " why , you have just be say something , and Dr. Nicholls say , ' if he have get aneurism of the aorta his day be number . ' " 

 " well . anything more ? " 

 " yes ; you say , ' I hope to God I may be mistake ; but there be a pretty clear indication of symptom , in my opinion . ' " 

 " how do you know we be speak of Osborne Hamley ? " he ask ; perhaps in hope of throw she off the scent . but as soon as she perceive that he be descend to her level of subterfuge , she take courage , and say in quite a different tone to the cowed one which she have be use : 

 " oh ! I know . I hear his name mention by you both before I begin to listen . " 

 " then you own you do listen ? " 

 " yes , " say she , hesitate a little now . 

 " and pray how do you come to remember so exactly the name of the disease speak of ? " 

 " because I go now do not   be angry , I really can not   see any harm in what I do " 

 " then , do not   deprecate anger . you go " 

 " into the surgery , and look it out . why might not I ? " 

 Mr. Gibson do not answer do not look at she . his face be very pale , and both forehead and lip be contract . at length he rouse himself , sigh , and say , 

 " well ! I suppose as one brew one must bake . " 

 " I do not   understand what you mean , " pout she . 

 " perhaps not , " he reply . " I suppose that it be what you hear on that occasion that make you change your behaviour to Roger Hamley ? I have   notice how much more civil you be to he of late . " 

 " if you mean that I have ever get to like he as much as Osborne , you be very much mistaken ; no , not even though he have offer to Cynthia , and be to be my son - in - law . " 

 " let I know the whole affair . you overheard , I will own that it be Osborne about whom we be speak , though I shall have something to say about that presently and then , if I understand you rightly , you change your behaviour to Roger , and make he more welcome to this house than you have ever do before , regard he as proximate heir to the Hamley estate ? " 

 " I do not   know what you mean by ' proximate . ' " 

 " go into the surgery , and look into the dictionary , then , " say he , lose his temper for the first time during the conversation . 

 " I know , " say she through sob and tear , " that Roger have take a fancy to Cynthia ; any one might see that ; and as long as Roger be only a young son , with no profession , and nothing but his fellowship , I think it right to discourage he , as any one would who have a grain of common sense in they ; for a clumsier , more common , awkward , stupid fellow I never see to be call ' county , ' I mean . " 

 " take care ; you will have to eat your word presently when you come to fancy he will have Hamley some day . " 

 " no , I shall not , " say she , not perceive his exact drift . " you be vex now because it be not molly he be in love with ; and I call it very unjust and unfair to my poor fatherless girl . I be sure I have always try to further Molly 's interest as if she be my own daughter . " 

 Mr. Gibson be too indifferent to this accusation to take any notice of it . he return to what be of far more importance to he . 

 " the point I want to be clear about be this . do you or do you not alter your behaviour to Roger in consequence of what you overheard of my professional conversation with Dr. Nicholls ? have you not favour his suit to Cynthia since then , on the understanding gather from that conversation that he stand a good chance of inherit Hamley ? " 

 " I suppose I do , " say she , sulkily . " and if I do , I can not   see any harm in it , that I should be question as if I be in a witness - box . he be in love with Cynthia long before that conversation , and she like he so much . it be not for I to cross the path of true love . I do not   see how you would have a mother show her love for her child if she may not turn accidental circumstance to her advantage . perhaps Cynthia might have die if she have be cross in love ; her poor father be consumptive . " 

 " do not   you know that all professional conversation be confidential ? that it would be the most dishonourable thing possible for I to betray secret which I learn in the exercise of my profession ? " 

 " yes , of course , you . " 

 " well ! and be not you and I one in all these respect ? you can not do a dishonourable act without my be inculpate in the disgrace . if it would be a deep disgrace for I to betray a professional secret , what would it be for I to trade on that knowledge ? " 

 he be try hard to be patient ; but the offence be of that class which gall he insupportably . 

 " I do not   know what you mean by trading . trade in a daughter 's affection be the last thing I should do ; and I should have think you would be rather glad than otherwise to get Cynthia well married , and off your hand . " 

 Mr. Gibson get up , and walk about the room , his hand in his pocket . once or twice he begin to speak , but he stop impatiently short without go on . 

 " I do not   know what to say to you , " he say at length . " you either can not   or will not   see what I mean . I be glad enough to have Cynthia here . I have give she a true welcome , and I sincerely hope she will find this house as much a home as my own daughter do . but for the future I must look out of my door , and double - lock the approach if I be so foolish as to however , that be past and go ; and it remain with I to prevent its recurrence as far as I can for the future . now let we hear the present state of affair . " 

 " I do not   think I ought to tell you anything about it . it be a secret , just as much as your mystery be . " 

 " very well ; you have tell I enough for I to act upon , which I most certainly shall do . it be only the other day I promise the squire to let he know if I suspect anything any love affair , or entanglement , much less an engagement , between either of his son and our girl . " 

 " but this be not an engagement ; he would not let it be so ; if you would only listen to I , I could tell you all . only I do hope you will not   go and tell the squire and everybody . Cynthia do so beg that it might not be know . it be only my unfortunate frankness that have lead I into this scrape . I never could keep a secret from those whom I love . " 

 " I must tell the squire . I shall not mention it to any one else . and do you quite think it be consistent with your general frankness to have overhear what you do , and never to have mention it to I ? I could have tell you then that Dr. Nicholls ' opinion be decidedly oppose to mine , and that he believe that the disturbance about which I consult he on Osborne 's behalf be merely temporary . Dr. Nicholls would tell you that Osborne be as likely as any man to live and marry and beget child . " 

 if there be any skill use by Mr. Gibson so to word this speech as to conceal his own opinion , Mrs. Gibson be not sharp enough to find it out . she be dismayed , and Mr. Gibson enjoy her dismay ; it restore he to something like his usual frame of mind . 

 " let we review this misfortune , for I see you consider it as such , " say he . 

 " no , not quite a misfortune , " say she . " but , certainly , if I have know Dr. Nicholls ' opinion " she hesitate . 

 " you see the advantage of always consult I , " he continue gravely . " here be Cynthia engage " 

 " not engage , I tell you before . he would not allow it to be consider an engagement on her part . " 

 " well , entangle in a love - affair with a lad of three - and - twenty , with nothing beyond his fellowship and a chance of inherit an encumbered estate ; no profession even , abroad for two year , and I must go and tell his father all about it to - morrow . " 

 " oh dear ! pray say that , if he dislike it , he have only to express his opinion . " 

 " I do not   think you can act without Cynthia in the affair . and if I be not mistaken , Cynthia will have a pretty stout will of her own on the subject . " 

 " oh , I do not   think she care for he very much ; she be not one to be always fall in love , and she do not take thing very deeply to heart . but , of course , one would not do anything abruptly ; two year ' absence give one plenty of time to turn oneself in . " 

 " but a little while ago we be threaten with consumption and an early death if Cynthia 's affection be thwart . " 

 " oh , you dear creature , how you remember all my silly word ! it might be , you know . poor dear Mr. Kirkpatrick be consumptive , and Cynthia may have inherit it , and a great sorrow might bring out the latent seed . at time I be so fearful . but I daresay it be not probable , for I do not   think she take thing very deeply to heart . " 

 " then I be quite at liberty to give up the affair , act as Cynthia 's proxy , if the Squire disapprove of it ? " 

 Poor Mrs. Gibson be in a strait at this question . 

 " no ! " she say at last . " we can not give it up . I be sure Cynthia would not ; especially if she think other be act for she . and he really be very much in love . I wish he be in Osborne 's place . " 

 " shall I tell you what I should do ? " say Mr. Gibson , in real earnest . " however it may have be bring about , here be two young people in love with each other . one be as fine a young fellow as ever breathe ; the other a very pretty , lively , agreeable girl . the father of the young man must be tell , and it be most likely he will bluster and oppose ; for there be no doubt it be an imprudent affair as far as money go . but let they be steady and patient , and a well lot need await no young woman . I only wish it be Molly 's good fortune to meet with such another . " 

 " I will try for she ; I will indeed , " say Mrs. Gibson , relieve by his change of tone . 

 " no , do not . that be one thing I forbid . I will have no ' try ' for Molly . " 

 " well , do not   be angry , dear ! do you know I be quite afraid you be go to lose your temper at one time . " 

 " it would have be of no use ! " say he , gloomily , get up as if to close the sitting . his wife be only too glad to make her escape . the conjugal interview have not be satisfactory to either . Mr. Gibson have be compel to face and acknowledge the fact , that the wife he have choose have a very different standard of conduct from that which he have uphold all his life , and have hop to have see inculcate in his daughter . he be more irritated than he choose to show ; for there be so much of self - reproach in his irritation that he keep it to himself , brood over it , and allow a feeling of suspicious dissatisfaction with his wife to grow up in his mind , which extend itself by - and - by to the innocent Cynthia , and cause his manner to both mother and daughter to assume a certain curt severity , which take the latter at any rate with extreme surprise . but on the present occasion he follow his wife up to the drawing - room , and gravely congratulate the astonished Cynthia . 

 " have mamma tell you ? " say she , shoot an indignant glance at her mother . " it be hardly an engagement ; and we all pledge ourselves to keep it a secret , mamma among the rest ! " 

 " but , my dear Cynthia , you could not expect you could not have wish I to keep a secret from my husband ? " plead Mrs. Gibson . 

 " no , perhaps not . at any rate , sir , " say Cynthia , turn towards he with graceful frankness , " I be glad you should know it . you have always be a most kind friend to I , and I daresay I should have tell you myself , but I do not want it name ; if you please , it must still be a secret . in fact , it be hardly an engagement he "   she blush and sparkle a little at the euphuism , which imply that there be but one " he " present in her thought at the moment   " would not allow I to bind myself by any promise until his return ! " 

 Mr. Gibson look gravely at she , irresponsive to her win look , which at the moment remind he too forcibly of her mother 's way . then he take her hand , and say , seriously enough , " I hope you be worthy of he , Cynthia , for you have indeed draw a prize . I have never know a truer or warm heart than Roger 's ; and I have know he boy and man . " 

 molly feel as if she could have thank her father aloud for this testimony to the value of he who be go away . but Cynthia pout a little before she smile up in his face . 

 " you be not complimentary , be you , Mr. Gibson ? " say she . " he think I worthy , I suppose ; and if you have so high an opinion of he , you ought to respect his judgment of I . " if she hop to provoke a compliment she be disappoint , for Mr. Gibson let go her hand in an absent manner , and sate down in an easy chair by the fire , gaze at the wood ember as if hop to read the future in they . molly see Cynthia 's eye fill with tear , and follow she to the other end of the room , where she have go to seek some work material . 

 " Dear Cynthia , " be all she say ; but she press her hand while try to assist in the search . 

 " oh , Molly , I be so fond of your father ; what make he speak so to I to - night ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say molly ; " perhaps he be tired . " 

 they be recall from further conversation by Mr. Gibson . he have rouse himself from his reverie , and be now address Cynthia . 

 " I hope you will not consider it a breach of confidence , Cynthia , but I must tell the Squire of of what have take place to - day between you and his son . I have bind myself by a promise to he . he be afraid it be as well to tell you the truth he be afraid "   an emphasis on this last word   " of something of this kind between his son and one of you two girl . it be only the other day I assure he there be nothing of the kind on foot ; and I tell he then I would inform he at once if I see any symptom . " 

 Cynthia look extremely annoyed . 

 " it be the one thing I stipulate for secrecy . " 

 " but why ? " say Mr. Gibson . " I can understand your not wish to have it make public under the present circumstance . but the near friend on both side ! surely you can have no objection to that ? " 

 " yes , I have , " say Cynthia ; " I would not have have any one know if I could have help it . " 

 " I be almost certain Roger will tell his father . " 

 " no , he will not , " say Cynthia ; " I make he promise , and I think he be one to respect a promise " with a glance at her mother , who , feel herself in disgrace with both husband and child , be keep a judicious silence . 

 " well , at any rate , the story would come with so much well a grace from he that I shall give he the chance ; I will not   go over to the Hall till the end of the week ; he may have write and tell his father before then . " 

 Cynthia hold her tongue for a little while . then she say , with tearful pettishness , 

 " a man 's promise be to override a woman 's wish , then , be it ? " 

 " I do not   see any reason why it should not . " 

 " will you trust in my reason when I tell you it will cause I a great deal of distress if it get know ? " she say this in so plead a voice , that if Mr. Gibson have not be thoroughly displeased and annoy by his previous conversation with her mother , he must have yield to she . as it be , he say , coldly , " Telling Roger 's father be not make it public . I do not   like this exaggerated desire for such secrecy , Cynthia . it seem to I as if something more than be apparent be conceal behind it . " 

 " Come , Molly , " say Cynthia , suddenly ; " let we sing that duet I have   be teach you ; it be well than talk as we be do . " 

 it be a little lively french duet . molly sing it carelessly , with heaviness at her heart ; but Cynthia sing it with spirit and apparent merriment ; only she break down in hysteric at last , and fly upstairs to her own room . molly , heed nothing else neither her father nor Mrs. Gibson 's word follow she , and find the door of her bedroom lock , and for all reply to her entreaty to be allow to come in , she hear Cynthia sob and cry . 

 it be more than a week after the incident just record before Mr. Gibson find himself at liberty to call on the squire ; and he heartily hop that long before then , Roger 's letter might have arrive from Paris , tell his father the whole story . but he see at the first glance that the Squire have hear nothing unusual to disturb his equanimity . he be look well than he have do for month past ; the light of hope be in his eye , his face seem of a healthy ruddy colour , gain partly by his resumption of outdoor employment in the superintendence of the work , and partly because the happiness he have lately have through Roger 's mean , cause his blood to flow with regular vigour . he have feel Roger 's go away , it be true ; but whenever the sorrow of part with he press too heavily upon he , he fill his pipe , and smoke it out over a long , slow , deliberate , re - perusal of Lord Hollingford 's letter , every word of which he know by heart ; but expression in which he make a pretence to himself of doubt , that he might have an excuse for look at his son 's praise once again . the first greeting over , Mr. Gibson plunge into his subject . 

 " any news from Roger yet ? " 

 " oh , yes ; here be his letter , " say the Squire , produce his black leather case , in which Roger 's missive have be place along with the other very heterogeneous content . 

 Mr. Gibson read it , hardly see the word after he have by one rapid glance assure himself that there be no mention of Cynthia in it . 

 " Hum ! I see he do not   name one very important event that have befall he since he leave you , " say Mr. Gibson , seize on the first word that come . " I believe I be commit a breach of confidence on one side ; but I be go to keep the promise I make the last time I be here . I find there be something something of the kind you apprehend you understand between he and my step - daughter , Cynthia Kirkpatrick . he call at our house to wish we good - by , while wait for the London coach , find she alone , and speak to she . they do not   call it an engagement , but of course it be one . " 

 " give I back the letter , " say the Squire , in a constrained kind of voice . then he read it again , as if he have not previously master its content , and as if there might be some sentence or sentence he have overlook . 

 " no ! " he say at last , with a sigh . " he tell I nothing about it . lad may play at confidence with their father , but they keep a deal back . " the Squire appear more disappointed at not have hear of this straight from Roger than displeased at the fact itself , Mr. Gibson think . but he let he take his time . 

 " he be not the eld son , " continue the Squire , talk as it be to himself . " but it be not the match I should have plan for he . how come you , sir , " say he , fire round on Mr. Gibson , suddenly " to say when you be last here , that there be nothing between my son and either of your girl ? why , this must have be go on all the time ! " 

 " I be afraid it be . but I be as ignorant about it as the babe unborn . I only hear of it on the evening of the day of Roger 's departure . " 

 " and that be a week ago , sir . what be keep you quiet ever since ? " 

 " I think that Roger would tell you himself . " 

 " that show you have   no son . More than half their life be unknown to their father . why , Osborne there , we live together that be to say , we have our meal together , and we sleep under the same roof and yet well ! well ! life be as God have make it . you say it be not an engagement yet ? but I wonder what I be do ? hop for my lad 's disappointment in the folly he be set his heart on and just when he be be help I . be it a folly , or be it not ? I ask you , Gibson , for you must know this girl . she have not   much money , I suppose ? " 

 " about thirty pound a year , at my pleasure during her mother 's life . " 

 " Whew ! it be well he be not Osborne . they will have to wait . what family be she of ? none of them in trade , I reckon , from her be so poor ? " 

 " I believe her father be grandson of a certain Sir Gerald Kirkpatrick . her mother tell I it be an old baronetcy . I know nothing of such thing . " 

 " that be something . I do know something of such thing , as you be pleased to call they . I like honourable blood . " 

 Mr. Gibson could not help say , " but I be afraid that only one - eighth of Cynthia 's blood be honourable ; I know nothing far of her relation except the fact that her father be a curate . " 

 " Professional . that be a step above trade at any rate . how old be she ? " 

 " eighteen or nineteen . " 

 " Pretty ? " 

 " yes , I think so ; most people do ; but it be all a matter of taste . come , Squire , judge for yourself . ride over and take lunch with we any day you like . I may not be in ; but her mother will be there , and you can make acquaintance with your son 's future wife . " 

 this be go too fast , however ; presume too much on the quietness with which the squire have be question he . Mr. Hamley draw back within his shell , and speak in a surly manner as he reply , 

 " Roger 's ' future wife ! ' he will be wise by the time he come home . two year among the black folk will have put more sense in he . " 

 " possible , but not probable , I should say , " reply Mr. Gibson . " black folk be not remarkable for their power of reasoning , I believe , so that they have not   much chance of alter his opinion by argument , even if they understand each other 's language ; and certainly if he share my taste , their peculiarity of complexion will only make he appreciate white skin the more . " 

 " but you say it be no engagement , " growl the squire . " if he think well of it , you will not   keep he to it , will you ? " 

 " if he wish to break it off , I shall certainly advise Cynthia to be equally willing , that be all I can say . and I see no reason for discuss the affair far at present . I have   tell you how matter stand because I promise you I would , if I see anything of this kind go on . but in the present condition of thing , we can neither make nor mar ; we can only wait . " and he take up his hat to go . but the squire be discontent . 

 " do not   go , Gibson . do not   take offence at what I have   say , though I be sure I do not   know why you should . what be the girl like in herself ? " 

 " I do not   know what you mean , " say Mr. Gibson . but he do ; only he be vex , and do not choose to understand . 

 " be she well , be she like your Molly ? sweet - temper and sensible with her glove always mend , and neat about the foot , and ready to do anything one ask she just as if do it be the very thing she like well in the world ? " 

 Mr. Gibson 's face relax now , and he could understand all the Squire 's broken sentence and unexplained meaning . 

 " she be much pretty than Molly to begin with , and have very win way . she be always well - dress and smart - look , and I know she have not   much to spend on her clothe , and always do what she be ask to do , and be ready enough with her pretty , lively answer . I do not   think I ever see she out of temper ; but then I be not sure if she take thing keenly to heart , and a certain obtuseness of feeling go a great way towards a character for good temper , I have   observe . altogether I think Cynthia be one in a hundred . " 

 the Squire meditate a little . " your Molly be one in a thousand , to my mind . but then , you see , she come of no family at all , and I do not   suppose she will have a chance of much money . " this he say as if he be think aloud , and without reference to Mr. Gibson , but it nettle the latter , and he reply somewhat impatiently , 

 " well , but as there be no question of Molly in this business , I do not   see the use of bring her name in , and consider either her family or her fortune . " 

 " no , to be sure not , " say the Squire , rouse up . " my wit have go far afield , and I will own I be only think what a pity it be she would not   do for Osborne . but , of course , it be out of the question out of the question . " 

 " yes , " say Mr. Gibson , " and if you will excuse I , Squire , I really must go now , and then you will be at liberty to send your wit afield uninterrupted . " this time he be at the door before the squire call he back . he stand impatiently hit his top - boot with his riding - whip , wait for the interminable last word . 

 " I say , Gibson , we be old friend , and you be a fool if you take anything I say as an offence . Madam your wife and I do not   hit it off the only time I ever see she . I will not   say she be silly , but I think one of we be silly , and it be not   I . however , we will pass that over . suppose you bring she , and this girl Cynthia   which be as outlandish a christian name as I would wish to hear , and little molly out here to lunch some day , I be more at my ease in my own house , and I be more sure to be civil , too . we need say nothing about Roger , neither the lass nor I , and you keep your wife 's tongue quiet , if you can . it will only be like a compliment to you on your marriage , you know and no one must take it for anything more . mind , no allusion or mention of Roger , and this piece of folly . I shall see the girl then , and I can judge she for myself ; for , as you say , that will be the good plan . Osborne will be here too ; and he be always in his element talk to woman . I sometimes think he be half a woman himself , he spend so much money and be so unreasonable . " 

 the Squire be pleased with his own speech and his own thought , and smile a little as he finish speak . Mr. Gibson be both pleased and amuse ; and he smile too , anxious as he be to be go . the next Thursday be soon fix upon as the day on which Mr. Gibson be to bring his womenkind out to the Hall . he think that , on the whole , the interview have go off a good deal well than he have expect , and feel rather proud of the invitation of which he be the bearer . therefore Mrs. Gibson 's manner of receive it be an annoyance to he . she , meanwhile , have be consider herself as an injured woman ever since the evening of the day of Roger 's departure ; what business have any one have to speak as if the chance of Osborne 's life be prolong be infinitely small , if in fact the matter be uncertain ? she like Osborne extremely , much well than Roger ; and would gladly have scheme to secure he for Cynthia , if she have not shrink from the notion of her daughter 's become a widow . for if Mrs. Gibson have ever feel anything acutely it be the death of Mr. Kirkpatrick ; and , amiably callous as she be in most thing , she recoil from expose her daughter wilfully to the same kind of suffering which she herself have experience . but if she have only know Dr. Nicholls ' opinion she would never have favour Roger 's suit ; never . and then Mr. Gibson himself ; why be he so cold and reserve in his treatment of she since that night of explanation ? she have do nothing wrong ; yet she be treat as though she be in disgrace . and everything about the house be flat just now . she even miss the little excitement of Roger 's visit , and the watching of his attention to Cynthia . Cynthia too be silent enough ; and as for Molly , she be absolutely dull and out of spirit , a state of mind so annoying to Mrs. Gibson just now , that she vent some of her discontent upon the poor girl , from whom she fear neither complaint nor repartee . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXVI . 

 DOMESTIC diplomacy . 
 

 the evening of the day on which Mr. Gibson have be to see the Squire , the three woman be alone in the drawing - room , for Mr. Gibson have have a long round and be not as yet come in . they have have to wait dinner for he ; and for some time after his return there be nothing do or say but what relate to the necessary business of eat . Mr. Gibson be , perhaps , as well satisfied with his day 's work as any of the four ; for this visit to the squire have be weigh on his mind ever since he have hear of the state of thing between Roger and Cynthia . he do not like the have to go and tell of a love - affair so soon after he have declare his belief that no such thing exist ; it be a confession of fallibility which be distasteful to most man . if the squire have not be of so unsuspicious and simple a nature , he might have draw his own conclusion from the apparent concealment of fact , and feel doubtful of Mr. Gibson 's perfect honesty in the business ; but be what he be , there be no danger of such unjust misapprehension . still Mr. Gibson know the hot hasty temper he have to deal with , and have expect more violence of language than he really encounter ; and the last arrangement by which Cynthia , her mother , and molly who , as Mr. Gibson think to himself , and smile at the thought , be sure to be a peacemaker , and a sweetener of intercourse be to go to the Hall and make acquaintance with the Squire , appear like a great success to Mr. Gibson , for achieve which he take not a little credit to himself . altogether , he be more cheerful and bland than he have be for many day ; and when he come up into the drawing - room for a few minute after dinner , before go out again to see his town patient , he whistle a little under his breath , as he stand with his back to the fire , look at Cynthia , and think that he have not do her justice when describe she to the squire . now this soft , almost tuneless whistle , be to Mr. Gibson what purring be to a cat . he could no more have do it with an anxious case on his mind , or when he be annoy by human folly , or when he be hungry , than he could have fly through the air . molly know all this by instinct , and be happy without be aware of it , as soon as she hear the low whistle which be no music after all . but Mrs. Gibson do not like this trick of her husband 's ; it be not refine she think , not even " artistic ; " if she could have call it by this fine word it would have compensate she for the want of refinement . to - night it be particularly irritate to her nerve ; but since her conversation with Mr. Gibson about Cynthia 's engagement , she have not feel herself in a sufficiently good position to complain . 

 Mr. Gibson begin , " well , Cynthia ; I have   see the Squire to - day , and make a clean breast of it . " 

 Cynthia look up quickly , question with her eye ; Molly stop she net to listen ; no one speak . 

 " you be all to go there on Thursday to lunch ; he ask you all , and I promise for you . " 

 still no reply ; natural , perhaps , but very flat . 

 " you will be glad of that , Cynthia , shall not   you ? " ask Mr. Gibson . " it may be a little formidable , but I hope it will be the beginning of a good understanding between you . " 

 " thank you ! " say she , with an effort . " but but will not   it make it public ? I do so wish not to have it know , or talk about , not till he come back or close upon the marriage . " 

 " I do not   see how it should make it public , " say Mr. Gibson . " my wife go to lunch with my friend , and take her daughter with she there be nothing in that , be there ? " 

 " I be not sure that I shall go , " put in Mrs. Gibson . she do not know why she say it , for she fully intend to go all the time ; but have say it , she be bind to stick to it for a little while ; and , with such a husband as her , the hard necessity be sure to fall upon she of have to find a reason for her say . then it come , quick and sharp . 

 " why not ? " say he , turn round upon she . 

 " oh , because because I think he ought to have call on Cynthia first ; I have   that sort of sensitiveness I can not   bear to think of her be slight because she be poor . " 

 " nonsense ! " say Mr. Gibson . " I do assure you , no slight whatever be intend . he do not wish to speak about the engagement to any one not even to Osborne that be your wish , too , be not   it , Cynthia ? nor do he intend to mention it to any of you when you go there ; but , naturally enough , he want to make acquaintance with his future daughter - in - law . if he deviate so much from his usual course as to come call here " 

 " I be sure I do not   want he to come call here , " say Mrs. Gibson , interrupting . " he be not so very agreeable the only time he do come . but I be that sort of a character that I can not put up with any neglect of person I love , just because they be not smile upon by fortune . " she sigh a little ostentatiously as she end her sentence . 

 " well , then , you will not   go ! " say Mr. Gibson , provoke , but not wish to have a long discussion , especially as he feel his temper go . 

 " do you wish it , Cynthia ? " say Mrs. Gibson , anxious for an excuse to yield . 

 but her daughter be quite aware of this motive for the question , and reply quietly , " not particularly , mamma . I be quite willing to refuse the invitation . " 

 " it be already accept , " say Mr. Gibson , almost ready to vow that he would never again meddle in any affair in which woman be concern , which would effectually shut he out from all love - affair for the future . he have be touch by the Squire 's relenting , pleased with what he have think would give other pleasure , and this be the end of it ! 

 " oh , do go , Cynthia ! " say Molly , plead with her eye as well as her word . " do ; I be sure you will like the squire ; and it be such a pretty place , and he will be so much disappointed . " 

 " I should not like to give up my dignity , " say Cynthia , demurely . " and you hear what mamma say ! " 

 it be very malicious of she . she fully intend to go , and be equally sure that her mother be already plan her dress for the occasion in her own mind . Mr. Gibson , however , who , surgeon though he be , have never learn to anatomize a woman 's heart , take it all literally , and be excessively angry both with Cynthia and her mother ; so angry that he do not dare to trust himself to speak . he go quickly to the door , intend to leave the room ; but his wife 's voice arrest he ; she say , 

 " my dear , do you wish I to go ? if you do , I will put my own feeling on one side . " 

 " of course I do ! " he say , short and stern , and leave the room . 

 " then I will go ! " say she , in the voice of a victim those word be mean for he , but he hardly hear they . " and we will have a fly from the ' George , ' and get a livery - coat for Thomas , which I have   long be want , only dear Mr. Gibson do not like it , but on an occasion like this I be sure he will not   mind ; and Thomas shall go on the box , and " 

 " but , mamma , I have   my feeling too , " say Cynthia . 

 " Nonsense , child ! when all be so nicely arrange too . " 

 so they go on the day appoint . Mr. Gibson be aware of the change of plan , and that they be go after all ; but he be so much annoyed by the manner in which his wife have receive an invitation that appear to he so much kind than he have expect from his previous knowledge of the squire , and his wish on the subject of his son ' marriage , that Mrs. Gibson hear neither interest nor curiosity express by her husband as to the visit itself , or the reception they meet with . Cynthia 's indifference as to whether the invitation be accept or not have displease Mr. Gibson . he be not up to her way with her mother , and do not understand how much of this say indifference have be assume in order to countervent Mrs. Gibson 's affectation and false sentiment . but for all his annoyance on the subject , he be , in fact , very curious to know how the visit have go off , and take the first opportunity of be alone with Molly to question she about the lunch of the day before at Hamley Hall . 

 " and so you go to Hamley yesterday after all ? " 

 " yes ; I think you would have come . the squire seem quite to expect you . " 

 " I think of go there at first ; but I change my mind like other people . I do not   see why woman be to have a monopoly of changeableness . well ! how do it go off ? pleasantly , I suppose , for both your mother and Cynthia be in high spirit last night . " 

 " yes . the dear old squire be in his good dress and on his good behaviour , and be so prettily attentive to Cynthia , and she look so lovely , walk about with he , and listen to all his talk about the garden and farm . Mamma be tired , and stop in - door , so they get on very well , and see a great deal of each other . " 

 " and my little girl trot behind ? " 

 " oh , yes . you know I be almost at home , and besides of course " molly go very red , and leave the sentence unfinishe . 

 " do you think she be worthy of he ? " ask her father , just as if she have complete her speech . 

 " of Roger , papa ? oh , who be ? but she be very sweet , and very , very charming . " 

 " very charming if you will , but somehow I do not   quite understand she . why do she want all this secrecy ? why be she not more eager to go and pay her duty to Roger 's father ? she take it as coolly as if I have ask she to go to church ! " 

 " I do not   think she do take it coolly ; I believe I do not   quite understand she either , but I love she dearly all the same . " 

 " Umph ; I like to understand people thoroughly , but I know it be not necessary to woman . D'ye really think she be worthy of he ? " 

 " oh , papa " say Molly , and then she stop ; she want to speak in favour of Cynthia , but somehow she could form no reply that please she to this repeat inquiry . he do not seem much to care whether he get an answer or not , for he go on with his own thought , and the result be that he ask Molly if Cynthia have hear from Roger . 

 " yes ; on Wednesday morning . " 

 " do she show it to you ? but of course not . besides , I read the Squire 's letter , which tell all about he . " 

 now Cynthia , rather to Molly 's surprise , have tell she that she might read the letter if she like , and Molly have shrink from avail herself of the permission , for Roger 's sake . she think that he would probably have pour out his heart to the one sole person , and that it be not fair to listen , as it be , to his confidence . 

 " be osborne at home ? " ask Mr. Gibson . " the Squire say he do not think he would have come back ; but the young fellow be so uncertain " 

 " no , he be still from home . " then molly blush all over crimson , for it suddenly strike she that Osborne be probably with his wife that mysterious wife , of whose existence she be cognizant , but of whom she know so little , and of whom her father know nothing . Mr. Gibson notice the blush with anxiety . what do it mean ? it be troublesome enough to find that one of the Squire 's precious son have fall in love within the prohibit rank ; and what would not have to be say and do if anything fresh be to come out between Osborne and Molly ? he speak out at once to relieve himself of this new apprehension . 

 " molly , I be take by surprise by this affair between Cynthia and Roger Hamley if there be anything more on the tapis let I know at once , honestly and openly . I know it be an awkward question for you to reply to ; but I would not   ask it unless I have good reason . " he take her hand as he speak . she look up at he with clear , truthful eye , which fill with tear as she speak . she do not know why the tear come ; perhaps it be because she be not so strong as formerly . 

 " if you mean that you be afraid that Osborne think of I as Roger think of Cynthia , papa , you be quite mistaken . Osborne and I be friend and nothing more , and never can be anything more . that be all I can tell you . " 

 " it be quite enough , little one . it be a great relief . I do not   want to have my Molly carry off by any young man just yet ; I should miss she sadly . " he could not help say this in the fulness of his heart just then , but he be surprised at the effect these few tender word produce . molly throw her arm round his neck , and begin to sob bitterly , her head lie on his shoulder . " there , there ! " say he , pat she on the back , and lead she to the sofa , " that will do . I get quite enough of tear in the day , shed for real cause , not to want they at home , where , I hope , they be shed for no cause at all . there be nothing really the matter , be there , my dear ? " he continue , hold she a little away from he that he might look in her face . she smile at he through her tear ; and he do not see the look of sadness which return to her face after he have leave she . 

 " nothing , dear , dear papa nothing now . it be such a comfort to have you all to myself it make I happy . " 

 Mr. Gibson know all imply in these word , and feel that there be no effectual help for the state of thing which have arise from his own act . it be well for they both that they should not speak out more fully . so he kiss she , and say , 

 " that be right , dear ! I can leave you in comfort now , and indeed I have   stay too long already gossip . go out and have a walk take Cynthia with you , if you like . I must be off . good - by , little one . " 

 his commonplace word act like an astringent on Molly 's relaxed feeling . he intend that they should do so ; it be the true kindness to she ; but he walk away from she with a sharp pang at his heart , which he stun into numbness as soon as he could by throw himself violently into the affair and care of other . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXVII . 

 a FLUKE , and what come of it . 
 

 illustrationhe honour and glory of have a lover of her own be soon to fall to Molly 's share ; though , to be sure , it be a little deduction from the honour that the man who come with the full intention of propose to she , end by make Cynthia an offer . it be Mr. Coxe , who come back to Hollingford to follow out the purpose he have announce to Mr. Gibson nearly two year before , of induce Molly to become his wife as soon as he should have succeed to his uncle 's estate . he be now a rich , though still a red - haired , young man . he come to the George Inn , bring his horse and his groom ; not that he be go to ride much , but that he think such outward sign of his rich might help on his suit ; and he be so justly modest in his estimation of himself that he believe that he need all extraneous aid . he pique himself on his constancy ; and indeed , consider that he have be so much restrain by his duty , his affection , and his expectation to his crab old uncle , that he have not be able to go much into society , and very rarely indeed into the company of young lady , such fidelity to Molly be very meritorious , at least in his own eye . Mr. Gibson too be touch by it , and make it a point of honour to give he a fair field , all the time sincerely hop that molly would not be such a goose as to lend a willing ear to a youth who could never remember the difference between apophysis and epiphysis . he think it as well not to tell his wife more of Mr. Coxe 's antecedent than that he have be a former pupil ; who have relinquish   " all that he know of , " understand   the medical profession because an old uncle have leave he enough of money to be idle . Mrs. Gibson , who feel that she have somehow lose her place in her husband 's favour , take it into her head that she could reinstate herself if she be successful in find a good match for his daughter Molly . she know that her husband have forbid she to try for this end , as distinctly as word could express a meaning ; but her own word so seldom express her meaning , or if they do , she hold to her opinion so loosely , that she have no idea but that it be the same with other people . accordingly she give Mr. Coxe a very sweet and gracious welcome . 

 " it be such a pleasure to I to make acquaintance with the former pupil of my husband . he have speak to I so often of you that I quite feel as if you be one of the family , as indeed I be sure that Mr. Gibson consider you . " 

 Mr. Coxe feel much flatter , and take the word as a happy omen for his love - affair . " be Miss Gibson in ? " ask he , blush violently . " I know she formerly that be to say , I live in the same house with she , for more than two year , and it would be a great pleasure to to " 

 " certainly , I be sure she will be so glad to see you . I send she and Cynthia you do not   know my daughter Cynthia , I think , Mr. Coxe ? she and Molly be such great friend out for a brisk walk this frosty day , but I think they will soon come back . " she go on say agreeable nothing to the young man , who receive her attention with a certain complacency , but be all the time much more engage in listen to the well - remember click at the front door , the shut it to again with household care , and the sound of the familiar bound footstep on the stair . at last they come . Cynthia enter first , bright and blooming , fresh colour in her cheek and lip , fresh brilliance in her eye . she look startled at the sight of a stranger , and for an instant she stop short at the door , as if take by surprise . then in come molly softly behind she , smile , happy , dimpled ; but not such a glowing beauty as Cynthia . 

 " oh , Mr. Coxe , be it you ? " say she , go up to he with an outstretched hand , and greet he with simple friendliness . 

 " yes ; it seem such a long time since I see you . you be so much grow so much well , I suppose I must not   say what , " he reply , speak hurriedly , and hold her hand all the time , rather to her discomfiture . then Mrs. Gibson introduce her daughter , and the two girl speak of the enjoyment of their walk . Mr. Coxe mar his cause in that very first interview , if indeed he ever could have have any chance , by his precipitancy in show his feeling , and Mrs. Gibson help he to mar it by try to assist he . molly lose she open friendliness of manner , and begin to shrink away from he in a way which he think be a very ungrateful return for all his faithfulness to she these two year past ; and after all she be not the wonderful beauty his fancy or his love have paint she . that Miss Kirkpatrick be far more beautiful and much easy of access . for Cynthia put on all her pretty air her look of intent interest in what any one be say to she , let the subject be what it would , as if it be the thing she care most about in the whole world ; her unspoken deference ; in short , all the unconscious way she possess by instinct of tickle the vanity of man . so while molly quietly repel he , Cynthia draw he to she by her soft attractive way ; and his constancy fall before her charm . he be thankful that he have not go too far with Molly , and grateful to Mr. Gibson for have prohibit all declaration two year ago ; for Cynthia , and Cynthia alone , could make he happy . after a fortnight 's time , during which he have entirely veer round in his allegiance , he think it desirable to speak to Mr. Gibson . he do so with a certain sense of exultation in his own correct behaviour in the affair , but at the same time feel rather ashamed of the confession of his own changeableness which be naturally involve . now it have so happen that Mr. Gibson have be unusually little at home during the fortnight that Mr. Coxe have ostensibly lodge at the " George , " but in reality have spend the great part of his time at Mr. Gibson 's house so that he have see very little of his former pupil , and on the whole he have think he improve , especially after Molly 's manner have make her father pretty sure that Mr. Coxe stand no chance in that quarter . but Mr. Gibson be quite ignorant of the attraction which Cynthia have have for the young man . if he have perceive it , he would have nip it in the bud pretty quickly , for he have no notion of any girl , even though only partially engage to one man , receive offer from other , if a little plain speaking could prevent it . Mr. Coxe have ask for a private interview ; they be sit in the old surgery , now call the consulting - room , but still retain so much of its former self as to be the last place in which Mr. Coxe could feel himself at ease . he be red up to the very root of his red hair , and keep turn his glossy new hat round and round in his finger , unable to find out the proper way of begin his sentence , so at length he plunge in , grammar or no grammar . 

 " Mr. Gibson , I daresay you will be surprised , I be sure I be at at what I want to say ; but I think it be the part of an honourable man , as you say yourself , sir , a year or two ago , to to speak to the father first , and as you , sir , stand in the place of a father to Miss Kirkpatrick , I should like to express my feeling , my hope , or perhaps I should say wish , in short " 

 " Miss Kirkpatrick ? " say Mr. Gibson , a good deal surprised . 

 " yes , sir ! " continue Mr. Coxe , rush on now he have get so far . " I know it may appear inconstant and changeable , but I do assure you , I come here with a heart as faithful to your daughter as ever beat in a man 's bosom . I most fully intend to offer myself and all that I have to her acceptance before I leave ; but really , sir , if you have see her manner to I every time I endeavour to press my suit a little it be more than coy , it be absolutely repellent , there could be no mistaking it , while Miss Kirkpatrick " he look modestly down , and smooth the nap of his hat , smile a little while he do so . 

 " while Miss Kirkpatrick ? " repeat Mr. Gibson , in such a stern voice , that Mr. Coxe , land esquire as he be now , feel as much discomfited as he use to do when he be an apprentice , and Mr. Gibson have speak to he in a similar manner . 

 " I be only go to say , sir , that so far as one can judge from manner , and willingness to listen , and apparent pleasure in my visit altogether , I think I may venture to hope that Miss Kirkpatrick be not quite indifferent to I , and I would wait , you have no objection , have you , sir , to my speaking to she , I mean ? " say Mr. Coxe , a little anxious at the expression on Mr. Gibson 's face . " I do assure you I have not   a chance with Miss Gibson , " he continue , not know what to say , and fancy that his inconstancy be rankle in Mr. Gibson 's mind . 

 " no ! I do not   suppose you have . do not   go and fancy it be that which be annoy I . you be mistaken about Miss Kirkpatrick , however . I do not   believe she could ever have mean to give you encouragement ! " 

 Mr. Coxe 's face grow perceptibly pale . his feeling , if evanescent , be evidently strong . 

 " I think , sir , if you could have see she I do not   consider myself vain , and manner be so difficult to describe . at any rate , you can have no objection to my take my chance , and speak to she . " 

 " of course , if you will not   be convince otherwise , I can have no objection . but if you will take my advice , you will spare yourself the pain of a refusal . I may , perhaps , be trench on confidence , but I think I ought to tell you that her affection be otherwise engage . " 

 " it can not be ! " say Mr. Coxe . " Mr. Gibson , there must be some mistake . I have go as far as I dare in express my feeling , and her manner have be most gracious . I do not   think she could have misunderstood my meaning . perhaps she have change her mind ? it be possible that , after consideration , she have learn to prefer another , be it not ? " 

 " by ' another , ' you mean yourself , I suppose . I can believe in such inconstancy "   he could not help , in his own mind , give a slight sneer at the instance before he , " but I should be very sorry to think that Miss Kirkpatrick could be guilty of it . " 

 " but she may it be a chance . will you allow I to see she ? " 

 " certainly , my poor fellow " for , intermingle with a little contempt , be a good deal of respect for the simplicity , the unworldliness , the strength of feeling , even though the feeling be evanescent " I will send she to you directly . " 

 " thank you , sir . God bless you for a kind friend ! " 

 Mr. Gibson go upstairs to the drawing - room , where he be pretty sure he should find Cynthia . there she be , as bright and careless as usual , make up a bonnet for her mother , and chatter to Molly as she work . 

 " Cynthia , you will oblige I by go down into my consulting - room at once . Mr. Coxe want to speak to you ! " 

 " Mr. Coxe ? " say Cynthia . " what can he want with I ? " 

 evidently , she answer her own question as soon as it be ask , for she colour , and avoid meet Mr. Gibson 's severe , uncompromise look . as soon as she have leave the room , Mr. Gibson sit down , and take up a new Edinburgh lie on the table , as an excuse for conversation . be there anything in the article that make he say , after a minute or two , to Molly , who sit silent and wonder " molly , you must never trifle with the love of an honest man . you do not   know what pain you may give . " 

 presently Cynthia come back into the drawing - room , look very much confused . most likely she would not have return if she have know that Mr. Gibson be still there ; but it be such an unheard - of thing for he to be sit in that room in the middle of the day , read or make pretence to read , that she have never think of his remain . he look up at she the moment she come in , so there be nothing for it but put a bold face on it , and go back to her work . 

 " be Mr. Coxe still downstairs ? " ask Mr. Gibson . 

 " no . he be go . he ask I to give you both his kind regard . I believe he be leave this afternoon . " Cynthia try to make her manner as commonplace as possible ; but she do not look up , and her voice tremble a little . 

 Mr. Gibson go on look at his book for a few minute ; but Cynthia feel that more be come , and only wish it would come quickly , for the severe silence be very hard to bear . it come at last . 

 " I trust this will never occur again , Cynthia ! " say he , in grave displeasure . " I should not feel satisfied with the conduct of any girl , however free , who could receive marked attention from a young man with complacency , and so lead he on to make an offer which she never mean to accept . but what must I think of a young woman in your position , engage yet ' accept most graciously , ' for that be the way Coxe express it the overture of another man ? do you consider what unnecessary pain you have give he by your thoughtless behaviour ? I call it thoughtless , but it be the mild epithet I can apply to it . I beg that such a thing may not occur again , or I shall be oblige to characterize it more severely . " 

  " I trust this will never occur again , Cynthia ! " 
 " I trust this will never occur again , Cynthia ! " 
 click to ENLARGE 
 Molly could not imagine what " more severely " could be , for her father 's manner appear to she almost cruel in its sternness . Cynthia colour up extremely , then go pale , and at length raise her beautiful appeal eye full of tear to Mr. Gibson . he be touch by that look , but he resolve immediately not to be mollify by any of her physical charm of expression , but to keep to his sober judgment of her conduct . 

 " please , Mr. Gibson , hear my side of the story before you speak so hardly to I . I do not mean to to flirt . I merely mean to make myself agreeable , I can not   help do that , and that goose of a Mr. Coxe seem to have fancy I mean to give he encouragement . " 

 " do you mean that you be not aware that he be fall in love with you ? " Mr. Gibson be melt into a readiness to be convince by that sweet voice and plead face . 

 " well , I suppose I must speak truly . " Cynthia blush and smile ever so little but it be a smile , and it harden Mr. Gibson 's heart again . " I do think once or twice that he be become a little more complimentary than the occasion require ; but I hate throw cold water on people , and I never think he could take it into his silly head to fancy himself seriously in love , and to make such a fuss at the last , after only a fortnight 's acquaintance . " 

 " you seem to have be pretty well aware of his silliness   I should rather call it simplicity . do not   you think you should have remember that it might lead he to exaggerate what you be do and say into encouragement ? " 

 " perhaps . I daresay I be all wrong , and that he be all right , " say Cynthia , pique and pouting . " we use to say in France , that ' les absens ont toujour tort , ' but really it seem as if here " she stop . she be unwilling to be impertinent to a man whom she respect and like . she take up another point of her defence , and rather make matter bad . " besides , Roger would not allow I to consider myself as finally engage to he ; I would willingly have do it , but he would not let I . " 

 " nonsense . do not   let we go on talk about it , Cynthia ! I have   say all that I mean to say . I believe that you be only thoughtless , as I tell you before . but do not   let it happen again . " he leave the room at once , to put a stop to the conversation , the continuance of which would serve no useful purpose , and perhaps end by irritate he . 

 " not guilty , but we recommend the prisoner not to do it again . it be pretty much that , be not   it , molly ? " say Cynthia , let her tear downfall , even while she smile . " I do believe your father might make a good woman of I yet , if he would only take the pain , and be not   quite so severe . and to think of that stupid little fellow make all this mischief ! he pretend to take it to heart , as if he have love I for year instead of only for day . I daresay only for hour if the truth be tell . " 

 " I be afraid he be become very fond of you , " say molly ; " at least it strike I once or twice ; but I know he could not stay long , and I think it would only make you uncomfortable if I say anything about it . but now I wish I have ! " 

 " it would not   have make a bit of difference , " reply Cynthia . " I know he like I , and I like to be like ; it be bear in I to try to make every one I come near fond of I ; but then they should not   carry it too far , for it become very troublesome if they do . I shall hate red - haired people for the rest of my life . to think of such a man as that be the cause of your father 's displeasure with I ! " 

 molly have a question at her tongue 's end that she long to put ; she know it be indiscreet , but at last out it come almost against her will : 

 " shall you tell Roger about it ? " 

 Cynthia reply , " I have   not think about it no ! I do not   think I shall there be no need . perhaps , if we be ever married " 

 " ever marry ! " say Molly , under her breath . but Cynthia take no notice of the exclamation until she have finish the sentence which it interrupt . 

 " and I can see his face and know his mood , I may tell it he then ; but not in writing , and when he be absent ; it might annoy he . " 

 " I be afraid it would make he uncomfortable , " say Molly , simply . " and yet it must be so pleasant to be able to tell he everything all your difficulty and trouble . " 

 " yes ; only I do not   worry he with these thing ; it be well to write he merry letter , and cheer he up among the black folk . you repeat ' ever married , ' a little while ago ; do you know , Molly , I do not   think I ever shall be married to he ? I do not   know why , but I have a strong presentiment , so it be just as well not to tell he all my secret , for it would be awkward for he to know they if it never come off ! " 

 molly drop her work , and sit silent , look into the future ; at length she say , " I think it would break his heart , Cynthia ! " 

 " nonsense . why , I be sure that Mr. Coxe come here with the intention of fall in love with you you need not   blush so violently . I be sure you see it as plainly as I do , only you make yourself disagreeable , and I take pity on he , and console his wound vanity . " 

 " can you do you dare to compare Roger Hamley to Mr. Coxe ? " ask Molly , indignantly . 

 " no , no , I do not ! " say Cynthia in a moment . " they be as different as man can be . do not   be so dreadfully serious over everything , molly . you look as oppress with sad reproach , as if I have be pass on to you the scolding your father give I . " 

 " because I do not   think you value Roger as you ought , Cynthia ! " say molly stoutly , for it require a good deal of courage to force herself to say this , although she could not tell why she shrink so from speak . 

 " yes , I do ! it be not in my nature to go into ecstasy , and I do not   suppose I shall ever be what people call ' in love . ' but I be glad he love I , and I like to make he happy , and I think he the good and most agreeable man I know , always except your father when he be not   angry with I . what can I say more , molly ? would you like I to say I think he handsome ? " 

 " I know most people think he plain , but " 

 " well , I be of the opinion of most people then , and small blame to they . but I like his face oh , ten thousand time well than Mr. Preston 's handsomeness ! " for the first time during the conversation Cynthia seem thoroughly in earnest . why Mr. Preston be introduce neither she nor molly know ; it come up and out by a sudden impulse ; but a fierce look come into the eye , and the soft lip contract themselves as Cynthia name his name . molly have notice this look before , always at the mention of this one person . 

 " Cynthia , what make you dislike Mr. Preston so much ? " 

 " do not   you ? why do you ask I ? and yet , Molly , " say she , suddenly relax into depression , not merely in tone and look , but in the droop of her limb " molly , what should you think of I if I marry he after all ? " 

 " married he ! have he ever ask you ? " 

 but Cynthia , instead of reply to this question , go on , utter her own thought , " more unlikely thing have happen . have you never hear of strong will mesmerize weak one into submission ? one of the girl at Madame Lefevre 's go out as a governess to a russian family , who live near Moscow . I sometimes think I will write to she to find I a situation in Russia , just to get out of the daily chance of see that man ! " 

 " but sometimes you seem quite intimate with he , and talk to he " 

 " how can I help it ? " say Cynthia impatiently . then recover herself she add : " we know he so well at Ashcombe , and he be not a man to be easily throw off , I can tell you . I must be civil to he ; it be not from like , and he know it be not , for I have   tell he so . however , we will not   talk about he . I do not   know how we come to do it , I be sure : the mere fact of his existence , and of his be within half a mile of we , be bad enough . oh ! I wish Roger be at home , and rich , and could marry I at once , and carry I away from that man ! if I have think of it , I really believe I would have take poor red - haired Mr. Coxe . " 

 " I do not   understand it at all , " say Molly . " I dislike Mr. Preston , but I should never think of take such violent step as you speak of , to get away from the neighbourhood in which he live . " 

 " no , because you be a reasonable little darling , " say Cynthia , resume her usual manner , and come up to Molly , and kiss she . " at least you will acknowledge I be a good hater ! " 

 " yes . but still I do not   understand it . " 

 " oh , never mind ! there be old complication with our affair at Ashcombe . money matter be at the root of it all . horrid poverty do let we talk of something else ! or , well still , let I go and finish my letter to Roger , or I shall be too late for the african mail ! " 

 " be not   it go ? oh , I ought to have remind you ! it will be too late . do you not see the notice at the post - office that letter ought to be in London on the morning of the 10th instead of the evening . oh , I be so sorry ! " 

 " so be I , but it can not   be help . it be to be hop it will be the great treat when he do get it . I have   a far great weight on my heart , because your father seem so displeased with I . I be fond of he , and now he be make I quite a coward . you see , molly , " continue she , a little piteously , " I have   never live with people with such a high standard of conduct before ; and I do not   quite know how to behave . " 

 " you must learn , " say molly tenderly . " you will find Roger quite as strict in his notion of right and wrong . " 

 " ah , but he be in love with I ! " say Cynthia , with a pretty consciousness of her power . molly turn away her head , and be silent ; it be of no use combat the truth , and she try rather not to feel it not to feel , poor girl , that she too have a great weight on her heart , into the cause of which she shrink from examine . that whole winter long she have feel as if her sun be all shroud over with grey mist , and could no long shine brightly for she . she waken up in the morning with a dull sense of something be wrong ; the world be out of joint , and , if she be bear to set it right , she do not know how to do it . blind herself as she would , she could not help perceive that her father be not satisfied with the wife he have choose . for a long time molly have be surprised at his apparent contentment ; sometimes she have be unselfish enough to be glad that he be satisfied ; but still more frequently nature would have its way , and she be almost irritated at what she consider his blindness . something , however , have change he now : something that have arise at the time of Cynthia 's engagement . he have become nervously sensitive to his wife 's failing , and his whole manner have grow dry and sarcastic , not merely to she , but sometimes to Cynthia , and even but this very rarely , to Molly herself . he be not a man to go into passion , or ebullition of feeling : they would have relieve he , even while degrade he in his own eye ; but he become hard , and occasionally bitter in his speech and way . molly now learn to long after the vanish blindness in which her father have pass the first year of his marriage ; yet there be no outrageous infraction of domestic peace . some people might say that Mr. Gibson " accept the inevitable ; " he tell himself in more homely phrase " that it be no use cry over spilt milk : " and he , from principle , avoid all actual dissension with his wife , prefer to cut short a discussion by a sarcasm , or by leave the room . moreover , Mrs. Gibson have a very tolerable temper of her own , and her cat - like nature purr and delight in smooth way , and pleasant quietness . she have no great facility for understand sarcasm ; it be true it disturb she , but as she be not quick at decipher any depth of meaning , and feel it unpleasant to think about it , she forget it as soon as possible . yet she see she be often in some kind of disfavour with her husband , and it make she uneasy . she resemble Cynthia in this : she like to be like ; and she want to regain the esteem which she do not perceive she have lose for ever . molly sometimes take her stepmother 's part in secret ; she feel as if she herself could never have bear her father 's hard speech so patiently ; they would have cut she to the heart , and she must either have demand an explanation , and probe the sore to the bottom , or sit down despairing and miserable . instead of which Mrs. Gibson , after her husband have leave the room , on these occasion would say in a manner more bewildered than hurt 

 " I think dear papa seem a little put out to - day ; we must see that he have a dinner that he like when he come home . I have often perceive that everything depend on make a man comfortable in his own house . " 

 and thus she go on , grope about to find the mean of reinstate herself in his good grace really try , accord to her light , till Molly be often compel to pity she in spite of herself , and although she see that her stepmother be the cause of her father 's increase astringency of disposition . for , indeed , he have get into that kind of exaggerated susceptibility with regard to his wife 's fault , which may be well typify by the state of bodily irritation that be produce by the constant recurrence of any particular noise : those who be bring within hearing of it , be apt to be always on the watch for the repetition , if they be once make to notice it , and be in an irritable state of nerve . 

 so that poor Molly have not pass a cheerful winter , independently of any private sorrow that she might have in her own heart . she do not look well , either : she be gradually fall into low health , rather than bad health . her heart beat more feebly and slow ; the vivifying stimulant of hope even unacknowledged hope be go out of her life . it seem as if there be not , and never could be in this world , any help for the dumb discordancy between her father and his wife . day after day , month after month , year after year , would molly have to sympathize with her father , and pity her stepmother , feel acutely for both , and certainly more than Mrs. Gibson feel for herself . molly could not imagine how she have at one time wish for her father 's eye to be open , and how she could ever have fancy that if they be , he would be able to change thing in Mrs. Gibson 's character . it be all hopeless , and the only attempt at a remedy be to think about it as little as possible . then Cynthia 's way and manner about Roger give molly a great deal of uneasiness . she do not believe that Cynthia care enough for he ; at any rate , not with the sort of love that she herself would have bestow , if she have be so happy no , that be not it if she have be in Cynthia 's place . she feel as if she should have go to he both hand hold out , full and brim over with tenderness , and be grateful for every word of precious confidence bestow on she . yet Cynthia receive his letter with a kind of carelessness , and read they with a strange indifference , while molly sit at her foot , so to speak , look up with eye as wistful as a dog 's wait for crumb , and such chance beneficence . 

 she try to be patient on these occasion , but at last she must ask " where be he , Cynthia ? what do he say ? " by this time Cynthia have put down the letter on the table by she , smile a little from time to time , as she remember the love compliment it contain . 

 " where ? oh , I do not   look exactly somewhere in Abyssinia Huon . I can not   read the word , and it do not   much signify , for it would give I no idea . " 

 " be he well ? " ask greedy Molly . 

 " yes , now . he have have a slight touch of fever , he say ; but it be all over now , and he hop he be get acclimatize . " 

 " of fever ! and who take care of he ? he would want nursing , and so far from home . oh , Cynthia ! " 

 " oh , I do not   fancy he have any nursing , poor fellow ! one do not   expect nursing , and hospital , and doctor in Abyssinia ; but he have plenty of quinine with he , and I suppose that be the good specific . at any rate he say he be quite well now ! " 

 molly sit silent for a minute or two . 

 " what be the date of the letter , Cynthia ? " 

 " I do not   look . December the December the 10th . " 

 " that be nearly two month ago , " say Molly . 

 " yes ; but I determine I would not   worry myself with useless anxiety , when he go away . if anything do go wrong , you know , " say Cynthia , use a euphuism for death , as most people do   it be an ugly word to speak plain out in the midst of life , " it would be all over before I even hear of his illness , and I could be of no use to he could I , molly ? " 

 " no . I daresay it be all very true ; only I should think the squire could not take it so easily . " 

 " I always write he a little note when I hear from Roger , but I do not   think I will name this touch of fever shall I , molly ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Molly . " People say one ought , but I almost wish I have not   hear it . please , do he say anything else that I may hear ? " 

 " oh , lover ' letter be so silly , and I think this be silly than usual , " say Cynthia , look over her letter again . " here be a piece you may read , from that line to that , " indicate two place . " I have not   read it myself for it look dullish all about Aristotle and Pliny and I want to get this bonnet - cap make up before we go out to pay our call . " 

 molly take the letter , the thought cross her mind that he have touch it , have have his hand upon it , in those far distant desert land , where he might be lose to sight and to any human knowledge of his fate ; even now her pretty brown finger almost caress the flimsy paper with their delicacy of touch as she read . she see reference make to book , which , with a little trouble , would be accessible to she here in Hollingford . perhaps the detail and the reference would make the letter dull and dry to some people , but not to she , thank to his former teaching and the interest he have excite in she for his pursuit . but , as he say in apology , what have he to write about in that savage land , but his love , and his research , and travel ? there be no society , no gaiety , no new book to write about , no gossip in Abyssinian wild . 

 Molly be not in strong health , and perhaps this make she a little fanciful ; but certain it be that her thought by day and her dream by night be haunt by the idea of Roger lie ill and untended in those savage land . her constant prayer , " o my Lord ! give she the live child , and in no wise slay it , " come from a heart as true as that of the real mother in King Solomon 's judgment . " let he live , let he live , even though I may never set eye upon he again . have pity upon his father ! grant that he may come home safe , and live happily with she whom he love so tenderly so tenderly , o God . " and then she would burst into tear , and drop asleep at last , sob . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 

 MR . KIRKPATRICK , Q.C. 
 

 Cynthia be always the same with molly : kind , sweet - temper , ready to help , profess a great deal of love for she , and probably feel as much as she do for any one in the world . but Molly have reach to this superficial depth of affection and intimacy in the first few week of Cynthia 's residence in her father 's house ; and if she have be of a nature prone to analyse the character of one whom she love dearly , she might have perceive that , with all Cynthia 's apparent frankness , there be certain limit beyond which her confidence do not go ; where her reserve begin , and her real self be shroud in mystery . for instance , her relation with Mr. Preston be often very puzzling to Molly . she be sure that there have be a much great intimacy between they formerly at Ashcombe , and that the remembrance of this be often very galling and irritate to Cynthia , who be as evidently desirous of forget it as he be anxious to make she remember it . but why this intimacy have cease , why Cynthia dislike he so extremely now , and many other unexplained circumstance connect with these two fact , be Cynthia 's secret ; and she effectually baffle all Molly 's innocent attempt during the first glow of her friendship for Cynthia , to learn the girlish antecedent of her companion 's life . every now and then Molly come to a dead wall , beyond which she could not pass at least with the delicate instrument which be all she choose to use . perhaps Cynthia might have tell all there be to tell to a more forcible curiosity , which know how to improve every slip of the tongue and every fit of temper to its own gratification . but Molly 's be the interest of affection , not the coarser desire of know everything for a little excitement ; and as soon as she see that Cynthia do not wish to tell she anything about that period of her life , Molly leave off refer to it . but if Cynthia have preserve a sweet tranquillity of manner and an unvarying kindness for Molly during the winter of which there be question , at present she be the only person to whom the beauty 's way be unchanged . Mr. Gibson 's influence have be good for she as long as she see that he like she ; she have try to keep as high a place in his good opinion as she could , and have curb many a little sarcasm against her mother , and many a twisting of the absolute truth when he be by . now there be a constant uneasiness about she which make she more cowardly than before ; and even her partisan , Molly , could not help be aware of the distinct equivocation she occasionally use when anything in Mr. Gibson 's word or behaviour press she too hard . her repartee to her mother be less frequent than they have be , but there be often the unusual phenomenon of pettishness in her behaviour to she . these change in humour and disposition , here describe all at once , be in themselves a series of delicate alteration of relative conduct spread over many month many winter month of long evening and bad weather , which bring out discord of character , as a dash of cold water bring out the fade colour of an old fresco . 

 during much of this time Mr. Preston have be at Ashcombe ; for Lord Cumnor have not be able to find an agent whom he like to replace Mr. Preston ; and while the inferior situation remain vacant Mr. Preston have undertake to do the duty of both . Mrs. Goodenough have have a serious illness ; and the little society at Hollingford do not care to meet while one of their habitual set be scarcely out of danger . so there have be very little visit ; and though Miss Browning say that the absence of the temptation of society be very agreeable to cultivate mind , after the dissipation of the previous autumn , when there be party every week to welcome Mr. Preston , yet Miss Phobe let out in confidence that she and her sister have fall into the habit of go to bed at nine o'clock , for they find cribbage night after night , from five o'clock till ten , rather too much of a good thing . to tell the truth , that winter , if peaceful , be monotonous in Hollingford ; and the whole circle of gentility there be delighted to be stir up in March by the intelligence that Mr. Kirkpatrick , the newly - make Q.C. , be come on a visit for a couple of day to his sister - in - law , Mrs. Gibson . Mrs. Goodenough 's room be the very centre of gossip ; gossip have be her daily bread through her life , gossip be meat and wine to she now . 

 " dear - ah - I ! " say the old lady , rouse herself so as to sit upright in her easy - chair , and prop herself with her hand on the arm ; " who would ha ' think she have such grand relation ! why , Mr. Ashton tell I once that a Queen 's counsel be as like to be a judge as a kitten be like to be a cat . and to think of she be as good as a sister to a judge ! I see one oncst ; and I know I think as I should not   wish for a well winter - cloak than his old robe would make I , if I could only find out where I could get them second - hand . and I know she have her silk gown turn and dye and clean , and , for aught I know , turn again , while she live at Ashcombe . keep a school , too , and so near akin to this Queen 's counsel all the time ! well , to be sure , it be not   much of a school only ten young lady at the good o ' time ; so perhaps he never hear of it . " 

 " I have   be wonder what they will give he to dinner , " say Miss Browning . " it be an unlucky time for visitor ; no game to be have , and lamb so late this year , and chicken hardly to be have for love or money . " 

 " he will have to put up with calf 's head , that he will , " say Mrs. Goodenough , solemnly . " if I would ha ' get my usual health I would copy out a receipt of my grandmother 's for a roll calf 's head , and send it to Mrs. Gibson the doctor have be very kind to I all through this illness I wish my daughter in Combermere would send I some autumn chicken I would pass them on to the doctor , that I would ; but she be be a - killing of them all , and a - sending of they to I , and the last she send she write I word be the last . " 

 " I wonder if they will give a party for he ! " suggest Miss Phobe . " I should like to see a Queen 's counsel for once in my life . I have see javelin - man , but that be the great thing in the legal line I ever come across . " 

 " they will ask Mr. Ashton , of course , " say Miss Browning . " the three black grace , Law , Physic , and divinity , as the song call they . whenever there be a second course , there be always the clergyman of the parish invite in any family of gentility . " 

 " I wonder if he be marry ! " say Mrs. Goodenough . Miss Phobe have be feel the same wonder , but have not think it maidenly to express it , even to her sister , who be the source of knowledge , have meet Mrs. Gibson in the street on her way to Mrs. Goodenough 's . 

 " yes , he be marry , and must have several child , for Mrs. Gibson say that Cynthia Kirkpatrick have pay they a visit in London , to have lesson with her cousin . and she say that his wife be a most accomplished woman , and of good family , though she bring he no fortune . " 

 " it be a very creditable connection , I be sure ; it be only a wonder to I as how we have   hear so little talk of it before , " say Mrs. Goodenough . " at the first look of the thing , I should not   ha ' think Mrs. Gibson be one to hide away her fine relation under a bushel ; indeed , for that matter , we be all of we fond o ' turn the good breadth o ' the gown to the front . I remember , speak o ' breadth , how I have   undo my skirt many a time and oft to put a stain or a grease - spot next to poor Mr. Goodenough . he have a soft kind of heart when first we be married , and he say , say he , ' Patty , link thy right arm into my left one , then thou'lt be near to my heart ; ' and so we keep up the habit , when , poor man , he have a deal more to think on than romance on which side his heart lay ; so , as I say , I always put my damage breadth on the right hand , and when we walk arm in arm , as we always do , no one be never the wiser . " 

 " I should not be surprised if he invite Cynthia to pay he another visit in London , " say Miss Browning . " if he do it when he be poor , he be twenty time more likely to do it now he be a Queen 's counsel . " 

 " ay , work it by the rule o ' three , and she stand a good chance . I only hope it will not   turn her head ; go up visit in London at her age . why , I be fifty before ever I go ! " 

 " but she have be in France ; she be quite a travelled young lady , " say Miss Phobe . 

 Mrs. Goodenough shake her head for a whole minute before she give vent to her opinion . 

 " it be a risk , " say she , " a great risk . I do not   like say so to the doctor , but I should not   like have my daughter , if I be he , so cheek - by - jowl with a girl as be bring up in the country where Robespierre and Bonyparte be bear . " 

 " but Buonaparte be a Corsican , " say Miss Browning , who be much far advanced both in knowledge and in liberality of opinion than Mrs. Goodenough . " and there be a great opportunity for cultivation of the mind afford by intercourse with foreign country . I always admire Cynthia 's grace of manner , never too shy to speak , yet never put herself forwards ; she be quite a help to a party ; and if she have a few air and grace , why they be natural at her age ! now as for dear Molly , there be a kind of awkwardness about she she break one of our good china cup last time she be at a party at our house , and spill the coffee on the new carpet ; and then she get so confused that she hardly do anything but sit in a corner and hold her tongue all the rest of the evening . " 

 " she be so sorry for what she have do , sister , " say Miss Phobe , in a gentle tone of reproach ; she be always faithful to Molly . 

 " well , and do I say she be not ? but be there any need for she to be stupid all the evening after ? " 

 " but you be rather sharp , rather displeased " 

 " and I think it my duty to be sharp , ay , and cross too , when I see young folk careless . and when I see my duty clear , I do it ; I be not one to shrink from it , and they ought to be grateful to I . it be not every one that will take the trouble of reprove they , as Mrs. Goodenough know . I be very fond of Molly Gibson , very , for her own sake and for her mother 's too ; I be not sure if I do not   think she be worth half - a - dozen Cynthias , but for all that she should not   break my good china teacup , and then sit do nothing for her livelihood all the rest of the evening . " 

 by this time Mrs. Goodenough give evident sign of be tired ; Molly 's misdemeanor and Miss Browning 's broken teacup be not as exciting subject of conversation as Mrs. Gibson 's newly - discover good luck in have a successful London lawyer for a relation . 

 Mr. Kirkpatrick have be , like many other man , struggle on in his profession , and encumber with a large family of his own ; he be ready to do a good turn for his connection , if it occasion he no loss of time , and if   which be , perhaps , a primary condition   he remember their existence . Cynthia 's visit to Doughty Street nine or ten year ago have not make much impression upon he after he have once suggest its feasibility to his good - natured wife . he be even rather startled every now and then by the appearance of a pretty little girl amongst his own child , as they troop in to dessert , and have to remind himself who she be . but as it be his custom to leave the table almost immediately and to retreat into a small back - room call his study , to immerse himself in paper for the rest of the evening , the child have not make much impression upon he ; and probably the next time he remember her existence be when Mrs. Kirkpatrick write to he to beg he to receive Cynthia for a night on her way to school at Boulogne . the same request be repeat on her return ; but it so happen that he have not see she either time ; and only dimly remember some remark which his wife have make on one of these occasion , that it seem to she rather hazardous to send so young a girl so long a journey without make more provision for her safety than Mrs. Kirkpatrick have do . he know that his wife would fill up all deficiency in this respect as if Cynthia have be her own daughter ; and think no more about she until he receive an invitation to attend Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's wedding with Mr. Gibson , the highly - esteem surgeon of Hollingford ,   c.   c. an attention which irritate instead of please he . " do the woman think I have nothing to do but run about the country in search of bride and bridegroom , when this great case of Houghton v. Houghton be come on , and I have not   a moment to spare ? " he ask of his wife . 

 " perhaps she never hear of it , " suggest Mrs. Kirkpatrick . 

 " Nonsense ! the case have be in the paper for day . " 

 " but she may not   know you be engage in it . " 

 " she may not , " say he , meditatively such ignorance be possible . 

 but now the great case of Houghton v. Houghton be a thing of the past ; the hard struggle be over , the comparative table - land of Q. C.-dom gain , and Mr. Kirkpatrick have leisure for family feeling and recollection . one day in the Easter vacation he find himself near Hollingford ; he have a Sunday to spare , and he write to offer himself as a visitor to the Gibsons from Friday till Monday , express strongly   what he really feel , in a less degree ,   his wish to make Mr. Gibson 's acquaintance . Mr. Gibson , though often overwhelm with professional business , be always hospitable ; and moreover , it be always a pleasure to he to get out of the somewhat confine mental atmosphere which he have breathe over and over again , and have a whiff of fresh air : a glimpse of what be pass in the great world beyond his daily limit of thought and action . so he be ready to give a cordial welcome to his unknown relation . Mrs. Gibson be in a flutter of sentimental delight , which she fancy be family affection , but which might not have be quite so effervescent if Mr. Kirkpatrick have remain in his former position of struggle lawyer , with seven child , live in Doughty Street . 

 when the two gentleman meet they be attract towards each other by a similarity of character , with just enough difference in their opinion to make the experience of each , on which such opinion be base , valuable to the other . to Mrs. Gibson , although the bond between they count for very little in their intercourse , Mr. Kirkpatrick pay very polite attention ; and be , in fact , very glad that she have do so well for herself as to marry a sensible and agreeable man , who be able to keep she in comfort , and to behave to her daughter in so liberal a manner . molly strike he as a delicate - look girl , who might be very pretty if she have a great look of health and animation : indeed , look at she critically , there be beautiful point about her face long soft grey eye , black curl eyelash , rarely - show dimple , perfect tooth ; but there be a languor over all , a slow depression of manner , which contrast unfavourably with the brightly - colour Cynthia , sparkling , quick , graceful , and witty . as Mr. Kirkpatrick express it afterwards to his wife , he be quite in love with that girl ; and Cynthia , as ready to captivate stranger as any little girl of three or four , rise to the occasion , forget all her care and despondency , remember no long her regret at have lose something of Mr. Gibson 's good opinion , and listen eagerly and make soft reply , intermix with naive sally of droll humour , till Mr. Kirkpatrick be quite captivate . he leave Hollingford , almost surprised to have perform a duty , and find it a pleasure . for Mrs. Gibson and Molly he have a general friendly feeling ; but he do not care if he never see they again . but for Mr. Gibson he have a warm respect , a strong personal liking , which he should be glad to have ripen into a friendship , if there be time for it in this bustling world . and he fully resolve to see more of Cynthia ; his wife must know she ; they must have she up to stay with they in London , and show she something of the world . but , on return home , Mr. Kirkpatrick find so much work await he that he have to lock up embryo friendship and kindly plan in some safe closet of his mind , and give himself up , body and soul , to the immediate work of his profession . but , in May , he find time to take his wife to the Academy Exhibition , and some portrait there strike he as be like Cynthia , he tell his wife more about she and his visit to Hollingford than he have ever have leisure to do before ; and the result be that on the next day a letter be send off to Mrs. Gibson , invite Cynthia to pay a visit to her cousin in London , and remind she of many little circumstance that have occur when she be with they as a child , so as to carry on the clue of friendship from that time to the present . 

 on its receipt , this letter be greet in various way by the four people who sate round the breakfast - table . Mrs. Gibson read it to herself first . then , without tell what its content be , so that her auditor be quite in the dark as to what her remark apply , she say , 

 " I think they might have remember that I be a generation near to they than she be , but nobody think of family affection now - a day ; and I like he so much , and buy a new cookery - book , all to make it pleasant and agreeable and what he be use to . " she say all this in a plaintive , aggrieved tone of voice ; but as no one know to what she be refer , it be difficult to offer her consolation . her husband be the first to speak . 

 " if you want we to sympathize with you , tell we what be the nature of your woe . " 

 " why , I daresay it be what he mean as a very kind attention , only I think I ought to have be ask before Cynthia , " say she , read the letter over again . 

 " who be he ? and what be mean for a ' kind attention ' ? " 

 " Mr. Kirkpatrick , to be sure . this letter be from he ; and he want Cynthia to go and pay they a visit , and never say anything about you or I , my dear . and I be sure we do our good to make it pleasant ; and he should have ask we first , I think . " 

 " as I could not   possibly have go , it make very little difference to I . " 

 " but I could have go ; and , at any rate , he should have pay we the compliment : it be only a proper mark of respect , you know . so ungrateful , too , when I give up my dressing - room on purpose for he ! " 

 " and I dress for dinner every day he be here , if we be each to recapitulate all our sacrifice on his behalf . but , for all that , I do not   expect to be invite to his house . I shall be only too glad if he will come again to mine . " 

 " I have   a great mind not to let Cynthia go , " say Mrs. Gibson reflectively . 

 " I can not   go , mamma , " say Cynthia , colour . " my gown be all so shabby , and my old bonnet must do for the summer . " 

 " well , but you can buy a new one ; and I be sure it be high time you should get yourself another silk gown . you must have be save up a great deal , for I do not   know when you have   have any new clothe . " 

 Cynthia begin to say something , but stop short . she go on butter her toast , but she hold it in her hand without eat it ; without look up either , as , after a minute or two of silence , she speak again : 

 " I can not go . I should like it very much ; but I really can not go . please , mamma , write at once , and refuse it . " 

 " nonsense , child ! when a man in Mr. Kirkpatrick 's position come forward to offer a favour , it do not do to decline it without give a sufficient reason . so kind of he as it be , too ! " 

 " suppose you offer to go instead of I ? " propose Cynthia . 

 " no , no ! that will not   do , " say Mr. Gibson , decidedly . " you can not   transfer invitation in that way . but , really , this excuse about your clothe do appear to be very trivial , Cynthia , if you have no other reason to give . " 

 " it be a real , true reason to I , " say Cynthia , look up at he as she speak . " you must let I judge for myself . it would not do to go there in a state of shabbiness , for even in Doughty Street , I remember , my aunt be very particular about dress ; and now that Margaret and Helen be grow up , and they visit so much , pray do not   say anything more about it , for I know it would not do . " 

 " what have you do with all your money , I wonder ? " say Mrs. Gibson . " you have   twenty pound a year , thank to Mr. Gibson and I ; and I be sure you have not   spend more than ten . " 

 " I have not   many thing when I come back from France , " say Cynthia , in a low voice , and evidently trouble by all this questioning . " pray let it be decide at once ; I can not   go , and there be an end of it . " she get up , and leave the room rather suddenly . 

 " I do not   understand it at all , " say Mrs. Gibson . " do you , molly ? " 

 " no . I know she do not   like spend money on her dress , and be very careful . " Molly say this much , and then be afraid she have make mischief . 

 " but then she must have get the money somewhere . it always have strike I that if you have not extravagant habit , and do not live up to your income , you must have a certain sum to lay by at the end of the year . have I not often say so , Mr. Gibson ? " 

 " probably . " 

 " well , then , apply the same reasoning to Cynthia 's case ; and then , I ask , what have become of the money ? " 

 " I can not tell , " say Molly , see that she be appeal to . " she may have give it away to some one who want it . " 

 Mr. Gibson put down his newspaper . 

 " it be very clear that she have neither get the dress nor the money necessary for this London visit , and that she do not   want any more inquiry to be make on the subject . she like mystery , in fact , and I detest they . still , I think it be a desirable thing for she to keep up the acquaintance , or friendship , or whatever it be to be call , with her father 's family ; and I shall gladly give she ten pound ; and if that be not enough , why , either you must help she out , or she must do without some superfluous article of dress or another . " 

 " I be sure there never be such a kind , dear , generous man as you be , Mr. Gibson , " say his wife . " to think of your be a stepfather ! and so good to my poor fatherless girl ! but , molly my dear , I think you will acknowledge that you too be very fortunate in your stepmother . be not you , love ? and what happy tete - a - tete we shall have together when Cynthia go to London ! I be not sure if I do not   get on well with you even than with she , though she be my own child ; for , as dear papa say so truly , there be a love of mystery about she ; and if I hate anything , it be the slight concealment or reserve . ten pound ! why , it will quite set she up , buy she a couple of gown and a new bonnet , and I do not   know what all ! dear Mr. Gibson , how generous you be ! " 

 something very like " Pshaw ! " be growl out from behind the newspaper . 

 " may I go and tell she ? " say Molly , rise up . 

 " yes , do , love . tell she it would be so ungrateful to refuse ; and tell she that your father wish she to go ; and tell she , too , that it would be quite wrong not to avail herself of an opening which may by - and - by be extend to the rest of the family . I be sure if they ask I which certainly they ought to do I will not   say before they ask Cynthia , because I never think of myself , and be really the most forgiving person in the world , in forgiving slight ; but when they do ask I , which they be sure to do , I shall never be content till , by put in a little hint here and a little hint there , I have   induce they to send you an invitation . a month or two in London would do you so much good , Molly . " 

 molly have leave the room before this speech be end , and Mr. Gibson be occupy with his newspaper ; but Mrs. Gibson finish it to herself very much to her own satisfaction ; for , after all , it be well to have some one of the family go on the visit , though she might not be the right person , than to refuse it altogether , and never to have the opportunity of say anything about it . as Mr. Gibson be so kind to Cynthia , she too would be kind to Molly , and dress her becomingly , and invite young man to the house ; do all the thing , in fact , which molly and her father do not want to have do , and throw the old stumbling - block in the way of their unrestrained intercourse , which be the one thing they desire to have , free and open , and without the constant dread of her jealousy . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXXIX . 

 secret thought OOZE OUT . 
 

 molly find Cynthia in the drawing - room , stand in the bow - window , look out on the garden . she start as molly come up to she . 

 " oh , Molly , " say she , put her arm out towards she , " I be always so glad to have you with I ! " 

 it be outburst of affection such as these that always call molly back , if she have be ever so unconsciously waver in her allegiance to Cynthia . she have be wish downstairs that Cynthia would be less reserved , and not have so many secret ; but now it seem almost like treason to have want she to be anything but what she be . never have any one more than Cynthia the power speak of by Goldsmith when he write 

 he throw off his friend like a huntsman his pack , 
 for he know when he like he could whistle they back . 
 " do you know , I think you will be glad to hear what I have   get to tell you , " say Molly . " I think you would really like to go to London ; should not   you ? " 

 " yes , but it be of no use like , " say Cynthia . " do not   you begin about it , Molly , for the thing be settle ; and I can not   tell you why , but I can not   go . " 

 " it be only the money , dear . and papa have be so kind about it . he want you to go ; he think you ought to keep up relationship ; and he be go to give you ten pound . " 

 " how kind he be ! " say Cynthia . " but I ought not to take it . I wish I have know you year ago ; I should have be different to what I be . " 

 " never mind that ! we like you as you be ; we do not   want you different . you will really hurt papa if you do not   take it . why do you hesitate ? do you think Roger will not   like it ? " 

 " Roger ! no , I be not   think about he ! why should he care ? I shall be there and back again before he even hear about it . " 

 " then you will go ? " say Molly . 

 Cynthia think for a minute or two . " yes , I will , " say she , at length . " I daresay it be not wise ; but it will be pleasant , and I will go . where be Mr. Gibson ? I want to thank he . oh , how kind he be ! molly , you be a lucky girl ! " 

 " I ? " say Molly , quite startled at be tell this ; for she have be feel as if so many thing be go wrong , almost as if they would never go right again . 

 " there he be ! " say Cynthia . " I hear he in the hall ! " and down she fly , and lay her hand on Mr. Gibson 's arm , she thank he with such warm impulsiveness , and in so pretty and caress a manner , that something of his old feeling of personal liking for she return , and he forget for a time the cause of disapproval he have against she . 

 " there , there ! " say he , " that be enough , my dear ! it be quite right you should keep up with your relation ; there be nothing more to be say about it . " 

 " I do think your father be the most charming man I know , " say Cynthia , on her return to Molly ; " and it be that which always make I so afraid of lose his good opinion , and fret so when I think he be displeased with I . and now let we think all about this London visit . it will be delightful , will not   it ? I can make ten pound go ever so far ; and in some way it will be such a comfort to get out of Hollingford . " 

 " will it ? " say Molly , rather wistfully . 

 " oh , yes ! you know I do not   mean that it will be a comfort to leave you ; that will be anything but a comfort . but , after all , a country town be a country town , and London be London . you need not smile at my truism ; I have   always have a sympathy with M. de la Palisse , 

 M. de la Palisse est mort 
 En perdant sa vie ; 
 Un quart d'heure avant sa mort 
 Il ťtait en vie , " 
 sing she , in so gay a manner that she puzzle molly , as she often do , by her change of mood from the gloomy decision with which she have refuse to accept the invitation only half an hour ago . she suddenly take molly round the waist , and begin waltz round the room with she , to the imminent danger of the various little table , load with " objet d'art "   as Mrs. Gibson delight to call they   with which the drawing - room be crowd . she avoid they , however , with her usual skill ; but they both stand still at last , surprised at Mrs. Gibson 's surprise , as she stand at the door , look at the whirl go on before she . 

 " upon my word , I only hope you be not go crazy , both of you ! what be all this about , pray ? " 

 " only because I be so glad I be go to London , mamma , " say Cynthia , demurely . 

 " I be not sure if it be quite the thing for an engaged young lady to be so much beside herself at the prospect of gaiety . in my time , our great pleasure in our lover ' absence be in think about they . " 

 " I should have think that would have give you pain , because you would have have to remember that they be away , which ought to have make you unhappy . now , to tell you the truth , just at the moment I have forget all about Roger . I hope it be not   very wrong . osborne look as if he do all my share as well as his own of the fretting after Roger . how ill he look yesterday ! " 

 " yes , " say molly ; " I do not   know if any one besides I have notice it . I be quite shocked . " 

 " ah , " say Mrs. Gibson , " I be afraid that young man will not   live long very much afraid , " and she shake her head ominously . 

 " oh , what will happen if he die ! " exclaim molly , suddenly sit down , and think of that strange , mysterious wife who never make her appearance , whose very existence be never speak about and Roger away too ! 

 " well , it would be very sad , of course , and we should all feel it very much , I have   no doubt ; for I have   always be very fond of Osborne ; in fact , before Roger become , as it be , my own flesh and blood , I like Osborne well : but we must not forget the living , dear Molly , "   for Molly 's eye be fill with tear at the dismal thought present to she . " our dear good Roger would , I be sure , do all in his power to fill Osborne 's place in every way ; and his marriage need not be so long delay . " 

 " do not   speak of that in the same breath as Osborne 's life , mamma , " say Cynthia , hastily . 

 " why , my dear , it be a very natural thought . for poor Roger 's sake , you know , one wish it not to be so very , very long an engagement ; and I be only answer Molly 's question , after all . one can not   help follow out one 's thought . People must die , you know young , as well as old . " 

 " if I ever suspect Roger of follow out his thought in a similar way , " say Cynthia , " I would never speak to he again . " 

 " as if he would ! " say Molly , warm in her turn . " you know he never would ; and you should not   suppose it of he , Cynthia no , not even for a moment ! " 

 " I can not   see the great harm of it all , for my part , " say Mrs. Gibson , plaintively . " a young man strike we all as look very ill and I be sure I be sorry for it ; but illness very often lead to death . surely you agree with I there , and what be the harm of say so ? then Molly ask what will happen if he die ; and I try to answer her question . I do not   like talk or thinking of death any more than any one else ; but I should think myself want in strength of mind if I could not look forward to the consequence of death . I really think we be command to do so , somewhere in the Bible or the Prayer - book . " 

 " do you look forward to the consequence of my death , mamma ? " ask Cynthia . 

 " you really be the most unfeeling girl I ever meet with , " say Mrs. Gibson , really hurt . " I wish I could give you a little of my own sensitiveness , for I have too much for my happiness . do not   let we speak of Osborne 's look again ; ten to one it be only some temporary over - fatigue , or some anxiety about Roger , or perhaps a little fit of indigestion . I be very foolish to attribute it to anything more serious , and dear papa might be displeased if he know I have do so . medical man do not   like other people to be make conjecture about health ; they consider it as trench on their own particular province , and very proper , I be sure . now let we consider about your dress , Cynthia ; I could not understand how you have spend your money , and make so little show with it . " 

 " Mamma ! it may sound very cross , but I must tell Molly , and you , and everybody , once for all , that as I do not   want and do not   ask for more than my allowance , I be not go to answer any question about what I do with it . " she do not say this with any want of respect ; but she say it with quiet determination , which subdue her mother for the time ; though often afterwards , when Mrs. Gibson and Molly be alone , the former would start the wonder as to what Cynthia could possibly have do with her money , and hunt each poor conjecture through wood and valley of doubt , till she be weary out ; and the exciting sport be give up for the day . at present , however , she confine herself to the practical matter in hand ; and the genius for millinery and dress , inherent in both mother and daughter , soon settle a great many knotty point of contrivance and taste , and then they all three set to work to " gar auld clae look amaist as weel be the new . " 

 Cynthia 's relation with the squire have be very stationary ever since the visit she have pay to the Hall the previous autumn . he have receive they all at that time with hospitable politeness , and he have be more charmed with Cynthia than he like to acknowledge to himself when he think the visit all over afterwards . 

 " she be a pretty lass , sure enough , " think he , " and have pretty way about she too , and like to learn from old people , which be a good sign ; but somehow I do not   like madam her mother ; but still she be her mother , and the girl 's her daughter ; yet she speak to she once or twice as I should not   ha ' like our little fanny to have speak , if it have please God for she to ha ' live . no , it be not the right way , and it may be a bit old - fashioned , but I like the right way . and then again she take possession o ' I , as I may say , and little Molly have to run after we in the garden walk that be too narrow for three , just like a little four - legged doggie ; and the other be so full of listen to I , she never turn round for to speak a word to Molly . I do not   mean to say they be not fond of each other , and that be in Roger 's sweetheart 's favour ; and it be very ungrateful in I to go and find fault with a lass who be so civil to I , and have such a pretty way with she of hang on every word that fall from my lip . well ! a deal may come and go in two year ! and the lad say nothing to I about it . I will be as deep as he , and take no more notice of the affair till he come home and tell I himself . " 

 so although the squire be always delighted to receive the little note which Cynthia send he every time she hear from Roger , and although this attention on her part be melt the heart he try to harden , he control himself into write she the brief acknowledgment . his word be strong in meaning , but formal in expression ; she herself do not think much about they , be satisfied to do the kind action that call they forth . but her mother criticise they and ponder they . she think she have hit on the truth when she decide in her own mind that it be a very old - fashioned style , and that he and his house and his furniture all want some of the brightening up and polish which they be sure to receive , when she never quite like to finish the sentence definitely , although she keep repeat to herself that " there be no harm in it . " 

 to return to the squire . occupy as he now be , he recover his former health , and something of his former cheerfulness . if Osborne have meet he half - way , it be probable that the old bond between father and son might have be renew ; but Osborne either be really an invalid , or have sink into invalid habit , and make no effort to rally . if his father urge he to go out nay , once or twice he gulp down his pride , and ask Osborne to accompany he Osborne would go to the window and find out some flaw or speck in the wind or weather , and make that an excuse for stop in - door over his book . he would saunter out on the sunny side of the house in a manner that the squire consider as both indolent and unmanly . yet if there be a prospect of his leave home , which he do pretty often about this time , he be seize with a hectic energy : the cloud in the sky , the easterly wind , the dampness of the air , be nothing to he then ; and as the squire do not know the real secret cause of this anxiety to be go , he take it into his head that it arise from Osborne 's dislike to Hamley and to the monotony of his father 's society . 

 " it be a mistake , " think the Squire . " I see it now . I be never great at make friend myself : I always think those Oxford and Cambridge man turn up their nose at I for a country booby , and I would get the start and have none o ' they . but when the boy go to Rugby and Cambridge , I should ha ' let they have have their own friend about them , even though they might ha ' look down on I ; it be the bad they could ha ' do to I ; and now what few friend I have have fall off from I , by death or somehow , and it be but dreary work for a young man , I grant it . but he might try not to show it so plain to I as he do . I be get case - harden , but it do cut I to the quick sometimes it do . and he so fond of his dad as he be once ! if I can but get the land drain I will make he an allowance , and let he go to London , or where he like . maybe he will do well this time , or maybe he will go to the dog altogether ; but perhaps it will make he think a bit kindly of the old father at home I should like he to do that , I should ! " 

 it be possible that Osborne might have be induce to tell his father of his marriage during their long solitary intercourse , if the Squire , in an unlucky moment , have not give he his confidence about Roger 's engagement with Cynthia . it be on one wet Sunday afternoon , when the father and son be sit together in the large empty drawing - room . Osborne have not be to church in the morning ; the Squire have , and he be now try hard to read one of Blair 's sermon . they have din early ; they always do on Sundays ; and either that , or the sermon , or the hopeless wetness of the day , make the afternoon seem interminably long to the squire . he have certain unwritten rule for the regulation of his conduct on Sundays . cold meat , sermon - reading , no smoking till after evening prayer , as little thought as possible as to the state of the land and the condition of the crop , and as much respectable sit in - door in his good clothe as be consistent with go to church twice a day , and say the response louder than the clerk . to - day it have rain so unceasingly that he have remit the afternoon church ; but oh , even with the luxury of a nap , how long it seem before he see the Hall servant trudge homeward , along the field - path , a covey of umbrella ! he have be stand at the window for the last half - hour , his hand in his pocket , and his mouth often contract itself into the traditional sin of a whistle , but as often check into sudden gravity ending , nine time out of ten , in a yawn . he look askance at Osborne , who be sit near the fire absorb in a book . the poor squire be something like the little boy in the child 's story , who ask all sort of bird and beast to come and play with he ; and , in every case , receive the sober answer , that they be too busy to have leisure for trivial amusement . the father want the son to put down his book , and talk to he : it be so wet , so dull , and a little conversation would so wile away the time ! but Osborne , with his back to the window where his father be stand , see nothing of all this , and go on reading . he have assent to his father 's remark that it be a very wet afternoon , but have not carry on the subject into all the variety of truism of which it be susceptible . something more rousing must be start , and this the Squire feel . the recollection of the affair between Roger and Cynthia come into his head , and , without give it a moment 's consideration , he begin , 

 " Osborne ! do you know anything about this this attachment of Roger 's ? " 

 quite successful . Osborne lay down his book in a moment , and turn round to his father . 

 " Roger ! an attachment ! no ! I never hear of it I can hardly believe it that be to say , I suppose it be to " 

 and then he stop ; for he think he have no right to betray his own conjecture that the object be Cynthia Kirkpatrick . 

 " yes . he be though . can you guess who to ? nobody that I particularly like not a connection to my mind yet she be a very pretty girl ; and I suppose I be to blame in the first instance . " 

 " be it ? " 

 " it be no use beat about the bush . I have   go so far , I may as well tell you all . it be Miss Kirkpatrick , Gibson 's stepdaughter . but it be not an engagement , mind you " 

 " I be very glad I hope she like Roger back again " 

 " like it be only too good a connection for she not to like it : if Roger be of the same mind when he come home , I will be bind she will be only too happy ! " 

 " I wonder Roger never tell I , " say Osborne , a little hurt , now he begin to consider himself . 

 " he never tell I either , " say the Squire . " it be Gibson , who come here , and make a clean breast of it , like a man of honour . I have be say to he , I could not   have either of you two lad take up with his lass . I will own it be you I be afraid of it be bad enough with Roger , and maybe will come to nothing after all ; but if it have be you , I would ha ' break with Gibson and every mother 's son of them , soon than have let it go on ; and so I tell Gibson . " 

 " I beg your pardon for interrupt you , but , once for all , I claim the right of choose my wife for myself , subject to no man 's interference , " say Osborne , hotly . 

 " then you will keep your wife with no man 's interference , that be all ; for ne'er a penny will you get from I , my lad , unless you marry to please I a little , as well as yourself a great deal . that be all I ask of you . I be not particular as to beauty , or as to cleverness , and piano - playing , and that sort of thing ; if Roger marry this girl , we shall have enough of that in the family . I should not   much mind she be a bit old than you , but she must be well - bear , and the more money she bring the well for the old place . " 

 " I say again , father , I choose my wife for myself , and I do not   admit any man 's right of dictation . " 

 " well , well ! " say the Squire , get a little angry in his turn . " if I be not to be father in this matter , thou sha'n't   be son . go against I in what I have   set my heart on , and you will find there be the devil to pay , that be all . but do not   let we get angry , it be Sunday afternoon for one thing , and it be a sin ; and besides that , I have   not finish my story . " 

 for Osborne have take up his book again , and under pretence of reading , be fume to himself . he hardly put it away even at his father 's request . 

 " as I be say , Gibson say , when first we speak about it , that there be nothing on foot between any of you four , and that if there be , he would let I know ; so by - and - by he come and tell I of this . " 

 " of what I do not   understand how far it have go ? " 

 there be a tone in Osborne 's voice the squire do not quite like ; and he begin answer rather angrily . 

 " of this , to be sure of what I be tell you of Roger go and make love to this girl , that day he leave , after he have go away from here , and be wait for the ' Umpire ' in Hollingford . one would think you quite stupid at time , Osborne . " 

 " I can only say that these detail be quite new to I ; you never mention they before , I assure you . " 

 " well ; never mind whether I do or not . I be sure I say Roger be attach to Miss Kirkpatrick , and be hang to she ; and you might have understand all the rest as a matter of course . " 

 " possibly , " say Osborne , politely . " may I ask if Miss Kirkpatrick , who appear to I to be a very nice girl , respond to Roger 's affection ? " 

 " fast enough , I will be bind , " say the Squire , sulkily . " a Hamley of Hamley be not   to be have every day . now , I will tell you what , Osborne , you be the only marriageable one leave in the market , and I want to hoist the old family up again . do not   go against I in this ; it really will break my heart if you do . " 

 " Father , do not   talk so , " say Osborne . " I will do anything I can to oblige you , except " 

 " except the only thing I have   set my heart on your doing . " 

 " well , well , let it alone for the present . there be no question of my marrying just at this moment . I be out of health , and I be not up to go into society , and meet young lady and all that sort of thing , even if I have an opening into fitting society . " 

 " you should have an opening fast enough . there will be more money come in , in a year or two , please God . and as for your health , why , what be to make you well , if you cower over the fire all day , and shudder away from a good honest tankard as if it be poison ? " 

 " so it be to I , " say Osborne , languidly , play with his book as if he want to end the conversation and take it up again . the Squire see the movement , and understand they . 

 " well , " say he , " I will go and have a talk with Will about poor old Black Bess . it be Sunday work enough , ask after a dumb animal 's ache and pain . " 

 but after his father have leave the room Osborne do not take up his book again . he lay it down on the table by he , leant back in his chair , and cover his eye with his hand . he be in a state of health which make he despondent about many thing , though , least of all , about what be most in danger . the long concealment of his marriage from his father make the disclosure of it far , far more difficult than it would have be at first . unsupported by Roger , how could he explain it all to one so passionate as the squire ? how tell of the temptation , the steal marriage , the consequent happiness , and alas ! the consequent suffering ? for Osborne have suffer , and do suffer , greatly in the untoward circumstance in which he have place himself . he see no way out of it all , except by the one strong stroke of which he feel himself incapable . so with a heavy heart he address himself to his book again . everything seem to come in his way , and he be not strong enough in character to overcome obstacle . the only overt step he take in consequence of what he have hear from his father , be to ride over to Hollingford the first fine day after he have receive the news , and go to see Cynthia and the Gibsons . he have not be there for a long time ; bad weather and languor combine have prevent he . he find they full of preparation and discussion about Cynthia 's visit to London ; and she herself not at all in the sentimental mood proper to respond to his delicate intimation of how glad he be in his brother 's joy . indeed , it be so long after the time , that Cynthia scarcely perceive that to he the intelligence be recent , and that the first bloom of his emotion have not yet pass away . with her head a little on one side , she be contemplate the effect of a knot of ribbon , when he begin , in a low whisper , and lean forward towards she as he speak , " Cynthia I may call you Cynthia now , may not   I ? I be so glad of this news ; I have   only just hear of it , but I be so glad ! " 

 " what news do you mean ? " she have her suspicion ; but she be annoy to think that from one person her secret be pass to another and another , till , in fact , it be become no secret at all . still , Cynthia could always conceal her annoyance when she choose . " why be you to begin call I Cynthia now ? " she go on , smile . " the terrible word have slip out from between your lip before , do you know ? " 

 this light way of take his tender congratulation do not quite please Osborne , who be in a sentimental mood , and for a minute or so he remain silent . then , have finish make her bow of ribbon , she turn to he , and continue in a quick low voice , anxious to take advantage of a conversation between her mother and Molly , 

 " I think I can guess why you make that pretty little speech just now . but do you know you ought not to have be tell ? and , moreover , thing be not quite arrive at the solemnity of of well an engagement . he would not have it so . now , I sha'n't   say any more ; and you must not . pray remember you ought not to have know ; it be my own secret , and I particularly wish it not to be speak about ; and I do not   like its being so talk about . oh , the leaking of water through one small hole ! " 

 and then she plunge into the talk of the other two , make the conversation general . Osborne be rather discomfited at the non - success of his congratulation ; he have picture to himself the unbosoming of a love - sick girl , full of rapture , and glad of a sympathize confidant . he little know Cynthia 's nature . the more she suspect that she be call upon for a display of emotion , the less would she show ; and her emotion be generally under the control of her will . he have make an effort to come and see she ; and now he leant back in his chair , weary and a little dispirit . 

 " you poor dear young man , " say Mrs. Gibson , come up to he with her soft , soothing manner ; " how tired you look ! do take some of that eau - de - Cologne and bathe your forehead . this spring weather overcome I too . ' Primavera ' I think the Italians call it . but it be very try for delicate constitution , as much from its association as from its variableness of temperature . it make I sigh perpetually ; but then I be so sensitive . Dear Lady Cumnor always use to say I be like a thermometer . you have   hear how ill she have be ? " 

 " no , " say Osborne , not very much caring either . 

 " oh , yes , she be well now ; but the anxiety about she have try I so : detain here by what be , of course , my duty , but far away from all intelligence , and not know what the next post might bring . " 

 " where be she then ? " ask Osborne , become a little more sympathetic . 

 " at Spa . such a distance off ! three day ' post ! can not   you conceive the trial ? live with she as I do for year ; bind up in the family as I be . " 

 " but Lady Harriet say , in her last letter , that they hop she would be strong than she have be for year , " say Molly , innocently . 

 " yes Lady Harriet of course every one who know Lady Harriet know that she be of too sanguine a temperament for her statement to be perfectly rely on . altogether stranger be often delude by Lady Harriet she have an off - hand manner which take they in ; but she do not mean half she say . " 

 " we will hope she do in this instance , " say Cynthia , shortly . " they be in London now , and Lady Cumnor have not   suffer from the journey . " 

 " they say so , " say Mrs. Gibson , shake her head , and lay an emphasis on the word ' say . " " I be perhaps over - anxious , but I wish I wish I could see and judge for myself . it would be the only way of calm my anxiety . I almost think I shall go up with you , Cynthia , for a day or two , just to see she with my own eye . I do not   quite like your travel alone either . we will think about it , and you shall write to Mr. Kirkpatrick , and propose it , if we determine upon it . you can tell he of my anxiety ; and it will be only share your bed for a couple of night . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XL . 

 MOLLY gibson BREATHES FREELY . 
 

 that be the way in which Mrs. Gibson first broach her intention of accompany Cynthia up to London for a few day ' visit . she have a trick of produce the first sketch of any new plan before an outsider to the family circle ; so that the first emotion of other , if they disapprove of her project , have to be repress , until the idea have become familiar to they . to Molly it seem too charming a proposal ever to come to pass . she have never allow herself to recognize the restraint she be under in her stepmother 's presence ; but all at once she find it out when her heart dance at the idea of three whole day for that it would be at the least of perfect freedom of intercourse with her father ; of old time come back again ; of meal without perpetual fidgetiness after detail of ceremony and correctness of attendance . 

 " we will have bread - and - cheese for dinner , and eat it on our knee ; we will make up for have have to eat sloppy pudding with a fork instead of a spoon all this time , by put our knife in our mouth till we cut ourselves . papa shall pour his tea into his saucer if he be in a hurry ; and if I be thirsty , I will take the slop - basin . and oh , if I could but get , buy , borrow , or steal any kind of an old horse ; my grey skirt be not   new , but it will do ; that would be too delightful ! after all , I think I can be happy again ; for month and month it have seem as if I have get too old ever to feel pleasure , much less happiness again . " 

 so think molly . yet she blush , as if with guilt , when Cynthia , read her thought , say to her one day , 

 " molly , you be very glad to get rid of we , be not you ? " 

 " not of you , Cynthia ; at least , I do not   think I be . only , if you but know how I love papa , and how I use to see a great deal more of he than I ever do now " 

 " ah ! I often think what interloper we must seem , and be in fact " 

 " I do not   feel you as such . you , at any rate , have be a new delight to I a sister ; and I never know how charming such a relationship could be . " 

 " but mamma ? " say Cynthia , half - suspiciously , half - sorrowfully . 

 " she be papa 's wife , " say Molly , quietly . " I do not   mean to say I be not often very sorry to feel I be no long first with he ; but it be " the violent colour flush into her face till even her eye burn , and she suddenly find herself on the point of crying ; the weep ash - tree , the misery , the slow dropping comfort , and the comforter come all so vividly before she " it be Roger ! " she go on look up at Cynthia , as she overcome her slight hesitation at mention his name " Roger , who tell I how I ought to take papa 's marriage , when I be first startle and grieve at the news . oh , Cynthia , what a great thing it be to be love by he ! " 

 Cynthia blush , and look fluttered and pleased . 

 " yes , I suppose it be . at the same time , Molly , I be afraid he will expect I to be always as good as he fancy I now , and I shall have to walk on tiptoe all the rest of my life . " 

 " but you be good , Cynthia , " put in Molly . 

 " no , I be not . you be just as much mistaken as he be ; and some day I shall go down in your opinion with a run , just like the hall clock the other day when the spring break . " 

 " I think he will love you just as much , " say Molly . 

 " could you ? would you be my friend if if it turn out ever that I have do very wrong thing ? would you remember how very difficult it have sometimes be to I to act rightly ? "   she take hold of Molly 's hand as she speak . " we will not   speak of mamma , for your sake as much as mine or her ; but you must see she be not   one to help a girl with much good advice , or good oh , Molly , you do not   know how I be neglect just at a time when I want friend most . Mamma do not know it ; it be not in she to know what I might have be if I have only fall into wise , good hand . but I know it ; and what be more , " continue she , suddenly ashamed of her unusual exhibition of feeling , " I try not to care , which I daresay be really the bad of all ; but I could worry myself to death if I once take to serious thinking . " 

 " I wish I could help you , or even understand you , " say Molly , after a moment or two of sad perplexity . 

 " you can help I , " say Cynthia , change her manner abruptly . " I can trim bonnet , and make head - dress ; but somehow my hand can not   fold up gown and collar , like your deft little finger . please will you help I to pack ? that be a real , tangible piece of kindness , and not sentimental consolation for sentimental distress , which be , perhaps , imaginary after all . " 

 in general , it be the people that be leave behind stationary , who give way to low spirit at any parting ; the traveller , however bitterly they may feel the separation , find something in the change of scene to soften regret in the very first hour of separation . but as Molly walk home with her father from see Mrs. Gibson and Cynthia off to London by the " Umpire " coach , she almost dance along the street . 

 " now , papa ! " say she , " I be go to have you all to myself for a whole week . you must be very obedient . " 

 " do not   be tyrannical , then . you be walk I out of breath , and we be cut Mrs. Goodenough , in our hurry . " 

 so they cross over the street to speak to Mrs. Goodenough . 

 " we have   just be see my wife and her daughter off to London . Mrs. Gibson have go up for a week ! " 

 " deary , deary , to London , and only for a week ! why , I can remember its be a three day ' journey ! it will be very lonesome for you , Miss Molly , without your young companion ! " 

 " yes ! " say Molly , suddenly feel as if she ought to have take this view of the case . " I shall miss Cynthia very much . " 

 " and you , Mr. Gibson ; why , it will be like be a widower over again ! you must come and drink tea with I some evening . we must try and cheer you up a bit amongst we . shall it be Tuesday ? " 

 in spite of the sharp pinch which molly give to his arm , Mr. Gibson accept the invitation , much to the gratification of the old lady . 

 " Papa , how could you go and waste one of our evening ! we have but six in all , and now but five ; and I have so reckon on our do all sort of thing together . " 

 " what sort of thing ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know : everything that be unrefined and ungenteel , " add she , slily look up into her father 's face . 

 his eye twinkle , but the rest of his face be perfectly grave . " I be not go to be corrupt . with toil and labour I have   reach a very fair height of refinement . I will not   be pull down again . " 

 " yes , you will , papa . we will have bread - and - cheese for lunch this very day . and you shall wear your slipper in the drawing - room every evening you will stay quietly at home ; and oh , papa , do not   you think I could ride Nora Creina ? I have   be look out the old grey skirt , and I think I could make myself tidy . " 

 " where be the side - saddle to come from ? " 

 " to be sure , the old one will not   fit that great irish mare . but I be not particular , papa . I think I could manage somehow . " 

 " thank you . but I be not quite go to return into barbarism . it may be a depraved taste , but I should like to see my daughter properly mount . " 

 " think of rid together down the lane why , the dog - rose must be all out in flower , and the honeysuckle , and the hay how I should like to see Merriman 's farm again ! papa , do let I have one ride with you ! please do . I be sure we can manage it somehow . " 

 and ' somehow " it be manage . " somehow " all Molly 's wish come to pass ; there be only one little drawback to this week of holiday and happy intercourse with her father . everybody would ask they out to tea . they be quite like bride and bridegroom ; for the fact be , that the late dinner which Mrs. Gibson have introduce into her own house , be a great inconvenience in the calculation of the small tea - drinking at Hollingford . how ask people to tea at six , who din at that hour ? how , when they refuse cake and sandwich at half - past eight , how induce other people who be really hungry to commit a vulgarity before those calm and scornful eye ? so there have be a great lull of invitation for the Gibsons to Hollingford tea - party . Mrs. Gibson , whose object be to squeeze herself into " county society , " have take this being leave out of the small festivity with great equanimity ; but molly miss the kind homeliness of the party to which she have go from time to time as long as she could remember ; and though , as each three - cornered note be bring in , she grumble a little over the loss of another charming evening with her father , she really be glad to go again in the old way among old friend . Miss Browning and Miss Phobe be especially compassionate towards she in her loneliness . if they have have their will she would have din there every day ; and she have to call upon they very frequently in order to prevent their be hurt at she decline the dinner . Mrs. Gibson write twice during her week 's absence to her husband . that piece of news be quite satisfactory to the Miss Brownings , who have of late hold themselves a great deal aloof from a house where they choose to suppose that their presence be not want . in their winter evening they have often talk over Mr. Gibson 's household , and have little besides conjecture to go upon , they find the subject interminable , as they could vary the possibility every day . one of their wonder be how Mr. and Mrs. Gibson really get on together ; another be whether Mrs. Gibson be extravagant or not . now two letter during the week of her absence show what be in those day consider a very proper amount of conjugal affection . yet not too much at elevenpence - halfpenny postage . a third letter would have be extravagant . Sister look to sister with an approve nod as Molly name the second letter , which arrive in Hollingford the very day before Mrs. Gibson be to return . they have settle between themselves that two letter would show the right amount of good feeling and proper understanding in the Gibson family : more would have be extravagant ; only one would have be a mere matter of duty . there have be rather a question between Miss Browning and Miss Phobe as to which person the second letter   suppose it come   be to be address to . it would be very conjugal to write twice to Mr. Gibson ; and yet it would be very pretty if molly come in for her share . 

 " you have   have another letter , you say , my dear ? " ask Miss Browning . " I daresay Mrs. Gibson have write to you this time ? " 

 " it be a large sheet , and Cynthia have write on one half to I , and all the rest be to papa . " 

 " a very nice arrangement , I be sure . and what do Cynthia say ? be she enjoy herself ? " 

 " oh , yes , I think so . they have   have a dinner - party ; and one night , when mamma be at Lady Cumnor 's , Cynthia go to the play with her cousin . " 

 " upon my word ! and all in one week ? I do call that dissipation . why , Thursday would be take up with the journey , and Friday with resting , and Sunday be Sunday all the world over ; and they must have write on Tuesday . well ! I hope Cynthia will not   find Hollingford dull , that be all , when she come back . " 

 " I do not   think it be likely , " say Miss Phobe , with a little simper and a know look , which sate oddly on her kindly innocent face . " you see a great deal of Mr. Preston , do not   you , molly ? " 

 " Mr. Preston ! " say Molly , flush up with surprise . " no ! not much . he be be at Ashcombe all winter , you know ! he have but just come back to settle here . what should make you think so ? " 

 " oh ! a little bird tell we , " say Miss Browning . molly know that little bird from her childhood , and have always hat it , and long to wring its neck . why could not people speak out and say that they do not mean to give up the name of their informant ? but it be a very favourite form of fiction with the Miss Brownings , and to Miss Phobe it be the very acme of wit . 

 " the little bird be fly about one day in Heath Lane , and it see Mr. Preston and a young lady we will not   say who walk together in a very friendly manner , that be to say , he be on horseback ; but the path be raise above the road , just where there be the little wooden bridge over the brook " 

 " perhaps Molly be in the secret , and we ought not to ask she about it , " say Miss Phobe , see Molly 's extreme discomfiture and annoyance . 

 " it can be no great secret , " say Miss Browning , drop the little - bird formula , and assume an air of dignified reproval at Miss Phobe 's interruption , " for Miss Hornblower say Mr. Preston own to be engage " 

 " at any rate it be not   to Cynthia , that I know positively , " say Molly with some vehemence . " and pray put a stop to any such report ; you do not   know what mischief they may do . I do so hate that kind of chatter ! " it be not very respectful of Molly to speak in this way to be sure , but she think only of Roger ; and the distress any such report might cause , should he ever hear of they   in the centre of Africa !   make she colour up scarlet with vexation . 

 " Heighty - teighty ! Miss Molly ! do not   you remember that I be old enough to be your mother , and that it be not pretty behaviour to speak so to we to I ! ' Chatter ' to be sure . really , molly " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say Molly , only half - penitent . 

 " I daresay you do not mean to speak so to sister , " say Miss Phobe , try to make peace . 

 molly do not answer all at once . she want to explain how much mischief might be do by such report . 

 " but do not   you see , " she go on , still flush by vexation , " how bad it be to talk of such thing in such a way ? suppose one of they care for some one else , and that might happen , you know ; Mr. Preston , for instance , may be engage to some one else ? " 

 " molly ! I pity the woman ! indeed I do . I have a very poor opinion of Mr. Preston , " say Miss Browning , in a warning tone of voice ; for a new idea have come into her head . 

 " well , but the woman , or young lady , would not like to hear such report about Mr. Preston . " 

 " perhaps not . but for all that , take my word for it , he be a great flirt , and young lady have well not have much to do with he . " 

 " I daresay it be all accident their meeting in Heath Lane , " say Miss Phobe . 

 " I know nothing about it , " say Molly , " and I daresay I have be impertinent , only please do not   talk about it any more . I have my reason for ask you . " she get up , for by the striking of the church clock she have just find out that it be later than she have think , and she know that her father would be at home by this time . she bend down and kiss Miss Browning 's grave and passive face . 

 " how you be grow , molly ! " say Miss Phobe , anxious to cover over her sister 's displeasure . " ' as tall and as straight as a poplar - tree ! ' as the old song say . " 

 " grow in grace , molly , as well as in good look ! " say Miss Browning , watch she out of the room . as soon as she be fairly go , Miss Browning get up and shut the door quite securely , and then sit down near her sister , she say , in a low voice , " Phobe , it be molly herself that be with Mr. Preston in Heath Lane that day when Mrs. Goodenough see they together ! " 

 " gracious goodness I ! " exclaim Miss Phobe , receive it at once as gospel . " how do you know ? " 

 " by put two and two together . do not   you notice how red Molly go , and then pale , and how she say she know for a fact that Mr. Preston and Cynthia Kirkpatrick be not engage ? " 

 " perhaps not engage ; but Mrs. Goodenough see they loiter together , all by their own two self " 

 " Mrs. Goodenough only cross Heath Lane at the Shire Oak , as she be rid in her phaeton , " say Miss Browning sententiously . " we all know what a coward she be in a carriage , so that most likely she have only half her wit about she , and her eye be none of the good when she be stand steady on the ground . molly and Cynthia have get their new plaid shawl just alike , and they trim their bonnet alike , and Molly be grow as tall as Cynthia since Christmas . I be always afraid she would be short and stumpy , but she be now as tall and slender as anyone need be . I will answer for it , Mrs. Goodenough see Molly , and take she for Cynthia . " 

 when Miss Browning " answer for it " Miss Phobe give up doubt . she sate some time in silence revolve her thought . then she say : 

 " it would not   be such a very bad match after all , sister . " she speak very meekly , await her sister 's sanction to her opinion . 

 " Phobe , it would be a bad match for Mary Pearson 's daughter . if I have know what I know now we would never have have he to tea last September . " 

 " why , what do you know ? " ask Miss Phobe . 

 " Miss Hornblower tell I many thing ; some that I do not   think you ought to hear , Phobe . he be engage to a very pretty Miss Gregson , at Henwick , where he come from ; and her father make inquiry , and hear so much that be bad about he that he make his daughter break off the match , and she be dead since ! " 

 " how shocking ! " say Miss Phobe , duly impress . 

 " besides , he play at billiard , and he bet at race , and some people do say he keep race - horse . " 

 " but be not   it strange that the earl keep he on as his agent ? " 

 " no ! perhaps not . he be very clever about land , and very sharp in all law affair ; and my lord be not   bind to take notice if indeed he know of the manner in which Mr. Preston talk when he have take too much wine . " 

 " take too much wine ! oh , sister , be he a drunkard ? and we have have he to tea ! " 

 " I do not   say he be a drunkard , Phobe , " say Miss Browning , pettishly . " a man may take too much wine occasionally , without be a drunkard . do not   let I hear you use such coarse word , Phobe ! " 

 Miss Phobe be silent for a time after this rebuke . 

 presently she say , " I do hope it be not   Molly Gibson . " 

 " you may hope as much as you like , but I be pretty sure it be . however , we would well say nothing about it to Mrs. Goodenough ; she have get Cynthia into her head , and there let she rest . time enough to set report afloat about Molly when we know there be some truth in they . Mr. Preston might do for Cynthia , who be be bring up in France , though she have such pretty manner ; but it may have make she not particular . he must not , and he shall not , have Molly , if I go into church and forbid the bann myself ; but I be afraid I be afraid there be something between she and he . we must keep on the look - out , Phobe . I will be her guardian angel , in spite of herself . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLI . 

 gather CLOUDS . 
 

 illustrationrs . Gibson come back full of rose - colour account of London . Lady Cumnor have be gracious and affectionate , ' so touch by my go up to see she so soon after her return to England , " Lady Harriet charming and devote to her old governess , Lord Cumnor " just like his dear usual hearty self ; " and as for the Kirkpatricks , no Lord Chancellor 's house be ever grander than theirs , and the silk gown of the Q.C. have float over housemaid and footman . Cynthia , too , be so much admired ; and as for her dress , Mrs. Kirkpatrick have shower down ball - dress and wreath , and pretty bonnet and mantle , like a fairy godmother . Mr. Gibson 's poor present of ten pound shrank into very small dimension compare with all this munificence . 

 " and they be so fond of she , I do not   know when we shall have she back , " be Mrs. Gibson 's wind - up sentence . " and now , Molly , what have you and papa be do ? very gay , you sound in your letter . I have not time to read it in London ; so I put it in my pocket , and read it in the coach come home . but , my dear child , you do look so old - fashioned with your gown make all tight , and your hair all tumble about in curl . curl be quite go out . we must do your hair differently , " she continue , try to smooth Molly 's black wave into straightness . 

 " I send Cynthia an african letter , " say Molly , timidly . " do you hear anything of what be in it ? " 

 " oh , yes , poor child ! it make she very uneasy , I think ; she say she do not feel inclined to go to Mr. Rawson 's ball , which be on that night , and for which Mrs. Kirkpatrick have give she the ball - dress . but there be really nothing for she to fidget herself about . Roger only say he have have another touch of fever , but be well when he write . he say every European have to be acclimatize by fever in that part of Abyssinia where he be . " 

 " and do she go ? " ask Molly . 

 " yes , to be sure . it be not an engagement ; and if it be , it be not acknowledge . Fancy her go and say , ' a young man that I know have be ill for a few day in Africa , two month ago , therefore I do not   want to go to the ball to - night . ' it would have seem like affectation of sentiment ; and if there be one thing I hate it be that . " 

 " she would hardly enjoy herself , " say Molly . 

 " oh , yes , but she do . her dress be white gauze , trim with lilacs , and she really do look a mother may be allow a little natural partiality most lovely . and she dance every dance , although she be quite a stranger . I be sure she enjoy herself , from her manner of talk about it next morning . " 

 " I wonder if the Squire know . " 

 " know what ? oh , yes , to be sure you mean about Roger . I daresay he do not , and there be no need to tell he , for I have   no doubt it be all right now . " and she go out of the room to finish her unpack . 

 molly let she work fall , and sigh . " it will be a year the day after to - morrow since he come here to propose our go to Hurst Wood , and mamma be so vex at his calling before lunch . I wonder if Cynthia remember it as well as I do . and now , perhaps oh ! Roger , Roger ! I wish I pray that you be safe home again ! how could we all bear it , if " 

 she cover her face with her hand , and try to stop think . suddenly she get up , as if sting by a venomous fancy . 

 " I do not   believe she love he as she ought , or she could not could not have go and dance . what shall I do if she do not ? what shall I do ? I can bear anything but that . " 

 but she find the long suspense as to his health hard enough to endure . they be not likely to hear from he for a month at least , and before that time have elapse Cynthia would be at home again . molly learn to long for her return before a fortnight of her absence be over . she have have no idea that perpetual tete - a - tete with Mrs. Gibson could , by any possibility , be so tiresome as she find they . perhaps Molly 's state of delicate health , consequent upon her rapid growth during the last few month , make she irritable ; but really often she have to get up and leave the room to calm herself down after listen to a long series of word , more frequently plaintive or discontent in tone than cheerful , and which at the end convey no distinct impression of either the speaker 's thought or feeling . whenever anything have go wrong , whenever Mr. Gibson have coolly persevere in anything to which she have object ; whenever the cook have make a mistake about the dinner , or the housemaid break any little frangible article ; whenever Molly 's hair be not do to her liking , or her dress do not become she , or the smell of dinner pervade the house , or the wrong caller come , or the right caller do not come in fact , whenever anything go wrong , poor Mr. Kirkpatrick be regret and mourn over , nay , almost blame , as if , have he only give himself the trouble of living , he could have help it . 

 " when I look back to those happy day , it seem to I as if I have never value they as I ought . to be sure youth , love , what do we care for poverty ! I remember dear Mr. Kirkpatrick walk five mile into Stratford to buy I a muffin because I have such a fancy for one after Cynthia be bear . I do not   mean to complain of dear papa but I do not   think but , perhaps I ought not to say it to you . if Mr. Kirkpatrick have but take care of that cough of his ; but he be so obstinate ! man always be , I think . and it really be selfish of he . only I daresay he do not consider the forlorn state in which I should be leave . it come hard upon I than upon most people , because I always be of such an affectionate sensitive nature . I remember a little poem of Mr. Kirkpatrick 's , in which he compare my heart to a harpstring , vibrate to the slight breeze . " 

 " I think harpstring require a pretty strong finger to make they sound , " say Molly . 

 " my dear child , you have   no more poetry in you than your father . and as for your hair ! it be bad than ever . can not   you drench it in water to take those untidy twist and twirl out of it ? " 

 " it only make it curl more and more when it get dry , " say Molly , sudden tear come into her eye as a recollection come before she like a picture see long ago and forget for year a young mother wash and dress her little girl ; place the half - naked darling on her knee , and twin the wet ring of dark hair fondly round her finger , and then , in an ecstasy of fondness , kiss the little curly head . 

 the receipt of Cynthia 's letter make very agreeable event . she do not write often , but her letter be tolerably long when they do come , and very sprightly in tone . there be constant mention make of many new name , which convey no idea to Molly , though Mrs. Gibson would try and enlighten she by run commentary like the following : 

 " Mrs. Green ! ah , that be Mr. Jones 's pretty cousin , who live in Russell Square with the fat husband . they keep their carriage ; but I be not sure if it be not Mr. Green who be Mrs. Jones 's cousin . we can ask Cynthia when she come home . Mr. Henderson ! to be sure a young man with black whisker , a pupil of Mr. Kirkpatrick 's formerly , or be he a pupil of Mr. Murray 's ? I know they say he have read law with somebody . ah , yes ! they be the people who call the day after Mr. Rawson 's ball , and who admire Cynthia so much , without know I be her mother . she be very handsomely dressed indeed , in black satin ; and the son have a glass eye , but he be a young man of good property . Coleman ! yes , that be the name . " 

 no more news of Roger until some time after Cynthia have return from her London visit . she come back look fresher and pretty than ever , beautifully dress , thank to her own good taste , and her cousin 's generosity , full of amusing detail of the gay life she have be enjoy , yet not at all out of spirit at have leave it behind she . she bring home all sort of pretty and dainty device for Molly ; a neck - ribbon make up in the new fashion , a pattern for a tippet , a delicate pair of light glove , embroider as Molly have never see glove embroider before , and many another little sign of remembrance during her absence . yet somehow or other , Molly feel that Cynthia be change in her relation to she . molly be aware that she have never have Cynthia 's full confidence , for with all her apparent frankness and naivetť of manner , Cynthia be extremely reserved and reticent . she know this much of herself , and have often laugh about it to Molly , and the latter have by this time find out the truth of her friend 's assertion . but Molly do not trouble herself much about it . she too know that there be many thought and feeling that flit through her mind which she should never think of tell to any one , except perhaps if they be ever very much throw together to her father . she know that Cynthia withhold from she more than thought and feeling that she withhold fact . but then , as molly reflect , these fact might involve detail of struggle and suffering might relate to her mother 's neglect and altogether be of so painful a character , that it would be well if Cynthia could forget her childhood altogether , instead of fix it in her mind by the relation of her grievance and trouble . so it be not now by any want of confidence that molly feel distance as it be . it be because Cynthia rather avoid than seek her companionship ; because her eye shun the straight , serious , love look of Molly 's ; because there be certain subject on which she evidently dislike speak , not particularly interesting thing as far as Molly could perceive , but it almost seem as if they lay on the road to point to be avoid . molly feel a sort of sigh pleasure in notice Cynthia 's change manner of talk about Roger . she speak of he tenderly now ; " poor Roger , " as she call he ; and molly think that she must be refer to the illness which he have mention in his last letter . one morning in the first week after Cynthia 's return home , just as he be go out , Mr. Gibson run up into the drawing - room , hat on , booted and spur , and hastily lay an open pamphlet down before she ; point out a particular passage with his finger , but not speak a word before he rapidly quit the room . his eye be sparkling , and have an amuse as well as pleased expression . all this molly notice , as well as Cynthia 's flush of colour as she read what be thus point out to she . then she push it a little on one side , not close the book , however , and go on with her work . 

 " what be it ? may I see it ? " ask Molly , stretch out her hand for the pamphlet , which lie within her reach . but she do not take it until Cynthia have say 

 " certainly ; I do not   suppose there be any great secret in a scientific journal , full of report of meeting . " and she give the book a little push towards Molly . 

 " oh , Cynthia ! " say Molly , catch her breath as she read , " be you not proud ? " for it be an account of an annual gathering of the Geographical Society , and Lord Hollingford have read a letter he have receive from Roger Hamley , date from Arracuoba , a district in Africa , hitherto unvisite by any intelligent european traveller ; and about which Mr. Hamley send many curious particular . the reading of this letter have be receive with the great interest , and several subsequent speaker have pay the writer very high compliment . 

 but molly might have know Cynthia well than to expect an answer responsive to the feeling that prompt her question . let Cynthia be ever so proud , ever so glad , or so grateful , or even indignant , remorseful , grieve or sorry , the very fact that she be expect by another to entertain any of these emotion , would have be enough to prevent she express they . 

 " I be afraid I be not as much strike by the wonder of the thing as you be , molly . besides , it be not news to I ; at least , not entirely . I hear about the meeting before I leave London ; it be a good deal talk about in my uncle 's set ; to be sure , I do not   hear all the fine thing they say of he there but then , you know , that be a mere fashion of speaking , which mean nothing ; somebody be bind to pay compliment when a lord take the trouble to read one of his letter aloud . " 

 " nonsense , " say Molly . " you know you do not   believe what you be say , Cynthia . " 

 Cynthia give that pretty little jerk of her shoulder , which be her equivalent for a french shrug , but do not lift up her head from her sewing . molly begin to read the report over again . 

 " why , Cynthia ! " she say , " you might have be there ; lady be there . it say ' many lady be present . ' oh , could not   you have manage to go ? if your uncle 's set care about these thing , would not   some of they have take you ? " 

 " perhaps , if I have ask they . but I think they would have be rather astonish at my sudden turn for science . " 

 " you might have tell your uncle how matter really stand , he would not   have talk about it if you have wish he not , I be sure , and he could have help you . " 

 " once for all , molly , " say Cynthia , now lay down her work , and speak with quick authority , " do learn to understand that it be , and always have be my wish , not to have the relation which Roger and I bear to each other , mention or talk about . when the right time come , I will make it known to my uncle , and to everybody whom it may concern ; but I be not go to make mischief , and get myself into trouble even for the sake of hear compliment pay to he by let it out before the time . if I be push to it , I would soon break it off altogether at once , and have do with it . I can not   be bad off than I be now . " her angry tone have change into a kind of desponding complaint before she have end her sentence . molly look at she with dismay . 

 " I can not   understand you , Cynthia , " she say at length . 

 " no ; I daresay you can not , " say Cynthia , look at she with tear in her eye , and very tenderly , as if in atonement for her late vehemence . " I be afraid I hope you never will . " 

 in a moment , Molly 's arm be round she . " oh , Cynthia , " she murmur , " have I be plague you ? have I vex you ? do not   say you be afraid of my know you . of course you have   your fault , everybody have , but I think I love you the well for they . " 

 " I do not   know that I be so very bad , " say Cynthia , smile a little through the tear that Molly 's word and caress have force to overflow from her eye . " but I have get into scrape . I be in a scrape now . I do sometimes believe I shall always be in scrape , and if they ever come to light , I shall seem to be bad than I really be ; and I know your father will throw I off , and I no , I will not   be afraid that you will , molly . " 

 " I be sure I will not . be they do you think how would Roger take it ? " ask Molly , very timidly . 

 " I do not   know . I hope he will never hear of it . I do not   see why he should , for in a little while I shall be quite clear again . it all come about without my ever think I be do wrong . I have   a great mind to tell you all about it , molly . " 

 molly do not like to urge it , though she long to know , and to see if she could not offer help ; but while Cynthia be hesitate , and perhaps , to say the truth , rather regret that she have even make this slight advance towards bestow her confidence , Mrs. Gibson come in , full of some manner of alter a gown of her , so as to make it into the fashion of the day , as she have see it during her visit to London . Cynthia seem to forget her tear and her trouble , and to throw her whole soul into millinery . 

 Cynthia 's correspondence go on pretty briskly with her London cousin , accord to the usual rate of correspondence in those day . indeed , Mrs. Gibson be occasionally incline to complain of the frequency of Helen Kirkpatrick 's letter ; for before the penny post come in , the recipient have to pay the postage of letter ; and eleven - pence - halfpenny three time a week come , accord to Mrs. Gibson 's mode of reckon when annoyed , to a sum " between three and four shilling . " but these complaint be only for the family ; they see the wrong side of the tapestry . hollingford in general , Miss Brownings in particular , hear of " dear Helen 's enthusiastic friendship for Cynthia , " and of " the real pleasure it be to receive such constant news relay of news indeed from London . it be almost as good as live there ! " 

 " a great deal well I should think , " say Miss Browning with some severity . for she have get many of her notion of the metropolis from the British Essayists , where town be so often represent as the centre of dissipation , corrupt country wife and squire ' daughter , and unfit they for all their duty by the constant whirl of its not always innocent pleasure . London be a sort of moral pitch , which few could touch and not be defile . Miss Browning have be on the watch for the sign of deterioration in Cynthia 's character ever since her return home . but , except in a great number of pretty and become article of dress , there be no great change for the bad to be perceive . Cynthia have be " in the world , " have " beheld the glare and glitter and dazzle display of London , " yet have come back to Hollingford as ready as ever to place a chair for Miss Browning , or to gather flower for a nosegay for Miss Phobe , or to mend her own clothe . but all this be set down to the merit of Cynthia , not to the credit of London - town . 

 " as far as I can judge of London , " say Miss Browning , sententiously continue her tirade against the place , " it be no well than a pickpocket and a robber dress up in the spoil of honest folk . I should like to know where my Lord Hollingford be breed , and Mr. Roger Hamley . your good husband lend I that report of the meeting , Mrs. Gibson , where so much be say about they both , and he be as proud of their praise as if he have be akin to they , and Phobe read it aloud to I , for the print be too small for my eye ; she be a good deal perplex with all the new name of place , but I say she have well skip they all , for we have never hear of they before and probably should never hear of they again , but she read out the fine thing they say of my lord , and Mr. Roger , and I put it to you , where be they bear and breed ? why , within eight mile of Hollingford ; it might have be molly there or I ; it be all a chance ; and then they go and talk about the pleasure of intellectual society in London , and the distinguished people up there that it be such an advantage to know , and all the time I know it be only shop and the play that be the real attraction . but that be neither here nor there . we all put our good foot foremost , and if we have a reason to give that look sensible we speak it out like man , and never say anything about the silliness we be hug to our heart . but I ask you again , where do this fine society come from , and these wise man , and these distinguished traveller ? why , out of country parish like this ! London pick them all up , and deck herself with they , and then call out loud to the folk she be rob , and say , ' come and see how fine I be . ' fine , indeed ! I have   no patience with London : Cynthia be much well out of it ; and I be not sure , if I be you , Mrs. Gibson , if I would not   stop up those London letter : they will only be unsettle she . " 

 " but perhaps she may live in London some of these day , Miss Browning , " simper Mrs. Gibson . 

 " time enough then to be think of London . I wish she an honest country husband with enough to live upon , and a little to lay by , and a good character to boot . mind that , molly , " say she , fire round upon the startled Molly ; " I wish Cynthia a husband with a good character ; but she be get a mother to look after she ; you have   none , and when your mother be alive she be a dear friend of mine : so I be not go to let you throw yourself away upon any one whose life be not   clear and above - board , you may depend upon it ! " 

 this last speech fall like a bomb into the quiet little drawing - room , it be deliver with such vehemence . Miss Browning , in her secret heart , mean it as a warning against the intimacy she believe that Molly have form with Mr. Preston ; but as it happen that Molly have never dream of any such intimacy , the girl could not imagine why such severity of speech should be address to she . Mrs. Gibson , who always take up the point of every word or action where they touch her own self   and call it sensitiveness , break the silence that follow Miss Browning 's speech by say , plaintively , 

 " I be sure , Miss Browning , you be very much mistaken if you think that any mother could take more care of Molly than I do . I do not   I can not   think there be any need for any one to interfere to protect she , and I have not an idea why you have be talk in this way , just as if we be all wrong , and you be all right . it hurt my feeling , indeed it do ; for Molly can tell you there be not a thing or a favour that Cynthia have , that she have not . and as for not take care of she , why , if she be to go up to London to - morrow , I should make a point of go with she to see after she ; and I never do it for Cynthia when she be at school in France ; and her bedroom be furnish just like Cynthia 's , and I let she wear my red shawl whenever she like she might have it oftener if she would . I can not   think what you mean , Miss Browning . " 

 " I do not mean to offend you , but I mean just to give molly a hint . she understand what I mean . " 

 " I be sure I do not , " say Molly , boldly . " I have not   a notion what you mean , if you be allude to anything more than you say straight out , that you do not wish I to marry any one who have not   a good character , and that , as you be a friend of mamma 's , you would prevent my marry a man with a bad character , by every mean in your power . I be not think of marry ; I do not   want to marry anybody at all ; but if I do , and he be not a good man , I should thank you for come and warn I of it . " 

 " I shall not stand on warn you , molly . I shall forbid the bann in church , if need be , " say Miss Browning , half convince of the clear transparent truth of what Molly have say blush all over , it be true , but with her steady eye fix on Miss Browning 's face while she speak . 

 " do ! " say Molly . 

 " well , well , I will not   say any more . perhaps I be mistaken . we will not   say any more about it . but remember what I have say , molly ; there be no harm in that , at any rate . I be sorry I hurt your feeling , Mrs. Gibson . as stepmother go , I think you try and do your duty . good morning . good - by to you both , and God bless you . " 

 if Miss Browning think that her final blessing would secure peace in the room she be leave , she be very much mistaken ; Mrs. Gibson burst out with , 

 " try and do my duty , indeed ! I should be much oblige to you , Molly , if you would take care not to behave in such a manner as to bring down upon I such impertinence as I have just be receive from Miss Browning . " 

 " but I do not   know what make her talk as she do , mamma , " say Molly . 

 " I be sure I do not   know , and I do not   care either . but I know that I never be speak to as if I be try to do my duty before , ' try ' indeed ! everybody always know that I do it , without talk about it before my face in that rude manner . I have   that deep feeling about duty that I think it ought only to be talk about in church , and in such sacred place as that ; not to have a common caller startle one with it , even though she be an early friend of your mother 's . and as if I do not   look after you quite as much as I look after Cynthia ! why , it be only yesterday I go up into Cynthia 's room and find she read a letter that she put away in a hurry as soon as I come in , and I do not   even ask she who it be from , and I be sure I should have make you tell I . " 

 very likely . Mrs. Gibson shrink from any conflict with Cynthia , pretty sure that she would be worst in the end ; while molly generally submit soon than have any struggle for her own will . 

 just then Cynthia come in . 

 " what be the matter ? " say she quickly , see that something be wrong . 

 " why , Molly have be do something which have set that impertinent Miss Browning off into lecture I on try to do my duty ! if your poor father have but live , Cynthia , I should never have be speak to as I have be . ' a stepmother try to do her duty , ' indeed ! that be Miss Browning 's expression . " 

 any allusion to her father take from Cynthia all desire of irony . she come forward , and again ask Molly what be the matter . 

 molly , herself ruffle , make answer , 

 " Miss Browning seem to think I be likely to marry some one whose character be objectionable " 

 " you , Molly ? " say Cynthia . 

 " yes she once before speak to I , I suspect she have get some notion about Mr. Preston in her head " 

 Cynthia sate down quite suddenly . molly go on : " and she speak as if mamma do not look enough after I , I think she be rather provoke " 

 " not rather , but very very impertinent , " say Mrs. Gibson , a little soothe by Molly 's recognition of her grievance . 

 " what could have put it into her head ? " say Cynthia , very quietly , take up her sewing as she speak . 

 " I do not   know , " say her mother , reply to the question after her own fashion . " I be sure I do not   always approve of Mr. Preston ; but even if it be he she be think about , he be far more agreeable than she be ; and I have much rather have he come to call than an old maid like she any day . " 

 " I do not   know that it be Mr. Preston she be think about , " say Molly . " it be only a guess . when you be both in London she speak about he , I think she have hear something about you and he , Cynthia . " unseen by her mother Cynthia look up at Molly , her eye full of prohibition , her cheek full of angry colour . molly stop short suddenly . after that look she be surprised at the quietness with which Cynthia say , almost immediately , 

 " well , after all , it be only your fancy that she be allude to Mr. Preston , so perhaps we have well not say any more about he ; and as for her advice to mamma to look after you well , Miss Molly , I will stand bail for your good behaviour ; for both mamma and I know you be the last person to do any foolish thing in that way . and now do not   let we talk any more about it . I be come to tell you that Hannah Brand 's little boy have be badly burn , and his sister be downstairs ask for old linen . " 

 Mrs. Gibson be always kind to poor people , and she immediately get up and go to her store to search for the article want . 

 Cynthia turn quietly round to Molly . 

 " molly , pray do not   ever allude to anything between I and Mr. Preston , not to mamma , nor to any one . never do ! I have   a reason for it , do not   say anything more about it , ever . " 

 Mrs. Gibson come back at this moment , and Molly have to stop short again on the brink of Cynthia 's confidence ; uncertain indeed this time , whether she would have be tell anything more , and only sure that she have annoy Cynthia a good deal . 

 but the time be approach when she would know all . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLII . 

 the STORM BURSTS . 
 

 the autumn drift away through all its season . the golden corn - harvest , the walk through the stubble - field , and ramble into hazel - copse in search of nut ; the stripping of the apple - orchard of their ruddy fruit , amid the joyous cry and shout of watch child ; and the gorgeous tulip - like colouring of the later time have now come on with the shortening day . there be comparative silence in the land , except for the distant shot , and the whirr of the partridge as they rise up from the field . 

 ever since Miss Browning 's unlucky conversation , thing have be ajar in the Gibsons ' house . Cynthia seem to keep every one out at   mental   arms'-length ; and particularly avoid any private talk with Molly . Mrs. Gibson , still cherish a grudge against Miss Browning for her imply accusation of not look enough after molly , choose to exercise a most wearying supervision over the poor girl . it be , " where have you be , child ? " " who do you see ? " " who be that letter from ? " " why be you so long out when you have only to go to so - and - so ? " just as if molly have really be detect in carry on some underhand intercourse . she answer every question ask of she with the simple truthfulness of perfect innocence ; but the inquiry   although she read their motive , and know that they arise from no especial suspicion of her conduct , but only that Mrs. Gibson might be able to say that she look well after her stepdaughter   chafe she inexpressibly . very often she do not go out at all , soon than have to give a plan of her intended proceeding , when perhaps she have no plan at all , only thought of wander out at her own sweet will , and of take pleasure in the bright solemn fade of the year . it be a very heavy time for Molly , zest and life have flee , and leave so many of the old delight mere shell of seem . she think it be that her youth have flee ; at nineteen ! Cynthia be no long the same , somehow : and perhaps Cynthia 's change would injure she in the distant Roger 's opinion . her stepmother seem almost kind in comparison with Cynthia 's withdrawal of her heart ; Mrs. Gibson worry she , to be sure , with all these form of watch over she ; but in all her other way , she , at any rate , be the same . yet Cynthia herself seem anxious and care - wear , though she would not speak of her anxiety to Molly . and then the poor girl in her goodness would blame herself for feel Cynthia 's change of manner ; for as Molly say to herself , " if it be hard work for I to help always fret after Roger , and wonder where he be , and how he be , what must it be for she ? " 

 one day Mr. Gibson come in , bright and swift . 

 " molly , " say he , " where be Cynthia ? " 

 " go out to do some errand " 

 " well , it be a pity but never mind . put on your bonnet and cloak as fast as you can . I have   have to borrow old Simpson 's dog - cart , there would have be room both for you and Cynthia ; but as it be , you must walk back alone . I will drive you as far on the Barford Road as I can , and then you must jump down . I can not   take you on to Broadhurst 's , I may be keep there for hour . " 

 Mrs. Gibson be out of the room ; out of the house it might be , for all molly care , now she have her father 's leave and command . her bonnet and cloak be on in two minute , and she be sit by her father 's side , the back seat shut up , and the light weight go swiftly and merrily bump over the stone - pave lane . 

 " oh , this be charming ! " say Molly , after a toss - up on her seat from a tremendous bump . 

 " for youth , but not for crab age , " say Mr. Gibson . " my bone be get rheumatic , and would rather go smoothly over macadamize street . " 

 " that be treason to this lovely view and this fine pure air , papa . only I do not   believe you . " 

 " thank you . as you be so complimentary , I think I shall put you down at the foot of this hill ; we have   pass the second mile - stone from Hollingford . " 

 " oh , let I just go up to the top ! I know we can see the blue range of the Malverns from it , and Dorrimer Hall among the wood ; the horse will want a minute 's rest , and then I will get down without a word . " 

 so she go up to the top of the hill ; and there they sate still a minute or two , enjoy the view , without much speak . the wood be golden ; the old house of purple - red brick , with its twisted chimney , rise up from among they face on to green lawn , and a placid lake ; beyond again be the Malvern Hills . 

 " now jump down , lassie , and make the good of your way home before it get dark . you will find the cut over Croston heath shorter than the road we have   come by . " 

 to get to Croston Heath , Molly have to go down a narrow lane overshadow by tree , with picturesque old cottage dot here and there on the steep sandy bank ; and then there come a small wood , and then there be a brook to be cross on a plank - bridge , and up the steeper field on the opposite side be cut step in the turfy path ; these end , she be on Croston Heath , a wide - stretch common skirt by labourer ' dwelling , past which a near road to Hollingford lay . 

 the lonely part of the road be the first the lane , the wood , the little bridge , and the clambering through the upland field . but molly care little for loneliness . she go along the lane under the over - arch elm - branch , from which , here and there , a yellow leaf come float down upon her very dress ; past the last cottage where a little child have tumble down the slop bank , and be publish the accident with frightened cry . molly stoop to pick it up , and take it in her arm in a manner which cause intense surprise to take the place of alarm in its little breast , she carry it up the rough flag step towards the cottage which she suppose to be its home . the mother come run in from the garden behind the house , still hold the late damson she have be gather in her apron ; but , on see she , the little creature hold out its arm to go to she , and she drop her damson all about as she take it , and begin to soothe it as it cry afresh , intersperse her lulling with thank to Molly . she call she by her name ; and on molly ask the woman how she come to know it , she reply that before her marriage she have be a servant of Mrs. Goodenough , and so be " bind to know Dr. Gibson 's daughter by sight . " after the exchange of two or three more word , Molly run down into the lane , and pursue her way , stop here and there to gather a nosegay of such leaf as strike she for their brilliant colouring . she enter the wood . as she turn a corner in the lonely path , she hear a passionate voice of distress ; and in an instant she recognize Cynthia 's tone . she stand still and look around . there be some thick holly - bush shin out dark green in the midst of the amber and scarlet foliage . if any one be there , it must be behind these thick bush . so Molly leave the path , and go straight , plunge through the brown tangled growth of fern and underwood , and turn the holly bush . there stand Mr. Preston and Cynthia ; he hold her hand tight , each look as if just silence in some vehement talk by the rustle of Molly 's footstep . 

  there stand Mr. Preston and Cynthia . 
 there stand Mr. Preston and Cynthia . 
 click to enlarge 
 for an instant no one speak . then Cynthia say , 

 " oh , Molly , Molly , come and judge between we ! " 

 Mr. Preston let go Cynthia 's hand slowly , with a look that be more of a sneer than a smile ; and yet he , too , have be strongly agitated , whatever be the subject in dispute . molly come forward and take Cynthia 's arm , her eye steadily fix on Mr. Preston 's face . it be fine to see the fearlessness of her perfect innocence . he could not bear her look , and say to Cynthia , 

 " the subject of our conversation do not well admit of a third person 's presence . as Miss Gibson seem to wish for your company now , I must beg you to fix some other time and place where we can finish our discussion . " 

 " I will go if Cynthia wish I , " say Molly . 

 " no , no ; stay I want you to stay I want you to hear it all I wish I have tell you soon . " 

 " you mean that you regret that she have not be make aware of our engagement that you promise long ago to be my wife . pray remember that it be you who make I promise secrecy , not I you ! " 

 " I do not   believe he , Cynthia . do not , do not   cry if you can help it ; I do not   believe he . " 

 " Cynthia , " say he , suddenly change his tone to fervid tenderness , " pray , pray do not go on so ; you can not   think how it distress I ! " he step forward to try and take her hand and soothe she ; but she shrink away from he , and sob the more irrepressibly . she feel Molly 's presence so much to be a protection that now she dare to let herself go , and to weaken herself by give way to her emotion . 

 " go away ! " say Molly . " do not   you see you make she bad ? " but he do not stir ; he be look at Cynthia so intently that he do not seem even to hear she . " go , " say Molly , vehemently , " if it really distress you to see her cry . do not   you see , it be you who be the cause of it ? " 

 " I will go if Cynthia tell I , " say he at length . 

 " oh , Molly , I do not   know what to do , " say Cynthia , take down her hand from her tear - stain face , and appeal to Molly , and sob bad than ever ; in fact , she become hysterical , and though she try to speak coherently , no intelligible word would come . 

 " run to that cottage in the tree , and fetch she a cup of water , " say molly . he hesitate a little . 

 " why do not   you go ? " say Molly , impatiently . 

 " I have not do speak to she ; you will not leave before I come back ? " 

 " no . do not   you see she can not   move in this state ? " 

 he go quickly , if reluctantly . 

 Cynthia be some time before she could check her sob enough to speak . at length she say , " molly , I do hate he ! " 

 " but what do he mean by say you be engage to he ? do not   cry , dear , but tell I ; if I can help you I will , but I can not   imagine what it all really be . " 

 " it be too long a story to tell now , and I be not strong enough . look ! he be come back . as soon as I can , let we get home . " 

 " with all my heart , " say Molly . 

 he bring the water , and Cynthia drank , and be restore to calmness . 

 " now , " say Molly , " we have well go home as fast as you can manage it ; it be get dark quickly . " 

 if she hop to carry Cynthia off so easily she be mistaken . Mr. Preston be resolute on this point . he say 

 " I think since Miss Gibson have make herself acquainted with this much , we have well let she know the whole truth that you be engage to marry I as soon as you be twenty ; otherwise your be here with I , and by appointment too , may appear strange even equivocal to she . " 

 " as I know that Cynthia be engage to another man , you can hardly expect I to believe what you say , Mr. Preston . " 

 " oh , Molly , " say Cynthia , tremble all over , but try to be calm , " I be not engage neither to the person you mean , nor to Mr. Preston . " 

 Mr. Preston force a smile . " I think I have some letter that would convince Miss Gibson of the truth of what I have say ; and which will convince Mr. Osborne Hamley , if necessary I conclude it be to he she be allude . " 

 " I be quite puzzle by you both , " say Molly . " the only thing I do know be , that we ought not to be stand here at this time of evening , and that Cynthia and I shall go home directly . if you want to talk to Miss Kirkpatrick , Mr. Preston , why do not   you come to my father 's house , and ask to see she openly , and like a gentleman ? " 

 " I be perfectly willing , " say he ; " I shall only be too glad to explain to Mr. Gibson on what term I stand in relation to she . if I have not do it soon , it be because I have yield to her wish . " 

 " pray , pray do not . molly you do not   know all you do not   know anything about it ; you mean well and kindly , I know , but you be only make mischief . I be quite well enough to walk , do let we go ; I will tell you all about it when we be at home . " she take Molly 's arm and try to hasten she away ; but Mr. Preston follow , talk as he walk by their side . 

 " I do not know what you will say at home ; but can you deny that you be my promise wife ? can you deny that it have only be at your earnest request that I have keep the engagement secret so long ? " he be unwise Cynthia stop , and turn at bay . 

 " since you will have it out , since I must speak here , I own that what you say be literally true ; that when I be a neglect girl of sixteen , you whom I believe to be a friend , lend I money at my need , and make I give you a promise of marriage . " 

 " make you ! " say he , lay an emphasis on the first word . 

 Cynthia turn scarlet . " ' make ' be not the right word , I confess . I like you then you be almost my only friend and , if it have be a question of immediate marriage , I daresay I should never have object . but I know you well now ; and you have persecute I so of late , that I tell you once for all   as I have tell you before , till I be sick of the very word , that nothing shall ever make I marry you . nothing ! I see there be no chance of escape exposure and , I daresay , lose my character , and I know lose all the few friend I have . " 

 " never I , " say Molly , touch by the wail tone of despair that Cynthia be fall into . 

 " it be hard , " say Mr. Preston . " you may believe all the bad thing you like about I , Cynthia , but I do not   think you can doubt my real , passionate , disinterested love for you . " 

 " I do doubt it , " say Cynthia , break out with fresh energy . " ah ! when I think of the self - deny affection I have see I have know affection that think of other before itself " 

 Mr. Preston break in at the pause she make . she be afraid of reveal too much to he . 

 " you do not call it love which have be willing to wait for year to be silent while silence be desire to suffer jealousy and to bear neglect , rely on the solemn promise of a girl of sixteen for solemn say flimsy , when that girl grow old . Cynthia , I have love you , and I do love you , and I will not   give you up . if you will but keep your word , and marry I , I will swear I will make you love I in return . " 

 " oh , I wish I wish I have never borrow that unlucky money , it be the beginning of it all . oh , Molly , I have save and scrimp to repay it , and he will not   take it now ; I think if I could but repay it , it would set I free . " 

 " you seem to imply you sell yourself for twenty pound , " he say . they be nearly on the common now , close to the protection of the cottage , in very hearing of their inmate ; if neither of the other two thought of this , Molly do , and resolve in her mind to call in at one of they , and ask for the labourer 's protection home ; at any rate his presence must put a stop to this miserable altercation . 

 " I do not sell myself ; I like you then . but oh , how I do hate you now ! " cry Cynthia , unable to contain her word . 

 he bow and turn back , vanish rapidly down the field staircase . at any rate that be a relief . yet the two girl hasten on , as if he be still pursue they . once , when molly say something to Cynthia , the latter reply 

 " Molly , if you pity I if you love I do not   say anything more just now . we shall have to look as if nothing have happen when we get home . come to my room when we go upstairs to bed , and I will tell you all . I know you will blame I terribly , but I will tell you all . " 

 so Molly do not say another word till they reach home ; and then , comparatively at ease , inasmuch as no one perceive how late be their return to the house , each of the girl go up into their separate room , to rest and calm themselves before dress for the necessary family gathering at dinner . molly feel as if she be so miserably shake that she could not have go down at all , if her own interest only have be at stake . she sate by her dressing - table , hold her head in her hand , her candle unlighte , and the room in soft darkness , try to still her beat heart , and to recall all she have hear , and what would be its bearing on the life of those whom she love . Roger . oh , Roger ! far away in mysterious darkness of distance loving as he do   ah , that be love ! that be the love to which Cynthia have refer , as worthy of the name !   and the object of his love claim by another false to one she must be ! how could it be ? what would he think and feel if ever he come to know it ? it be of no use try to imagine his pain that could do no good . what lie before Molly be , to try and extricate Cynthia , if she could help she by thought , or advice , or action ; not to weaken herself by let her fancy run into picture of possible , probable suffering . 

 when she go into the drawing - room before dinner , she find Cynthia and her mother by themselves . there be candle in the room , but they be not light , for the wood - fire blaze merrily if fitfully , and they be await Mr. Gibson 's return , which might be expect at any minute . Cynthia sate in the shade , so it be only by her sensitive ear that Molly could judge of her state of composure . Mrs. Gibson be tell some of her day 's adventure whom she have find at home in the call she have be make ; who have be out ; and the small piece of news she have hear . to Molly 's quick sympathy Cynthia 's voice sound languid and weary , but she make all the proper reply , and express the proper interest at the right place , and Molly come to the rescue , chime in , with an effort , it be true ; but Mrs. Gibson be not one to notice slight shade or difference in manner . when Mr. Gibson return , the relative position of the party be alter . it be Cynthia now who raise herself into liveliness , partly from a consciousness that he would have notice any depression , and partly because Cynthia be one of those natural coquette , who , from their cradle to their grave , instinctively bring out all their prettiest air and grace in order to stand well with any man , young or old , who may happen to be present . she listen to his remark and story with all the sweet intentness of happy day , till Molly , silent and wonder , could hardly believe that the Cynthia before she be the same girl as she who be sob and cry as if her heart would break , but two hour before . it be true she look pale and heavy - eye , but that be the only sign she give of her past trouble , which yet must be a present care , think molly . after dinner , Mr. Gibson go out to his town patient ; Mrs. Gibson subside into her arm - chair , hold a sheet of the Times before she , behind which she take a quiet and lady - like doze . Cynthia have a book in one hand , with the other she shade her eye from the light . molly alone could neither read , nor sleep , nor work . she sate in the seat in the bow - window ; the blind be not draw down , for there be no danger of their be overlook . she gaze into the soft outer darkness , and find herself strive to discern the outline of object the cottage at the end of the garden the great beech - tree with the seat round it the wire arch , up which the summer rose have clamber ; each come out faint and dim against the dusky velvet of the atmosphere . presently tea come , and there be the usual nightly bustle . the table be clear , Mrs. Gibson rouse herself , and make the same remark about dear papa that she have do at the same hour for week past . Cynthia too do not look different from usual . and yet what a hide mystery do her calmness hide ! think molly . at length come bed - time , and the customary little speech . both Molly and Cynthia go to their own room without exchange a word . when molly be in hers she have forget whether she be to go to Cynthia , or Cynthia to come to she . she take off her gown and put on her dressing - gown , and stand and wait , and even sit down for a minute or two : but Cynthia do not come , so Molly go and knock at the opposite door , which , to her surprise , she find shut . when she enter the room Cynthia sate by her dressing - table , just as she have come up from the drawing - room . she have be lean her head on her arm , and seem almost to have forget the tryst she have make with Molly , for she look up as if startle , and her face do seem full of worry and distress ; in her solitude she make no more exertion , but give way to thought of care . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLIII . 

 CYNTHIA 's CONFESSION . 
 

 " you say I might come , " say Molly , " and that you would tell I all . " 

 " you know all , I think , " say Cynthia , heavily . " perhaps you do not   know what excuse I have , but at any rate you know what a scrape I be in . " 

 " I have   be think a great deal , " say Molly , timidly and doubtfully . " and I can not   help fancy if you tell papa " 

 before she could go on , Cynthia have stand up . 

 " no ! " say she . " that I will not . unless I be to leave here at once . and you know I have not another place to go to without warn , I mean . I daresay my uncle would take I in ; he be a relation , and would be bind to stand by I in whatever disgrace I might be ; or perhaps I might get a governess 's situation a pretty governess I should be ! " 

 " pray , please , Cynthia , do not   go off into such wild talking . I do not   believe you have   do so very wrong . you say you have not , and I believe you . that horrid man have manage to get you involve in some way ; but I be sure papa could set it to right , if you would only make a friend of he , and tell he all " 

 " no , Molly , " say Cynthia , " I can not , and there be an end of it . you may if you like , only let I leave the house first ; give I that much time . " 

 " you know I would never tell anything you wish I not to tell , Cynthia , " say Molly , deeply hurt . 

 " would you not , darling ? " say Cynthia , take her hand . " will you promise I that ? quite a sacred promise ? for it would be such a comfort to I to tell you all , now you know so much . " 

 " yes ! I will promise not to tell . you should not have doubt I , " say Molly , still a little sorrowfully . 

 " very well . I trust to you . I know I may . " 

 " but do think of tell papa , and get he to help you , " persevere molly . 

 " never , " say Cynthia , resolutely , but more quietly than before . " do you think I forget what he say at the time of that wretche Mr. Coxe ; how severe he be , and how long I be in disgrace , if indeed I be out of it now ? I be one of those people , as mamma say sometimes I can not live with person who do not   think well of I . it may be a weakness , or a sin , I be sure I do not   know , and I do not   care ; but I really can not be happy in the same house with any one who know my fault , and think that they be great than my merit . now you know your father would do that . I have often tell you that he   and you too , molly ,   have a high standard than I have ever know . oh , I could not   bear it ; if he be to know he would be so angry with I he would never get over it , and I have so like he ! I do so like he ! " 

 " well , never mind , dear ; he shall not know , " say Molly , for Cynthia be again become hysterical , " at least , we will say no more about it now . " 

 " and you will never say any more never promise I , " say Cynthia , take her hand eagerly . 

 " never till you give I leave . now do let I see if I can not help you . lie down on the bed , and I will sit by you , and let we talk it over . " 

 but Cynthia sit down again in the chair by the dressing - table . 

 " when do it all begin ? " say Molly , after a long pause of silence . 

 " long ago four or five year . I be such a child to be leave all to myself . it be the holiday , and mamma be away visit , and the Donaldsons ask I to go with they to the Worcester Festival . you can not   fancy how pleasant it all sound , especially to I . I have be shut up in that great dreary house at Ashcombe , where mamma have her school ; it belong to Lord Cumnor , and Mr. Preston as his agent have to see it all paint and paper ; but , besides that , he be very intimate with we ; I believe mamma think no , I be not sure about that , and I have enough blame to lay at her door , to prevent my tell you anything that may be only fancy " 

 then she pause and sate still for a minute or two , recall the past . molly be strike by the aged and careworn expression which have take temporary hold of the brilliant and beautiful face ; she could see from that how much Cynthia must have suffer from this hide trouble of her . 

 " well ! at any rate we be intimate with he , and he come a great deal about the house , and know as much as any one of mamma 's affair , and all the in and out of her life . I be tell you this in order that you may understand how natural it be for I to answer his question when he come one day and find I , not cry , for you know I be not much give to that , in spite of to - day 's exposure of myself ; but fret and fume because , though mamma have write word I might go with the Donaldsons , she have never say how I be to get any money for the journey , much less for anything of dress , and I have outgrow all my last year 's frock , and as for glove and boot in short , I really have hardly clothe decent enough for church " 

 " why do not   you write to she and tell she all this ? " say molly , half afraid of appear to cast blame by her very natural question . 

 " I wish I have her letter to show you ; you must have see some of mamma 's letter , though ; do not   you know how she always seem to leave out just the important point of every fact ? in this case she descant largely on the enjoyment she be have , and the kindness she be receive , and her wish that I could have be with she , and her gladness that I too be go to have some pleasure ; but the only thing that would have be of real use to I she leave out , and that be where she be go to next . she mention that she be leave the house she be stop at the day after she write , and that she should be at home by a certain date ; but I get the letter on a Saturday , and the festival begin the next Tuesday " 

 " Poor Cynthia ! " say Molly . " still , if you have write , your letter might have be forward . I do not   mean to be hard , only I do so dislike the thought of your ever have make a friend of that man . " 

 " ah ! " say Cynthia , sigh . " how easy it be to judge rightly after one see what evil come from judge wrongly ! I be only a young girl , hardly more than a child , and he be a friend to we then except mamma , the only friend I know ; the donaldson be only kind and good - natured acquaintance . " 

 " I be sorry , " say Molly , humbly , " I have be so happy with papa . I hardly can understand how different it must have be with you . " 

 " different ! I should think so . the worry about money make I sick of my life . we might not say we be poor , it would have injure the school ; but I would have stint and starve if mamma and I have get on as happily together as we might have do as you and Mr. Gibson do . it be not the poverty ; it be that she never seem to care to have I with she . as soon as the holiday come round she be off to some great house or another ; and I daresay I be at a very awkward age to have I lounge about in the drawing - room when caller come . girl at the age I be then be so terribly keen at scent out motif , and put in their disagreeable question as to the little twisting and twirling and vanishing of conversation ; they have   no distinct notion of what be the truth and falsehood of polite life . at any rate , I be very much in mamma 's way , and I feel it . Mr. Preston seem to feel it too for I ; and I be very grateful to he for kind word and sympathetic look crumb of kindness which would have drop under your table unnoticed . so this day , when he come to see how the workman be get on , he find I in the deserted schoolroom , look at my faded summer bonnet and some old ribbon I have be sponge , and half - wear - out glove a sort of rag - fair spread out on the deal table . I be in a regular passion with only look at that shabbiness . he say he be so glad to hear I be go to this festival with the donaldson ; old Betty , our servant , have tell he the news , I believe . but I be so perplexed about money , and my vanity be so put out about my shabby dress , that I be in a pet , and say I should not   go . he sate down on the table , and little by little he make I tell he all my trouble . I do sometimes think he be very nice in those day . somehow I never feel as if it be wrong or foolish or anything to accept his offer of money at the time . he have twenty pound in his pocket , he say , and really do not   know what to do with it , should not   want it for month ; I could repay it , or rather mamma could , when it suit she . she must have know I should want money , and most likely think I should apply to he . twenty pound would not   be too much , I must take it all , and so on . I know at least I think I know that I should never spend twenty pound ; but I think I could give he back what I do not   want , and so well , that be the beginning ! it do not   sound so very wrong , do it , molly ? " 

 " no , " say Molly , hesitatingly . she do not wish to make herself into a hard judge , and yet she do so dislike Mr. Preston . Cynthia go on , 

 " well , what with boot and glove , and a bonnet and a mantle , and a white muslin gown , which be make for I before I leave on Tuesday , and a silk gown that follow to the donaldson ' , and my journey , and all , there be very little left of the twenty pound , especially when I find I must get a ball - dress in Worcester , for we be all to go to the Ball . Mrs. Donaldson give I my ticket , but she rather look grave at my idea of go to the Ball in my white muslin , which I have already wear two evening at their house . oh dear ! how pleasant it must be to be rich ! you know , " continue Cynthia , smile a very little , " I can not   help be aware that I be pretty , and that people admire I very much . I find it out first at the donaldson ' . I begin to think I do look pretty in my fine new clothe , and I see that other people think so too . I be certainly the belle of the house , and it be very pleasant to feel my power . the last day or two of that gay week Mr. Preston join our party . the last time he have see I be when I be dress in shabby clothe too small for I , half - cry in my solitude , neglected and penniless . at the donaldson ' I be a little queen ; and as I say , fine feather make fine bird , and all the people be make much of I ; and at that Ball , which be the first night he come , I have more partner than I know what to do with . I suppose he really do fall in love with I then . I do not   think he have do so before . and then I begin to feel how awkward it be to be in his debt . I could not   give myself air to he as I do to other . oh ! it be so awkward and uncomfortable ! but I like he , and feel he as a friend all the time . the last day I be walk in the garden along with the other , and I think I would tell he how much I have enjoy myself , and how happy I have be , all thank to his twenty pound   I be begin to feel like Cinderella when the clock be strike twelve , and to tell he it should be repay to he as soon as possible , though I turn sick at the thought of tell mamma , and know enough of our affair to understand how very difficult it would be to muster up the money . the end of our talk come very soon ; for , almost to my terror , he begin to talk violent love to I , and to beg I to promise to marry he . I be so frightened , that I run away to the other . but that night I get a letter from he , apologize for startle I , renew his offer , his entreaty for a promise of marriage , to be fulfil at any date I would please to name in fact , a most urgent love - letter , and in it a reference to my unlucky debt , which be to be a debt no long , only an advance of the money to be hereafter mine if only you can fancy it all , Molly , well than I can remember it to tell it you . " 

 " and what do you say ? " ask Molly , breathless . 

 " I do not answer it at all until another letter come , entreat for a reply . by that time mamma have come home , and the old daily pressure and plaint of poverty have come on . Mary Donaldson write to I often , sing the praise of Mr. Preston as enthusiastically as if she have be bribe to do it . I have see he a very popular man in their set , and I like he well enough , and feel grateful to he . so I write and give he my promise to marry he when I be twenty , but it be to be a secret till then . and I try to forget I have ever borrow money of he , but somehow as soon as I feel pledge to he I begin to hate he . I could not   endure his eagerness of greet if ever he find I alone ; and mamma begin to suspect , I think . I can not tell you all the in and out ; in fact , I do not   understand they at the time , and I do not   remember clearly how it all happen now . but I know that Lady Cuxhaven send mamma some money to be apply to my education , as she call it ; and mamma seem very much put out and in very low spirit , and she and I do not   get on at all together . so , of course , I never venture to name the hateful twenty pound to she , but go on try to think that if I be to marry Mr. Preston , it need never be pay very mean and wicked , I daresay ; but oh , Molly , I have   be punish for it , for how I abhor that man . " 

 " but why ? when do you begin to dislike he ? you seem to have take it very passively all this time . " 

 " I do not   know . it be grow upon I before I go to that school at Boulogne . he make I feel as if I be in his power ; and by too often remind I of my engagement to he , he make I critical of his word and way . there be an insolence in his manner to mamma , too . ah ! you be think that I be not too respectful a daughter and perhaps not ; but I could not   bear his covert sneer at her fault , and I hat his way of show what he call his ' love ' for I . then , after I have be a semestre at Mdme . Lefevre 's , a new english girl come a cousin of his , who know but little of I . now , Molly , you must forget as soon as I have   tell you what I be go to say ; and she use to talk so much and perpetually about her cousin Robert he be the great man of the family , evidently and how he be so handsome , and every lady of the land in love with he , a lady of title into the bargain . " 

 " Lady Harriet ! I daresay , " say Molly , indignantly . 

 " I do not   know , " say Cynthia , wearily . " I do not   care at the time , and I do not   care now ; for she go on to say there be a very pretty widow too , who make desperate love to he . he have often laugh with they at all her little advance , which she think he do not   see through . and , oh ! and this be the man I have promise to marry , and go into debt to , and write love - letter to ! so now you understand it all , Molly . " 

 " no , I do not   yet . what do you do on hear how he have speak about your mother ? " 

 " there be but one thing to do . I write and tell he I hat he , and would never , never marry he , and would pay he back his money and the interest on it as soon as ever I could . " 

 " well ? " 

 " and Mdme . Lefevre bring I back my letter , unopened , I will say ; and tell I that she do not   allow letter to gentleman to be send by the pupil of her establishment unless she have previously see their content . I tell she he be a family friend , the agent who manage mamma 's affair I really could not stick at the truth ; but she would not   let it go ; and I have to see she burn it , and to give she my promise I would not   write again before she would consent not to tell mamma . so I have to calm down and wait till I come home . " 

 " but you do not   see he then ; at least , not for some time ? " 

 " no , but I could write ; and I begin to try and save up my money to pay he . " 

 " what do he say to your letter ? " 

 " oh , at first he pretend not to believe I could be in earnest ; he think it be only pique , or a temporary offence to be apologize for and cover over with passionate protestation . " 

 " and afterwards ? " 

 " he condescend to threat ; and , what be bad , then I turn coward . I could not   bear to have it all know and talk about , and my silly letter show oh , such letter ! I can not bear to think of they , begin , ' my dear Robert , ' to that man " 

 " but , oh , Cynthia , how could you go and engage yourself to Roger ? " ask Molly . 

 " why not ? " say Cynthia , sharply turn round upon she . " I be free I be free ; it seem a way of assure myself that I be quite free ; and I do like Roger it be such a comfort to be bring into contact with people who could be rely upon ; and I be not a stock or a stone that I could fail to be touch with his tender , unselfish love , so different to Mr. Preston 's . I know you do not   think I good enough for he ; and , of course , if all this come out , he will not   think I good enough either "   fall into a plaintive tone very touching to hear ; " and sometimes I think I will give he up , and go off to some fresh life amongst stranger ; and once or twice I have   think I would marry Mr. Preston out of pure revenge , and have he for ever in my power only I think I should have the bad of it ; for he be cruel in his very soul tigerish , with his beautiful striped skin and relentless heart . I have so beg and beg he to let I go without exposure . " 

 " never mind the exposure , " say Molly . " it will recoil far more on he than harm you . " 

 Cynthia go a little paler . " but I say thing in those letter about mamma . I be quick - eyed enough to all her fault , and hardly understand the force of her temptation ; and he say he will show those letter to your father , unless I consent to acknowledge our engagement . " 

 " he shall not ! " say Molly , rise up in her indignation , and stand before Cynthia almost as resolutely fierce as if she be in the very presence of Mr. Preston himself . " I be not afraid of he . he dare not insult I , or if he do I do not   care . I will ask he for those letter , and see if he will dare to refuse I . " 

 " you do not   know he , " say Cynthia , shake her head . " he have make many an appointment with I , just as if he would take back the money which have be seal up ready for he this four month ; or as if he would give I back my letter . poor , poor Roger ! how little he think of all this ! when I want to write word of love to he I pull myself up , for I have write word as affectionate to that other man . and if Mr. Preston ever guess that Roger and I be engage , he would manage to be revenge on both he and I , by give we as much pain as he could with those unlucky letter write when I be not sixteen , Molly , only seven of they ! they be like a mine under my foot , which may blow up any day ; and down will come father and mother and all . " she end bitterly enough , though her word be so light . 

 " how can I get they ? " say Molly , think : " for get they I will . with papa to back I , he dare not refuse . " 

 " ah ! but that be just the thing . he know I be afraid of your father 's hearing of it all , more than of any one else . " 

 " and yet he think he love you ! " 

 " it be his way of love . he say often enough he do not   care what he do so that he get I to be his wife ; and that after that he be sure he can make I love he . " Cynthia begin to cry , out of weariness of body and despair of mind . Molly 's arm be round she in a minute , and she press the beautiful head to her bosom , and lay her own cheek upon it , and hush she up with lulling word , just as if Cynthia be a little child . 

 " oh , it be such a comfort to have tell you all ! " murmur Cynthia . and Molly make reply , " I be sure we have right on our side ; and that make I certain he must and shall give up the letter . " 

 " and take the money ? " add Cynthia , lift her head , and look eagerly into Molly 's face . " he must take the money . oh , Molly , you can never manage it all without its come out to your father ! and I would far rather go out to Russia as a governess . I almost think I would rather no , not that , " say she , shudder away from what she be go to say . " but he must not know please , Molly , he must not know . I could not   bear it . I do not   know what I might not do . you will promise I never to tell he , or mamma ? " 

 " I never will . you do not think I would for anything short of save " she be go to have say , ' save you and Roger from pain . " but Cynthia break in , 

 " for nothing . no reason whatever must make you tell your father . if you fail , you fail , and I will love you for ever for try ; but I shall be no bad off than before . well , indeed ; for I shall have the comfort of your sympathy . but promise I not to tell Mr. Gibson . " 

 " I have promise once , " say Molly , " but I promise again ; so now do go to bed , and try and rest . you be look as white as a sheet ; you will be ill if you do not   get some rest ; and it be past two o'clock , and you be shiver with cold . " 

 so they wish each other good - night . but when molly get into her room all her spirit leave she ; and she throw herself down on her bed , dress as she be , for she have no heart leave for anything . if Roger ever hear of it all by any chance , she feel how it would disturb his love for Cynthia . and yet be it right to conceal it from he ? she must try and persuade Cynthia to tell it all straight out to he as soon as he return to England . a full confession on her part would wonderfully lessen any pain he might have on first hearing of it . she lose herself in thought of Roger how he would feel , what he would say , how that meeting would come to pass , where he be at that very time , and so on , till she suddenly pluck herself up , and recollect what she herself have offer and promise to do . now that the first fervour be over , she see the difficulty clearly ; and the foremost of all be how she be to manage to have an interview with Mr. Preston . how have Cynthia manage ? and the letter that have pass between they too ? unwillingly , Molly be compel to perceive that there must have be a great deal of underhand work go on beneath Cynthia 's apparent openness of behaviour ; and still more unwillingly she begin to be afraid that she herself might be lead into the practice . but she would try and walk in a straight path ; and if she do wander out of it , it should only be to save pain to those whom she love . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLIV . 

 MOLLY gibson to the RESCUE . 
 

 it seem curious enough , after the storm of the night , to meet in smooth tranquillity at breakfast . Cynthia be pale ; but she talk as quietly as usual about all manner of indifferent thing , while molly sate silent , watch and wonder , and become convince that Cynthia must have go through a long experience of conceal her real thought and secret trouble before she could have be able to put on such a semblance of composure . among the letter that come in that morning be one from the London Kirkpatricks ; but not from Helen , Cynthia 's own particular correspondent . her sister write to apologize for Helen , who be not well , she say : have have the influenza , which have leave she very weak and poorly . 

 " let she come down here for change of air , " say Mr. Gibson . " the country at this time of the year be well than London , except when the place be surround by tree . now our house be well drain , high up , gravel - soil , and I will undertake to doctor she for nothing . " 

 " it would be charming , " say Mrs. Gibson , rapidly revolve in her mind the change necessary in her household economy before receive a young lady accustom to such a household as Mr. Kirkpatrick 's , calculate the consequent inconvenience , and weigh they against the probable advantage , even while she speak . " should not you like it , Cynthia ? and molly too ? you then , dear , would become acquainted with one of the girl , and I have no doubt you would be ask back again , which would be so very nice ! " 

 " and I should not   let she go , " say Mr. Gibson , who have acquire an unfortunate facility of read his wife 's thought . 

 " Dear Helen ! " go on Mrs. Gibson , " I should so like to nurse she ! we would make your consulting - room into her own private sitting - room , my dear . "   it be hardly necessary to say that the scale have be weigh down by the inconvenience of have a person behind the scene for several week . " for with an invalid so much depend on tranquillity . in the drawing - room , for instance , she might constantly be disturb by caller ; and the dining - room be so so what shall I call it ? so dinnery , the smell of meal never seem to leave it ; it would have be different if dear papa have allow I to throw out that window " 

 " why can not   she have the dressing - room for her bedroom , and the little room open out of the drawing - room for her sitting - room ? " ask Mr. Gibson . 

 " the library , " for by this name Mrs. Gibson choose to dignify what have formerly be call the book - closet " why , it would hardly hold a sofa , besides the book and the writing - table ; and there be draught everywhere . no , my dear , we have well not ask she at all , her own home be comfortable at any rate ! " 

 " well , well ! " say Mr. Gibson , see that he be to be worst , and not care enough about the matter to show fight . " perhaps you be right . it be a case of luxury versus fresh air . some people suffer more from want of the one than from want of the other . you know I shall be glad to see she if she like to come , and take we as we be , but I can not   give up the consulting - room . it be a necessity ; our daily bread ! " 

 " I will write and tell they how kind Mr. Gibson be , " say his wife in high contentment , as her husband leave the room . " they will be just as much oblige to he as if she have come ! " 

 whether it be Helen 's illness , or from some other cause , after breakfast Cynthia become very flat and absent , and this last all day long . molly understand now why her mood have be so changeable for many month , and be tender and forbear with she accordingly . towards evening , when the two girl be leave alone , Cynthia come and stand over Molly , so that her face could not be see . 

 " molly , " say she , " will you do it ? will you do what you say last night ? I have   be think of it all day , and sometimes I believe he would give you back the letter if you ask he ; he might fancy at any rate it be worth try , if you do not   very much dislike it . " 

 now it so happen that with every thought she have give to it , molly dislike the idea of the propose interview with Mr. Preston more and more ; but it be , after all , her own offer , and she neither could nor would draw back from it ; it might do good ; she do not see how it could possibly do harm . so she give her consent , and try to conceal her distaste , which grow upon she more and more as Cynthia hastily arrange the detail . 

 " you shall meet he in the avenue lead from the park lodge up to the Towers . he can come in one way from the Towers , where he have often business he have pass - key everywhere you can go in as we have often do by the lodge you need not go far . " 

 it do strike molly that Cynthia must have have some experience in make all these arrangement ; and she venture to ask how he be to be inform of all this . Cynthia only reddened and reply , " oh ! never mind ! he will only be too glad to come ; you hear he say he wish to discuss the affair more ; it be the first time the appointment have come from my side . if I can but once be free oh , Molly , I will love you , and be grateful to you all my life ! " 

 molly think of Roger , and that thought prompt she next speech . 

 " it must be horrible I think I be very brave but I do not   think I could have could have accept even Roger , with a half - cancel engagement hang over I . " she blush as she speak . 

 " you forget how I det Mr. Preston ! " say Cynthia . " it be that , more than any excess of love for Roger , that make I thankful to be at least as securely pledge to some one else . he do not want to call it an engagement , but I do ; because it give I the feeling of assurance that I be free from Mr. Preston . and so I be ! all but these letter . oh ! if you can but make he take back his abominable money , and get I my letter ! then we would bury it all in oblivion , and he could marry somebody else , and I would marry Roger , and no one would be the wiser . after all , it be only what people call ' youthful folly . ' and you may tell Mr. Preston that as soon as he make my letter public , show they to your father or anything , I will go away from Hollingford , and never come back . " 

 load with many such message , which she feel that she should never deliver , not really know what she should say , hat the errand , not satisfied with Cynthia 's manner of speak about her relation to Roger , oppress with shame and complicity in conduct which appear to her deceitful , yet willing to bear all and brave all , if she could once set Cynthia in a straight path in a clear space , and almost more pitiful to her friend 's great distress and possible disgrace , than able to give she that love which involve perfect sympathy , molly set out on her walk towards the appoint place . it be a cloudy , bluster day , and the noise of the blow wind among the nearly leafless branch of the great tree fill her ear , as she pass through the park - gate and enter the avenue . she walk quickly , instinctively wish to get her blood up , and have no time for thought . but there be a bend in the avenue about a quarter of a mile from the lodge ; after that bend it be a straight line up to the great house , now empty of its inhabitant . molly do not like go quite out of sight of the lodge , and she stand face it , close by the trunk of one of the tree . presently she hear a step come over the grass . it be Mr. Preston . he see a woman 's figure , half - behind the trunk of a tree , and make no doubt that it be Cynthia . but when he come near , almost close , the figure turn round , and , instead of the brilliantly coloured face of Cynthia , he meet the pale resolve look of Molly . she do not speak to greet he ; but though he feel sure from the general aspect of pallor and timidity that she be afraid of he , her steady gray eye meet his with courageous innocence . 

 " be cynthia unable to come ? " ask he , perceive that she expect he . 

 " I do not know you think that you should meet she , " say Molly , a little surprised . in her simplicity she have believe that Cynthia have name that it be she , Molly Gibson , who would meet Mr. Preston at a give time and place ; but Cynthia have be too worldly - wise for that , and have decoy he thither by a vaguely word note , which , while avoid actual falsehood , have lead he to believe that she herself would give he the meeting . 

 " she say she should be here , " say Mr. Preston , extremely annoyed at be entrap , as he now feel that he have be , into an interview with Miss Gibson . molly hesitate a little before she speak . he be determined not to break the silence ; as she have intrude herself into the affair , she should find her situation as awkward as possible . 

 " at any rate she send I here to meet you , " say Molly . " she have tell I exactly how matter stand between you and she . " 

 " have she ? " sneer he . " she be not always the most open or reliable person in the world ! " 

 molly redden . she perceive the impertinence of the tone ; and her temper be none of the cool . but she master herself and gain courage by so do . 

 " you should not speak so of the person you profess to wish to have for your wife . but put all that aside , you have some letter of hers that she wish to have back again . " 

 " I daresay . " 

 " and that you have no right to keep . " 

 " no legal , or no moral right ? which do you mean ? " 

 " I do not know ; simply you have no right at all , as a gentleman , to keep a girl 's letter when she ask for they back again , much less to hold they over she as a threat . " 

 " I see you do know all , Miss Gibson , " say he , change his manner to one of more respect . " at least she have tell you her story from her point of view , her side ; now you must hear mine . she promise I as solemnly as ever woman " 

 " she be not a woman , she be only a girl , barely sixteen . " 

 " old enough to know what she be do ; but I will call she a girl if you like . she promise I solemnly to be my wife , make the one stipulation of secrecy , and a certain period of waiting ; she write I letter repeat this promise , and confidential enough to prove that she consider herself bind to I by such an implied relation . I do not   give in to humbug I do not   set myself up as a saint and in most way I can look after my own interest pretty keenly ; you know enough of her position as a penniless girl , and at that time , with no influential connection to take the place of wealth , and help I on in the world , it be as sincere and unworldly a passion as ever man feel ; she must say so herself . I might have marry two or three girl with plenty of money ; one of they be handsome enough , and not at all reluctant . " 

 molly interrupt he : she be chafe at the conceit of his manner . " I beg your pardon , but I do not want to hear account of young lady whom you might have marry ; I come here simply on behalf of Cynthia , who do not like you , and who do not wish to marry you . " 

 " well , then , I must make she ' like ' I , as you call it . she do ' like ' I once , and make promise which she will find it require the consent of two people to break . I do not   despair of make her love I as much as ever she do , accord to her letter , at least , when we be marry . " 

 " she will never marry you , " say Molly , firmly . 

 " then if she ever honour any one else with her preference , he shall be allow the perusal of her letter to I . " 

 molly almost could have laugh , she be so secure and certain that Roger would never read letter offer to he under these circumstance ; but then she think that he would feel such pain at the whole affair , and at the contact with Mr. Preston , especially if he have not hear of it from Cynthia first , and if she , Molly , could save he pain she would . before she could settle what to say , Mr. Preston speak again . 

 " you say the other day that Cynthia be engage . may I ask whom to ? " 

 " no , " say Molly , " you may not . you hear she say it be not an engagement . it be not exactly ; and if it be a full engagement , do you think , after what you last say , I should tell you to whom ? but you may be sure of this , he would never read a line of your letter . he be too no ! I will not   speak of he before you . you could never understand he . " 

 " it seem to I that this mysterious ' he ' be a very fortunate person to have such a warm defender in Miss Gibson , to whom he be not at all engage , " say Mr. Preston , with so disagreeable a look on his face that molly suddenly find herself on the point of burst into tear . but she rally herself , and work on for Cynthia first , and for Roger as well . 

 " no honourable man or woman will read your letter , and if any people do read they , they will be so much ashamed of it that they will not   dare to speak of they . what use can they be of to you ? " 

 " they contain Cynthia 's reiterate promise of marriage , " reply he . 

 " she say she would rather leave Hollingford for ever , and go out to earn her bread , than marry you . " 

 his face fall a little . he look so bitterly mortify , that molly be almost sorry for he . 

 " do she say that to you in cold blood ? do you know you be tell I very hard truth , Miss Gibson ? if they be truth , that be to say , " he continue , recover himself a little . " young lady be very fond of the word ' hate ' and ' det . ' I have   know many who have apply they to man whom they be all the time hop to marry . " 

 " I can not tell about other people , " say molly ; " I only know that Cynthia do " here she hesitate for a moment ; she feel for his pain , and so she hesitate ; but then she bring it out " do as nearly hate you as anybody like she ever do hate . " 

 " like she ? " say he , repeat the word almost unconsciously , seize on anything to try and hide his mortification . 

 " I mean , I should hate bad , " say molly in a low voice . 

 but he do not attend much to her answer . he be work the point of his stick into the turf , and his eye be bent on it . 

 " so now would you mind send she back the letter by I ? I do assure you that you can not make she marry you . " 

 " you be very simple , Miss Gibson , " say he , suddenly lift up his head . " I suppose you do not   know that there be any other feeling that can be gratify , except love . have you never hear of revenge ? Cynthia have cajole I with promise , and little as you or she may believe I well , it be no use speak of that . I do not   mean to let she go unpunished . you may tell she that . I shall keep the letter , and make use of they as I see fit when the occasion arise . " 

 molly be miserably angry with herself for her mismanagement of the affair . she have hop to succeed : she have only make matter bad . what new argument could she use ? meanwhile he go on , lash himself up as he think how the two girl must have talk he over , bring in wound vanity to add to the rage of disappointed love . 

 " Mr. Osborne Hamley may hear of their content , though he may be too honourable to read they . Nay , even your father may hear whisper ; and if I remember they rightly , Miss Cynthia Kirkpatrick do not always speak in the most respectful term of the lady who be now Mrs. Gibson . there be " 

 " stop , " say Molly . " I will not   hear anything out of these letter , write , when she be almost without friend , to you , whom she look upon as a friend ! but I have think of what I will do next . I give you fair warning . if I have not be foolish , I should have tell my father , but Cynthia make I promise that I would not . so I will tell it all , from begin to end , to Lady Harriet , and ask she to speak to her father . I feel sure that she will do it ; and I do not   think you will dare to refuse Lord Cumnor . " 

 he feel at once that he should not dare ; that , clever land - agent as he be , and high up in the earl 's favour on that account , yet that the conduct of which he have be guilty in regard to the letter , and the threat which he have hold out respect they , be just what no gentleman , no honourable man , no manly man , could put up with in any one about he . he know that much , and he wonder how she , the girl stand before he , have be clever enough to find it out . he forget himself for an instant in admiration of she . there she stand , frighten , yet brave , not let go her hold on what she mean to do , even when thing seem most against she ; and besides , there be something that strike he most of all perhaps , and which show the kind of man he be he perceive that molly be as unconscious that he be a young man , and she a young woman , as if she have be a pure angel of heaven . though he feel that he would have to yield , and give up the letter , he be not go to do it at once ; and while he be think what to say , so as still to evade make any concession till he have have time to think over it , he , with his quick sens all about he , hear the trotting of a horse cranch quickly along over the gravel of the drive . a moment afterwards , Molly 's perception overtake his . he could see the startled look overspread her face ; and in an instant she would have run away , but before the first rush be make , Mr. Preston lay his hand firmly on her arm . 

 " keep quiet . you must be see . you , at any rate , have do nothing to be ashamed of . " 

 as he speak , Mr. Sheepshanks come round the bend of the road and be close upon they . Mr. Preston see , if molly do not , the sudden look of intelligence that dawn upon the shrewd ruddy face of the old gentleman saw , but do not much heed . he go forwards and speak to Mr. Sheepshanks , who make a halt right before they . 

 " Miss Gibson ! your servant . rather a bluster day for a young lady to be out , and cold , I should say , for stand still too long ; eh , Preston ? " poke his whip at the latter in a knowing manner . 

 " yes , " say Mr. Preston ; " and I be afraid I have keep Miss Gibson too long standing . " 

 molly do not know what to say or do ; so she only bow a silent farewell , and turn away to go home , feel very heavy at heart at the non - success of her undertaking . for she do not know how she have conquer , in fact , although Mr. Preston might not as yet acknowledge it even to himself . before she be out of hearing , she hear Mr. Sheepshanks say , 

 " sorry to have disturb your tete - a - tete , Preston , " but though she hear the word , their imply sense do not sink into her mind ; she be only feel how she have go out glorious and confident , and be come back to Cynthia defeat . 

 Cynthia be on the watch for her return , and , rush downstair , drag molly into the dining - room . 

 " well , molly ? oh ! I see you have not   got they . after all , I never expect it . " she sate down , as if she could get over her disappointment well in that position , and molly stand like a guilty person before she . 

 " I be so sorry ; I do all I could ; we be interrupt at last Mr. Sheepshanks ride up . " 

 " provoke old man ! do you think you should have persuade he to give up the letter if you have have more time ? " 

 " I do not   know . I wish Mr. Sheepshanks have not   come up just then . I do not   like his find I stand talk to Mr. Preston . " 

 " oh ! I daresay he would never think anything about it . what do he Mr. Preston say ? " 

 " he seem to think you be fully engage to he , and that these letter be the only proof he have . I think he love you in his way . " 

 " his way , indeed ! " say Cynthia , scornfully . 

 " the more I think of it , the more I see it would be well for papa to speak to he . I do say I would tell it all to Lady Harriet , and get Lord Cumnor to make he give up the letter . but it would be very awkward . " 

 " very ! " say Cynthia , gloomily . " but he would see it be only a threat . " 

 " but I will do it in a moment , if you like . I mean what I say ; only I feel that papa would manage it good of all , and more privately . " 

 " I will tell you what , molly you be bind by a promise , you know , and can not tell Mr. Gibson without break your solemn word but it be just this : I will leave Hollingford and never come back again , if ever your father hear of this affair ; there ! " Cynthia stand up now , and begin to fold up Molly 's shawl , in her nervous excitement . 

 " oh , Cynthia Roger ! " be all that Molly say . 

 " yes , I know ! you need not remind I of he . but I be not go to live in the house with any one who may be always cast up in his mind the thing he have hear against I thing fault , perhaps which sound so much bad than they really be . I be so happy when I first come here ; you all like I , and admire I , and think well of I , and now why , Molly , I can see the difference in you already . you carry your thought in your face I have read they there these two day you have   be think , ' how Cynthia must have deceive I ; keep up a correspondence all this time have half - engagement to two man ! ' you have   be more full of that than of pity for I as a girl who have always be oblige to manage for herself , without any friend to help she and protect she . " 

 molly be silent . there be a great deal of truth in what Cynthia be say : and yet a great deal of falsehood . for , through all this long forty - eight hour , Molly have love Cynthia dearly ; and have be more weigh down by the position the latter be in than Cynthia herself . she also know but this be a second thought follow on the other that she have suffer much pain in try to do she good in this interview with Mr. Preston . she have be try beyond her strength : and the great tear well up into her eye , and fall slowly down her cheek . 

 " oh ! what a brute I be ! " say Cynthia , kiss they away . " I see I know it be the truth , and I deserve it but I need not reproach you . " 

 " you do not reproach I ! " say Molly , try to smile . " I have think something of what you say but I do love you dearly dearly , Cynthia I should have do just the same as you do . " 

 " no , you would not . your grain be different , somehow . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLV . 

 confidences . 
 

 all the rest of that day molly be depressed and not well . have anything to conceal be so unusual almost so unprecedented a circumstance with she that it prey upon she in every way . 

 it be a nightmare that she could not shake off ; she do so wish to forget it all , and yet every little occurrence seem to remind she of it . the next morning 's post bring several letter ; one from Roger for Cynthia , and Molly , letterless herself , look at Cynthia as she read it , with wistful sadness . it appear to Molly as though Cynthia should have no satisfaction in these letter , until she have tell he what be her exact position with Mr. Preston ; yet Cynthia be colour and dimple up as she always do at any pretty word of praise , or admiration , or love . but Molly 's thought and Cynthia 's reading be both interrupt by a little triumphant sound from Mrs. Gibson , as she push a letter she have just receive to her husband , with a 

 " there ! I must say I expect that ! " then , turn to Cynthia , she explain " it be a letter from uncle Kirkpatrick , love . so kind , wish you to go and stay with they , and help they to cheer up Helen ; poor Helen ! I be afraid she be very far from well . but we could not have have she here , without disturb dear papa in his consulting - room ; and , though I could have relinquish my dressing - room he well ! so I say in my letter how you be grieve you above all of we , because you be such a friend of Helen 's , you know and how you long to be of use , as I be sure you do and so now they want you to go up directly , for Helen have quite set her heart upon it . " 

 Cynthia 's eye sparkle . " I shall like go , " say she " all but leave you , molly , " she add , in a low tone , as if suddenly smite with some compunction . 

 " can you be ready to go by the ' Bang - up ' to - night ? " say Mr. Gibson ; " for , curiously enough , after more than twenty year of quiet practice at Hollingford , I be summon up to - day for the first time to a consultation in London to - morrow . I be afraid Lady Cumnor be bad , my dear . " 

 " you do not   say so ? poor dear lady ! what a shock it be to I ! I be so glad I have   have some breakfast . I could not have eat anything . " 

 " Nay , I only say she be bad . with her complaint , be bad may be only a preliminary to be well . do not   take my word for more than their literal meaning . " 

 " thank you . how kind and reassure dear papa always be ! about your gown , Cynthia ? " 

 " oh , they be all right , mamma , thank you . I shall be quite ready by four o'clock . molly , will you come with I and help I to pack ? I want to speak to you , dear , " say she , as soon as they have go upstairs . " it be such a relief to get away from a place haunt by that man ; but I be afraid you think I be glad to leave you ; and indeed I be not . " there be a little flavour of " protest too much " about this ; but molly do not perceive it . she only say , " indeed I do not . I know from my own feeling how you must dislike meet a man in public in a different manner from what you have do in private . I shall try not to see Mr. Preston again for a long , long time , I be sure . but , Cynthia , you have not   tell I one word out of Roger 's letter . please , how be he ? have he quite get over his attack of fever ? " 

 " yes , quite . he write in very good spirit . a great deal about bird and beast , as usual , habit of native , and thing of that kind . you may read from there "   indicate a place in the letter   " to there , if you can . and I will tell you what , I will trust you with it , molly , while I pack ; and that show my sense of your honour not but what you might read it all , only you would find the love - make dull ; but make a little account of where he be , and what he be do , date , and that sort of thing , and send it to his father . " 

 molly take the letter down without a word , and begin to copy it at the writing - table ; often read over what she be allow to read ; often pause , her cheek on her hand , her eye on the letter , and let her imagination rove to the writer , and all the scene in which she have either see he herself , or in which her fancy have paint he . she be startle from her meditation by Cynthia 's sudden entrance into the drawing - room , look the picture of glow delight . " no one here ? what a blessing ! ah , Miss Molly , you be more eloquent than you believe yourself . look here ! " hold up a large full envelope , and then quickly replace it in her pocket , as if she be afraid of be see . " what be the matter , sweet one ? " come up and caress Molly . " be it worry itself over that letter ? why , do not   you see these be my very own horrible letter , that I be go to burn directly , that Mr. Preston have have the grace to send I , thank to you , little Molly cuishla ma chree , pulse of my heart , the letter that have be hang over my head like somebody 's sword for these two year ? " 

 " oh , I be so glad ! " say Molly , rouse up a little . " I never think he would have send they . he be well than I believe he . and now it be all over . I be so glad ! you quite think he mean to give up all claim over you by this , do not   you , Cynthia ? " 

 " he may claim , but I will not   be claim ; and he have no proof now . it be the most charming relief ; and I owe it all to you , you precious little lady ! now there be only one thing more to be do ; and if you would but do it for I "   coax and caressing while she ask the question . 

 " oh , Cynthia , do not   ask I ; I can not do any more . you do not   know how sick I go when I think of yesterday , and Mr. Sheepshanks ' look . " 

 " it be only a very little thing . I will not   burden your conscience with tell you how I get my letter , but it be not through a person I can trust with money ; and I must force he to take back his twenty - three pound odd shilling . I have put it together at the rate of five per cent . , and it be seal up . oh , Molly , I should go off with such a light heart if you would only try to get it safely to he . it be the last thing ; there would be no immediate hurry , you know . you might meet he by chance in a shop , in the street , even at a party and if you only have it with you in your pocket , there would be nothing so easy . " 

 molly be silent . " papa would give it to he . there would be no harm in that . I would tell he he must ask no question as to what it be . " 

 " very well , " say Cynthia , " have it your own way . I think my way be the good : for if any of this affair come out but you have   do a great deal for I already , and I will not   blame you now for decline to do any more ! " 

 " I do so dislike have these underhand dealing with he , " plead molly . 

 " Underhand ! just simply give he a letter from I ! if I leave a note for Miss Browning , should you dislike give it to she ? " 

 " you know that be very different . I could do it openly . " 

 " and yet there might be write in that ; and there would not   be a line with the money . it would only be the winding - up the honourable , honest winding - up of an affair which have worry I for year . but do as you like ! " 

 " give it I ! " say Molly . " I will try . " 

 " there be a darling ! you can but try ; and if you can not   give it to he in private , without get yourself into a scrape , why , keep it till I come back again . he shall have it then , whether he will or no ! " 

 molly look forward to her two day alone with Mrs. Gibson with very different anticipation from those with which she have welcome the similar intercourse with her father . in the first place , there be no accompany the traveller to the inn from which the coach start ; leave - taking in the market - place be quite out of the bound of Mrs. Gibson 's sense of propriety . besides this , it be a gloomy , rainy evening , and candle have to be bring in at an unusually early hour . there would be no break for six hour no music , no reading ; but the two lady would sit at their worsted work , patter away at small - talk , with not even the usual break of dinner ; for , to suit the requirement of those who be leave , they have already din early . but Mrs. Gibson really mean to make molly happy , and try to be an agreeable companion , only Molly be not well , and be uneasy about many apprehend care and trouble and at such hour of indisposition as she be then pass through , apprehension take the shape of certainty , lie await in our path . molly would have give a good deal to have shake off all these feeling , unusual enough to she ; but the very house and furniture , and rain - blur outer landscape , seem steeped with unpleasant association , most of they date from the last few day . 

 " you and I must go on the next journey , I think , my dear , " say Mrs. Gibson , almost chime in with Molly 's wish that she could get away from Hollingford into some new air and life , for a week or two . " we have be stay - at - home for a long time , and variety of scene be so desirable for the young ! but I think the traveller will be wish themselves at home by this nice bright fireside . ' there be no place like home , ' as the poet say . ' Mid pleasure and palace although I may roam , ' it begin , and it be both very pretty and very true . it be a great blessing to have such a dear little home as this , be not it , molly ? " 

 " yes , " say Molly , rather drearily , have something of the " toujour perdrix " feeling at the moment . if she could but have go away with her father , just for two day , how pleasant it would have be . 

 " to be sure , love , it would be very nice for you and I to go a little journey all by ourselves . you and i. no one else . if it be not such miserable weather we would have go off on a little impromptu tour . I have   be long for something of the kind for some week ; but we live such a restricted kind of life here ! I declare sometimes I get quite sick of the very sight of the chair and table that I know so well . and one miss the other too ! it seem so flat and desert without they ! " 

 " yes ! we be very forlorn to - night ; but I think it be partly owe to the weather ! " 

 " Nonsense , dear . I can not   have you give in to the silly fancy of be affect by weather . poor dear Mr. Kirkpatrick use to say , ' a cheerful heart make its own sunshine . ' he would say it to I , in his pretty way , whenever I be a little low for I be a complete barometer you may really judge of the state of the weather by my spirit , I have always be such a sensitive creature ! it be well for Cynthia that she do not inherit it ; I do not   think she easily affect in any way , do you ? " 

 molly think for a minute or two , and then reply " no , she certainly be not easily affect not deeply affect perhaps I should say . " 

 " many girl , for instance , would have be touch by the admiration she excite I may say the attention she receive when she be at her uncle 's last summer . " 

 " at Mr. Kirkpatrick 's ? " 

 " yes . there be Mr. Henderson , that young lawyer ; that be to say , he be study law , but he have a good private fortune and be likely to have more , so he can only be what I call play at law . Mr. Henderson be over head and ear in love with she . it be not my fancy , although I grant mother be partial : both Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick notice it ; and in one of Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's letter , she say that poor Mr. Henderson be go into Switzerland for the long vacation , doubtless to try and forget Cynthia ; but she really believe he would find it only ' drag at each remove a lengthen chain . ' I think it such a refined quotation , and altogether word so prettily . you must know aunt Kirkpatrick some day , Molly , my love ; she be what I call a woman of a truly elegant mind . " 

 " I can not   help think it be a pity that Cynthia do not tell they of her engagement . " 

 " it be not an engagement , my dear ! how often must I tell you that ? " 

 " but what be I to call it ? " 

 " I do not   see why you need to call it anything . indeed , I do not   understand what you mean by ' it . ' you should always try to express yourself intelligibly . it really be one of the first principle of the english language . in fact , philosopher might ask what be language give we for at all , if it be not that we may make our meaning understand ? " 

 " but there be something between Cynthia and Roger ; they be more to each other than I be to Osborne , for instance . what be I to call it ? " 

 " you should not couple your name with that of any unmarried young man ; it be so difficult to teach you delicacy , child . perhaps one may say there be a peculiar relation between dear Cynthia and Roger , but it be very difficult to characterize it ; I have no doubt that be the reason she shrink from speak about it . for , between ourselves , Molly , I really sometimes think it will come to nothing . he be so long away , and , privately speak , Cynthia be not very , very constant . I once know she very much take before that little affair be quite go by ; and she be very civil to Mr. Henderson , in her way ; I fancy she inherit it , for when I be a girl I be beset by lover , and could never find in my heart to shake they off . you have not hear dear papa say anything of the old squire , or dear Osborne , have you ? it seem so long since we have hear or see anything of Osborne . but he must be quite well , I think , or we should have hear of it . " 

 " I believe he be quite well . some one say the other day that they have meet he rid it be Mrs. Goodenough , now I remember and that he be look strong than he have do for year . " 

 " indeed ! I be truly glad to hear it . I always be fond of Osborne ; and , do you know , I never really take to Roger ? I respect he and all that , of course ; but to compare he with Mr. Henderson ! Mr. Henderson be so handsome and well - breed , and get all his glove from Houbigant ! " 

 it be true that they have not see anything of Osborne Hamley for a long time ; but , as it often happen , just after they have be speak about he he appear . it be on the day follow Mr. Gibson 's departure that Mrs. Gibson receive one of the note , not so common now as formerly , from the family in town , ask she to go over to the tower , and find a book , or a manuscript , or something or other that Lady Cumnor want with all an invalid 's impatience . it be just the kind of employment she require for an amusement on a gloomy day , and it put she into a good humour immediately . there be a certain confidential importance about it , and it be a variety , and it give she the pleasant drive in a fly up the noble avenue , and the sense of be the temporary mistress of all the grand room once so familiar to she . she ask Molly to accompany she , out of an access of kindness , but be not at all sorry when molly excuse herself and preferred stopping at home . at eleven o'clock Mrs. Gibson be off , all in her Sunday good   to use the servant 's expression , which she herself would so have contemn , well - dress in order to impose on the servant at the Towers , for there be no one else to see or to be see by . 

 " I shall not be at home until the afternoon , my dear ! but I hope you will not find it dull . I do not   think you will , for you be something like I , my love never less alone than when alone , as one of the great author have justly express it . " 

 molly enjoy the house to herself fully as much as Mrs. Gibson would enjoy have the tower to herself . she venture on have her lunch bring upon a tray into the drawing - room , so that she might eat her sandwich while she go on with her book . in the middle , Mr. Osborne Hamley be announce . he come in , look wretchedly ill in spite of purblind Mrs. Goodenough 's report of his healthy appearance . 

 " this call be not on you , molly , " say he , after the first greeting be over . " I be in hope I might have find your father at home ; I think lunch - time be the good hour . " he have sate down , as if thoroughly glad of the rest , and fall into a languid stoop position , as if it have become so natural to he that no sense of what be consider good manner suffice to restrain he now . 

 " I hope you do not want to see he professionally ? " say Molly , wonder if she be wise in allude to his health , yet urge to it by her real anxiety . 

 " yes , I do . I suppose I may help myself to a biscuit and a glass of wine ? no , do not   ring for more . I could not eat it if it be here . but I just want a mouthful ; this be quite enough , thank you . when will your father be back ? " 

 " he be summon up to London . Lady Cumnor be bad . I fancy there be some operation go on ; but I do not   know . he will be back to - morrow night . " 

 " very well . then I must wait . perhaps I shall be well by that time . I think it be half fancy ; but I should like your father to tell I so . he will laugh at I , I daresay ; but I do not   think I shall mind that . he always be severe on fanciful patient , be not   he , molly ? " 

 molly think that if he see Osborne 's look just then he would hardly think he fanciful , or be incline to be severe . but she only say , " Papa enjoy a joke at everything , you know . it be a relief after all the sorrow he see . " 

 " very true . there be a great deal of sorrow in the world . I do not   think it be a very happy place after all . so Cynthia be go to London ? " he add , after a pause . " I think I should like to have see she again . poor old Roger ! he love she very dearly , molly , " he say . molly hardly know how to answer he in all this ; she be so strike by the change in both voice and manner . 

 " Mamma have go to the tower , " she begin , at length . " Lady Cumnor want several thing that mamma only can find . she will be sorry to miss you . we be speak of you only yesterday , and she say how long it be since we have see you . " 

 " I think I have   grow careless ; I have   often feel so weary and ill that it be all I could do to keep up a brave face before my father . " 

 " why do you not come and see papa ? " say molly ; " or write to he ? " 

 " I can not tell . I drift on , sometimes well , and sometimes bad , till to - day I muster up pluck , and come to hear what your father have get to tell I : and all for no use it seem . " 

 " I be very sorry . but it be only for two day . he shall go and see you as soon as ever he return . " 

 " he must not alarm my father , remember , Molly , " say Osborne , lift himself by the arm of his chair into an upright position and speak eagerly for the moment . " I wish to God Roger be at home ! " say he , fall back into the old posture . 

 " I can not   help understand you , " say Molly . " you think yourself very ill ; but be not   it that you be tired just now ? " she be not sure if she ought to have understand what be pass in his mind ; but as she do , she could not help speak a true reply . 

 " well , sometimes I do think I be very ill ; and then , again , I think it be only the mop life set I fancy and exaggerate . " he be silent for some time . then , as if he have take a sudden resolution , he speak again . " you see , there be other depend upon I upon my health . you have not   forget what you hear that day in the library at home ? no , I know you have not . I have see the thought of it in your eye often since then . I do not   know you at that time . I think I do now . " 

 " do not   go on talk so fast , " say Molly . " rest . no one will interrupt we ; I will go on with my sewing ; when you want to say anything more I shall be listen . " for she be alarmed at the strange pallor that have come over his face . 

 " thank you . " after a time he rouse himself , and begin to speak very quietly , as if on an indifferent matter of fact . 

 " the name of my wife be Aimťe . Aimťe Hamley , of course . she live at Bishopsfield , a village near Winchester . write it down , but keep it to yourself . she be a Frenchwoman , a roman Catholic , and be a servant . she be a thoroughly good woman . I must not say how dear she be to I . I dare not . I mean once to have tell Cynthia , but she do not   seem quite to consider I as a brother . perhaps she be shy of a new relation ; but you will give my love to she , all the same . it be a relief to think that some one else have my secret ; and you be like one of we , molly . I can trust you almost as I can trust Roger . I feel well already , now I feel that some one else know the whereabouts of my wife and child . " 

 " child ! " say Molly , surprised . but before he could reply , Maria have announce , " Miss Phobe Browning . " 

 " fold up that paper , " say he , quickly , put something into her hand . " it be only for yourself . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLVI . 

 HOLLINGFORD gossip . 
 

 Illustrationy dear Molly , why do not   you come and dine with we ? I say to sister I would come and scold you well . oh , Mr. Osborne Hamley , be that you ? " and a look of mistaken intelligence at the tete - a - tete she have disturb come so perceptibly over Miss Phobe 's face that molly catch Osborne 's sympathetic eye , and both smile at the notion . 

 " I be sure I well ! one must sometimes I see our dinner would have be " then she recover herself into a connected sentence . " we only just hear of Mrs. Gibson 's have a fly from the ' George , ' because sister send our Nancy to pay for a couple of rabbit Tom Ostler have snare ,   I hope we shall not   be take up for poacher , Mr. Osborne snare do not   require a licence , I believe ?   and she hear he be go off with the fly to the tower with your dear mamma ; for Coxe who drive the fly in general have sprain his ankle . we have just finish dinner , but when Nancy say Tom Ostler would not be back till night , I say , ' why , there be that poor dear girl leave all alone by herself , and her mother such a friend of ours , ' when she be alive , I mean . but I be sure I be glad I be mistaken . " 

 Osborne say , " I come to speak to Mr. Gibson , not know he have go to London , and Miss Gibson kindly give I some of her lunch . I must go now . " 

 " oh dear ! I be so sorry , " flutter out Miss Phobe , " I disturb you ; but it be with the good intention . I always be mal - apropos from a child . " but Osborne be go before she have finish her apology . as he leave , his eye meet Molly 's with a strange look of yearn farewell that strike she at the time , and that she remember strongly afterwards . " such a nice suitable thing , and I come in the midst , and spoilt it all . I be sure you be very kind , my dear , consider " 

 " consider what , my dear Miss Phobe ? if you be conjecture a love affair between Mr. Osborne Hamley and I , you never be more mistaken in your life . I think I tell you so once before . please do believe I . " 

 " oh , yes ! I remember . and somehow sister get it into her head it be Mr. Preston . I recollect . " 

 " one guess be just as wrong as the other , " say Molly , smile , and try to look perfectly indifferent , but go extremely red at the mention of Mr. Preston 's name . it be very difficult for she to keep up any conversation , for her heart be full of Osborne his change appearance , his melancholy word of foreboding , and his confidence about his wife French , Catholic , servant . molly could not help try to piece these strange fact together by imagination of her own , and find it very hard work to attend to kind Miss Phobe 's unceasing patter . she come up to the point , however , when the voice cease ; and could recall , in a mechanical manner , the echo of the last word , which both from Miss Phobe 's look , and the die accent that linger in Molly 's ear , she perceive to be a question . Miss Phobe be ask she if she would go out with she . she be go to Grinstead 's , the bookseller of Hollingford ; who , in addition to his regular business , be the agent for the Hollingford Book Society , receive their subscription , keep their account , order their book from London , and , on payment of a small salary , allow the Society to keep their volume on shelf in his shop . it be the centre of news , and the club , as it be , of the little town . everybody who pretend to gentility in the place belong to it . it be a test of gentility , indeed , rather than of education or a love of literature . no shopkeeper would have think of offer himself as a member , however great his general intelligence and love of reading ; while it boast on its list of subscriber most of the county family in the neighbourhood , some of whom subscribe to it as a sort of duty belong to their station , without often use their privilege of read the book : while there be resident in the little town , such as Mrs. Goodenough , who privately think read a great waste of time , that might be much well employ in sewing , and knitting , and pastry - making , but who nevertheless belong to it as a mark of station , just as these good , motherly woman would have think it a terrible come - down in the world if they have not have a pretty young servant - maid to fetch they home from the tea - party at night . at any rate , Grinstead 's be a very convenient place for a lounge . in that view of the Book Society every one agree . 

 molly go upstairs to get ready to accompany Miss Phobe ; and on open one of her drawer she see Cynthia 's envelope , contain the money she owe to Mr. Preston , carefully seal up like a letter . this be what molly have so unwillingly promise to deliver the last final stroke to the affair . molly take it up , hat it . for a time she have forget it ; and now it be here , face she , and she must try and get rid of it . she put it into her pocket for the chance of the walk and the day , and fortune for once seem to befriend she ; for , on their enter Grinstead 's shop , in which two or three people be now , as always , congregate , make play of examine the book , or business of write down the title of new work in the order - book , there be Mr. Preston . he bow as they come in . he could not help that ; but , at the sight of Molly , he look as ill - temper and out of humour as a man well could do . she be connect in his mind with defeat and mortification ; and besides , the sight of she call up what he desire now , above all thing , to forget ; namely , the deep conviction , receive through Molly 's simple earnestness , of Cynthia 's dislike to he . if Miss Phobe have see the scowl upon his handsome face , she might have undeceive her sister in her supposition about he and molly . but Miss Phobe , who do not consider it quite maidenly to go and stand close to Mr. Preston , and survey the shelf of book in such close proximity to a gentleman , find herself an errand at the other end of the shop , and occupy herself in buy writing - paper . molly finger her valuable letter , as it lie in her pocket ; do she dare to cross over to Mr. Preston , and give it to he , or not ? while she be still undecided , shrink always just at the moment when she think she have get her courage up for action , Miss Phobe , have finish her purchase , turn round , and after look a little pathetically at Mr. Preston 's back , say to Molly in a whisper " I think we will go to Johnson 's now , and come back for the book in a little while . " so across the street to Johnson 's they go ; but no soon have they enter the draper 's shop , than Molly 's conscience smite she for her cowardice , and loss of a good opportunity . " I will be back directly , " say she , as soon as Miss Phobe be engage with her purchase ; and Molly run across to Grinstead 's , without look either to the right or the left ; she have be watch the door , and she know that no Mr. Preston have issue forth . she run in ; he be at the counter now , talk to Grinstead himself ; molly put the letter into his hand , to his surprise , and almost against his will , and turn round to go back to Miss Phobe . at the door of the shop stand Mrs. Goodenough , arrest in the act of enter , star , with her round eye , make still rounder and more owl - like by spectacle , to see Molly Gibson give Mr. Preston a letter , which he , conscious of be watch , and favour underhand practice habitually , put quickly into his pocket , unopened . perhaps , if he have have time for reflection he would not have scruple to put molly to open shame , by reject what she so eagerly force upon he . 

 there be another long evening to be get through with Mrs. Gibson ; but on this occasion there be the pleasant occupation of dinner , which take up at least an hour ; for it be one of Mrs. Gibson 's fancy one which molly chafe against to have every ceremonial go through in the same stately manner for two as for twenty . so , although molly know full well , and her stepmother know full well , and Maria know full well , that neither Mrs. Gibson nor molly touch dessert , it be set on the table with as much form as if Cynthia have be at home , who delight in almond and raisin ; or Mr. Gibson be there , who never could resist date , though he always protest against " person in their station of life have a formal dessert set out before they every day . " 

 and Mrs. Gibson herself apologize , as it be , to Molly to - day , in the same word she have often use to Mr. Gibson , " it be no extravagance , for we need not eat it I never do . but it look well , and make Maria understand what be require in the daily life of every family of position . " 

 all through the evening Molly 's thought wander far and wide , though she manage to keep up a show of attention to what Mrs. Gibson be say . she be think of Osborne , and his abrupt , half - finish confidence , and his ill - look ; she be wonder when Roger would come home , and long for his return , as much   she say to herself   for Osborne 's sake as for her own . and then she check herself . what have she to do with Roger ? why should she long for his return ? it be Cynthia who be do this ; only somehow he be such a true friend to Molly , that she could not help think of he as a staff and a stay in the troublous time which appear to lie not far ahead this evening . then Mr. Preston and her little adventure with he come uppermost . how angry he look ! how could Cynthia have like he even enough to get into this abominable scrape , which be , however , all over now ! and so she run on in her fancy and imagination , little dream that that very night much talk be go on not half - a - mile from where she sate sewing , that would prove that the ' scrape "   as she call it , in her girlish phraseology   be not all over . 

 scandal sleep in the summer , comparatively speak . its nature be the reverse of that of the dormouse . warm ambient air , loitering abroad , gardening , flower to talk about , and preserve to make , soothe the wicked imp to slumber in the parish of Hollingford in summer - time . but when evening grow short , and people gather round the fire , and put their foot in a circle not on the fender , that be not allow then be the time for confidential conversation ! or in the pause allow for the tea - tray to circulate among the card - table when those who be peaceably incline try to stop the warm discussion about " the odd trick , " and the rather wearisome feminine way of ' shoulder the crutch , and show how field be win " small crumb and scrap of daily news come up to the surface , such as " Martindale have raise the price of his good joint a halfpenny in the pound ; " or , " it be a shame of Sir Harry to order in another book on farriery into the Book Society ; Phobe and I try to read it , but really there be no general interest in it ; " or , " I wonder what Mr. Ashton will do , now Nancy be go to be marry ! why , she be be with he these seventeen year ! it be a very foolish thing for a woman of her age to be think of matrimony ; and so I tell she , when I meet she in the market - place this morning ! " 

 so say Miss Browning on the night in question ; her hand of card lie by she on the puce baize - cover table , while she munch the rich pound - cake of a certain Mrs. Dawes , lately come to inhabit Hollingford . 

 " Matrimony be not so bad as you think for , Miss Browning , " say Mrs. Goodenough , stand up for the holy estate into which she have twice enter . " if I would ha ' see Nancy , I should ha ' give she my mind very different . it be a great thing to be able to settle what you will have for dinner , without never a one interfere with you . " 

 " if that be all ! " say Miss Browning , draw herself up , " I can do that ; and , perhaps , well than a woman who have a husband to please . " 

 " no one can say as I do not   please my husband both on them , though Jeremy be tickler in his taste than poor Harry Beaver . but as I use to say to them , ' leave the victual to I ; it be well for you than know what be to come beforehand . the stomach like to be take by surprise . ' and neither of them ever repent them of their confidence . you may take my word for it , bean and bacon will taste well   and Mr. Ashton 's Nancy in her own house   than all the sweetbread and spring chicken she be be a - do for he this seventeen year . but if I choose , I could tell you of something as would interest you all a deal more than old Nancy 's marriage to a widower with nine child only as the young folk themselves be meet in private , clandestine - like , it be perhaps not for I to tell their secret . " 

 " I be sure I do not   want to hear of clandestine meeting between young man and young woman , " say Miss Browning , throw up her head . " it be disgrace enough to the people themselves , I consider , if they enter on a love affair without the proper sanction of parent . I know public opinion have change on the subject ; but when poor Gratia be married to Mr. Byerley , he write to my father without ever have so much as pay she a compliment , or say more than the most trivial and commonplace thing to she ; and my father and mother send for she into my father 's study , and she say she be never so much frightened in her life , and they say it be a very good offer , and Mr. Byerley be a very worthy man , and they hop she would behave properly to he when he come to supper that night . and after that he be allow to come twice a week till they be marry . my mother and I sate at our work in the bow - window of the Rectory drawing - room , and Gratia and Mr. Byerley at the other end ; and my mother always call my attention to some flower or plant in the garden when it strike nine , for that be his time for go . without offence to the present company , I be rather inclined to look upon matrimony as a weakness to which some very worthy people be prone ; but if they must be marry , let they make the good of it , and go through the affair with dignity and propriety : or if there be misdoing and clandestine meeting , and such thing , at any rate , never let I hear about they ! I think it be you to play , Mrs. Dawes . you will excuse my frankness on the subject of matrimony ! Mrs. Goodenough there can tell you I be a very out - speak person . " 

 " it be not the out - speaking , it be what you say that go against I , Miss Browning , " say Mrs. Goodenough , affront , yet ready to play her card as soon as need . and as for Mrs. Dawes , she be too anxious to get into the genteelest of all   Hollingford   society to object to whatever Miss Browning   who , in right of be a deceased rector 's daughter , rather represent the select circle of the little town   advocate , whether celibacy , marriage , bigamy , or polygamy . 

 so the remainder of the evening pass over without any further reference to the secret Mrs. Goodenough be burn to disclose , unless a remark make apropos de rien by Miss Browning , during the silence of a deal , could be suppose to have connection with the previous conversation . she say suddenly and abruptly , 

 " I do not   know what I have do that any man should make I his slave . " if she be refer to any prospect of matrimonial danger she see opening before her fancy , she might have be comfort . but it be a remark of which no one take any notice , all be far too much engage in the rubber . only when Miss Browning take she early leave   for Miss Phobe have a cold , and be an invalid at home , Mrs. Goodenough burst out with 

 " well ! now I may speak out my mind , and say as how if there be a slave between we two , when Goodenough be alive , it be not   I ; and I do not   think as it be pretty in Miss Browning to give herself such air on her virginity when there be four widow in the room , who have   have six honest man among them for husband . no offence , Miss Airy ! " address an unfortunate little spinster , who find herself the sole representative of celibacy now that Miss Browning be go . " I could tell she of a girl as she be very fond on , who be on the high road to matrimony ; and in as cunne a way as ever I heerd on ; go out at dusk to meet her sweetheart , just as if she be my Sally , or your Jenny . and her name be molly too , which , as I have often think , show a low taste in they as first call she so ; she might as well be a scullery - maid at oncest . not that she be pick up anybody common ; she be look about she for a handsome fellow , and a smart young man enough ! " 

 every one around the table look curious and intent on the disclosure be make , except the hostess , Mrs. Dawes , who smile intelligence with her eye , and knowingly purse up her mouth until Mrs. Goodenough have finish her tale . then she say demurely , 

 " I suppose you mean Mr. Preston and Miss Gibson ? " 

 " why , who tell you ? " say Mrs. Goodenough , turn round upon she in surprise . " you can not   say as I do . there be many a Molly in Hollingford , besides she , though none , perhaps , in such a genteel station in life . I never name she , I be sure . " 

 " no . but I know . I could tell my tale too , " continue Mrs. Dawes . 

 " no ! could you , really ? " say Mrs. Goodenough , very curious and a little jealous . 

 " yes . my uncle sheepshank come upon they in the Park Avenue , he startle them a good deal , he say ; and when he tax Mr. Preston with be with his sweetheart , he do not   deny it . " 

 " well ! now so much have come out , I will tell you what I know . only , lady , I would not   wish to do the girl an unkind turn , so you must keep what I have   get to tell you a secret . " of course they promise ; that be easy . 

 " my Hannah , as married Tom Oakes , and live in Pearson 's Lane , be a - gathering of damson only a week ago , and Molly Gibson be a - walk fast down the lane , quite in a hurry like to meet some one , and Hannah 's little Anna - Maria fall down , and molly   who be a kind - hearted lass enough   pick she up ; so if Hannah have have her doubt before , she have none then . " 

 " but there be no one with she , be there ? " ask one of the lady , anxiously , as Mrs. Goodenough stop to finish her piece of cake , just at this crisis . 

 " no : I say she look as if she be go to meet some one , and by - and - by come Mr. Preston run out of the wood just beyond Hannah 's , and say he , ' a cup of water , please , good woman , for a lady have faint , or be ' sterical or something . ' now though he do not   know Hannah , Hannah know he . ' More folk know Tom Fool , than Tom Fool know , ' ask Mr. Preston 's pardon ; for he be no fool whatever he be . and I could tell you more , and what I have   seed with my own eye . I seed she give he a letter in Grinstead 's shop , only yesterday , and he look as black as thunder at she , for he seed I if she do not . " 

 " it be a very suitable kind of thing , " say Miss Airy ; " why do they make such a mystery of it ? " 

 " some folk like it , " say Mrs. Dawes ; " it add z to it all , to do their courting underhand . " 

 " ay , it be like salt to their victual , " put in Mrs. Goodenough . " but I do not   think Molly Gibson be one of that sort , I do not . " 

 " the Gibsons hold themselves very high ? " cry Mrs. Dawes , more as an inquiry than an assertion . " Mrs. Gibson have call upon I . " 

 " ay , you be like to be a patient of the doctor 's , " put in Mrs. Goodenough . 

 " she seem to I very affable , though she be so intimate with the Countess and the family at the Towers ; and be quite the lady herself ; dine late , I have   hear , and everything in style . " 

 " Style ! very different style to what Bob Gibson , her husband , be use to when first he come here , glad of a mutton - chop in his surgery , for I doubt if he have a fire anywhere else ; we call he Bob Gibson then , but none on we dare Bob he now ; I would as soon think o ' call he sweep ! " 

 " I think it look very bad for Miss Gibson ! " say one lady , rather anxious to bring back the conversation to the more interesting present time . but as soon as Mrs. Goodenough hear this natural comment on the disclosure she have make , she fire round on the speaker : 

 " not at all bad , and I will trouble you not to use such a word as that about Molly Gibson , as I have   know all her life . it be odd if you will . I be odd myself as a girl ; I never could abide a plate of gathered gooseberry , but I must need go and skulk behind a bush and gather them for myself . it be some folk 's taste , though it may not   be Miss Browning 's , who would have all the courting do under the nose of the family . all as ever I say be that I be surprised at it in Molly Gibson ; and that I would ha ' think it be liker that pretty piece of a Cynthia as they call she ; indeed , at one time I be ready to swear as it be her Mr. Preston be after . and now , lady , I will wish you a very good night . I can not abide waste ; and I will venture for it Sally 's let the candle in the lantern run all to grease , instead of put it out , as I have   tell she to do , if ever she be get to wait for I . " 

 so with formal dipping curtsey the lady separate , but not without thank Mrs. Dawes for the pleasant evening they have have ; a piece of old - fashioned courtesy always go through in those day . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLVII . 

 SCANDAL and its victim . 
 

 when Mr. Gibson return to Hollingford , he find an accumulation of business wait for he , and he be much inclined to complain of the consequence of the two day ' comparative holiday , which have result in over - work for the week to come . he have hardly time to speak to his family , he have so immediately to rush off to press case of illness . but Molly manage to arrest he in the hall , stand there with his great coat hold out ready for he to put on , but whispering as she do so 

 " Papa ! Mr. Osborne Hamley be here to see you yesterday . he look very ill , and he be evidently frightened about himself . " 

 Mr. Gibson face about , and look at she for a moment ; but all he say be 

 " I will go and see he ; do not   tell your mother where I be go : you have   not mention this to she , I hope ? " 

 " no , " say Molly , for she have only tell Mrs. Gibson of Osborne 's call , not of the occasion for it . 

 " do not   say anything about it ; there be no need . now I think of it , I can not   possibly go to - day , but I will go . " 

 something in her father 's manner dishearten Molly , who have persuade herself that Osborne 's evident illness be partly " nervous , " by which she mean imaginary . she have dwell upon his look of enjoyment at Miss Phobe 's perplexity , and think that no one really believe himself to be in danger could have give the merry glance which he have do ; but after see the seriousness of her father 's face , she recur to the shock she have experience on first see Osborne 's changed appearance . all this time Mrs. Gibson be busy read a letter from Cynthia which Mr. Gibson have bring from London ; for every opportunity of private conveyance be seize upon when postage be so high ; and Cynthia have forget so many thing in her hurried packing , that she now send a list of the clothe which she require . molly almost wonder that it have not come to she ; but she do not understand the sort of reserve that be spring up in Cynthia 's mind towards she . Cynthia herself struggle with the feeling , and try to fight against it by call herself " ungrateful ; " but the truth be , she believe that she no long hold her former high place in Molly 's estimation and she could not help turn away from one who know thing to her discredit . she be fully aware of Molly 's prompt decision and willing action , where action be especially disagreeable , on her behalf ; she know that Molly would never bring up the past error and difficulty ; but still the consciousness that the good , straightforward girl have learn that Cynthia have be guilty of so much underhand work cool her regard , and restrain her willingness of intercourse . reproach herself with ingratitude as she would , she could not help feel glad to be away from Molly ; it be awkward to speak to she as if nothing have happen ; it be awkward to write to she about forget ribbon and lace , when their last conversation have be on such different subject , and have call out such vehement expression of feeling . so Mrs. Gibson hold the list in her hand , and read out the small fragment of news that be intermix with notice of Cynthia 's requirement . 

 " Helen can not be so very ill , " say molly at length , " or Cynthia would not want her pink muslin and daisy wreath . " 

 " I do not   see that that follow , I be sure , " reply Mrs. Gibson rather sharply . " Helen would never be so selfish as to tie Cynthia to her side , however ill she be . indeed , I should not have feel that it be my duty to let Cynthia go to London at all , if I have think she be to be perpetually expose to the depressing atmosphere of a sick - room . besides , it must be so good for Helen to have Cynthia come in with bright pleasant account of the party she have be to even if Cynthia dislike gaiety I should desire she to sacrifice herself and go out as much as she could , for Helen 's sake . my idea of nursing be that one should not be always think of one 's own feeling and wish , but do those thing which will most serve to beguile the weary hour of an invalid . but then so few people have have to consider the subject so deeply as I have do ! " 

 Mrs. Gibson here think fit to sigh before go on with Cynthia 's letter . as far as molly could make any sense out of this rather incoherent epistle , very incoherently read aloud to she , Cynthia be really pleased , and glad to be of use and comfort to Helen , but at the same time very ready to be easily persuade into the perpetual small gaiety which abound in her uncle 's house in London , even at this dead season of the year . Mrs. Gibson come upon Mr. Henderson 's name once , and then go on with a running " um - um - um " to herself , which sound very mysterious , but which might as well have be omit , as all that Cynthia really say about he be , " Mr. Henderson 's mother have advise my aunt to consult a certain Dr. Donaldson , who be say to be very clever in such case as Helen 's , but my uncle be not sufficiently sure of the professional etiquette ,   c. " then there come a very affectionate , carefully word message to Molly , imply a good deal more than be say of love gratitude for the trouble she have take on Cynthia 's behalf . and that be all ; and Molly go away a little depressed ; she know not why . 

 the operation on Lady Cumnor have be successfully perform , and in a few day they hop to bring she down to the tower to recruit her strength in the fresh country air . the case be one which interest Mr. Gibson extremely , and in which his opinion have be prove to be right , in opposition to that of one or two great name in London . the consequence be that he be frequently consult and refer to during the progress of her recovery ; and , as he have much to do in the immediate circle of his Hollingford practice , as well as to write thoughtful letter to his medical brother in London , he find it difficult to spare the three or four hour necessary to go over to Hamley to see Osborne . he write to he , however , beg he to reply immediately and detail his symptom ; and from the answer he receive he do not imagine that the case be immediately press . Osborne , too , deprecate his come over to Hamley for the express purpose of see he . so the visit be defer to that " more convenient season " which be so often too late . 

 all these day the buzz gossip about Molly 's meeting with Mr. Preston , her clandestine correspondence , the secret interview in lonely place , have be gather strength , and assume the positive form of scandal . the simple innocent girl , who walk through the quiet street without a thought of be the object of mysterious implication , become for a time the unconscious black sheep of the town . servant hear part of what be say in their mistress ' drawing - room , and exaggerate the saying amongst themselves with the coarse strengthening of expression common with uneducated people . Mr. Preston himself become aware that her name be be couple with his , though hardly to the extent to which the love of excitement and gossip have carry people 's speech ; he chuckle over the mistake , but take no pain to correct it . " it serve she right , " say he to himself , " for meddle with other folk 's business , " and he feel himself avenge for the discomfiture which her menace of appeal to Lady Harriet have cause he , and the mortification he have experience in learn from her plain - speak lip , how he have be talk over by Cynthia and herself , with personal dislike on the one side , and evident contempt on the other . besides , if any denial of Mr. Preston 's stir up an examination as to the real truth , more might come out of his baffle endeavour to compel Cynthia to keep to her engagement to he than he care to have know . he be angry with himself for still love Cynthia ; love she in his own fashion , be it understand . he tell himself that many a woman of more position and wealth would be glad enough to have he ; some of they pretty woman too . and he ask himself why he be such a confounded fool as to go on hanker after a penniless girl , who be as fickle as the wind ? the answer be silly enough , logically ; but forcible in fact . Cynthia be Cynthia , and not Venus herself could have be her substitute . in this one thing Mr. Preston be more really true than many worthy man ; who , seek to be marry , turn with careless facility from the unattainable to the attainable , and keep their feeling and fancy tolerably loose till they find a woman who consent to be their wife . but no one would ever be to Mr. Preston what Cynthia have be , and be ; and yet he could have stab she in certain of his mood . so , Molly , who have come between he and the object of his desire , be not likely to find favour in his sight , or to obtain friendly action from he . 

 there come a time not very distant from the evening at Mrs. Dawes ' when Molly feel that people look askance at she . Mrs. Goodenough openly pull her grand - daughter away , when the young girl stop to speak to Molly in the street , and an engagement which the two have make for a long walk together be cut very short by a very trumpery excuse . Mrs. Goodenough explain her conduct in the following manner to some of her friend : 

 " you see , I do not   think the bad of a girl for meet her sweetheart here and there and everywhere , till she get talk about ; but then when she do and Molly Gibson 's name be in everybody 's mouth I think it be only fair to Bessy , who have trust I with Annabella not to let her daughter be see with a lass who have manage her matter so badly as to set folk talk about she . my maxim be this , and it be a very good work one , you may depend on't   woman should mind what they be about , and never be talk of ; and if a woman 's talk of , the less her friend have to do with she till the talk have die away , the well . so Annabella be not to have anything to do with Molly Gibson , this visit at any rate . " 

 for a good while the Miss Brownings be keep in ignorance of the evil tongue that whisper hard word about Molly . Miss Browning be know to " have a temper , " and by instinct every one who come in contact with she shrank from irritate that temper by utter the slight syllable against the small of those creature over whom she spread the agis of her love . she would and do reproach they herself ; she use to boast that she never spar they : but no one else might touch they with the slight slur of a pass word . but Miss Phobe inspire no such terror ; the great reason why she do not hear of the gossip against Molly as early as any one , be that , although she be not the rose , she live near the rose . besides , she be of so tender a nature that even thick - skinned Mrs. Goodenough be unwilling to say what would give Miss Phobe pain ; and it be the new - comer Mrs. Dawes , who in all ignorance allude to the town 's talk , as to something of which Miss Phobe must be aware . then Miss Phobe pour down her question , although she protest , even with tear , her total disbelief in all the answer she receive . it be a small act of heroism on her part to keep all that she then learn a secret from her sister Dorothy , as she do for four or five day ; till Miss Browning attack her one evening with the follow speech : 

 " Phobe ! either you have   some reason for puff yourself out with sigh , or you have   not . if you have a reason , it be your duty to tell it I directly ; and if you have not   a reason , you must break yourself of a bad habit that be grow upon you . " 

 " oh , sister ! do you think it be really my duty to tell you ? it would be such a comfort ; but then I think I ought not ; it will distress you so . " 

 " Nonsense . I be so well prepared for misfortune by the frequent contemplation of its possibility that I believe I can receive any ill news with apparent equanimity and real resignation . besides , when you say yesterday at breakfast - time that you mean to give up the day to make your drawer tidy , I be aware that some misfortune be impend , though of course I could not judge of its magnitude . be the Highchester Bank break ? " 

 " oh no , sister ! " say Miss Phobe , move to a seat close to her sister 's on the sofa . " have you really be think that ! I wish I have tell you what I hear at the very first , if you have   be fancy that ! " 

 " take warning , Phobe , and learn to have no concealment from I . I do think we must be ruin , from your way of go on : eat no meat at dinner , and sigh continually . and now what be it ? " 

 " I hardly know how to tell you , Dorothy . I really do not . " 

 Miss Phobe begin to cry ; Miss Browning take hold of her arm , and give she a little sharp shake . 

 " cry as much as you like when you have   tell I ; but do not   cry now , child , when you be keep I on the tenter - hook . " 

 " Molly Gibson have lose her character , sister . that be it . " 

 " Molly Gibson have do no such thing ! " say Miss Browning indignantly . " how dare you repeat such story about poor Mary 's child ? never let I hear you say such thing again . " 

 " I can not   help it . Mrs. Dawes tell I ; and she say it be all over the town . I tell she I do not believe a word of it . and I keep it from you ; and I think I should have be really ill if I would keep it to myself any long . oh , sister ! what be you go to do ? " 

 for Miss Browning have rise without speak a word , and be leave the room in a stately and determined fashion . 

 " I be go to put on my bonnet and thing , and then I shall call upon Mrs. Dawes , and confront she with her lie . " 

 " oh , do not   call they lie , sister ; it be such a strong , ugly word . please call they tallydiddle , for I do not   believe she mean any harm . besides besides if they should turn out to be truth ? really , sister , that be the weight on my mind ; so many thing sound as if they might be true . " 

 " what thing ? " say Miss Browning , still stand with judicial erectness of position in the middle of the floor . 

 " why one story be that molly have give he a letter . " 

 " who be he ? how be I to understand a story tell in that silly way ? " Miss Browning sit down on the near chair , and make up her mind to be patient if she could . 

 " he be Mr. Preston . and that must be true ; because I miss she from my side when I want to ask she if she think blue would look green by candlelight , as the young man say it would , and she have run across the street , and Mrs. Goodenough be just go into the shop , just as she say she be . " 

 Miss Browning 's distress be overcome her anger ; so she only say , " Phobe , I think you will drive I mad . do tell I what you hear from Mrs. Dawes in a sensible and coherent manner , for once in your life . " 

 " I be sure I be try with all my might to tell you everything just as it happen . " 

 " what do you hear from Mrs. Dawes ? " 

 " why , that molly and Mr. Preston be keep company just as if she be a maid - servant and he be a gardener : meeting at all sort of improper time and place , and faint away in his arm , and out at night together , and write to each other , and slip their letter into each other 's hand ; and that be what I be talk about , sister , for I next door to see that do once . I see she with my own eye run across the street to Grinstead 's , where he be , for we have just leave he there ; with a letter in her hand , too , which be not there when she come back all fluttered and blushing . but I never think anything of it at the time ; but now all the town be talk about it , and cry shame , and say they ought to be marry . " Miss Phobe sink into sob again ; but be suddenly rouse by a good box on her ear . Miss Browning be stand over she almost tremble with passion . 

 " Phobe , if ever I hear you say such thing again , I will turn you out of the house that minute . " 

 " I only say what Mrs. Dawes say , and you ask I what it be , " reply Miss Phobe , humbly and meekly . " Dorothy , you should not have do that . " 

 " never mind whether I should or I should not . that be not the matter in hand . what I have   get to decide be , how to put a stop to all these lie . " 

 " but , Dorothy , they be not all lie if you will call they so ; I be afraid some thing be true ; though I stick to their be false when Mrs. Dawes tell I of they . " 

 " if I go to Mrs. Dawes , and she repeat they to I , I shall slap her face or box her ear I be afraid , for I could not   stand tale be tell of poor Mary 's daughter , as if they be just a stirring piece of news like James Horrocks ' pig with two head , " say Miss Browning , meditate aloud . " that would do harm instead of good . Phobe , I be really sorry I box your ear , only I should do it again if you say the same thing . " Phobe sate down by her sister , and take hold of one of her wither hand , and begin caress it , which be her way of accept her sister 's expression of regret . " if I speak to Molly , the child will deny it , if she be half as good - for - nothing as they say ; and if she be not , she will only worry herself to death . no , that will not   do . Mrs. Goodenough but she be a donkey ; and if I convince she , she could never convince any one else . no ; Mrs. Dawes , who tell you , shall tell I , and I will tie my hand together inside my muff , and bind myself over to keep the peace . and when I have   hear what be to be hear , I will put the matter into Mr. Gibson 's hand . that be what I will do . so it be no use your say anything against it , Phobe , for I shall not   attend to you . " 

 Miss Browning go to Mrs. Dawes ' and begin civilly enough to make inquiry concern the report current in Hollingford about Molly and Mr. Preston ; and Mrs. Dawes fall into the snare , and tell all the real and fictitious circumstance of the story in circulation , quite unaware of the storm that be gather and ready to fall upon she as soon as she stop speak . but she have not the long habit of reverence for Miss Browning which would have keep so many Hollingford lady from justify themselves if she find fault . Mrs. Dawes stand up for herself and her own veracity , bring out fresh scandal , which she say she do not believe , but that many do ; and adduce so much evidence as to the truth of what she have say and do believe , that Miss Browning be almost quell , and sate silent and miserable at the end of Mrs. Dawes ' justification of herself . 

 " well ! " she say at length , rise up from her chair as she speak , " I be very sorry I have   live till this day ; it be a blow to I just as if I have hear of such going - on in my own flesh and blood . I suppose I ought to apologize to you , Mrs. Dawes , for what I say ; but I have   no heart to do it to - day . I ought not to have speak as I do ; but that be nothing to this affair , you see . " 

 " I hope you do I the justice to perceive that I only repeat what I have hear on good authority , Miss Browning , " say Mrs. Dawes in reply . 

 " my dear , do not   repeat evil on any authority unless you can do some good by speak about it , " say Miss Browning , lay her hand on Mrs. Dawes ' shoulder . " I be not a good woman , but I know what be good , and that advice be . and now I think I can tell you that I beg your pardon for fly out upon you so ; but God know what pain you be put I to . you will forgive I , will not   you , my dear ? " Mrs. Dawes feel the hand tremble on her shoulder , and see the real distress of Miss Browning 's mind , so it be not difficult for she to grant the request forgiveness . then Miss Browning go home , and say but a few word to Phobe , who indeed see well enough that her sister have hear the report confirm , and need no further explanation of the cause of scarcely - taste dinner , and short reply , and sadden look . presently Miss Browning sate down and write a short note . then she ring the bell , and tell the little maiden who answer it to take it to Mr. Gibson , and if he be out to see that it be give to he as soon as ever he come home . and then she go and put on her Sunday cap ; and Miss Phobe know that her sister have write to ask Mr. Gibson to come and be tell of the rumour affect his daughter . Miss Browning be sadly disturb at the information she have receive , and the task that lie before she ; she be miserably uncomfortable to herself and irritable to Miss Phobe , and the netting - cotton she be use keep continually snap and break from the jerk of her nervous hand . when the knock at the door be hear , the well - know doctor 's knock , Miss Browning take off her spectacle , and drop they on the carpet , break they as she do so ; and then she bid Miss Phobe leave the room , as if her presence have cast the evil - eye , and cause the misfortune . she want to look natural , and be distressed at forget whether she usually receive he sit or stand . 

 " well ! " say he , come in cheerfully , and rub his cold hand as he go straight to the fire , " and what be the matter with we ? it be Phobe , I suppose ? I hope none of those old spasm ? but , after all , a dose or two will set that to right . " 

 " oh ! Mr. Gibson , I wish it be Phobe , or I either ! " say Miss Browning , tremble more and more . 

 he sate down by she patiently , when he see her agitation , and take her hand in a kind , friendly manner . 

 " do not   hurry yourself , take your time . I daresay it be not so bad as you fancy ; but we will see about it . there be a great deal of help in the world , much as we abuse it . " 

 " Mr. Gibson , " say she , " it be your Molly I be so grieve about . it be out now , and God help we both , and the poor child too , for I be sure she be be lead astray , and not go wrong by her own free will ! " 

 " molly ! " say he , fight against her word . " what be my little Molly be do or say ? " 

 " oh ! Mr. Gibson , I do not   know how to tell you . I never would have name it , if I have not be convince , sorely , sorely against my will . " 

 " at any rate , you can let I hear what you have   hear , " say he , put his elbow on the table , and screen his eye with his hand . " not that I be a bit afraid of anything you can hear about my girl , " continue he . " only in this little nest of gossip , it be as well to know what people be talk about . " 

 " they say oh ! how shall I tell you ? " 

 " go on , can not   you ? " say he , remove his hand from his blaze eye . " I be not go to believe it , so do not   be afraid ! " 

 " but I fear you must believe it . I would not if I could help it . she be be carry on a clandestine correspondence with Mr. Preston ! " 

 " Mr. Preston ! " exclaim he . 

 " and meet he at all sort of unseemly place and hour , out of door , in the dark , faint away in his his arm , if I must speak out . all the town be talk of it . " Mr. Gibson 's hand be over his eye again , and he make no sign ; so Miss Browning go on , add touch to touch . " Mr. Sheepshanks see they together . they have exchange note in Grinstead 's shop ; she run after he there . " 

 " be quiet , can not   you ? " say Mr. Gibson , take his hand away , and show his grim set face . " I have   hear enough . do not   go on . I say I should not   believe it , and I do not . I suppose I must thank you for tell I ; but I can not   yet . " 

 " I do not   want your thank , " say Miss Browning , almost cry . " I think you ought to know ; for though you be married again , I can not   forget you be dear Mary 's husband once upon a time ; and Molly 's her child . " 

 " I would rather not speak any more about it just at present , " say he , not at all reply to Miss Browning 's last speech . " I may not control myself as I ought . I only wish I could meet Preston , and horsewhip he within an inch of his life . I wish I have the doctoring of these slanderous gossip . I would make their tongue lie still for a while . my little girl ! what harm have she do they all , that they should go and foul her fair name ? " 

 " indeed , Mr. Gibson , I be afraid it be all true . I would not have send for you if I have not   examine into it . do ascertain the truth before you do anything violent , such as horsewhipping or poisoning . " 

 with all the inconsťquence of a man in a passion , Mr. Gibson laugh out , " what have I say about horsewhipping or poisoning ? do you think I would have Molly 's name drag about the street in connection with any act of violence on my part ? let the report die away as it arise . time will prove its falsehood . " 

 " but I do not   think it will , and that be the pity of it , " say Miss Browning . " you must do something , but I do not   know what . " 

 " I shall go home and ask Molly herself what be the meaning of it all ; that be all I shall do . it be too ridiculous know molly as I do , it be perfectly ridiculous . " he get up and walk about the room with hasty step , laugh short unnatural laugh from time to time . " really what will they say next ? ' Satan find some mischief still for idle tongue to do . ' " 

 " do not   talk of Satan , please , in this house . no one know what may happen , if he be lightly speak about , " plead Miss Browning . 

 he go on , without notice she , talk to himself , " I have   a great mind to leave the place ; and what food for scandal that piece of folly would give rise to ! " then he be silent for a time ; his hand in his pocket , his eye on the ground , as he continue his quarter - deck march . suddenly he stop close to Miss Browning 's chair : " I be thoroughly ungrateful to you , for as true a mark of friendship as you have   ever show to I . true or false , it be right I should know the wretched scandal that be be circulate ; and it could not   have be pleasant for you to tell it I . thank you from the bottom of my heart . " 

 " indeed , Mr. Gibson , if it be false I would never have name it , but let it die away . " 

 " it be not true , though ! " say he , doggedly , let drop the hand he have take in his effusion of gratitude . 

 she shake her head . " I shall always love molly for her mother 's sake , " she say . and it be a great concession from the correct Miss Browning . but her father do not understand it as such . 

 " you ought to love she for her own . she have do nothing to disgrace herself . I shall go straight home , and probe into the truth . " 

 " as if the poor girl who have be lead away into deceit already would scruple much at go on in falsehood , " be Miss Browning 's remark on this last speech of Mr. Gibson 's ; but she have discretion enough not to make it until he be well out of hearing . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLVIII . 

 an innocent CULPRIT . 
 

 with his head bend down as if he be face some keen - blow wind and yet there be not a breath of air stir Mr. Gibson go swiftly to his own home . he ring at the door - bell ; an unusual proceeding on his part . Maria open the door . " go and tell Miss Molly she be want in the dining - room . do not   say who it be that want she . " there be something in Mr. Gibson 's manner that make Maria obey he to the letter , in spite of Molly 's surprised question , 

 " want I ? who be it , Maria ? " 

 Mr. Gibson go into the dining - room , and shut the door , for an instant 's solitude . he go up to the chimney - piece , take hold of it , and lay his head on his hand , and try to still the beating of his heart . 

 the door open . he know that molly stand there before he hear her tone of astonishment . 

 " Papa ! " 

 " hush ! " say he , turn round sharply . " shut the door . come here . " 

 she come to he , wonder what be amiss . her thought go to the Hamleys immediately . " be it Osborne ? " she ask , breathless . if Mr. Gibson have not be too much agitated to judge calmly , he might have deduce comfort from these three word . 

 but instead of allow himself to seek for comfort from collateral evidence , he say , " molly , what be this I hear ? that you have be keep up a clandestine intercourse with Mr. Preston meet he in out - of - the - way place ; exchange letter with he in a stealthy way ? " 

 though he have profess to disbelieve all this , and do disbelieve it at the bottom of his soul , his voice be hard and stern , his face be white and grim , and his eye fix Molly 's with the terrible keenness of their research . molly tremble all over , but she do not attempt to evade his penetration . if she be silent for a moment , it be because she be rapidly review her relation with regard to Cynthia in the matter . it be but a moment 's pause of silence ; but it seem long minute to one who be crave for a burst of indignant denial . he have take hold of her two arm just above her wrist , as she have advance towards he ; he be unconscious of this action ; but , as his impatience for her word grow upon he , he grasp she more and more tightly in his vice - like hand , till she make a little involuntary sound of pain . and then he let go ; and she look at her soft bruise flesh , with tear gather fast to her eye to think that he , her father , should have hurt she so . at the instant it appear to her stranger that he should inflict bodily pain upon his child , than that he should have hear the truth even in an exaggerated form . with a childish gesture she hold out her arm to he ; but if she expect pity , she receive none . 

 " Pooh ! " say he , as he just glance at the mark , " that be nothing nothing . answer my question . have you have you meet that man in private ? " 

 " yes , papa , I have ; but I do not   think it be wrong . " 

 he sate down now . " wrong ! " he echo , bitterly . " not wrong ? well ! I must bear it somehow . your mother be dead . that be one comfort . it be true , then , be it ? why , I do not   believe it not I. I laugh in my sleeve at their credulity ; and I be the dupe all the time ! " 

 " Papa , I can not tell you all . it be not my secret , or you should know it directly . indeed , you will be sorry some time I have never deceive you yet , have I ? " try to take one of his hand ; but he keep they tightly in his pocket , his eye fix on the pattern of the carpet before he . " Papa ! " say she , plead again , " have I ever deceive you ? " 

 " how can I tell ? I hear of this from the town 's talk . I do not   know what next may come out ! " 

 " the town 's talk ! " say molly in dismay . " what business be it of theirs ? " 

 " every one make it their business to cast dirt on a girl 's name who have disregard the commonest rule of modesty and propriety . " 

 " Papa , you be very hard . Modesty disregard ! I will tell you exactly what I have do . I meet Mr. Preston once , that evening when you put I down to walk over Croston Heath , and there be another person with he . I meet he a second time and that time by appointment nobody but our two self , in the Towers ' Park . that be all , papa . you must trust I . I can not explain more . you must trust I indeed . " 

 he could not help relent at her word ; there be such truth in the tone in which they be speak . but he neither speak nor stir for a minute or two . then he raise his eye to hers for the first time since she have acknowledge the external truth of what he charge she with . her face be very white , but it bear the impress of the final sincerity of death , when the true expression prevail without the poor disguise of time . 

 " the letter ? " he say , but almost as if he be ashamed to question that countenance any far . 

 " I give he one letter , of which I do not write a word , which , in fact , I believe to have be merely an envelope , without any writing whatever inside . the giving that letter , the two interview I have name , make all the private intercourse I have have with Mr. Preston . oh ! papa , what have they be say that have grieve shock you so much ? " 

 " never mind . as the world go , what you say you have do , molly , be grind enough . you must tell I all . I must be able to refute these rumour point by point . " 

 " how be they to be refute , when you say that the truth which I have acknowledge be grind enough for what people be say ? " 

 " you say you be not act for yourself , but for another . if you tell I who the other be , if you tell I everything out fully , I will do my utmost to screen she for of course I guess it be Cynthia while I be exonerate you . " 

 " no , papa ! " say Molly , after some little consideration ; " I have tell you all I can tell ; all that concern myself ; and I have promise not to say one word more . " 

 " then your character will be impugn . it must be , unless the full explanation of these secret meeting be give . I have   a great mind to force the whole truth out of Preston himself ! " 

 " Papa ! once again I beg you to trust I . if you ask Mr. Preston you will very likely hear the whole truth ; but that be just what I have be try so hard to conceal , for it will only make several people very unhappy if it be know , and the whole affair be over and do with now . " 

 " not your share in it . Miss Browning send for I this evening to tell I how people be talk about you . she imply that it be a complete loss of your good name . you do not   know , Molly , how slight a thing may blacken a girl 's reputation for life . I would hard work to stand all she say , even though I do not   believe a word of it at the time . and now you have   tell I that much of it be true . " 

 " but I think you be a brave man , papa . and you believe I , do not   you ? we shall outlive these rumour , never fear . " 

 " you do not   know the power of ill - natured tongue , child , " say he . 

 " oh , now you have   call I ' child ' again I do not   care for anything . dear , dear papa , I be sure it be good and wisest to take no notice of these speech . after all , they may not mean they ill - naturedly . I be sure Miss Browning would not . by - and - by they will quite forget how much they make out of so little , and even if they do not , you would not have I break my solemn word , would you ? " 

 " perhaps not . but I can not easily forgive the person who , by practise on your generosity , lead you into this scrape . you be very young , and look upon these thing as merely temporary evil . I have more experience . " 

 " still , I do not   see what I can do now , papa . perhaps I have   be foolish ; but what I do , I do of my own self . it be not suggest to I . and I be sure it be not wrong in moral , whatever it might be in judgment . as I say , it be all over now ; what I do end the affair , I be thankful to say ; and it be with that object I do it . if people choose to talk about I , I must submit ; and so must you , dear papa . " 

 " do your mother do Mrs. Gibson know anything about it ? " ask he with sudden anxiety . 

 " no ; not a bit ; not a word . pray do not   name it to she . that might lead to more mischief than anything else . I have really tell you everything I be at liberty to tell . " 

 it be a great relief to Mr. Gibson to find that his sudden fear that his wife might have be privy to it all be ill - found . he have be seize by a sudden dread that she , whom he have choose to marry in order to have a protectress and guide for his daughter , have be cognizant of this ill - advise adventure with Mr. Preston ; nay , more , that she might even have instigate it to save her own child ; for that Cynthia be , somehow or other , at the bottom of it all he have no doubt whatever . but now , at any rate , Mrs. Gibson have not be play a treacherous part ; that be all the comfort he could extract out of Molly 's mysterious admission , that much mischief might result from Mrs. Gibson 's know anything about these meeting with Mr. Preston . 

 " then , what be to be do ? " say he . " these report be abroad , be I to do nothing to contradict they ? be I to go about smile and content with all this talk about you , pass from one idle gossip to another ? " 

 " I be afraid so . I be very sorry , for I never mean you to have know anything about it , and I can see now how it must distress you . but surely when nothing more happen , and nothing come of what have happen , the wonder and the gossip must die away . I know you believe every word I have say , and that you trust I , papa . please , for my sake , be patient with all this gossip and cackle . " 

 " it will try I hard , Molly , " say he . 

 " for my sake , papa ! " 

 " I do not   see what else I can do , " reply he moodily , " unless I get hold of Preston . " 

 " that would be the bad of all . that would make a talk . and , after all , perhaps he be not so very much to blame . yes ! he be . but he behave well to I as far as that go , " say she , suddenly recollect his speech when Mr. Sheepshanks come up in the tower ' Park " do not   stir , you have do nothing to be ashamed of . " 

 " that be true . a quarrel between man which drag a woman 's name into notice be to be avoid at any cost . but soon or later I must have it out with Preston . he shall find it not so pleasant to have place my daughter in equivocal circumstance . " 

 " he do not   place I . he do not   know I be come , do not   expect to meet I either time ; and would far rather not have take the letter I give he if he could have help himself . " 

 " it be all a mystery . I hate to have you mix up in mystery . " 

 " I hate to be mix up . but what can I do ? I know of another mystery which I be pledge not to speak about . I can not help myself . " 

 " well , all I can say be , never be the heroine of a mystery that you can avoid , if you can not   help be an accessory . then , I suppose , I must yield to your wish and let this scandal wear itself out without any notice from I ? " 

 " what else can you do under the circumstance ? " 

 " ay ; what else , indeed ? how shall you bear it ? " 

 for an instant the quick hot tear spring into her eye ; to have everybody all her world , think evil of she , do seem hard to the girl who have never think or say an unkind thing of they . but she smile as she make answer , 

 " it be like tooth - drawing , it will be over some time . it would be much bad if I really have be do wrong . " 

 " cynthia shall beware " he begin ; but molly put her hand before his mouth . 

 " Papa , Cynthia must not be accuse , or suspect ; you will drive she out of your house if you do , she be so proud , and so unprotected , except by you . and Roger , for Roger 's sake , you will never do or say anything to send Cynthia away , when he have trust we all to take care of she , and love she in his absence . oh ! I think if she be really wicked , and I do not love she at all , I should feel bound to watch over she , he love she so dearly . and she be really good at heart , and I do love she dearly . you must not vex or hurt Cynthia , papa , remember she be dependent upon you ! " 

 " I think the world would get on tolerably well , if there be no woman in it . they plague the life out of one . you have   make I forget , amongst you poor old Job Houghton that I ought to have go to see an hour ago . " 

 molly put up her mouth to be kiss . " you be not angry with I now , papa , be you ? " 

 " get out of my way "   kiss she all the same . " if I be not angry with you , I ought to be ; for you have   cause a great deal of worry , which will not   be over yet awhile , I can tell you . " 

 for all Molly 's bravery at the time of this conversation , it be she that suffer more than her father . he keep out of the way of hear gossip ; but she be perpetually throw into the small society of the place . Mrs. Gibson herself have catch cold , and moreover be not tempt by the quiet old - fashioned visiting which be go on just about this time , provoke by the visit of two of Mrs. Dawes ' pretty unrefined niece , who laugh , and chatter , and eat , and would fain have flirt with Mr. Ashton , the vicar , could he have be bring by any possibility to understand his share in the business . Mr. Preston do not accept the invitation to Hollingford tea - drinking with the same eager gratitude as he have do a year before : or else the shadow which hang over Molly would have extend to he , her co - partner in the clandestine meeting which give such umbrage to the feminine virtue of the town . molly herself be invite , because it would not do to pass any apparent slight on either Mr. or Mrs. Gibson ; but there be a tacit and underhand protest against her be receive on the old term . every one be civil to she , but no one be cordial ; there be a very perceptible film of difference in their behaviour to she from what it be formerly ; nothing that have outline and could be define . but Molly , for all her clear conscience and her brave heart , feel acutely that she be only tolerate , not welcome . she catch the buzzing whisper of the two Miss Oakes 's , who , when they first meet the heroine of the prevail scandal , look at her askance , and criticise her pretension to good look , with hardly an attempt at under - tone . molly try to be thankful that her father be not in the mood for visit . she be even glad that her stepmother be too much of an invalid to come out , when she feel thus slight , and as it be , degrade from her place . Miss Browning herself , that true old friend , speak to she with chilling dignity , and much reserve ; for she have never hear a word from Mr. Gibson since the evening when she have put herself to so much pain to tell he of the disagreeable rumour affect his daughter . 

 only Miss Phobe would seek out molly with even more than her former tenderness ; and this try Molly 's calmness more than all the slight put together . the soft hand , press her under the table , the continual appeal to she , so as to bring she back into the conversation , touch molly almost to shed tear . sometimes the poor girl wonder to herself whether this change in the behaviour of her acquaintance be not a mere fancy of her ; whether , if she have never have that conversation with her father , in which she have bear herself so bravely at the time , she should have discover the difference in their treatment of she . she never tell her father how she feel these perpetual small slight : she have choose to bear the burden of her own free will ; nay , more , she have insist on be allow to do so ; and it be not for she to grieve he now by show that she shrink from the consequence of her own act . so she never even make an excuse for not go into the small gaiety , or mingle with the society of Hollingford . only she suddenly let go the stretch of restraint she be live in , when one evening her father tell she that he be really anxious about Mrs. Gibson 's cough , and should like Molly to give up a party at Mrs. Goodenough 's , to which they be all three invite , but to which molly alone be go . Molly 's heart leap up at the thought of stop at home , even though the next moment she have to blame herself for rejoice at a reprieve that be purchase by another 's suffering . however , the remedy prescribe by her husband do Mrs. Gibson good ; and she be particularly grateful and caressing to Molly . 

 " really , dear ! " say she , stroke Molly 's head , " I think your hair be get soft , and lose that disagreeable crisp curly feeling . " 

 then molly know that her stepmother be in high good - humour ; the smoothness or curliness of her hair be a sure test of the favour in which Mrs. Gibson hold she at the moment . 

 " I be so sorry to be the cause of detain you from this little party , but dear papa be so over - anxious about I . I have always be a kind of pet with gentleman , and poor Mr. Kirkpatrick never know how to make enough of I . but I think Mr. Gibson be even more foolishly fond : his last word be , ' take care of yourself , Hyacinth ; ' and then he come back again to say , ' if you do not   attend to my direction I will not   answer for the consequence . ' I shake my forefinger at he , and say , ' do not   be so anxious , you silly man . ' " 

 " I hope we have do everything he tell we to do , " say Molly . 

 " oh yes ! I feel so much well . do you know , late as it be , I think you might go to Mrs. Goodenough 's yet ? Maria could take you , and I should like to see you dress ; when one have be wear dull warm gown for a week or two one get quite a craving for bright colour , and evening dress . so go and get ready , dear , and then perhaps you will bring I back some news , for really , shut up as I have be with only papa and you for the last fortnight , I have   get quite moped and dismal , and I can not   bear to keep young people from the gaiety suitable to their age . " 

 " oh , pray , mamma ! I have so much rather not go ! " 

 " very well ! very well ! only I think it be rather selfish of you , when you see I be so willing to make the sacrifice for your sake . " 

 " but you say it be a sacrifice to you , and I do not   want to go . " 

 " very well ; do I not say you might stop at home ? only pray do not   chop logic ; nothing be so fatigue to a sick person . " 

 then they be silent for some time . Mrs. Gibson break the silence by say , in a languid voice 

 " can not   you think of anything amusing to say , molly ? " 

 molly pump up from the depth of her mind a few little triviality which she have nearly forget , but she feel that they be anything but amusing , and so Mrs. Gibson seem to feel they ; for presently she say 

 " I wish Cynthia be at home . " and Molly feel it as a reproach to her own dulness . 

 " shall I write to she and ask she to come back ? " 

 " well , I be not sure ; I wish I know a great many thing . you have   not hear anything of poor dear Osborne Hamley lately , have you ? " 

 remember her father 's charge not to speak of Osborne 's health , Molly make no reply , nor be any need , for Mrs. Gibson go on think aloud 

 " you see , if Mr. Henderson have be as attentive as he be in the spring and the chance about Roger I shall be really grieve if anything happen to that young man , uncouth as he be , but it must be own that Africa be not merely an unhealthy it be a savage and even in some part a cannibal country . I often think of all I have   read of it in geography book , as I lie awake at night , and if Mr. Henderson be really become attach ! the future be hide from we by infinite wisdom , Molly , or else I should like to know it ; one would calculate one 's behaviour at the present time so much well if one only know what event be to come . but I think , on the whole , we have well not alarm Cynthia . if we have only know in time we might have plan for she to have come down with Lord Cumnor and my lady . " 

 " be they come ? be Lady Cumnor well enough to travel ? " 

 " yes , to be sure ; or else I should not have consider whether or no Cynthia could have come down with they . it would have sound very well more than respectable , and would have give she a position among that lawyer set in London . " 

 " then Lady Cumnor be well ? " 

 " to be sure . I should have think papa would have mention it to you ; but , to be sure , he be always so scrupulously careful not to speak about his patient . quite right too quite right and delicate . why , he hardly ever tell I how they be go on . yes ! the Earl and the Countess , and Lady Harriet and Lord and Lady Cuxhaven , and Lady Agnes ; and I have   order a new winter bonnet and a black satin cloak . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER XLIX . 

 MOLLY gibson find a champion . 
 

 Lady Cumnor have so far recover from the violence of her attack , and from the consequent operation , as to be able to be remove to the tower for change of air ; and accordingly she be bring thither by her whole family with all the pomp and state become an invalid peeress . there be every probability that " the family " would make a long residence at the Towers than they have do for several year , during which time they have be wanderer hither and thither in search of health . somehow , after all , it be very pleasant and restful to come to the old ancestral home , and every member of the family enjoy it in his or her own way ; Lord Cumnor most especially . his talent for gossip and his love of small detail have scarcely fair play in the hurry of a London life , and be much nip in the bud during his Continental sojourning , as he neither speak French fluently , nor understand it easily when speak . besides , he be a great proprietor , and like to know how his land be go on ; how his tenant be fare in the world . he like to hear of their birth , marriage , and death , and have something of a royal memory for face . in short , if ever a peer be an old woman , Lord Cumnor be that peer ; but he be a very good - natured old woman , and ride about on his stout old cob with his pocket full of halfpence for the child , and little packet of snuff for the old people . like an old woman , too , he enjoy an afternoon cup of tea in his wife 's sitting - room , and over his gossip 's beverage he would repeat all that he have learn in the day . Lady Cumnor be exactly in that state of convalescence when such talk as her lord 's be extremely agreeable to she , but she have contemn the habit of listen to gossip so severely all her life , that she think it due to consistency to listen first , and enter a supercilious protest afterwards . it have , however , come to be a family habit for all of they to gather together in Lady Cumnor 's room on their return from their daily walk , or drive , or ride , and over the fire , sip their tea at her early meal , to recount the morsel of local intelligence they have hear during the morning . when they have say all that they have to say   and not before , they have always to listen to a short homily from her ladyship on the well - wear text , the poorness of conversation about person , the probable falsehood of all they have hear , and the degradation of character imply by its repetition . on one of these November evening they be all assemble in Lady Cumnor 's room . she be lie , all drape in white , and cover up with an indian shawl , on a sofa near the fire . Lady Harriet sate on the rug , close before the wood - fire , pick up fall ember with a pair of dwarf tong , and pile they on the red and odorous heap in the centre of the hearth . Lady Cuxhaven , notable from girlhood , be use the blind man 's holiday to net fruit - net for the wall at Cuxhaven Park . Lady Cumnor 's woman be try to see to pour out tea by the light of one small wax - candle in the background   for Lady Cumnor could not bear much light to her weakened eye ; and the great leafless branch of the tree outside the house keep sweep against the window , move by the wind that be gather . 

 it be always Lady Cumnor 's habit to snub those she love well . her husband be perpetually snub by she , yet she miss he now that he be later than usual , and profess not to want her tea ; but they all know that it be only because he be not there to hand it to she , and be find fault with for his invariable stupidity in forget that she like to put sugar in before she take any cream . at length he burst in : 

 " I beg your pardon , my lady , I be later than I should have be , I know . why ! have not   you have your tea yet ? " he exclaim , bustle about to get the cup for his wife . 

 " you know I never take cream before I have   sweeten it , " say she , with even more emphasis on the " never " than usual . 

 " oh , dear ! what a simpleton I be ! I think I might have remember it by this time . you see I meet old sheepshank , and that be the reason of it . " 

 " of your hand I the cream before the sugar ? " ask his wife . it be one of her grim joke . 

 " no , no ! ha , ha ! you be well this evening , I think , my dear . but , as I be say , Sheepshanks be such an eternal talker , there be no get away from he , and I have no idea it be so late ! " 

 " well , I think the least you can do be to tell we something of Mr. Sheepshanks ' conversation now you have tear yourself away from he . " 

 " Conversation ! do I call it conversation ? I do not   think I say much . I listen . he really have always a great deal to say . More than Preston , for instance . and , by the way , he be tell I something about Preston ; old sheepshank think he will be marry before long , he say there be a great deal of gossip go on about he and Gibson 's daughter . they have   be catch meet in the park , and corresponding , and all that kind of thing that be likely to end in a marriage . " 

 " I shall be very sorry , " say Lady Harriet . " I always like that girl ; and I can not   bear papa 's model land - agent . " 

 " I daresay it be not true , " say Lady Cumnor , in a very audible aside to Lady Harriet . " papa pick up story one day to contradict they the next . " 

 " ah , but this do sound like truth . sheepshank say all the old lady in the town have get hold of it , and be make a great scandal out of it . " 

 " I do not   think it do sound quite a nice story . I wonder what Clare could be do to allow such going on , " say Lady Cuxhaven . 

 " I think it be much more likely that Clare 's own daughter that pretty pawky Miss Kirkpatrick be the real heroine of this story , " say Lady Harriet . " she always look like a heroine of genteel comedy ; and those young lady be capable of a good deal of innocent intriguing , if I remember rightly . now little Molly Gibson have a certain gaucherie about she which would disqualify she at once from any clandestine proceeding . besides , ' clandestine ! ' why , the child be truth itself . papa , be you sure Mr. Sheepshanks say it be Miss Gibson that be exciting Hollingford scandal ? be not   it Miss Kirkpatrick ? the notion of she and Mr. Preston make a match of it do not   sound so incongruous ; but if it be my little friend Molly , I will go to church and forbid the bann . " 

 " really , Harriet , I can not   think what always make you take such an interest in all these petty Hollingford affair . " 

 " Mamma , it be only tit for tat . they take the most lively interest in all our saying and doing . if I be go to be marry , they would want to know every possible particular , when we first meet , what we first say to each other , what I wear , and whether he offer by letter or in person . I be sure those good Miss Brownings be wonderfully well - inform as to Mary 's method of manage her nursery , and educate her girl ; so it be only a proper return of the compliment to want to know on our side how they be go on . I be quite of papa 's faction . I like to hear all the local gossip . " 

 " especially when it be flavour with a spice of scandal and impropriety , as in this case , " say Lady Cumnor , with the momentary bitterness of a convalescent invalid . Lady Harriet colour with annoyance . but then she rally her courage , and say with more gravity than before , 

 " I be really interested in this story about Molly Gibson , I own . I both like and respect she ; and I do not like to hear her name couple with that of Mr. Preston . I can not   help fancy papa have make some mistake . " 

 " no , my dear . I be sure I be repeat what I hear . I be sorry I say anything about it , if it annoy you or my lady there . sheepshank do say Miss Gibson , though , and he go on to say it be a pity the girl have get herself so talk about ; for it be the way they have carry on that give rise to all the chatter . Preston himself be a very fair match for she , and nobody could have object to it . but I will try and find a more agreeable piece of news . Old Margery at the lodge be dead ; and they do not   know where to find some one to teach clear - starch at your school ; and Robert Hall make forty pound last year by his apple . " so they drift away from Molly and her affair ; only Lady Harriet keep turn what she have hear over in her own mind with interest and wonder . 

 " I warn she against he the day of her father 's wedding . and what a straightforward , out - speak topic it be then ! I do not   believe it ; it be only one of old sheepshank ' story , half invention and half deafness . " 

 the next day Lady Harriet ride over to Hollingford , and for the settling of her curiosity she call on Miss Brownings , and introduce the subject . she would not have speak about the rumour she have hear to any who be not warm friend of Molly 's . if Mr. Sheepshanks have choose to allude to it when she have be rid with her father , she would very soon have silence he by one of the haughty look she know full well how to assume . but she feel as if she must know the truth , and accordingly she begin thus abruptly to Miss Browning : 

 " what be all this I hear about my little friend Molly Gibson and Mr. Preston ? " 

 " oh , Lady Harriet ! have you hear of it ? we be so sorry ! " 

 " sorry for what ? " 

 " I think , beg your ladyship 's pardon , we have well not say any more till we know how much you know , " say Miss Browning . 

 " Nay , " reply Lady Harriet , laugh a little , " I shall not   tell what I know till I be sure you know more . then we will make an exchange if you like . " 

 " I be afraid it be no laugh matter for poor Molly , " say Miss Browning , shake her head . " People do say such thing ! " 

 " but I do not   believe they ; indeed I do not , " burst in Miss Phobe , half cry . 

 " no more will I , then , " say Lady Harriet , take the good lady 's hand . 

 " it be all very fine , Phobe , say you do not   believe they , but I should like to know who it be that convince I , sadly against my will , I be sure . " 

 " I only tell you the fact as Mrs. Goodenough tell they I , sister ; but I be sure if you have see poor patient molly as I have do , sit up in a corner of a room , look at the Beauties of England and Wales till she must have be sick of they , and no one speak to she ; and she as gentle and sweet as ever at the end of the evening , though maybe a bit pale fact or no fact , I will not   believe anything against she . " 

 so there sate Miss Phobe , in tearful defiance of fact . 

 " and , as I say before , I be quite of your opinion , " say Lady Harriet . 

 " but how do your ladyship explain away her meeting with Mr. Preston in all sort of unlikely and open - air place ? " ask Miss Browning , who , to do her justice , would have be only too glad to join Molly 's partisan , if she could have preserve her character for logical deduction at the same time . " I go so far as to send for her father and tell he all about it . I think at least he would have horsewhip Mr. Preston ; but he seem to have take no notice of it . " 

 " then we may be quite sure he know some way of explain matter that we do not , " say Lady Harriet , decisively . " after all , there may be a hundred and fifty perfectly natural and justifiable explanation . " 

 " Mr. Gibson know of none when I think it my duty to speak to he , " say Miss Browning . 

 " why , suppose that Mr. Preston be engage to Miss Kirkpatrick , and molly be confidante and messenger ? " 

 " I do not   see that your ladyship 's supposition much alter the blame . why , if he be honourably engaged to Cynthia Kirkpatrick , do he not visit she openly at her home in Mr. Gibson 's house ? why do molly lend herself to clandestine proceeding ? " 

 " one can not   account for everything , " say Lady Harriet , a little impatiently , for reason be go hard against she . " but I choose to have faith in Molly Gibson . I be sure she be not do anything very wrong . I have   a great mind to go and call on her Mrs. Gibson be confine to her room with this horrid influenza and take she with I on a round of call through this little gossiping town , on Mrs. Goodenough , or Badenough , who seem to have be propagate all these story . but I have   not time to - day . I have   to meet papa at three , and it be three now . only remember , Miss Phobe , it be you and I against the world , in defence of a distressed damsel . " 

 " Don Quixote and Sancho Panza ! " say she to herself as she run lightly down Miss Browning 's old - fashioned staircase . 

 " now , I do not   think that be pretty of you , Phobe , " say Miss Browning in some displeasure , as soon as she be alone with her sister . " first , you convince I against my will , and make I very unhappy ; and I have to do unpleasant thing , all because you have   make I believe that certain statement be true ; and then you turn round and cry , and say you do not   believe a word of it all , make I out a regular ogre and backbiter . no ! it be of no use . I shall not   listen to you . " so she leave Miss Phobe in tear , and lock herself up in her own room . 

 Lady Harriet , meanwhile , be rid homeward by her father 's side , apparently listen to all he choose to say , but in reality turn over the probability and possibility that might account for these strange interview between Molly and Mr. Preston . it be a case of parler de l ' ne et l'on en voit les oreille . at a turn in the road they see Mr. Preston a little way before they , come towards they on his good horse , point device , in his riding attire . 

 the earl , in his thread - bare coat , and on his old brown cob , call out cheerfully , 

 " Aha ! here 's Preston . good - day to you . I be just want to ask you about that slip of pasture - land on the Home Farm . John Brickkill want to plough it up and crop it . it be not two acre at the good . " 

 while they be talk over this bit of land , Lady Harriet come to her resolution . as soon as her father have finish , she say , " Mr. Preston , perhaps you will allow I to ask you one or two question to relieve my mind , for I be in some little perplexity at present . " 

  Lady Harriet ask one or two Questions . 
 Lady Harriet ask one or two Questions . 
 click to enlarge 
 " certainly ; I shall only be too happy to give you any information in my power . " but the moment after he have make this polite speech , he recollect Molly 's speech that she would refer her case to Lady Harriet . but the letter have be return , and the affair be now wind up . she have come off conqueror , he the vanquish . surely she would never have be so ungenerous as to appeal after that . 

 " there be report about Miss Gibson and you current among the gossip of Hollingford . be we to congratulate you on your engagement to that young lady ? " 

 " ah ! by the way , Preston , we ought to have do it before , " interrupt Lord Cumnor , in hasty goodwill . but his daughter say quietly , " Mr. Preston have not yet tell we if the report be well found , papa . " 

 she look at he with the air of a person expect an answer , and expect a truthful answer . 

 " I be not so fortunate , " reply he , try to make his horse appear fidgety , without incur observation . 

 " then I may contradict that report ? " ask Lady Harriet quickly . " or be there any reason for believe that in time it may come true ? I ask because such report , if unfounded , do harm to young lady . " 

 " keep other sweetheart off , " put in Lord Cumnor , look a good deal pleased at his own discernment . Lady Harriet go on : 

 " and I take a great interest in Miss Gibson . " 

 Mr. Preston see from her manner that he be " in for it , " as he express it to himself . the question be , how much or how little do she know ? 

 " I have no expectation or hope of ever have a near interest in Miss Gibson than I have at present . I shall be glad if this straightforward answer relieve your ladyship from your perplexity . " 

 he could not help the touch of insolence that accompany these last word . it be not in the word themselves , nor in the tone in which they be speak , nor in the look which accompany they , it be in all ; it imply a doubt of Lady Harriet 's right to question he as she do ; and there be something of defiance in it as well . but this touch of insolence put Lady Harriet 's mettle up ; and she be not one to check herself , in any course , for the opinion of an inferior . 

 " then , sir ! be you aware of the injury you may do to a young lady 's reputation if you meet she , and detain she in long conversation , when she be walk by herself , unaccompanie by any one ? you give rise you have give rise to report . " 

 " my dear Harriet , be not you go too far ? you do not   know Mr. Preston may have intention unacknowledged intention . " 

 " no , my lord . I have no intention with regard to Miss Gibson . she may be a very worthy young lady I have no doubt she be . Lady Harriet seem determined to push I into such a position that I can not but acknowledge myself to be it be not enviable not pleasant to own but I be , in fact , a jilt man ; jilt by Miss Kirkpatrick , after a tolerably long engagement . my interview with Miss Gibson be not of the most agreeable kind as you may conclude when I tell you she be , I believe , the instigator certainly , she be the agent in this last step of Miss Kirkpatrick 's . be your ladyship 's curiosity "   with an emphasis on this last word   ' satisfied with this rather mortify confession of mine ? " 

 " Harriet , my dear , you have   go too far we have no right to pry into Mr. Preston 's private affair . " 

 " no more I have , " say Lady Harriet , with a smile of win frankness : the first smile she have accord to Mr. Preston for many a long day ; ever since the time , year ago , when , presume on his handsomeness , he have assume a tone of gallant familiarity with Lady Harriet , and pay her personal compliment as he would have do to an equal . 

 " but he will excuse I , I hope , " continue she , still in that gracious manner which make he feel that he now hold a much high place in her esteem than he have have at the beginning of their interview , " when he learn that the busy tongue of the Hollingford lady have be speak of my friend , Miss Gibson , in the most unwarrantable manner ; draw unjustifiable inference from the fact of that intercourse with Mr. Preston , the nature of which he have just confer such a real obligation on I by explain . " 

 " I think I need hardly request Lady Harriet to consider this explanation of mine as confidential , " say Mr. Preston . 

 " of course , of course ! " say the earl ; " every one will understand that . " and he ride home , and tell his wife and Lady Cuxhaven the whole conversation between Lady Harriet and Mr. Preston ; in the strict confidence , of course . Lady Harriet have to stand a good many stricture on manner , and proper dignity for a few day after this . however , she console herself by call on the Gibsons ; and , find that Mrs. Gibson   who be still an invalid   be asleep at the time , she experience no difficulty in carry off the unconscious Molly for a walk , which Lady Harriet so contrive that they twice pass through all the length of the principal street of the town , loiter at Grinstead 's for half an hour , and wound up by Lady Harriet 's call on the Miss Brownings , who , to her regret , be not at home . 

 " perhaps , it be as well , " say she , after a minute 's consideration . " I will leave my card , and put your name down underneath it , molly . " 

 molly be a little puzzled by the manner in which she have be take possession of , like an inanimate chattel , for all the afternoon , and exclaim , " please , Lady Harriet I never leave card ; I have not get any , and on the Miss Brownings , of all people ; why , I be in and out whenever I like . " 

 " never mind , little one . to - day you shall do everything properly , and accord to full etiquette . " 

 " and now tell Mrs. Gibson to come out to the tower for a long day ; we will send the carriage for she whenever she will let we know that she be strong enough to come . indeed , she have well come for a few day ; at this time of the year it do not   do for an invalid to be out in the evening , even in a carriage . " so speak Lady Harriet , stand on the white door - step at Miss Brownings ' , and hold Molly 's hand while she wish her good - by . " you will tell she , dear , that I come partly to see she but that find her asleep , I run off with you , and do not   forget about she come to stay with we for change of air mamma will like it , I be sure and the carriage , and all that . and now good - by , we have   do a good day 's work ! and well than you be aware of , " continue she , still address molly , though the latter be quite out of hearing . " hollingford be not the place I take it to be , if it do not   veer round in Miss Gibson 's favour after my to - day 's trotting of that child about . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER L. 

 CYNTHIA AT BAY . 
 

 Mrs. Gibson be slow in recover her strength after the influenza , and before she be well enough to accept Lady Harriet 's invitation to the Towers , Cynthia come home from London . if Molly have think her manner of departure be scarcely as affectionate and considerate as it might have be , if such a thought have cross Molly 's fancy for an instant , she be repentant for it as soon as ever Cynthia return , and the girl meet together face to face , with all the old familiar affection , go upstairs to the drawing - room , with their arm round each other 's waist , and sit there together hand in hand . Cynthia 's whole manner be more quiet than it have be , when the weight of her unpleasant secret rest on her mind , and make she alternately despondent or flighty . 

 " after all , " say Cynthia , " there be a look of home about these room which be very pleasant . but I wish I could see you look strong , mamma ! that be the only unpleasant thing . molly , why do not   you send for I ? " 

 " I want to do , " begin molly 

 " but I would not   let she , " say Mrs. Gibson . " you be much well in London than here , for you could have do I no good ; and your letter be very agreeable to read ; and now Helen be well , and I be nearly well , and you have   come home just at the right time , for everybody be full of the Charity Ball . " 

 " but we be not go this year , mamma , " say Cynthia decidedly . " it be on the 25th , be not   it ? and I be sure you will never be well enough to take we . " 

 " you really seem determined to make I out bad than I be , child , " say Mrs. Gibson , rather querulously , she be one of those who , when their malady be only trifle , exaggerate it , but when it be really of some consequence , be unwilling to sacrifice any pleasure by acknowledge it . it be well for she in this instance that her husband have wisdom and authority enough to forbid she go to this ball , on which she have set her heart ; but the consequence of his prohibition be an increase of domestic plaintiveness and low spirit , which seem to tell on Cynthia the bright gay Cynthia herself and it be often hard work for Molly to keep up the spirit of two other people as well as her own . Ill - health might account for Mrs. Gibson 's despondency , but why be Cynthia so silent , not to say so sighing ? molly be puzzle to account for it ; and all the more perplexed because from time to time Cynthia keep call upon she for praise for some unknown and mysterious virtue that she have practise ; and Molly be young enough to believe that , after any exercise of virtue , the spirit rise , cheer up by an approve conscience . such be not the case with Cynthia , however . she sometimes say such thing as these , when she have be particularly inert and desponding : 

 " ah , Molly , you must let my goodness lie fallow for a while ! it have bear such a wonderful crop this year . I have be so pretty - behaved if you know all ! " or , " really , Molly , my virtue must come down from the cloud ! it be strained to the utmost in London and I find it be like a kite after soar aloft for some time , it suddenly come down , and get tangle in all sort of briar and bramble ; which thing be an allegory , unless you can bring yourself to believe in my extraordinary goodness while I be away give I a sort of right to fall foul of all mamma 's briar and bramble now . " 

 but Molly have have some experience of Cynthia 's whim of perpetually hint at a mystery which she do not mean to reveal in the Mr. Preston day , and , although she be occasionally pique into curiosity , Cynthia 's allusion at something more in the background fall in general on rather deaf ear . one day the mystery burst its shell , and come out in the shape of an offer make to Cynthia by Mr. Henderson and refuse . under all the circumstance , Molly could not appreciate the heroic goodness so often allude to . the revelation of the secret at last take place in this way . Mrs. Gibson breakfast in bed : she have do so ever since she have have the influenza ; and , consequently , her own private letter always go up on her breakfast - tray . one morning she come into the drawing - room early than usual , with an open letter in her hand . 

 " I have   have a letter from aunt Kirkpatrick , Cynthia . she send I my dividend , your uncle be so busy . but what do she mean by this , Cynthia ? "   hold out the letter to she , with a certain paragraph indicate by her finger . Cynthia put she net on one side , and look at the writing . suddenly her face turn scarlet , and then become of a deadly white . she look at Molly , as if to gain courage from the strong serene countenance . 

 " it mean mamma , I may as well tell you at once Mr. Henderson offer to I while I be in London , and I refuse he . " 

 " refuse he and you never tell I , but let I hear it by chance ! really , Cynthia , I think you be very unkind . and pray what make you refuse Mr. Henderson ? such a fine young man , and such a gentleman ! your uncle tell I he have a very good private fortune beside . " 

 " Mamma , do you forget that I have promise to marry Roger Hamley ? " say Cynthia quietly . 

 " no ! of course I do not   how can I , with molly always din the word ' engagement ' into my ear ? but really , when one consider all the uncertainty , and after all it be not a distinct promise , he seem almost as if he might have look forward to something of this sort . " 

 " of what sort , mamma ? " say Cynthia , sharply . 

 " why , of a more eligible offer . he must have know you might change your mind , and meet with some one you like well : so little as you have see of the world . " Cynthia make an impatient movement , as if to stop her mother . 

 " I never say I like he well , how can you talk so , mamma ? I be go to marry Roger , and there be an end of it . I will not be speak to about it again . " she get up and leave the room . 

 " go to marry Roger ! that be all very fine . but who be to guarantee his come back alive ? and if he do , what have they to marry upon , I should like to know ? I do not   wish she to have accept Mr. Henderson , though I be sure she like he ; and true love ought to have its course , and not be thwart ; but she need not have quite finally refuse he until well , until we have see how matter turn out . such an invalid as I be too ! it have give I quite a palpitation at the heart . I do call it quite unfeeling of Cynthia . " 

 " certainly , " begin molly ; but then she remember that her stepmother be far from strong , and unable to bear a protest in favour of the right course without irritation . so she change her speech into a suggestion of remedy for palpitation ; and curb her impatience to speak out her indignation at the contemplated falsehood to Roger . but when they be alone , and Cynthia begin upon the subject , Molly be less merciful . Cynthia say , 

 " well , Molly , and now you know all ! I have   be long to tell you and yet somehow I could not . " 

 " I suppose it be a repetition of Mr. Coxe , " say Molly , gravely . " you be agreeable , and he take it for something more . " 

 " I do not   know , " sigh Cynthia . " I mean I do not   know if I be agreeable or not . he be very kind very pleasant but I do not expect it all to end as it do . however , it be of no use thinking of it . " 

 " no ! " say Molly , simply ; for to her mind the pleasantest and kind person in the world put in comparison with Roger be as nothing ; he stand by himself . Cynthia 's next word , and they do not come very soon , be on quite a different subject , and speak in rather a pettish tone . nor do she allude again in jest sadness to her late effort at virtue . 

 in a little while Mrs. Gibson be able to accept the often - repeat invitation from the tower to go and stay there for a day or two . Lady Harriet tell she that it would be a kindness to Lady Cumnor to come and bear her company in the life of seclusion the latter be still compel to lead ; and Mrs. Gibson be flatter and gratify with a dim unconscious sense of be really want , not merely delude herself into a pleasing fiction . Lady Cumnor be in that state of convalescence common to many invalid . the spring of life have begin again to flow , and with the flow return the old desire and project and plan , which have all become mere matter of indifference during the bad part of her illness . but as yet her bodily strength be not sufficient to be an agent to her energetic mind , and the difficulty of drive the ill - match pair of body and will the one weak and languid , the other strong and stern , make her ladyship often very irritable . Mrs. Gibson herself be not quite strong enough for a ' souffre - douleur ; " and the visit to the tower be not , on the whole , quite so happy a one as she have anticipate . Lady Cuxhaven and Lady Harriet , each aware of their mother 's state of health and temper , but only allude to it as slightly as be absolutely necessary in their conversation with each other , take care not to leave " Clare " too long with Lady Cumnor ; but several time when one or the other go to relieve guard they find Clare in tear , and Lady Cumnor hold forth on some point on which she have be meditate during the silent hour of her illness , and on which she seem to consider herself bear to set the world to right . Mrs. Gibson be always apt to consider these remark as address with a personal direction at some error of her own , and defend the fault in question with a sense of property in it , whatever it might happen to be . the second and the last day of her stay at the Towers , Lady Harriet come in , and find her mother harangue in an excited tone of voice , and Clare look submissive and miserable and oppress . 

 " what be the matter , dear mamma ? be not you tire yourself with talk ? " 

 " no , not at all ! I be only speak of the folly of people dress above their station . I begin by tell Clare of the fashion of my grandmother 's day , when every class have a sort of costume of its own , and servant do not ape tradespeople , nor tradespeople professional man , and so on , and what must the foolish woman do but begin to justify her own dress , as if I have be accuse she , or even think about she at all . such nonsense ! really , Clare , your husband have spoil you sadly , if you can not   listen to any one without think they be allude to you . People may flatter themselves just as much by think that their fault be always present to other people 's mind , as if they believe that the world be always contemplate their individual charm and virtue . " 

 " I be tell , Lady Cumnor , that this silk be reduce in price . I buy it at Waterloo House after the season be over , " say Mrs. Gibson , touch the very handsome gown she wear in deprecation of Lady Cumnor 's angry voice , and blunder on to the very source of irritation . 

 " again , Clare ! how often must I tell you I have no thought of you or your gown , or whether they cost much or little ; your husband have to pay for they , and it be his concern if you spend more on your dress than you ought to do . " 

 " it be only five guineas for the whole dress , " plead Mrs. Gibson . 

 " and very pretty it be , " say Lady Harriet , stoop to examine it , and so hop to soothe the poor aggrieved woman . but Lady Cumnor go on , 

 " no ! you ought to have know I well by this time . when I think a thing I say it out . I do not   beat about the bush . I use straightforward language . I will tell you where I think you have be in fault , Clare , if you like to know . " like it or not , the plain - speak be come now . " you have spoil that girl of yours till she do not know her own mind . she have behave abominably to Mr. Preston ; and it be all in consequence of the fault in her education . you have much to answer for . " 

 " Mamma , mamma ! " say Lady Harriet , " Mr. Preston do not wish it speak about . " and at the same moment Mrs. Gibson exclaim , " Cynthia Mr. Preston ! " in such a tone of surprise , that if Lady Cumnor have be in the habit of observe the revelation make by other people 's tone and voice , she would have find out that Mrs. Gibson be ignorant of the affair to which she be allude . 

 " as for Mr. Preston 's wish , I do not suppose I be bind to regard they when I feel it my duty to reprove error , " say Lady Cumnor loftily to Lady Harriet . " and , Clare , do you mean to say that you be not aware that your daughter have be engage to Mr. Preston for some time year , I believe , and have at last choose to break it off , and have use the Gibson girl I forget her name as a cat' - paw , and make both she and herself the town 's talk the butt for all the gossip of Hollingford ? I remember when I be young there be a girl call Jilting Jessy . you will have to watch over your young lady , or she will get some such name . I speak to you like a friend , Clare , when I tell you it be my opinion that girl of yours will get herself into some more mischief yet before she be safely married . not that I care one straw for Mr. Preston 's feeling . I do not   even know if he be get feeling or not ; but I know what be become in a young woman , and jilting be not . and now you may both go away , and send Bradley to I , for I be tired , and want to have a little sleep . " 

 " indeed , Lady Cumnor will you believe I ? I do not think Cynthia be ever engage to Mr. Preston . there be an old flirtation . I be afraid " 

 " ring the bell for Bradley , " say Lady Cumnor , wearily : her eye close . Lady Harriet have too much experience of her mother 's mood not to lead Mrs. Gibson away almost by main force , she protest all the while that she do not think there be any truth in the statement , though it be dear Lady Cumnor that say it . 

 once in her own room , Lady Harriet say , " now , Clare , I will tell you all about it ; and I think you will have to believe it , for it be Mr. Preston himself who tell I . I hear of a great commotion in Hollingford about Mr. Preston ; and I meet he rid out , and ask he what it be all about ; he do not   want to speak about it , evidently . no man do , I suppose , when he be be jilt ; and he make both papa and I promise not to tell ; but papa do and that be what mamma have for a foundation ; you see , a really good one . " 

 " but Cynthia be engage to another man she really be . and another a very good match indeed have just be offer to she in London . Mr. Preston be always at the root of mischief . " 

 " Nay ! I do think in this case it must be that pretty Miss Cynthia of yours who have draw on one man to be engage to she , not to say two , and another to make she an offer . I can not   endure Mr. Preston , but I think it be rather hard to accuse he of have call up the rival , who be , I suppose , the occasion of his be jilt . " 

 " I do not   know ; I always feel as if he owe I a grudge , and man have so many way of be spiteful . you must acknowledge that if he have not meet you I should not have have dear Lady Cumnor so angry with I . " 

 " she only want to warn you about Cynthia . Mamma have always be very particular about her own daughter . she have be very severe on the least approach to flirt , and Mary will be like she ! " 

 " but Cynthia will flirt , and I can not   help it . she be not noisy , or giggle ; she be always a lady that everybody must own . but she have a way of attract man , she must have inherit from I , I think . " and here she smile faintly , and would not have reject a confirmatory compliment , but none come . " however , I will speak to she ; I will get to the bottom of the whole affair . pray tell Lady Cumnor that it have so flutter I the way she speak , about my dress and all . and it only cost five guineas after all , reduce from eight ! " 

 " well , never mind now . you be look very much flushed ; quite feverish ! I leave you too long in mamma 's hot room . but do you know she be so much pleased to have you here ? " and so Lady Cumnor really be , in spite of the continual lecture which she give " Clare , " and which poor Mrs. Gibson turn under as helplessly as the typical worm . still it be something to have a countess to scold she ; and that pleasure would endure when the worry be past . and then Lady Harriet pet she more than usual to make up for what she have to go through in the convalescent 's room ; and Lady Cuxhaven talk sense to she , with dash of science and deep thought intermix , which be very flattering , although generally unintelligible ; and Lord Cumnor , good - nature , good - temper , kind , and liberal , be full of gratitude to she for her kindness in come to see Lady Cumnor , and his gratitude take the tangible shape of a haunch of venison , to say nothing of less game . when she look back upon her visit , as she drive home in the solitary grandeur of the tower ' carriage , there have be but one great endure rub Lady Cumnor 's crossness and she choose to consider Cynthia as the cause of that , instead of see the truth , which have be so often set before she by the member of her ladyship 's family , that it take its origin in her state of health . Mrs. Gibson do not exactly mean to visit this one discomfort upon Cynthia , nor do she quite mean to upbraid her daughter for conduct as yet unexplained , and which might have some justification ; but , find she quietly sit in the drawing - room , she sate down despondingly in her own little easy chair , and in reply to Cynthia 's quick pleasant greeting of 

 " well , mamma , how be you ? we do not   expect you so early ! let I take off your bonnet and shawl ! " she reply dolefully , 

 " it have not be such a happy visit that I should wish to prolong it . " her eye be fix on the carpet , and her face be as irresponsive to the welcome offer as she could make it . 

 " what have be the matter ? " ask Cynthia , in all good faith . 

 " you ! cynthia you ! I little think when you be bear how I should have to bear to hear you speak about . " 

 Cynthia throw back her head , and angry light come into her eye . 

 " what business have they with I ? how come they to talk about I in any way ? " 

 " everybody be talk about you ; it be no wonder they be . Lord Cumnor be sure to hear about everything always . you should take more care about what you do , Cynthia , if you do not   like be talk about . " 

 " it rather depend upon what people say , " say Cynthia , affect a lightness which she do not feel ; for she have a prevision of what be come . 

 " well ! I do not   like it , at any rate . it be not pleasant to I to hear first of my daughter 's misdoing from Lady Cumnor , and then to be lecture about she , and her flirt , and her jilting , as if I have have anything to do with it . I can assure you it have quite spoil my visit . no ! do not   touch my shawl . when I go to my room I can take it myself . " 

 Cynthia be bring to bay , and sate down ; remain with her mother , who keep sigh ostentatiously from time to time . 

 " would you mind tell I what they say ? if there be accusation abroad against I , it be as well I should know what they be . here be Molly "   as the girl enter the room , fresh from a morning 's walk . " molly , mamma have come back from the tower , and my lord and my lady have be do I the honour to talk over my crime and misdemeanor , and I be ask mamma what they have say . I do not   set up for more virtue than other people , but I can not   make out what an earl and a countess have to do with poor little I . " 

 " it be not for your sake ! " say Mrs. Gibson . " it be for mine . they feel for I , for it be not pleasant to have one 's child 's name in everybody 's mouth . " 

 " as I say before , that depend upon how it be in everybody 's mouth . if I be go to marry Lord Hollingford , I make no doubt every one would be talk about I , and neither you nor I should mind it in the least . " 

 " but this be no marriage with Lord Hollingford , so it be nonsense to talk as if it be . they say you have   go and engage yourself to Mr. Preston , and now refuse to marry he ; and they call that jilting . " 

 " do you wish I to marry he , mamma ? " ask Cynthia , her face in a flame , her eye cast down . molly stand by , very hot , not fully understand it ; and only keep where she be by the hope of come in as sweetener or peacemaker , or helper of some kind . 

 " no , " say Mrs. Gibson , evidently discomfit by the question . " of course I do not ; you have go and entangle yourself with Roger Hamley , a very worthy young man ; but nobody know where he be , and if he be dead or alive ; and he have not a penny if he be alive . " 

 " I beg your pardon . I know that he have some fortune from his mother ; it may not be much , but he be not penniless ; and he be sure to earn fame and great reputation , and with it money will come , " say Cynthia . 

 " you have   entangle yourself with he , and you have   do something of the sort with Mr. Preston , and get yourself into such an imbroglio "   Mrs. Gibson could not have say " mess " for the world , although the word be present to her mind , " that when a really eligible person come forward handsome , agreeable , and quite the gentleman and a good private fortune into the bargain , you have to refuse he . you will end as an old maid , Cynthia , and it will break my heart . " 

 " I daresay I shall , " say Cynthia , quietly . " I sometimes think I be the kind of person of which old maid be make ! " she speak seriously , and a little sadly . 

 Mrs. Gibson begin again . " I do not   want to know your secret as long as they be secret ; but when all the town be talk about you , I think I ought to be tell . " 

 " but , mamma , I do not   know I be such a subject of conversation ; and even now I can not   make out how it have come about . " 

 " no more can I. I only know that they say you have   be engage to Mr. Preston , and ought to have marry he , and that I can not   help it , if you do not choose , any more than I could have help your refuse Mr. Henderson ; and yet I be constantly blame for your misconduct . I think it be very hard . " Mrs. Gibson begin to cry . just then her husband come in . 

 " you here , my dear ! welcome back , " say he , come up to she courteously , and kiss her cheek . " why , what be the matter ? tear ? " and he heartily wish himself away again . 

 " yes ! " say she , raise herself up , and clutch after sympathy of any kind , at any price . " I be come home again , and I be tell Cynthia how Lady Cumnor have be so cross to I , and all through she . do you know she have go and engage herself to Mr. Preston , and then break it off ? everybody be talk about it , and they know it up at the Towers . " 

 for one moment his eye meet Molly 's , and he comprehend it all . he make his lip up into a whistle , but no sound come . Cynthia have quite lose her defiant manner since her mother have speak to Mr. Gibson . molly sate down by she . 

 " Cynthia , " say he , very seriously . 

 " yes ! " she answer , softly . 

 " be this true ? I have hear something of it before not much ; but there be scandal enough about to make it desirable that you should have some protector some friend who know the whole truth . " 

 no answer . at last she say , " molly know it all . " 

 Mrs. Gibson , too , have be awe into silence by her husband 's grave manner , and she do not like to give vent to the jealous thought in her mind that Molly have know the secret of which she be ignorant . Mr. Gibson reply to Cynthia with some sternness : 

 " yes ! I know that molly know it all , and that she have have to bear slander and ill word for your sake , Cynthia . but she refuse to tell I more . " 

 " she tell you that much , do she ? " say Cynthia , aggrieve . 

 " I could not help it , " say Molly . 

 " she do not   name your name , " say Mr. Gibson . " at the time I believe she think she have conceal it but there be no mistaking who it be . " 

 " why do she speak about it at all ? " say Cynthia , with some bitterness . her tone her question stir up Mr. Gibson 's passion . 

 " it be necessary for she to justify herself to I I hear my daughter 's reputation attack for the private meeting she have give to Mr. Preston I come to she for an explanation . there be no need to be ungenerous , Cynthia , because you have   be a flirt and a jilt , even to the degree of drag Molly 's name down into the same mire . " 

 Cynthia lift her bow - down head , and look at he . 

 " you say that of I , Mr. Gibson ? not know what the circumstance be , you say that ? " 

 he have speak too strongly : he know it . but he could not bring himself to own it just at that moment . the thought of his sweet innocent Molly , who have bear so much patiently , prevent any retractation of his word at the time . 

 " yes ! " he say , " I do say it . you can not tell what evil construction be put upon action ever so slightly beyond the bound of maidenly propriety . I do say that molly have have a great deal to bear , in consequence of this clandestine engagement of your , Cynthia there may be extenuate circumstance , I acknowledge but you will need to remember they all to excuse your conduct to Roger Hamley , when he come home . I ask you to tell I the full truth , in order that until he come , and have a legal right to protect you , I may do so . " no answer . " it certainly require explanation , " continue he . " here be you , engage to two man at once to all appearance ! " still no answer . " to be sure , the gossip of the town have not   yet pick out the fact of Roger Hamley 's be your accept lover ; but scandal have be rest on Molly , and ought to have rest on you , Cynthia for a conceal engagement to Mr. Preston necessitating meeting in all sort of place unknown to your friend . " 

 " Papa , " say Molly , " if you know all you would not   speak so to Cynthia . I wish she would tell you herself all that she have tell I . " 

 " I be ready to hear whatever she have to say , " say he . but Cynthia say , 

 " no ! you have prejudge I ; you have speak to I as you have no right to speak . I refuse to give you my confidence , or accept your help . People be very cruel to I " her voice tremble for a moment " I do not think you would have be . but I can bear it . " 

 and then , in spite of Molly , who would have detain she by force , she tear herself away , and hastily leave the room . 

 " oh , papa ! " say Molly , crying , and cling to he , " do let I tell you all . " and then she suddenly recollect the awkwardness of tell some of the detail of the story before Mrs. Gibson , and stop short . 

 " I think , Mr. Gibson , you have be very very unkind to my poor fatherless child , " say Mrs. Gibson , emerge from behind her pocket - handkerchief . " I only wish her poor father have be alive , and all this would never have happen . " 

 " very probably . still I can not see of what either she or you have to complain . inasmuch as we could , I and mine have shelter she ! I have love she ; I do love she almost as if she be my own child as well as Molly , I do not pretend to do . " 

 " that be it , Mr. Gibson ! you do not treat she like your own child . " but in the midst of this wrangle molly steal out , and go in search of Cynthia . she think she bear an olive - branch of healing in the sound of her father 's just speak word : " I do love she almost as if she be my own child . " but Cynthia be lock into her room , and refuse to open the door . 

 " open to I , please , " plead molly . " I have something to say to you I want to see you do open ! " 

 " no ! " say Cynthia . " not now . I be busy . leave I alone . I do not   want to hear what you have get to say . I do not   want to see you . by - and - by we shall meet , and then " molly stand quite quietly , wonder what new word of more persuasion she could use . in a minute or two Cynthia call out , " be you there still , molly ? " and when molly answer " yes , " and hop for a relenting , the same hard metallic voice , tell of resolution and repression , speak out , " go away . I can not bear the feeling of your be there wait and listen . go downstairs out of the house anywhere away . it be the most you can do for I now . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER LI . 

 " troubles never come alone . " 
 

 illustrationolly have her out - of - door thing on , and she creep away as she be bid . she lift her heavy weight of heart and body along till she come to a field , not so very far off , where she have seek the comfort of loneliness ever since she be a child ; and there , under the hedge - bank , she sate down , bury her face in her hand , and quiver all over as she think of Cynthia 's misery , which she might not try to touch or assuage . she never know how long she sate there , but it be long past lunch - time when once again she steal up to her room . the door opposite be open wide , Cynthia have quit the chamber . molly arrange her dress and go down into the drawing - room . Cynthia and her mother sate there in the stern repose of an armed neutrality . Cynthia 's face look make of stone , for colour and rigidity ; but she be net away as if nothing unusual have occur . not so Mrs. Gibson ; her face bear evident mark of tear , and she look up and greet Molly 's entrance with a faint smile notice . Cynthia go on as though she have never hear the opening of the door , or feel the approach sweep of Molly 's dress . molly take up a book , not to read , but to have the semblance of some employment which should not necessitate conversation . 

 there be no measure the duration of the silence that ensue . molly grow to fancy it be some old enchantment that weigh upon their tongue and keep they still . at length Cynthia speak , but she have to begin again before her word come clear . 

 " I wish you both to know that henceforward all be at an end between I and Roger Hamley . " 

 Molly 's book go down upon her knee ; with open eye and lip she strove to draw in Cynthia 's meaning . Mrs. Gibson speak querulously , as if injure , 

 " I could have understand this if it have happen three month ago , when you be in London ; but now it be just nonsense , Cynthia , and you know you do not   mean it ! " 

 Cynthia do not reply ; nor do the resolute look on her face change when molly speak at last , 

 " cynthia think of he ! it will break his heart ! " 

 " no ! " say Cynthia , " it will not . but even if it do I can not help it . " 

 " all this talk will soon pass away ! " say molly ; " and when he know the truth from your own self " 

 " from my own self he shall never hear it . I do not love he well enough to go through the shame of have to excuse myself , to plead that he will reinstate I in his good opinion . Confession may be well ! I can never believe it pleasant but it may be an ease of mind if one make it to some people , to some person , and it may not be a mortification to sue for forgiveness . I can not tell . all I know be , and I know it clearly , and will act upon it inflexibly that " and here she stop short . 

 " I think you might finish your sentence , " say her mother , after a silence of five second . 

 " I can not bear to exculpate myself to Roger Hamley . I will not submit to his thinking less well of I than he have do , however foolish his judgment may have be . I would rather never see he again , for these two reason . and the truth be , I do not love he . I like he , I respect he ; but I will not marry he . I have write to tell he so . that be merely as a relief to myself , for when or where the letter will reach he and I have write to old Mr. Hamley . the relief be the one good thing come out of it all . it be such a comfort to feel free again . it weary I so to think of strain up to his goodness . ' extenuate my conduct ! ' " she conclude , quote Mr. Gibson 's word . yet when Mr. Gibson come home , after a silent dinner , she ask to speak with he , alone , in his consulting - room ; and there lay bare the exculpation of herself which she have give to molly many week before . when she have end , she say : 

 " and now , Mr. Gibson , I still treat you like a friend , help I to find some home far away , where all the evil talking and gossip mamma tell I of can not find I and follow I . it may be wrong to care for people 's good opinion , but it be I , and I can not alter myself . you , Molly , all the people in the town , I have not   the patience to live through the nine day ' wonder . I want to go away and be a governess . " 

 " but , my dear Cynthia , how soon Roger will be back , a tower of strength ! " 

 " have not mamma tell you I have break it all off with Roger ? I write this morning . I write to his father . that letter will reach to - morrow . I write to Roger . if he ever receive that letter , I hope to be far away by that time ; in Russia may be . " 

 " Nonsense . an engagement like yours can not be break off , except by mutual consent . you have   only give other a great deal of pain without free yourself . nor will you wish it in a month 's time . when you come to think calmly , you will be glad to think of the stay and support of such a husband as Roger . you have be in fault , and have act foolishly at first , perhaps wrongly afterwards ; but you do not   want your husband to think you faultless ? " 

 " yes , I do , " say Cynthia . " at any rate , my lover must think I so . and it be just because I do not love he even as so light a thing as I could love , that I feel that I could not   bear to have to tell he I be sorry , and stand before he like a chidden child to be admonish and forgive . " 

 " but here you be , just in such a position before I , Cynthia ! " 

 " yes ! but I love you well than Roger ; I have   often tell Molly so . and I would have tell you , if I have not   expect and hop to leave you all before long . I could see if the recollection of it all come up before your mind ; I could see it in your eye ; I should know it by instinct . I have a fine instinct for read the thought of other when they refer to I . I almost hate the idea of Roger judge I by his own standard , which be not   make for I , and graciously forgive I at last . " 

 " then I do believe it be right for you to break it off , " say Mr. Gibson , almost as if he be think to himself . " that poor poor lad ! but it will be good for he too . and he will get over it . he have a good strong heart . poor old Roger ! " 

 for a moment Cynthia 's wilful fancy stretch after the object pass out of her grasp , Roger 's love become for the instant a treasure ; but , again , she know that in its entirety of high undoubting esteem , as well as of passionate regard , it would no long be her ; and for the flaw which she herself have make she cast it away , and would none of it . yet often in after year , when it be too late , she wonder and strove to penetrate the inscrutable mystery of " what would have be . " 

 " still , take till to - morrow before you act upon your decision , " say Mr. Gibson , slowly . " what fault you have fall into have be mere girlish fault at first , lead you into much deceit , I grant . " 

 " do not   give yourself the trouble to define the shade of blackness , " say Cynthia , bitterly . " I be not so obtuse but what I know they all well than any one can tell I . and as for my decision I act upon it at once . it may be long before Roger get my letter , but I hope he be sure to get it at last , and , as I say , I have let his father know ; it will not   hurt he ! oh , sir , I think if I have be differently bring up I should not   have have the sore angry heart I have . now ! no , do not ! I do not   want reasoning comfort . I can not   stand it . I should always have want admiration and worship , and man 's good opinion . those unkind gossip ! to visit molly with their hard word ! oh , dear ! I think life be very dreary . " 

 she put her head down on her hand ; tired out mentally as well as bodily . so Mr. Gibson think . he feel as if much speech from he would only add to her excitement , and make she bad . he leave the room , and call Molly , from where she be sit , dolefully . " go to Cynthia ! " he whisper , and Molly go . she take Cynthia into her arm with gentle power , and lay her head against her own breast , as if the one have be a mother , and the other a child . 

 " oh , my darling ! " she murmur . " I do so love you , dear , dear Cynthia ! " and she stroke her hair , and kiss her eyelid ; Cynthia passive all the while , till suddenly she start up sting with a new idea , and look molly straight in the face , she say , 

 " molly , Roger will marry you ! see if it be not   so ! you two good " 

 but molly push she away with a sudden violence of repulsion . " do not ! " she say . she be crimson with shame and indignation . " your husband this morning ! mine to - night ! what do you take he for ? " 

 " a man ! " smile Cynthia . " and therefore , if you will not   let I call he changeable , I will coin a word and call he consolable ! " but Molly give she back no answering smile . at this moment , the servant Maria enter the consulting - room , where the two girl be . she have a scared look . 

 " be not   master here ? " ask she , as if she distrust her eye . 

 " no ! " say Cynthia . " I hear he go out . I hear he shut the front door not five minute ago . " 

 " oh , dear ! " say Maria . " and there be a man come on horseback from Hamley Hall , and he say as Mr. Osborne be dead , and that master must go off to the squire straight away . " 

 " Osborne Hamley dead ! " say Cynthia , in awed surprise . molly be out at the front door , seek the messenger through the dusk , round into the stable - yard , where the groom sate motionless on his dark horse , fleck with foam , make visible by the lantern place on the step near , where it have be leave by the servant , who be dismay at this news of the handsome young man who have frequent their master 's house , so full of sportive elegance and winsomeness . molly go up to the man , whose thought be lose in recollection of the scene he have leave at the place he have come from . 

 she lay her hand on the hot damp skin of the horse 's shoulder ; the man start . 

 " be the doctor come , Miss ? " for he see who it be by the dim light . 

 " he be dead , be he not ? " ask Molly , in a low voice . 

 " I be afeard he be , leastway , there be no doubt accord to what they say . but I have   ride hard ! there may be a chance . be the doctor come , Miss ? " 

 " he be go out . they be seek he , I believe . I will go myself . oh ! the poor old squire ! " she go into the kitchen go over the house with swift rapidity to gain news of her father 's whereabouts . the servant know no more than she do . neither she nor they have hear what Cynthia , ever quick of perception , have do . the shutting of the front door have fall on deaf ear , as far as other be concern . Upstairs speed molly to the drawing - room , where Mrs. Gibson stand at the door , listen to the unusual stir in the house . 

 " what be it , molly ? why , how white you look , child ! " 

 " where 's papa ? " 

 " go out . what be the matter ? " 

 " where ? " 

 " how should I know ? I be asleep ; Jenny come upstairs on her way to the bedroom ; she be a girl who never keep to her work and Maria take advantage of she . " 

 " Jenny , Jenny ! " cry molly , frantic at the delay . 

 " do not   shout , dear , ring the bell . what can be the matter ? " 

 " oh , Jenny ! " say Molly , half - way up the stair to meet she , " who want papa ? " 

 Cynthia come to join the group ; she too have be look for trace or tiding of Mr. Gibson . 

 " what be the matter ? " say Mrs. Gibson . " can nobody speak and answer a question ? " 

 " Osborne Hamley be dead ! " say Cynthia , gravely . 

 " dead ! osborne ! poor fellow ! I know it would be so , though , I be sure of it . but Mr. Gibson can do nothing if he be dead . poor young man ! I wonder where Roger be now ? he ought to come home . " 

 Jenny have be blame for come into the drawing - room instead of Maria , whose place it be , and so have lose the few wit she have . to Molly 's hurried question her reply have be entirely unsatisfactory . a man have come to the back door she could not see who it be she have not ask his name : he want to speak to master , master have seem in a hurry , and only stop to get his hat . 

 " he will not be long away , " think Molly , " or he would have leave word where he be go . but oh ! the poor father all alone ! " and then a thought come into her head , which she act upon straight . " go to James , tell he to put the side - saddle I have in November on Nora Creina . do not   cry , Jenny . there be no time for that . no one be angry with you . run ! " 

 so down into the cluster of collect woman molly come , equip in her jacket and skirt ; quick determination in her eye ; control quiver about the corner of her mouth . 

 " why , what in the world , " say Mrs. Gibson " Molly , what be you think about ? " but Cynthia have understand it at a glance , and be arrange Molly 's hastily assume dress , as she pass along . 

 " I be go . I must go . I can not bear to think of he alone . when papa come back he be sure to go to Hamley , and if I be not want , I can come back with he . " she hear Mrs. Gibson 's voice follow she in remonstrance , but she do not stay for word . she have to wait in the stable - yard , and she wonder how the messenger could bear to eat and drink the food and beer bring out to he by the servant . her come out have evidently interrupt the eager talk , the question and answer pass sharp to and fro ; but she catch the word , " all amongst the tangle grass , " and " the Squire would let none on we touch he : he take he up as if he be a baby ; he have to rest many a time , and once he sate he down on the ground ; but still he keep he in his arm ; but we think we should ne'er have get he up again he and the body . " 

 " the body ! " 

 molly have never feel that Osborne be really dead till she hear those word . they ride quick under the shadow of the hedgerow tree , but when they slacken speed , to go up a brow , or to give their horse breath , molly hear those two little word again in her ear ; and say they over again to herself , in hope of force the sharp truth into her unwilling sense . but when they come in sight of the square stillness of the house , shin in the moonlight the moon have rise by this time molly catch at her breath , and for an instant she think she never could go in , and face the presence in that dwelling . one yellow light burn steadily , spot the silver shin with its earthly coarseness . the man point it out : it be almost the first word he have speak since they have leave Hollingford . 

 " it be the old nursery . they carry he there . the Squire break down at the stair - foot , and they take he to the readiest place . I will be bind for it the squire be there hisself , and old Robin too . they fetch he , as a knowledgable man among dumb beast , till th ' regular doctor come . " 

 molly drop down from her seat before the man could dismount to help she . she gather up her skirt and do not stay again to think of what be before she . she run along the once familiar turn , and swiftly up the stair , and through the door , till she come to the last ; then she stop and listen . it be a deathly silence . she open the door : the squire be sit alone at the side of the bed , hold the dead man 's hand , and look straight before he at vacancy . he do not stir or move , even so much as an eyelid , at Molly 's entrance . the truth have enter his soul before this , and he know that no doctor , be he ever so cunning , could , with all his strive , put the breath into that body again . molly come up to he with the soft step , the most hush breath that ever she could . she do not speak , for she do not know what to say . she feel that he have no more hope from earthly skill , so what be the use of speak of her father and the delay in his coming ? after a moment 's pause , stand by the old man 's side , she slip down to the floor , and sit at his foot . possibly her presence might have some balm in it ; but uttering of word be as a vain thing . he must have be aware of she be there , but he take no apparent notice . there they sate , silent and still , he in his chair , she on the floor ; the dead man , beneath the sheet , for a third . she fancy that she must have disturb the father in his contemplation of the quiet face , now more than half , but not fully , cover up out of sight . time have never seem so without measure , silence have never seem so noiseless as it do to Molly , sit there . in the acuteness of her sens she hear a step mount a distant staircase , come slowly , come nearer . she know it not to be her father 's , and that be all she care about . Nearer and near close to the outside of the door a pause , and a soft hesitate tap . the great gaunt figure sit by her side quiver at the sound . molly rise and go to the door : it be Robinson , the old butler , hold in his hand a cover basin of soup . 

 " God bless you , Miss , " say he ; " make he touch a drop o ' this : he be go since breakfast without food , and it be past one in the morning now . " 

 he softly remove the cover , and molly take the basin back with she to her place at the Squire 's side . she do not speak , for she do not well know what to say , or how to present this homely want of nature before one so rapt in grief . but she put a spoonful to his lip , and touch they with the savoury food , as if he have be a sick child , and she the nurse ; and instinctively he take down the first spoonful of the soup . but in a minute he say , with a sort of cry , and almost overturn the basin molly hold , by his passionate gesture as he point to the bed , 

 " he will never eat again never . " 

 then he throw himself across the corpse , and weep in such a terrible manner that molly tremble lest he also should die should break his heart there and then . he take no more notice of her word , of her tear , of her presence , than he do of that of the moon , look through the unclosed window , with passionless stare . her father stand by they both before either of they be aware . 

 " go downstairs , molly , " say he gravely ; but he stroke her head tenderly as she rise . " go into the dining - room . " now she feel the reaction from all her self - control . she tremble with fear as she go along the moonlit passage . it seem to she as if she should meet Osborne , and hear it all explain ; how he come to die , what he now feel and think and wish she to do . she do get down to the dining - room , the last few step with a rush of terror , senseless terror of what might be behind she ; and there she find supper lay out , and candle light , and Robinson bustle about decant some wine . she want to cry ; to get into some quiet place , and weep away her over - excitement ; but she could hardly do so there . she only feel very much tired , and to care for nothing in this world any more . but vividness of life come back when she find Robinson hold a glass to her lip as she sit in the great leather easy - chair , to which she have go instinctively as to a place of rest . 

 " Drink , Miss. it be good old Madeira . your papa say as how you be to eat a bit . say he , ' my daughter may have to stay here , Mr. Robinson , and she be young for the work . persuade she to eat something , or she will break down utterly . ' those be his very word . " 

 molly do not say anything . she have not energy enough for resistance . she drink and she eat at the old servant 's bidding ; and then she ask he to leave she alone , and go back to her easy - chair and let herself cry , and so ease her heart . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LII . 

 SQUIRE HAMLEY 's SORROW . 
 

 it seem very long before Mr. Gibson come down . he go and stand with his back to the empty fireplace , and do not speak for a minute or two . 

 " he be go to bed , " say he at length . " Robinson and I have get he there . but just as I be leave he he call I back and ask I to let you stop . I be sure I do not   know but one do not   like to refuse at such a time . " 

 " I wish to stay , " say Molly . 

 " do you ? there be a good girl . but how will you manage ? " 

 " oh , never mind that . I can manage . Papa , " she pause " what do Osborne die of ? " she ask the question in a low , awe - stricken voice . 

 " something wrong about the heart . you would not   understand if I tell you . I apprehend it for some time ; but it be well not to talk of such thing at home . when I see he on Thursday week , he seem well than I have   see he for a long time . I tell Dr. Nicholls so . but one never can calculate in these complaint . " 

 " you see he on Thursday week ? why , you never mention it ! " say Molly . 

 " no . I do not   talk of my patient at home . besides , I do not   want he to consider I as his doctor , but as a friend . any alarm about his own health would only have hasten the catastrophe . " 

 " then do not   he know that he be ill ill of a dangerous complaint , I mean : one that might end as it have do ? " 

 " no ; certainly not . he would only have be watch his symptom accelerate matter , in fact . " 

 " oh , papa ! " say Molly , shock . 

 " I have   no time to go into the question , " Mr. Gibson continue . " and until you know what have to be say on both side and in every instance , you be not qualified to judge . we must keep our attention on the duty in hand now . you sleep here for the remainder of the night , which be more than half - go already ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " promise I to go to bed just as usual . you may not think it , but most likely you will go to sleep at once . People do at your age . " 

 " Papa , I think I ought to tell you something . I know a great secret of Osborne 's , which I promise solemnly not to tell ; but the last time I see he I think he must have be afraid of something like this . " a fit of sobbing come upon she , which her father be afraid would end in hysteric . but suddenly she master herself , and look up into his anxious face , and smile to reassure he . 

 " I could not help it , papa ! " 

 " no . I know . go on with what you be say . you ought to be in bed ; but if you have   a secret on your mind you will not   sleep . " 

 " Osborne be marry , " say she , fix her eye on her father . " that be the secret . " 

 " married ! nonsense . what make you think so ? " 

 " he tell I . that be to say , I be in the library be read there , some time ago ; and Roger come and speak to Osborne about his wife . Roger do not see I , but Osborne do . they make I promise secrecy . I do not   think I do wrong . " 

 " do not   worry yourself about right or wrong just now ; tell I more about it , at once . " 

 " I know no more till six month ago last November , when you go up to Lady Cumnor . then he call , and give I his wife 's address , but still under promise of secrecy ; and , except those two time , and once when Roger just allude to it , I have never hear any one mention the subject . I think he would have tell I more that last time , only Miss Phobe come in . " 

 " where be this wife of his ? " 

 " down in the south ; near Winchester , I think . he say she be a Frenchwoman and a roman Catholic ; and I think he say she be a servant , " add Molly . 

 " Phew ! " her father make a long whistle of dismay . 

 " and , " continue molly , " he speak of a child . now you know as much as I do , papa , except the address . I have it write down safe at home . " 

 Forgetting , apparently , what time of night it be , Mr. Gibson sate down , stretch out his leg before he , put his hand in his pocket , and begin to think . molly sate still without speak , too tired to do more than wait . 

 " well ! " say he at last , jump up , " nothing can be do to - night ; by to - morrow morning , perhaps , I may find out . poor little pale face ! " take it between both his hand and kiss it ; " poor , sweet , little pale face ! " then he ring the bell , and tell Robinson to send some maid - servant to take Miss Gibson to her room . 

 " he will not   be up early , " say he , in parting . " the shock have lower he too much to be energetic . send breakfast up to he in his own room . I will be here again before ten . " 

 late as it be before he leave , he keep his word . 

 " now , Molly , " he say , " you and I must tell he the truth between we . I do not   know how he will take it ; it may comfort he , but I have   very little hope : either way , he ought to know it at once . " 

 " Robinson say he have go into the room again , and he be afraid he have lock the door on the inside . " 

 " never mind . I shall ring the bell , and send up Robinson to say that I be here , and wish to speak to he . " 

 the message return be , " the Squire 's kind love , and could not see Mr. Gibson just then . " Robinson add , " it be a long time before he would answer at all , sir . " 

 " go up again , and tell he I can wait his convenience . now that be a lie , " Mr. Gibson say , turn round to Molly as soon as Robinson have leave the room . " I ought to be far enough away at twelve ; but , if I be not much mistaken , the innate habit of a gentleman will make he uneasy at the idea of keep I wait his pleasure , and will do more to bring he out of that room into this than any entreaty or reasoning . " Mr. Gibson be grow impatient though , before they hear the Squire 's footstep on the stair ; he be evidently come slowly and unwillingly . he come in almost like one blind , grope along , and take hold of chair or table for support or guidance till he reach Mr. Gibson . he do not speak when he hold the doctor by the hand ; he only hang down his head , and keep on a feeble shaking of welcome . 

 " I be bring very low , sir . I suppose it be God 's doing ; but it come hard upon I . he be my firstborn child . " he say this almost as if speak to a stranger , and inform he of fact of which he be ignorant . 

 " here be Molly , " say Mr. Gibson , choke a little himself , and push she forward . 

 " I beg your pardon ; I do not see you at first . my mind be a good deal occupy just now . " he sate heavily down , and then seem almost to forget they be there . molly wonder what be to come next . suddenly her father speak , 

 " where 's Roger ? " say he . " be he not likely to be soon at the cape ? " he get up and look at the direction of one or two unopened letter bring by that morning 's post ; among they be one in Cynthia 's handwriting . both molly and he see it at the same time . how long it be since yesterday ! but the squire take no notice of their proceeding or their look . 

 " you will be glad to have Roger at home as soon as may be , I think , sir . some month must elapse first ; but I be sure he will return as speedily as possible . " 

 the Squire say something in a very low voice . both father and daughter strain their ear to hear what it be . they both believe it to be , " Roger be not   Osborne ! " and Mr. Gibson speak on that belief . he speak more quietly than Molly have ever hear he do before . 

 " no ! we know that . I wish that anything that Roger could do , or that I could do , or that any one could do , would comfort you ; but it be past human comfort . " 

 " I do try to say , God 's will be do , sir , " say the Squire , look up at Mr. Gibson for the first time , and speak with more life in his voice ; " but it be hard to be resign than happy people think . " they be all silent for a while . the squire himself be the first to speak again , " he be my first child , sir ; my eld son . and of late year we be not " his voice break down , but he control himself " we be not   quite as good friend as could be wish ; and I be not sure not sure that he know how I love he . " and now he cry aloud with an exceed bitter cry . 

 " well so ! " whisper Mr. Gibson to Molly . " when he be a little calm , do not   be afraid ; tell he all you know , exactly as it happen . " 

 molly begin . her voice sound high and unnatural to herself , as if some one else be speak , but she make her word clear . the squire do not attempt to listen , at first , at any rate . 

 " one day when I be here , at the time of Mrs. Hamley 's last illness "   the Squire here check his convulsive breathing , " I be in the library , and Osborne come in . he say he have only come in for a book , and that I be not to mind he , so I go on reading . presently , Roger come along the flagged garden - path just outside the window   which be open . he do not see I in the corner where I be sit , and say to Osborne , ' here be a letter from your wife ! ' " 

 now the squire be all attention ; for the first time his tear - swollen eye meet the eye of another , and he look at Molly with search anxiety , as he repeat , " his wife ! Osborne marry ! " molly go on : 

 " Osborne be angry with Roger for speak out before I , and they make I promise never to mention it to any one ; or to allude to it to either of they again . I never name it to papa till last night . " 

 " go on , " say Mr. Gibson . " tell the squire about Osborne 's call what you tell I ! " still the Squire hang on her lip , listen with open mouth and eye . 

 " some month ago Osborne call . he be not well , and want to see papa . Papa be away , and I be alone . I do not   exactly remember how it come about , but he speak to I of his wife for the first and only time since the affair in the library . " she look at her father , as if question he as to the desirableness of tell the few further particular that she know . the Squire 's mouth be dry and stiff , but he try to say , " tell I all , everything . " and molly understand the half - form word . 

 " he say his wife be a good woman , and that he love she dearly ; but she be a french roman Catholic , and a " another glance at her father ' she have be a servant once . that be all ; except that I have her address at home . he write it down and give it I . " 

 " well , well ! " moan the squire . " it be all over now . all over . all past and go . we will not blame he , no ; but I wish he would ha ' tell I ; he and I to live together with such a secret in one of we . it be no wonder to I now nothing can be a wonder again , for one never can tell what be in a man 's heart . marry so long ! and we sit together at meal and live together . why , I tell he everything ! too much , may be , for I show he all my passion and ill - temper ! marry so long ! oh , Osborne , Osborne , you should have tell I ! " 

 " yes , he should ! " say Mr. Gibson . " but I daresay he know how much you would dislike such a choice as he have make . but he should have tell you ! " 

 " you know nothing about it , sir , " say the squire sharply . " you do not   know the term we be on . not hearty or confidential . I be cross to he many a time ; angry with he for be dull , poor lad and he with all this weight on his mind . I will not   have people interfere and judge between I and my son . and Roger too ! he could know it all , and keep it from I ! " 

 " Osborne evidently have bind he down to secrecy , just as he bind I , " say molly ; " Roger could not help himself . " 

 " Osborne be such a fellow for persuade people , and win they over , " say the Squire , dreamily . " I remember but what be the use of remembering ? it be all over , and Osborne 's dead without open his heart to I . I could have be tender to he , I could . but he will never know it now ! " 

 " but we can guess what wish he have strong in his mind at the last , from what we do know of his life , " say Mr. Gibson . 

 " what , sir ? " say the Squire , with sharp suspicion of what be come . 

 " his wife must have be his last thought , must she not ? " 

 " how do I know she be his wife ? do you think he would go and marry a french baggage of a servant ? it may be all a tale trump up . " 

 " stop , Squire . I do not   care to defend my daughter 's truth or accuracy . but with the dead man 's body lie upstairs his soul with God think twice before you say more hasty word , impugn his character ; if she be not his wife , what be she ? " 

 " I beg your pardon . I hardly know what I be say . do I accuse Osborne ? oh , my lad , my lad thou might have trust thy old dad ! he use to call I his ' old dad ' when he be a little chap not big than this , " indicate a certain height with his hand . " I never mean to say he be not not what one would wish to think he now his soul with God , as you say very justly for I be sure it be there " 

 " well ! but , Squire , " say Mr. Gibson , try to check the other 's rambling , " to return to his wife " 

 " and the child , " whisper Molly to her father . low as the whisper be , it strike on the squire 's ear . 

 " what ? " say he , turn round to she suddenly , " child ? you never name that ? be there a child ? husband and father , and I never know ! God bless Osborne 's child ! I say , God bless it ! " he stand up reverently , and the other two instinctively rise . he close his hand as if in momentary prayer . then exhausted he sate down again , and put out his hand to Molly . 

 " you be a good girl . thank you . tell I what I ought to do , and I will do it . " this to Mr. Gibson . 

 " I be almost as much puzzled as you be , squire , " reply he . " I fully believe the whole story ; but I think there must be some write confirmation of it , which perhaps ought to be find at once , before we act . Most probably this be to be discover among Osborne 's paper . will you look over they at once ? molly shall return with I , and find the address that Osborne give she , while you be busy " 

 " she will come back again ? " say the Squire eagerly . " you she will not   leave I to myself ? " 

 " no ! she shall come back this evening . I will manage to send she somehow . but she have no clothe but the habit she come in , and I want my horse that she ride away upon . " 

 " take the carriage , " say the Squire . " take anything . I will give order . you will come back again , too ? " 

 " no ! I be afraid not , to - day . I will come to - morrow , early . molly shall return this evening , whenever it suit you to send for she . " 

 " this afternoon ; the carriage shall be at your house at three . I dare not look at Osborne 's at the paper without one of you with I ; and yet I shall never rest till I know more . " 

 " I will send the desk in by Robinson before I leave . and can you give I some lunch before I go ? " 

 little by little he lead the squire to eat a morsel or so of food ; and so , strengthen he physically , and encourage he mentally , Mr. Gibson hop that he would begin his research during Molly 's absence . 

 there be something touch in the Squire 's wistful look after molly as she move about . a stranger might have imagine she to be his daughter instead of Mr. Gibson 's . the meek , break - down , considerate way of the bereaved father never show themselves more strongly than when he call they back to his chair , out of which he seem too languid to rise , and say , as if by an after - think : " give my love to Miss Kirkpatrick ; tell she I look upon she as quite one of the family . I shall be glad to see she after after the funeral . I do not   think I can before . " 

 " he know nothing of Cynthia 's resolution to give up Roger , " say Mr. Gibson as they ride away . " I have a long talk with her last night , but she be as resolute as ever . from what your mamma tell I , there be a third lover in London , whom she be already refuse . I be thankful that you have   no lover at all , Molly , unless that abortive attempt of Mr. Coxe 's at an offer , long ago , can be call a lover . " 

 " I never hear of it , papa ! " say Molly . 

 " oh , no ; I forget . what a fool I be ! why , do not   you remember the hurry I be in to get you off to Hamley Hall , the very first time you ever go ? it be all because I get hold of a desperate love - letter from Coxe , address to you . " 

 but Molly be too tired to be amuse , or even interested . she could not get over the sight of the straight body cover with a sheet , which yet let the outline be see , all that remain of Osborne . her father have trust too much to the motion of the ride , and the change of scene from the darken house . he see his mistake . 

 " some one must write to Mrs. Osborne Hamley , " say he . " I believe she to have a legal right to the name ; but whether or no , she must be tell that the father of her child be dead . shall you do it , or I ? " 

 " oh , you , please , papa ! " 

 " I will , if you wish . but she may have hear of you as a friend of her dead husband 's ; while of I a mere country doctor it be very probable she have never hear the name . " 

 " if I ought , I will do it . " Mr. Gibson do not like this ready acquiescence , give in so few word , too . 

 " there be Hollingford church - spire , " say she presently , as they draw near the town , and catch a glimpse of the church through the tree . " I think I never wish to go out of sight of it again . " 

 " nonsense ! " say he . " why , you have   all your travel to do yet ; and if these new - fangle railway spread , as they say they will , we shall all be spin about the world ; ' sit on tea - kettle , ' as Phobe Browning call it . Miss Browning write such a capital letter of advice to Miss Hornblower . I hear of it at the miller ' . Miss Hornblower be go to travel by railroad for the first time ; and Dorothy be very anxious , and send her direction for her conduct ; one piece of advice be not to sit on the boiler . " 

 molly laugh a little , as she be expect to do . " here we be at home , at last . " 

 Mrs. Gibson give molly a warm welcome . for one thing , Cynthia be in disgrace ; for another , Molly come from the centre of news ; for a third , Mrs. Gibson be really fond of the girl , in her way , and sorry to see her pale heavy look . 

 " to think of it all be so sudden at last ! not but what I always expect it ! and so provoking ! just when Cynthia have give up Roger ! if she have only wait a day ! what do the Squire say to it all ? " 

 " he be beat down with grief , " reply molly . 

 " indeed ! I should not have fancy he have like the engagement so much . " 

 " what engagement ? " 

 " why , Roger to Cynthia , to be sure . I ask you how the squire take her letter , announce the breaking of it off ? " 

 " oh I make a mistake . he have not   open his letter to - day . I see Cynthia 's among they . " 

 " now that I call positive disrespect . " 

 " I do not   know . he do not mean it for such . where be Cynthia ? " 

 " go out into the meadow - garden . she will be in directly . I want she to do some errand for I , but she flatly refuse to go into the town . I be afraid she mismanage her affair badly . but she will not   allow I to interfere . I hate to look at such thing in a mercenary spirit , but it be provoking to see her throw over two such good match . first Mr. Henderson , and now Roger Hamley . when do the Squire expect Roger ? do he think he will come back soon for poor dear Osborne 's death ? " 

 " I do not   know . he hardly seem to think of anything but Osborne . he appear to I to have almost forget every one else . but perhaps the news of Osborne 's be marry , and of the child , may rouse he up . " 

 molly have no doubt that Osborne be really and truly married , nor have she any idea that her father have never breathe the fact of which she have tell he on the previous night , to his wife or Cynthia . but Mr. Gibson have be slightly dubious of the full legality of the marriage , and have not feel inclined to speak of it to his wife until that have be ascertain one way or another . so Mrs. Gibson exclaim , " what do you mean , child ? marry ! Osborne marry ! who say so ? " 

 " oh , dear ! I suppose I ought not to have name it . I be very stupid to - day . yes ! Osborne have be marry a long time ; but the squire do not know of it until this morning . I think it have do he good . but I do not   know . " 

 " who be the lady ? why , I call it a shame to go about as a single man , and be marry all the time ! if there be one thing that revolt I , it be duplicity . who be the lady ? do tell I all you know about it , there be a dear . " 

 " she be french , and a roman Catholic , " say Molly . 

 " french ! they be such beguiling woman ; and he be so much abroad ! you say there be a child , be it a boy or a girl ? " 

 " I do not hear . I do not ask . " 

 molly do not think it necessary to do more than answer question ; indeed , she be vex enough to have tell anything of what her father evidently consider it desirable to keep secret . just then Cynthia come wander into the room with a careless , hopeless look in her face , which molly notice at once . she have not hear of Molly 's arrival , and have no idea that she be return until she see she sit there . 

 " Molly , darling ! be that you ? you be as welcome as the flower in May , though you have   not be go twenty - four hour . but the house be not   the same when you be away ! " 

 " and she bring we such news too ! " say Mrs. Gibson . " I be really almost glad you write to the squire yesterday , for if you have wait till to - day I think you be in too great a hurry at the time he might have think you have some interested reason for give up your engagement . Osborne Hamley be marry all this time unknown to everybody , and have get a child too . " 

 " Osborne marry ! " exclaim Cynthia . " if ever a man look a bachelor , he do . Poor Osborne ! with his fair delicate elegance , he look so young and boyish ! " 

 " yes ! it be a great piece of deceit , and I can not   easily forgive he for it . only think ! if he have pay either of you any particular attention , and you have fall in love with he ! why , he might have break your heart , or Molly 's either . I can not   forgive he , even though he be dead , poor fellow ! " 

 " well , as he never do pay either of we any particular attention , and as we neither of we do fall in love with he , I think I only feel sorry that he have all the trouble and worry of concealment . " Cynthia speak with a pretty keen recollection of how much trouble and worry her concealment have cost she . 

 " and now of course it be a son , and will be the heir , and Roger will just be as poorly off as ever . I hope you will take care and let the squire know Cynthia be quite ignorant of these new fact that have come out when she write those letter , molly ? I should not like a suspicion of worldliness to rest upon any one with whom I have any concern . " 

 " he have not   read Cynthia 's letter yet . oh , do let I bring it home unopened , " say Molly . " send another letter to Roger now at once ; it will reach he at the same time ; he will get both when he arrive at the Cape , and make he understand which be the last the real one . think ! he will hear of Osborne 's death at the same time two such sad thing ! do , Cynthia ! " 

 " no , my dear , " say Mrs. Gibson . " I could not allow that , even if Cynthia feel inclined for it . ask to be re - engaged to he ! at any rate , she must wait now until he propose again , and we see how thing turn out . " 

 but Molly keep she plead eye fix on Cynthia . 

 " no ! " say Cynthia firmly , but not without consideration . " it can not be . I have   feel more content this last night than I have   do for week past . I be glad to be free . I dread Roger 's goodness , and learning , and all that . it be not in my way , and I do not   believe I should have ever marry he , even without know of all these ill - natured story that be circulate about I , and which he would hear of , and expect I to explain , and be sorry for , and penitent and humble . I know he could not have make I happy , and I do not   believe he would have be happy with I . it must stay as it be . I would rather be a governess than married to he . I should get weary of he every day of my life . " 

 " Weary of Roger ! " say molly to herself . " it be good as it be , I see , " she answer aloud . " only I be very sorry for he , very . he do love you so . you will never get any one to love you like he ! " 

 " very well . I must take my chance . and too much love be rather oppressive to I , I believe . I like a great deal , widely spread about ; not all confine to one individual lover . " 

 " I do not   believe you , " say Molly . " but do not   let we talk any more about it . it be good as it be . I think I almost feel sure you would be sorry this morning . but we will leave it alone now . " she sate silently look out of the window , her heart sorely stir , she scarcely know how or why . but she could not have speak . most likely she would have begin to cry if she have speak . Cynthia steal softly up to she after a while . 

 " you be vex with I , Molly , " she begin in a low voice . but Molly turn sharply round : 

 " I ! I have no business at all in the affair . it be for you to judge . do what you think right . I believe you have do right . only I do not   want to discuss it , and paw it over with talk . I be very much tired , dear " gently now she speak " and I hardly know what I say . if I speak crossly , do not   mind it . " Cynthia do not reply at once . then she say , 

 " do you think I might go with you , and help you ? I might have do yesterday ; and you say he have not   open my letter , so he have not hear as yet . and I be always fond of poor Osborne , in my way , you know . " 

 " I can not tell ; I have no right to say , " reply molly , scarcely understand Cynthia 's motif , which , after all , be only impulse in this case . " papa would be able to judge ; I think , perhaps , you have well not . but do not   go by my opinion ; I can only tell what I should wish to do in your place . " 

 " it be as much for your sake as any one 's , Molly , " say Cynthia . 

 " oh , then , do not ! I be tired to - day with sit up ; but to - morrow I shall be all right ; and I should not like it , if , for my sake , you come into the house at so solemn a time . " 

 " very well ! " say Cynthia , half - glad that her impulsive offer be decline ; for , as she say , think to herself , " it would have be awkward after all . " so Molly go back in the carriage alone , wonder how she should find the squire ; wonder what discovery he have make among Osborne 's paper , and at what conviction he would have arrive . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LIII . 

 unlooked - for arrival . 
 

 Robinson open the door for Molly almost before the carriage have fairly draw up at the Hall , and tell she that the squire have be very anxious for her return , and have more than once send he to an upstairs window , from which a glimpse of the hill - road between Hollingford and Hamley could be catch , to know if the carriage be not yet in sight . molly go into the drawing - room . the squire be stand in the middle of the floor await she in fact , long to go out and meet she , but restrain by a feeling of solemn etiquette , which prevent his move about as usual in that house of mourning . he hold a paper in his hand , which be tremble with excitement and emotion ; and four or five open letter be strew on a table near he . 

 " it be all true , " he begin ; ' she be his wife , and he be her husband be her husband that be the word for it be ! poor lad ! poor lad ! it be cost he a deal . pray God , it be not   my fault . read this , my dear . it be a certificate . it be all regular Osborne Hamley to Marie - Aimťe Scherer , parish - church and all , and witness . oh , dear ! " he sate down in the near chair and groan . molly take a seat by he , and read the legal paper , the perusal of which be not need to convince she of the fact of the marriage . she hold it in her hand after she have finish read it , wait for the squire 's next coherent word ; for he keep talk to himself in broken sentence . " ay , ay ! that come o ' temper , and crabbedness . she be the only one as could , and I have   be bad since she be go . bad ! bad ! and see what it have come to ! he be afraid of I ay afraid . that be the truth of it afraid . and it make he keep all to himself , and care kill he . they may call it heart - disease o my lad , my lad , I know well now ; but it be too late that be the sting of it too late , too late ! " he cover his face , and move himself backward and forward till Molly could bear it no long . 

 " there be some letter , " say she : " may I read any of they ? " at another time she would not have ask ; but she be drive to it now by her impatience of the speechless grief of the old man . 

 " ay , read them , read them , " say he . " maybe you can . I can only pick out a word here and there . I put them there for you to look at ; and tell I what be in them . " 

 Molly 's knowledge of write French of the present day be not so great as her knowledge of the French of the Mťmoires de Sully , and neither the spelling nor the writing of the letter be of the good ; but she manage to translate into good enough colloquial English some innocent sentence of love , and submission to Osborne 's will as if his judgment be infallible , and of faith in his purpose , little sentence in " little language " that go home to the squire 's heart . perhaps if molly have read French more easily she might not have translate they into such touching , homely , broken word . here and there , there be expression in English ; these the hungry - hearted Squire have read while wait for Molly 's return . every time she stop , he say , " go on . " he keep his face shade , and only repeat those two word at every pause . she get up to find some more of Aimťe 's letter . in examine the paper , she come upon one in particular . " have you see this , sir ? this certificate of baptism "   read aloud   " of Roger Stephen Osborne Hamley , bear June 21 , 183 , child of Osborne Hamley and Marie - Aimťe his wife " 

 " give it I , " say the Squire , his voice break now , and stretch forth his eager hand . " ' Roger , ' that be I , ' Stephen , ' that be my poor old father : he die when he be not so old as I be ; but I have   always think on he as very old . he be main and fond of Osborne , when he be quite a little one . it be good of the lad to have think on my father Stephen . ay ! that be his name . and Osborne Osborne Hamley ! one Osborne Hamley lie dead on his bed and t'other t'other I have   never see , and never hear on till to - day . he must be call Osborne , Molly . there be a Roger there be two for that matter ; but one be a good - for - nothing old man ; and there be never an Osborne any more , unless this little thing be call Osborne ; we will have he here , and get a nurse for he ; and make his mother comfortable for life in her own country . I will keep this , molly . you be a good lass for find it . Osborne Hamley ! and if God will give I grace , he shall never hear a cross word from I never ! he shall not   be afeard of I . oh , my Osborne , my Osborne "   he burst out , " do you know now how bitter and sore be my heart for every hard word as I ever speak to you ? do you know now how I love you my boy my boy ? " 

 from the general tone of the letter , molly doubt if the mother would consent , so easily as the Squire seem to expect , to be part from her child ; the letter be not very wise , perhaps   though of this molly never think , but a heart full of love speak tender word in every line . still , it be not for Molly to talk of this doubt of hers just then ; but rather to dwell on the probable grace and charm of the little Roger Stephen Osborne Hamley . she let the Squire exhaust himself in wonder as to the particular of every event , help he out in conjecture ; and both of they , from their imperfect knowledge of possibility , make the most curious , fantastic , and improbable guess at the truth . and so that day pass over , and the night come . 

 there be not many people who have any claim to be invite to the funeral , and of these Mr. Gibson and the Squire 's hereditary man of business have take charge . but when Mr. Gibson come , early on the follow morning , Molly refer the question to he , which have suggest itself to her mind , though apparently not to the Squire 's , what intimation of her loss should be send to the widow , live solitary near Winchester , watch and wait , if not for his come who lie dead in his distant home , at least for his letter . one from she have already come , in her foreign handwriting , to the post - office to which all her communication be usually send , but of course they at the Hall know nothing of this . 

 " she must be tell , " say Mr. Gibson , musing . 

 " yes , she must , " reply his daughter . " but how ? " 

 " a day or two of waiting will do no harm , " say he , almost as if he be anxious to delay the solution of the problem . " it will make her anxious , poor thing , and all sort of gloomy possibility will suggest themselves to her mind amongst they the truth ; it will be a kind of preparation . " 

 " for what ? something must be do at last , " say Molly . 

 " yes ; true . suppose you write , and say he be very ill ; write to - morrow . I daresay they have   indulge themselves in daily postage , and then she will have have three day ' silence . you say how you come to know all you do about it ; I think she ought to know he be very ill in great danger , if you like : and you can follow it up next day with the full truth . I would not   worry the squire about it . after the funeral we will have a talk about the child . " 

 " she will never part with it , " say Molly . 

 " Whew ! till I see the woman I can not   tell , " say her father ; ' some woman would . it will be well provide for , accord to what you say . and she be a foreigner , and may very likely wish to go back to her own people and kindre . there be much to be say on both side . " 

 " so you always say , papa . but in this case I think you will find I be right . I judge from her letter ; but I think I be right . " 

 " so you always say , daughter . Time will show . so the child be a boy ? Mrs. Gibson tell I particularly to ask . it will go far to reconcile she to Cynthia 's dismissal of Roger . but indeed it be quite as well for both of they , though of course he will be a long time before he think so . they be not suit to each other . poor Roger ! it be hard work write to he yesterday ; and who know what may have become of he ! well , well ! one have to get through the world somehow . I be glad , however , this little lad have turn up to be the heir . I should not   have like the property to go to the Irish Hamleys , who be the next heir , as Osborne once tell I . now write that letter , Molly , to the poor little Frenchwoman out yonder . it will prepare she for it ; and we must think a bit how to spare she the shock , for Osborne 's sake . " 

 the writing this letter be rather difficult work for Molly , and she tear up two or three copy before she could manage it to her satisfaction ; and at last , in despair of ever do it well , she send it off without re - read it . the next day be easy ; the fact of Osborne 's death be tell briefly and tenderly . but when this second letter be send off , Molly 's heart begin to bleed for the poor creature , bereft of her husband , in a foreign land , and he at a distance from she , dead and bury without she ever have have the chance of print his dear feature on her memory by one last long linger look . with her thought full of the unknown Aimťe , molly talk much about she that day to the squire . he would listen for ever to any conjecture , however wild , about the grandchild , but perpetually wince away from all discourse about " the Frenchwoman , " as he call she ; not unkindly , but to his mind she be simply the Frenchwoman chattering , dark - eye , demonstrative , and possibly even rouge . he would treat she with respect as his son 's widow , and would try even not to think upon the female inveiglement in which he believe . he would make she an allowance to the extent of his duty : but he hop and trust he might never be call upon to see she . his solicitor , Gibson , anybody and everybody , should be call upon to form a phalanx of defence against that danger . 

 and all this time a little young grey - eyed woman be make her way , not towards he , but towards the dead son , whom as yet she believe to be her live husband . she know she be act in defiance of his express wish ; but he have never dismay she with any expression of his own fear about his health ; and she , bright with life , have never contemplate death come to fetch away one so beloved . he be ill very ill , the letter from the strange girl say that ; but Aimťe have nurse her parent , and know what illness be . the french doctor have praise her skill and neat - handedness as a nurse , and even if she have be the clumsiest of woman , be he not her husband she all ? and be she not his wife , whose place be by his pillow ? so , without even as much reasoning as have be here give , Aimťe make her preparation , swallow down the tear that would overflow her eye , and drop into the little trunk she be pack so neatly . and by her side , on the ground , sate the child , now nearly two year old ; and for he Aimťe have always a smile and a cheerful word . her servant love she and trust she ; and the woman be of an age to have have experience of humankind . Aimťe have tell she that her husband be ill , and the servant have know enough of the household history to be aware that as yet Aimťe be not his acknowledge wife . but she sympathize with the prompt decision of her mistress to go to he directly , wherever he be . caution come from education of one kind or another , and Aimťe be not dismay by warning ; only the woman plead hard for the child to be leave . " he be such company , " she say ; " and he would so tire his mother in her journeying ; and maybe his father would be too ill to see he . " to which Aimťe reply , " good company for you , but well for I . a woman be never tired with carry her own child "   which be not true ; but there be sufficient truth in it to make it believe by both mistress and servant , " and if Monsieur could care for anything , he would rejoice to hear the babble of his little son . " so Aimťe catch the evening coach to London at the near cross - road , Martha stand by as chaperon and friend to see she off , and hand she in the large lusty child , already crow with delight at the sight of the horse . there be a " lingerie " shop , keep by a Frenchwoman , whose acquaintance Aimťe have make in the day when she be a London nursemaid , and thither she betook herself , rather than to an hotel , to spend the few night - hour that intervene before the Birmingham coach start at early morning . she sleep or watch on a sofa in the parlour , for spare - bed there be none ; but Madame Pauline come in betime with a good cup of coffee for the mother , and of ' soupe blanche " for the boy ; and they go off again into the wide world , only think of , only seek the " he , " who be everything human to both . Aimťe remember the sound of the name of the village where Osborne have often tell she that he alight from the coach to walk home ; and though she could never have spell the strange uncouth word , yet she speak it with pretty slow distinctness to the guard , ask he in her broken English when they should arrive there ? not till four o'clock . alas ! and what might happen before then ! once with he she would have no fear ; she be sure that she could bring he round ; but what might not happen before he be in her tender care ? she be a very capable person in many way , though so childish and innocent in other . she make up her mind to the course she should pursue when the coach set she down at Feversham . she ask for a man to carry her trunk , and show she the way to Hamley Hall . 

 " Hamley Hall ! " say the innkeeper . " eh ! there be a deal o ' trouble there just now . " 

 " I know , I know , " say she , hasten off after the wheelbarrow in which her trunk be go , and breathlessly struggle to keep up with it , her heavy child asleep in her arm . her pulse beat all over her body ; she could hardly see out of her eye . to she , a foreigner , the draw blind of the house , when she come in sight of it , have no significance ; she hurry , stumble on . 

 " back door or front , missus ? " ask the boot from the inn . 

 " the most near , " say she . and the front door be " the most near . " Molly be sit with the squire in the darken drawing - room , read out her translation of Aimťe 's letter to her husband . the squire be never weary of hear they ; the very sound of Molly 's voice soothe and comfort he , it be so sweet and low . and he pull she up , much as a child do , if on a second reading of the same letter she substitute one word for another . the house be very still this afternoon , still as it have be now for several day ; every servant in it , however needlessly , move about on tiptoe , speak below the breath , and shut door as softly as might be . the near noise or stir of active life be that of the rook in the tree , who be begin their spring chatter of business . suddenly , through this quiet , there come a ring at the front - door bell that sound , and go on sound , through the house , pull by an ignorant vigorous hand . molly stop read ; she and the squire look at each other in surprised dismay . perhaps a thought of Roger 's sudden   and impossible   return be in the mind of each ; but neither speak . they hear Robinson hurrying to answer the unwonted summon . they listen ; but they hear no more . there be little more to hear . when the old servant open the door , a lady with a child in her arm stand there . she gasp out her ready - prepare english sentence , 

 " can I see Mr. Osborne Hamley ? he be ill , I know ; but I be his wife . " 

 Robinson have be aware that there be some mystery , long suspect by the servant , and come to light at last to the master , he have guess that there be a young woman in the case ; but when she stand there before he , ask for her dead husband as if he be live , any presence of mind Robinson might have have forsook he ; he could not tell she the truth , he could only leave the door open , and say to she , " wait awhile , I will come back , " and betake himself to the drawing - room where Molly be , he know . he go up to she in a flutter and a hurry , and whisper something to she which turn she white with dismay . 

 " what be it ? what be it ? " say the Squire , tremble with excitement . " do not   keep it from I . I can bear it . Roger " 

 they both think he be go to faint ; he have rise up and come close to Molly ; suspense would be bad than anything . 

 " Mrs. Osborne Hamley be here , " say Molly . " I write to tell she her husband be very ill , and she have come . " 

 " she do not know what have happen , seemingly , " say Robinson . 

 " I can not   see she I can not   see she , " say the Squire , shrink away into a corner . " you will go , molly , will not   you ? you will go . " 

 molly stand for a moment or two , irresolute . she , too , shrink from the interview . Robinson put in his word : " she look but a weakly thing , and have carry a big baby , choose how far , I do not   stop to ask . " 

 at this instant the door softly open , and right into the midst of they come the little figure in grey , look ready to fall with the weight of her child . 

 " you be molly , " say she , not see the squire at once . " the lady who write the letter ; he speak of you sometimes . you will let I go to he . " 

 molly do not answer , except that at such moment the eye speak solemnly and comprehensively . Aimťe read their meaning . all she say be , " he be not oh , my husband my husband ! " her arm relax , her figure sway , the child scream and hold out his arm for help . that help be give he by his grandfather , just before Aimťe fall senseless on the floor . 

 " Maman , maman ! " cry the little fellow , now strive and fight to get back to she , where she lay ; he fight so lustily that the Squire have to put he down , and he crawl to the poor inanimate body , behind which sit molly , hold the head ; whilst Robinson rush away for water , wine , and more womankind . 

  " Maman , Maman ! " 
 " Maman , Maman ! " 
 click to enlarge 
 " poor thing , poor thing ! " say the Squire , bend over she , and cry afresh over her suffering . " she be but young , Molly , and she must ha ' love he dearly . " 

 " to be sure ! " say Molly , quickly . she be untie the bonnet , and take off the worn , but neatly mend glove ; there be the soft luxuriant black hair , shade the pale , innocent face , the little notable - looking brown hand , with the wedding - ring for sole ornament . the child cluster his finger round one of her , and nestle up against she with his plaintive cry , get more and more into a burst of wail : " Maman , maman ! " at the grow acuteness of his imploring , her hand move , her lip quiver , consciousness come partially back . she do not open her eye , but great heavy tear steal out from beneath her eyelash . molly hold her head against her own breast ; and they try to give her wine , which she shrink from water , which she do not reject ; that be all . at last she try to speak . " take I away , " she say , " into the dark . leave I alone . " 

 so Molly and the woman lift she up and carry she away , and lay she on the bed , in the good bed - chamber in the house , and darken the already shade light . she be like an unconscious corpse herself , in that she offer neither assistance nor resistance to all that they be do . but just before Molly be leave the room to take up her watch outside the door , she feel rather than hear that Aimťe speak to she . 

 " food bread and milk for baby . " but when they bring her food herself , she only shrink away and turn her face to the wall without a word . in the hurry , the child have be leave with Robinson and the squire . for some unknown , but most fortunate reason , he take a dislike to Robinson 's red face and hoarse voice , and show a most decide preference for his grandfather . when molly come down she find the squire feed the child , with more of peace upon his face than there have be for all these day . the boy be every now and then leave off take his bread and milk to show his dislike to Robinson by word and gesture : a proceeding which only amuse the old servant , while it highly delight the more favoured squire . 

 " she be lie very still , but she will neither speak nor eat . I do not   even think she be cry , " say Molly , volunteer this account , for the squire be for the moment too much absorb in his grandson to ask many question . 

 Robinson put in his word : " Dick Hayward , he be Boots at the Hamley Arms , say the coach she come by start at five this morning from London , and the passenger say she have be cry a deal on the road , when she think folk be not notice ; and she never come in to meal with the rest , but stop feed her child . " 

 " she will be tired out ; we must let she rest , " say the Squire . " and I do believe this little chap be go to sleep in my arm . God bless he . " 

 but molly steal out , and send off a lad to Hollingford with a note to her father . her heart have warm towards the poor stranger , and she feel uncertain as to what ought to be the course pursue in her case . 

 she go up from time to time to look at the girl , scarce old than herself , who lie there with her eye open , but as motionless as death . she softly cover she over , and let she feel the sympathetic presence from time to time ; and that be all she be allow to do . the squire be curiously absorb in the child , but Molly 's supreme tenderness be for the mother . not but what she admire the sturdy , gallant , healthy little fellow , whose every limb , and square inch of clothing , show the tender and thrifty care that have be take of he . by - and - by the Squire say in a whisper , 

 " she be not like a Frenchwoman , be she , molly ? " 

 " I do not   know . I do not   know what Frenchwomen be like . People say Cynthia be french . " 

 " and she do not   look like a servant ? we will not   speak of Cynthia since she be serve my Roger so . why , I begin to think , as soon as I could think after that , how I would make Roger and her happy , and have they marry at once ; and then come that letter ! I never want she for a daughter - in - law , not i. but he do , it seem ; and he be not   one for want many thing for himself . but it be all over now ; only we will not   talk of she ; and maybe , as you say , she be more french than English . this poor thing look like a gentlewoman , I think . I hope she be get friend who will take care of she , she can not   be above twenty . I think she must be old than my poor lad ! " 

 " she be a gentle , pretty creature , " say Molly . " but but I sometimes think it have kill she ; she lie like one dead . " and molly could not keep from cry softly at the thought . 

 " Nay , nay ! " say the Squire . " it be not so easy to break one 's heart . sometimes I have   wish it be . but one have to go on live ' all the appoint day , ' as it say in the Bible . but we will do our good for she . we will not think of let she go away till she be fit to travel . " 

 Molly wonder in her heart about this go away , on which the Squire seem fully resolve . she be sure that he intend to keep the child ; perhaps he have a legal right to do so ; but would the mother ever part from it ? her father , however , would solve the difficulty , her father , whom she always look to as so clear - seeing and experienced . she watch and wait for his coming . the February evening draw on ; the child lie asleep in the squire 's arm till his grandfather grow tired , and lay he down on the sofa : the large square - cornered yellow sofa upon which Mrs. Hamley use to sit , support by pillow in a half - recline position . since her time it have be place against the wall , and have serve merely as a piece of furniture to fill up the room . but once again a human figure be lie upon it ; a little human creature , like a cherub in some old italian picture . the squire remember his wife as he put the child down . he think of she as he say to Molly , 

 " how pleased she would have be ! " but molly think of the poor young widow upstairs . Aimťe be she ' she " at the first moment . presently , but it seem a long long time first , she hear the quick prompt sound which tell of her father 's arrival . in he come to the room as yet only light by the fitful blaze of the fire . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LIV . 

 MOLLY GIBSON 's worth be discover . 
 

 Mr. Gibson come in rub his hand after his frosty ride . molly judge from the look in his eye that he have be fully informed of the present state of thing at the Hall by some one . but he simply go up to and greet the squire , and wait to hear what be say to he . the squire be fumble at the taper on the writing - table , and before he answer much he light it , and sign to his friend to follow he , he go softly to the sofa and show he the sleep child , take the utmost care not to arouse it by flare or sound . 

 " well ! this be a fine young gentleman , " say Mr. Gibson , return to the fire rather soon than the squire expect . " and you have   get the mother here , I understand . Mrs. Osborne Hamley , as we must call she , poor thing ! it be a sad come home to she ; for I hear she know nothing of his death . " he speak without exactly address any one , so that either Molly or the squire might answer as they like . the squire say , 

 " yes ! she be feel it a terrible shock . she be upstairs in the good bedroom . I should like you to see she , Gibson , if she will let you . we must do our duty by she , for my poor lad 's sake . I wish he could have see his boy lie there ; I do . I daresay it prey on he to have to keep it all to himself . he might ha ' know I , though . he might ha ' know my bark be waur than my bite . it be all over now , though ; and God forgive I if I be too sharp . I be punish now . " 

 molly grow impatient on the mother 's behalf . 

 " Papa , I feel as if she be very ill ; perhaps bad than we think . will you go and see she at once ? " 

 Mr. Gibson follow her upstairs , and the Squire come too , think that he would do his duty now , and even feel some self - satisfaction at conquer his desire to stay with the child . they go into the room where she have be take . she lie quite still in the same position as at first . her eye be open and tearless , fix on the wall . Mr. Gibson speak to she , but she do not answer ; he lift her hand to feel her pulse ; she never notice . 

 " bring I some wine at once , and order some beef - tea , " he say to Molly . 

 but when he try to put the wine into her mouth as she lie there on her side , she make no effort to receive or swallow it , and it run out upon the pillow . Mr. Gibson leave the room abruptly ; Molly chafe the little inanimate hand ; the Squire stand by in dumb dismay , touch in spite of himself by the death - in - life of one so young , and who must have be so much beloved . 

 Mr. Gibson come back two step at a time ; he be carry the half - awaken child in his arm . he do not scruple to rouse he into yet further wakefulness do not grieve to hear he begin to wail and cry . his eye be on the figure upon the bed , which at that sound quiver all through ; and when her child be lay at she back , and begin caressingly to scramble yet close , Aimťe turn round , and take he in her arm , and lull he and soothe he with the soft will not of mother 's love . 

 before she lose this faint consciousness , which be habit or instinct rather than think , Mr. Gibson speak to she in French . the child 's one word of " maman " have give he this clue . it be the language sure to be most intelligible to her dull brain ; and as it happen , only Mr. Gibson do not think of that it be the language in which she have be command , and have learn to obey . 

 Mr. Gibson 's tongue be a little stiff at first , but by - and - by he speak it with all his old readiness . he extort from her short answer at first , then long one , and from time to time he ply she with little drop of wine , until some further nourishment should be at hand . molly be strike by her father 's low tone of comfort and sympathy , although she could not follow what be say quickly enough to catch the meaning of what pass . 

 by - and - by , however , when her father have do all that he could , and they be once more downstairs , he tell they more about her journey than they yet know . the hurry , the sense of act in defiance of a prohibition , the over - master anxiety , the broken night , and fatigue of the journey , have ill prepare she for the shock at last , and Mr. Gibson be seriously alarmed for the consequence . she have wander strangely in her reply to he ; he have perceive that she be wander , and have make great effort to recall her sens ; but Mr. Gibson foresee that some bodily illness be come on , and stop late that night , arrange many thing with Molly and the squire . one the only comfort arise from her state be the probability that she would be entirely unconscious by the morrow the day of the funeral . wear out by the contend emotion of the day , the squire seem now unable to look beyond the wrench and trial of the next twelve hour . he sate with his head in his hand , decline to go to bed , refuse to dwell on the thought of his grandchild not three hour ago such a darling in his eye . Mr. Gibson give some instruction to one of the maid - servant as to the watch she be to keep by Mrs. Osborne Hamley , and insist on Molly 's go to bed . when she plead the apparent necessity of she stay up , he say , 

 " now , Molly , look how much less trouble the dear old squire would give if he would obey order . he be only add to anxiety by indulge himself . one pardon everything to extreme grief , however . but you will have enough to do to occupy all your strength for day to come ; and go to bed you must now . I only wish I see my way as clearly through other thing as I do to your near duty . I wish I would never let Roger go wander off ; he will wish it too , poor fellow ! do I tell you Cynthia be go off in hot haste to her uncle Kirkpatrick 's ? I suspect a visit to he will stand in lieu of go out to Russia as a governess . " 

 " I be sure she be quite serious in wish for that . " 

 " yes , yes ! at the time . I have   no doubt she think she be sincere in intend to go . but the great thing be to get out of the unpleasantness of the present time and place ; and uncle Kirkpatrick 's will do this as effectually , and more pleasantly , than a situation at Nishni - Novgorod in an ice - palace . " 

 he have give Molly 's thought a turn , which be what he want to do . molly could not help remember Mr. Henderson , and his offer , and all the consequent hint ; and wonder , and wish what do she wish ? or have she be fall asleep ? before she have quite ascertain this point she be asleep in reality . 

 after this , long day pass over in a monotonous round of care ; for no one seem to think of Molly 's leave the Hall during the woeful illness that befell Mrs. Osborne Hamley . it be not that her father allow she to take much active part in the nursing ; the Squire give he carte - blanche , and he engage two efficient hospital nurse to watch over the unconscious Aimťe ; but Molly be need to receive the fine direction as to her treatment and diet . it be not that she be want for the care of the little boy ; the squire be too jealous of the child 's exclusive love for that , and one of the housemaid be employ in the actual physical charge of he ; but he need some one to listen to his incontinence of language , both when his passionate regret for his dead son come uppermost , and also when he have discover some extraordinary charm in that son 's child ; and again when he be oppress with the uncertainty of Aimťe 's long - continue illness . molly be not so good or so bewitch a listener to ordinary conversation as Cynthia ; but where her heart be interested her sympathy be deep and unfailing . in this case she only wish that the squire could really feel that Aimťe be not the encumbrance which he evidently consider she to be . not that he would have acknowledge the fact , if it have be put before he in plain word . he fight against the dim consciousness of what be in his mind ; he speak repeatedly of patience when no one but himself be impatient ; he would often say that when she grow well she must not be allow to leave the Hall until she be perfectly strong , when no one be even contemplate the remotest chance of she leave her child , except only himself . molly once or twice ask her father if she might not speak to the squire , and represent the hardship of send she away the improbability that she would consent to quit her boy , and so on ; but Mr. Gibson only reply , 

 " wait quietly . time enough when nature and circumstance have have their chance , and have fail . " 

 it be well that molly be such a favourite with the old servant ; for she have frequently to restrain and to control . to be sure , she have her father 's authority to back she ; and they be aware that where her own comfort , ease , or pleasure be concern she never interfere , but submit to their will . if the squire have know of the want of attendance to which she submit with the most perfect meekness , as far as she herself be the only sufferer , he would have go into a tower rage . but Molly hardly think of it , so anxious be she to do all she could for other , and to remember the various charge which her father give she in his daily visit . perhaps he do not spare she enough ; she be willing and uncomplaining ; but one day after Mrs. Osborne Hamley have " take the turn , " as the nurse call it , when she be lie weak as a new - bear baby , but with her faculty all restore , and her fever gone , when spring bud be bloom out , and spring bird sing merrily , Molly answer to her father 's sudden questioning that she feel unaccountably weary ; that her head ache heavily , and that she be aware of a sluggishness of thought which it require a painful effort to overcome . 

 " do not   go on , " say Mr. Gibson , with a quick pang of anxiety , almost of remorse . " lie down here with your back to the light . I will come back and see you before I go . " and off he go in search of the squire . he have a good long walk before he come upon Mr. Hamley in a field of spring wheat , where the woman be weed , his little grandson hold to his finger in the interval of short walk of inquiry into the dirty place , which be all his sturdy little limb could manage . 

 " well , Gibson , and how go the patient ? well ? I wish we could get she out of door , such a fine day as it be . it would make she strong as soon as anything . I use to beg my poor lad to come out more . maybe , I worry he ; but the air be the fine thing for strengthen that I know of . though , perhaps , she will not thrive in english air as if she have be bear here ; and she will not be quite right till she get back to her native place , wherever that be . " 

 " I do not   know . I begin to think we shall get she quite round here ; and I do not   know that she could be in a well place . but it be not about she . may I order the carriage for my Molly ? " Mr. Gibson 's voice sound as if he be choke a little as he say these last word . 

 " to be sure , " say the Squire , set the child down . he have be hold he in his arm the last few minute : but now he want all his eye to look into Mr. Gibson 's face . " I say , " say he , catch hold of Mr. Gibson 's arm , " what be the matter , man ? do not   twitch up your face like that , but speak ! " 

 " nothing be the matter , " say Mr. Gibson , hastily . " only I want she at home , under my own eye ; " and he turn away to go to the house . but the squire leave his field and his weeder , and keep at Mr. Gibson 's side . he want to speak , but his heart be so full he do not know what to say . " I say , Gibson , " he get out at last , " your Molly be liker a child of mine than a stranger ; and I reckon we have   all on we be come too hard upon she . you do not   think there be much amiss , do you ? " 

 " how can I tell ? " say Mr. Gibson , almost savagely . but any hastiness of temper be instinctively understand by the squire ; and he be not offend , though he do not speak again till they reach the house . then he go to order the carriage , and stand by sorrowful enough while the horse be be put in . he feel as if he should not know what to do without molly ; he have never know her value , he think , till now . but he keep silence on this view of the case ; which be a praiseworthy effort on the part of one who usually let by - stander see and hear as much of his pass feeling as if he have have a window in his breast . he stand by while Mr. Gibson help the faintly - smile , tearful Molly into the carriage . then the squire mount on the step and kiss her hand ; but when he try to thank she and bless she , he break down ; and as soon as he be once more safely on the ground , Mr. Gibson cry out to the coachman to drive on . and so molly leave Hamley Hall . from time to time her father ride up to the window , and make some little cheerful and apparently careless remark . when they come within two mile of Hollingford , he put spur to his horse , and ride briskly past the carriage window , kiss his hand to the occupant as he do so . he go on to prepare her home for Molly : when she arrive Mrs. Gibson be ready to greet she . Mr. Gibson have give one or two of his bright , imperative order , and Mrs. Gibson be feel rather lonely " without either of her two dear girl at home , " as she phrase it , to herself as well as to other . 

 " why , my sweet Molly , this be an unexpected pleasure . only this morning I say to papa , ' when do you think we shall see our Molly back ? ' he do not say much he never do , you know ; but I be sure he think directly of give I this surprise , this pleasure . you be look a little what shall I call it ? I remember such a pretty line of poetry , ' oh , call she fair , not pale ! ' so we will call you fair . " 

 " you would well not call she anything , but let she get to her own room and have a good rest as soon as possible . have not   you get a trashy novel or two in the house ? that be the literature to send she to sleep . " 

 he do not leave she till he have see she lay on a sofa in a darken room , with some slight pretence of reading in her hand . then he come away , lead his wife , who turn round at the door to kiss her hand to Molly , and make a little face of unwillingness to be drag away . 

 " now , Hyacinth , " say he , as he take his wife into the drawing - room , ' she will need much care . she have be overwork , and I have   be a fool . that be all . we must keep she from all worry and care , but I will not   answer for it that she will not have an illness , for all that ! " 

 " poor thing ! she do look wear out . she be something like I , her feeling be too much for she . but now she be come home she shall find we as cheerful as possible . I can answer for myself ; and you really must brighten up your doleful face , my dear nothing so bad for invalid as the appearance of depression in those around they . I have have such a pleasant letter from Cynthia to - day . Uncle Kirkpatrick really seem to make so much of she , he treat she just like a daughter ; he have give she a ticket to the Concerts of Ancient Music ; and Mr. Henderson have be to call on she , in spite of all that have go before . " 

 for an instant , Mr. Gibson think that it be easy enough for his wife to be cheerful , with the pleasant thought and evident anticipation she have in her mind , but a little more difficult for he to put off his doleful look while his own child lie in a state of suffering and illness which might be the precursor of a still bad malady . but he be always a man for immediate action as soon as he have resolve on the course to be take ; and he know that ' some must watch , while some must sleep ; so run the world away . " 

 the illness which he apprehend come upon molly ; not violently or acutely , so that there be any immediate danger to be dread ; but make a long pull upon her strength , which seem to lessen day by day , until at last her father fear that she might become a permanent invalid . there be nothing very decide or alarming to tell Cynthia , and Mrs. Gibson keep the dark side from she in her letter . " molly be feel the spring weather ; " or " Molly have be a good deal overdone with her stay at the Hall , and be rest ; " such little sentence tell nothing of Molly 's real state . but then , as Mrs. Gibson say to herself , it would be a pity to disturb Cynthia 's pleasure by tell she much about Molly ; indeed , there be not much to tell , one day be so like another . but it so happen that Lady Harriet , who come whenever she could to sit awhile with Molly , at first against Mrs. Gibson 's will , and afterwards with her full consent , for reason of her own , Lady Harriet write a letter to Cynthia , to which she be urge by Mrs. Gibson . it fall out in this manner : one day , when Lady Harriet be sit in the drawing - room for a few minute after she have be with Molly , she say , 

 " really , Clare , I spend so much time in your house that I be go to establish a work - basket here . Mary have infect I with her notability , and I be go to work mamma a footstool . it be to be a surprise ; and so if I do it here she will know nothing about it . only I can not match the gold bead I want for the pansy in this dear little town ; and Hollingford , who could send I down star and planet if I ask he , I make no doubt , could no more match bead than " 

 " my dear Lady Harriet ! you forget Cynthia ! think what a pleasure it would be to she to do anything for you . " 

 " would it ? then she shall have plenty of it ; but mind , it be you who have answer for she . she shall get I some wool too ; how good I be to confer so much pleasure on a fellow - creature ! but seriously , do you think I might write and give she a few commission ? neither Agnes nor Mary be in town " 

 " I be sure she would be delighted , " say Mrs. Gibson , who also take into consideration the reflection of aristocratic honour that would fall upon Cynthia if she have a letter from Lady Harriet while at Mr. Kirkpatrick 's . so she give the address , and Lady Harriet write . all the first part of the letter be take up with apology and commission ; but then , never doubt but that Cynthia be aware of Molly 's state , she go on to say 

 " I see molly this morning . twice I have be forbid admittance , as she be too ill to see any one out of her own family . I wish we could begin to perceive a change for the well ; but she look more fading every time , and I fear Mr. Gibson consider it a very anxious case . " 

 the day but one after this letter be despatch , Cynthia walk into the drawing - room at home with as much apparent composure as if she have leave it not an hour before . Mrs. Gibson be doze , but believe herself to be read ; she have be with molly the great part of the morning , and now after her lunch , and the invalid 's pretence of early dinner , she consider herself entitle to some repose . she start up as Cynthia come in : 

 " Cynthia ! dear child , where have you come from ? why in the world have you come ? my poor nerve ! my heart be quite fluttering ; but , to be sure , it be no wonder with all this anxiety I have to undergo . why have you come back ? " 

 " because of the anxiety you speak of , mamma . I never know , you never tell I how ill Molly be . " 

 " Nonsense ! I beg your pardon , my dear , but it be really nonsense . Molly 's illness be only nervous , Mr. Gibson say . a nervous fever ; but you must remember nerve be mere fancy , and she be get well . such a pity for you to have leave your uncle 's . who tell you about molly ? " 

 " Lady Harriet . she write about some wool " 

 " I know , I know . but you might have know she always exaggerate thing . not but what I have be almost wear out with nursing . perhaps , after all , it be a very good thing you have come , my dear ; and now you shall come down into the dining - room and have some lunch , and tell I all the Hyde Park Street news into my room , do not   go into yours yet molly be so sensitive to noise ! " 

 while Cynthia eat her lunch , Mrs. Gibson go on questioning . " and your aunt , how be her cold ? and Helen , quite strong again ? Margaretta as pretty as ever ? the boy be at Harrow , I suppose ? and my old favourite , Mr. Henderson ? " she could not manage to slip in this last inquiry naturally ; in spite of herself there be a change of tone , an accent of eagerness . Cynthia do not reply on the instant ; she pour herself out some water with great deliberation , and then say , 

 " my aunt be quite well ; Helen be as strong as she ever be , and Margaretta very pretty . the boy be at Harrow , and I conclude that Mr. Henderson be enjoy his usual health , for he be to dine at my uncle 's to - day . " 

 " take care , Cynthia . look how you be cut that gooseberry tart , " say Mrs. Gibson , with sharp annoyance ; not provoke by Cynthia 's present action , although it give excuse for a little vent of temper . " I can not   think how you could come off in this sudden kind of way ; I be sure it must have annoy your uncle and aunt . I daresay they will never ask you again . " 

 " on the contrary , I be to go back there as soon as ever I can be easy to leave Molly . " 

 " ' easy to leave Molly . ' now that really be nonsense , and rather uncomplimentary to I , I must say : nurse she as I have be do , daily , and almost nightly ; for I have be waken time out of number by Mr. Gibson get up , and go to see if she have have her medicine properly . " 

 " I be afraid she have be very ill ? " ask Cynthia . 

 " yes , she have , in one way ; but not in another . it be what I call more a tedious , than an interesting illness . there be no immediate danger , but she lie much in the same state from day to day . " 

 " I wish I have know ! " sigh Cynthia . " do you think I might go and see she now ? " 

 " I will go and prepare she . you will find she a good deal well than she have be . ah ; here be Mr. Gibson ! " he come into the dining - room , hear voice . Cynthia think that he look much old . 

 " you here ! " say he , come forward to shake hand . " why , how do you come ? " 

 " by the ' Umpire . ' I never know molly have be so ill , or I would have come directly . " her eye be full of tear . Mr. Gibson be touch ; he shake her hand again , and murmur , " you be a good girl , Cynthia . " 

 " she be hear one of dear Lady Harriet 's exaggerated account , " say Mrs. Gibson , " and come straight off . I tell she it be very foolish , for Molly be a great deal well now . " 

 " very foolish , " say Mr. Gibson , echo his wife 's word , but smile at Cynthia . " but sometimes one like foolish people for their folly , well than wise people for their wisdom . " 

 " I be afraid folly always annoy I , " say his wife . " however , Cynthia be here , and what be do , be do . " 

 " very true , my dear . and now I will run up and see my little girl , and tell she the good news . you would well follow I in a couple of minute . " this to Cynthia . 

 Molly 's delight at see she show itself first in a few happy tear ; and then in soft caress and inarticulate sound of love . once or twice she begin , " it be such a pleasure , " and there she stop short . but the eloquence of these five word sink deep into Cynthia 's heart . she have return just at the right time , when molly want the gentle fillip of the society of a fresh and yet a familiar person . Cynthia 's tact make her talkative or silent , gay or grave , as the vary humour of molly require . she listen , too , with the semblance , if not the reality , of unwearied interest , to Molly 's continual recurrence to all the time of distress and sorrow at Hamley Hall , and to the scene which have then so deeply impress themselves upon her susceptible nature . Cynthia instinctively know that the repetition of all these painful recollection would ease the oppressed memory , which refuse to dwell on anything but what have occur at a time of feverish disturbance of health . so she never interrupt molly , as Mrs. Gibson have so frequently do , with " you tell I all that before , my dear . let we talk of something else ; " or , " really I can not allow you to be always dwell on painful thought . try and be a little more cheerful . youth be gay . you be young , and therefore you ought to be gay . that be put in a famous form of speech ; I forget exactly what it be call . " 

 so Molly 's health and spirit improve rapidly after Cynthia 's return : and although she be likely to retain many of her invalid habit during the summer , she be able to take drive , and enjoy the fine weather ; it be only she as yet tender spirit that require a little management . all the Hollingford people forget that they have ever think of she except as a darling of the town ; and each in his or her way show kind interest in her father 's child . Miss Browning and Miss Phobe consider it quite a privilege that they be allow to see she a fortnight or three week before any one else ; Mrs. Goodenough , spectacle on nose , stir dainty mess in a silver saucepan for Molly 's benefit ; the tower send book , and force fruit , and new caricature , and strange and delicate poultry ; humble patient of " the doctor , " as Mr. Gibson be usually term , leave the early cauliflower they could grow in their cottage garden , with " their duty for Miss. " 

 and last of all , though strong in regard , most piteously eager in interest , come Squire Hamley himself . when she be at the bad , he ride over every day to hear the small detail , face even Mrs. Gibson   his abomination   if her husband be not at home , to ask and hear , and ask and hear , till the tear be unconsciously steal down his cheek . every resource of his heart , or his house , or his land be search and try , if it could bring a moment 's pleasure to she ; and whatever it might be that come from he , at she very bad time , it bring out a dim smile upon her face . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LV . 

 an ABSENT LOVER return . 
 

 Illustrationnd now it be late June ; and to Molly 's and her father 's extreme urgency in pushing , and Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick 's affectionate persistency in pull , Cynthia have yield , and have go back to finish her interrupted visit in London , but not before the bruit of her previous sudden return to nurse Molly have tell strongly in her favour in the fluctuate opinion of the little town . her affair with Mr. Preston be thrust into the shade ; while every one be speak of her warm heart . under the gleam of Molly 's recovery everything assume a rosy hue , as indeed become the time when actual rose be fully in bloom . 

 one morning Mrs. Gibson bring molly a great basket of flower , that have be send from the Hall . molly still breakfast in bed , but she have just come down , and be now well enough to arrange the flower for the drawing - room , and as she do so with these blossom , she make some comment on each . 

 " ah ! these white pink ! they be Mrs. Hamley 's favourite flower ; and so like she ! this little bit of sweet briar , it quite scent the room . it have prick my finger , but never mind . oh , mamma , look at this rose ! I forget its name , but it be very rare , and grow up in the sheltered corner of the wall , near the mulberry - tree . Roger buy the tree for his mother with his own money when he be quite a boy ; he show it I , and make I notice it . " 

 " I daresay it be Roger who get it now . you hear papa say he have see he yesterday . " 

 " no ! Roger ! Roger come home ! " say Molly , turn first red , then very white . 

 " yes . oh , I remember you have go to bed before papa come in , and he be call off early to tiresome Mrs. Beale . yes , Roger turn up at the Hall the day before yesterday . " 

 but molly lean back against her chair , too faint to do more at the flower for some time . she have be startle by the suddenness of the news . " Roger come home ! " 

 it happen that Mr. Gibson be unusually busy on this particular day , and he do not come home till late in the afternoon . but Molly keep her place in the drawing - room all the time , not even go to take her customary siesta , so anxious be she to hear everything about Roger 's return , which as yet appear to she almost incredible . but it be quite natural in reality ; the long monotony of her illness have make she lose all count of time . when Roger leave England , his idea be to coast round Africa on the eastern side until he reach the cape ; and thence to make what further journey or voyage might seem to he well in pursuit of his scientific object . to Cape Town all his letter have be address of late ; and there , two month before , he have receive the intelligence of Osborne 's death , as well as Cynthia 's hasty letter of relinquishment . he do not consider that he be do wrong in return to England immediately , and report himself to the gentleman who have send he out , with a full explanation of the circumstance relate to Osborne 's private marriage and sudden death . he offer , and they accept his offer , to go out again for any time that they might think equivalent to the five month he be yet engaged to they for . they be most of they gentleman of property , and see the full importance of prove the marriage of an eld son , and instal his child as the natural heir to a long - descend estate . this much information , but in a more condensed form , Mr. Gibson give to Molly , in a very few minute . she sit up on her sofa , look very pretty with the flush on her cheek , and the brightness in her eye . 

 " well ! " say she , when her father stop speak . 

 " well ! what ? " ask he , playfully . 

 " oh ! why , such a number of thing . I have   be wait all day to ask you all about everything . how be he look ? " 

 " if a young man of twenty - four ever do take to grow tall , I should say that he be tall . as it be , I suppose it be only that he look broad , strong more muscular . " 

 " oh ! be he change ? " ask Molly , a little disturb by this account . 

 " no , not change ; and yet not the same . he be as brown as a berry for one thing ; catch a little of the negro tinge , and a beard as fine and sweeping as my bay - mare 's tail . " 

 " a beard ! but go on , papa . do he talk as he use to do ? I should know his voice amongst ten thousand . " 

 " I do not   catch any Hottentot twang , if that be what you mean . nor do he say , ' Casar and Pompey berry much alike , ' specially Pompey , ' which be the only speciman of negro language I can remember just at this moment . " 

 " and which I never could see the wit of , " say Mrs. Gibson , who have come into the room after the conversation have begin ; and do not understand what it be aim at . molly fidget ; she want to go on with her question and keep her father to definite and matter - of - fact answer , and she know that when his wife chime into a conversation , Mr. Gibson be very apt to find out that he must go about some necessary piece of business . 

 " tell I , how be they all get on together ? " it be an inquiry which she do not make in general before Mrs. Gibson , for Molly and her father have tacitly agree to keep silence on what they know or have observe , respect the three who form the present family at the Hall . 

 " oh ! " say Mr. Gibson , " Roger be evidently put everything to right in his firm , quiet way . " 

 " ' thing to right . ' why , what be wrong ? " ask Mrs. Gibson quickly . " the Squire and the french daughter - in - law do not   get on well together , I suppose ? I be always so glad Cynthia act with the promptitude she do ; it would have be very awkward for she to have be mix up with all these complication . poor Roger ! to find himself supplant by a child when he come home ! " 

 " you be not in the room , my dear , when I be tell Molly of the reason for Roger 's return ; it be to put his brother 's child at once into his rightful and legal place . so now , when he find the work partly do to his hand , he be happy and gratify in proportion . " 

 " then he be not much affect by Cynthia 's break off her engagement ? "   Mrs. Gibson could afford to call it an " engagement " now .   " I never do give he credit for very deep feeling . " 

 " on the contrary , he feel it very acutely . he and I have a long talk about it , yesterday . " 

 both Molly and Mrs. Gibson would have like to have hear something more about this conversation ; but Mr. Gibson do not choose to go on with the subject . the only point which he disclose be that Roger have insist on his right to have a personal interview with Cynthia ; and , on hear that she be in London at present , have defer any further explanation or expostulation by letter , prefer to await her return . 

 molly go on with her question on other subject . " and Mrs. Osborne Hamley ? how be she ? " 

 " wonderfully brighten up by Roger 's presence . I do not   think I have   ever see her smile before ; but she give he the sweetest smile from time to time . they be evidently good friend ; and she lose her strange startled look when she speak to he . I suspect she have be quite aware of the Squire 's wish that she should return to France ; and have be hard put to it to decide whether to leave her child or not . the idea that she would have to make some such decision come upon she when she be completely shatter by grief and illness , and she have not   have any one to consult as to her duty until Roger come , upon whom she have evidently firm reliance . he tell I something of this himself . " 

 " you seem to have have quite a long conversation with he , papa ! " 

 " yes . I be go to see old Abraham , when the squire call to I over the hedge , as I be jog along . he tell I the news ; and there be no resist his invitation to come back and lunch with they . besides , one get a great deal of meaning out of Roger 's word ; it do not   take so very long a time to hear this much . " 

 " I should think he would come and call upon we soon , " say Mrs. Gibson to Molly , " and then we shall see how much we can manage to hear . " 

 " do you think he will , papa ? " say Molly , more doubtfully . she remember the last time he be in that very room , and the hope with which he leave it ; and she fancy that she could see trace of this thought in her father 's countenance at his wife 's speech . 

 " I can not   tell , my dear . until he be quite convinced of Cynthia 's intention , it can not   be very pleasant for he to come on mere visit of ceremony to the house in which he have know she ; but he be one who will always do what he think right , whether pleasant or not . " 

 Mrs. Gibson could hardly wait till her husband have finish his sentence before she testify against a part of it . 

 " ' convince of Cynthia 's intention ! ' I should think she have make they pretty clear ! what more do the man want ? " 

 " he be not as yet convince that the letter be not   write in a fit of temporary feeling . I have   tell he that this be true ; although I do not   feel it my place to explain to he the cause of that feeling . he believe that he can induce she to resume the former footing . I do not ; and I have   tell he so ; but , of course , he need the full conviction that she alone can give he . " 

 " Poor Cynthia ! my poor child ! " say Mrs. Gibson , plaintively . " what she have expose herself to by let herself be over - persuade by that man ! " 

 Mr. Gibson 's eye flash fire . but he keep his lip tight closed ; and only say , " ' that man , ' indeed ! " quite below his breath . 

 molly , too , have be damp by an expression or two in her father 's speech . " mere visit of ceremony ! " be it so , indeed ? a " mere visit of ceremony ! " whatever it be , the call be pay before many day be over . that he feel all the awkwardness of his position towards Mrs. Gibson that he be in reality suffer pain all the time be but too evident to Molly ; but , of course , Mrs. Gibson see nothing of this in her gratification at the proper respect pay to she by one whose name be in the newspaper that chronicle his return , and about whom already Lord Cumnor and the Towers family have be make inquiry . 

 Molly be sit in her pretty white invalid 's dress , half reading , half dream , for the June air be so clear and ambient , the garden so full of bloom , the tree so full of leaf , that read by the open window be only a pretence at such a time ; besides which , Mrs. Gibson continually interrupt she with remark about the pattern of her worsted work . it be after lunch orthodox calling time , when Maria usher in Mr. Roger Hamley . molly start up ; and then stand shyly and quietly in her place while a bronzed , bearded , grave man come into the room , in whom she at first have to seek for the merry boyish face she know by heart only two year ago . but month in the climate in which Roger have be travel age as much as year in more temperate region . and constant thought and anxiety while in daily peril of life deepen the line of character upon the face . moreover , the circumstance that have of late affect he personally be not of a nature to make he either buoyant or cheerful . but his voice be the same ; that be the first point of the old friend molly catch , when he address she in a tone far soft than he use in speak conventional politeness to her stepmother . 

 " I be so sorry to hear how ill you have be ! you be look but delicate ! " let his eye rest upon her face with affectionate examination . molly feel herself colour all over with the consciousness of his regard . to do something to put an end to it , she look up , and show he her beautiful soft grey eye , which he never remember to have notice before . she smile at he as she blush still deep , and say , 

 " oh ! I be quite strong now to what I be . it would be a shame to be ill when everything be in its full summer beauty . " 

 " I have hear how deeply we I be indebted to you my father can hardly praise you " 

 " please do not , " say Molly , the tear come into her eye in spite of herself . he seem to understand she at once ; he go on as if speak to Mrs. Gibson : " indeed , my little sister - in - law be never weary of talk about Monsieur le Docteur , as she call your husband ! " 

 " I have not have the pleasure of make Mrs. Osborne Hamley 's acquaintance yet , " say Mrs. Gibson , suddenly aware of a duty which might have be expect from she , " and I must beg you to apologize to she for my remissness . but Molly have be such a care and anxiety to I for , you know , I look upon she quite as my own child that I really have not go anywhere ; except to the tower , perhaps I should say , which be just like another home to I . and then I understand that Mrs. Osborne Hamley be think of return to France before long ? still it be very remiss . " 

 the little trap thus set for news of what might be go on in the Hamley family be quite successful . Roger answer she thus : 

 " I be sure Mrs. Osborne Hamley will be very glad to see any friend of the family , as soon as she be a little strong . I hope she will not go back to France at all . she be an orphan , and I trust we shall induce she to remain with my father . but at present nothing be arrange . " then , as if glad to have get over his " visit of ceremony , " he get up and take leave . when he be at the door he look back , have , as he think , a word more to say ; but he quite forget what it be , for he surprise Molly 's intent gaze , and sudden confusion at discovery , and go away as soon as he could . 

 " Poor Osborne be right ! " say he . " she have grow into delicate fragrant beauty , just as he say she would : or be it the character which have form her face ? now the next time I enter these door , it will be to learn my fate ! " 

 Mr. Gibson have tell his wife of Roger 's desire to have a personal interview with Cynthia , rather with a view to she repeat what he say to her daughter . he do not see any exact necessity for this , it be true ; but he think it might be advisable that she should know all the truth in which she be concern , and he tell his wife this . but she take the affair into her own management , and , although she apparently agree with Mr. Gibson , she never name the affair to Cynthia ; all that she say to she be 

 " your old admirer , Roger Hamley , have come home in a great hurry , in consequence of poor dear Osborne 's unexpected decease . he must have be rather surprised to find the widow and her little boy establish at the Hall . he come to call here the other day , and make himself really rather agreeable , although his manner be not improve by the society he have keep on his travel . still I prophesy he will be consider as a fashionable ' lion , ' and perhaps the very uncouthness which jar against my sense of refinement , may even become admire in a scientific traveller , who have be into more desert place , and eat more extraordinary food , than any other Englishman of the day . I suppose he have give up all chance of inherit the estate , for I hear he talk of return to Africa , and become a regular wanderer . your name be not mention , but I believe he inquire about you from Mr. Gibson . " 

 " there ! " say she to herself , as she fold up and direct her letter ; " that can not   disturb she , or make she uncomfortable . and it be all the truth too , or very near it . of course he will want to see she when she come back ; but by that time I do hope Mr. Henderson will have propose again , and that that affair will be all settle . " 

 but Cynthia return to Hollingford one Tuesday morning , and in answer to her mother 's anxious inquiry on the subject , would only say that Mr. Henderson have not offer again . " why should he ? she have refuse he once , and he do not know the reason of her refusal , at least one of the reason . she do not know if she should have take he if there have be no such person as Roger Hamley in the world . no ! Uncle and aunt Kirkpatrick have never hear anything about Roger 's offer , nor have her cousin . she have always declare her wish to keep it a secret , and she have not mention it to any one , whatever other people might have do . " underneath this light and careless vein there be other feeling ; but Mrs. Gibson be not one to probe beneath the surface . she have set her heart on Mr. Henderson 's marry Cynthia very early in their acquaintance ; and to know , firstly , that the same wish have enter into his head , and that Roger 's attachment to Cynthia , with its consequence , have be the obstacle ; and secondly , that Cynthia herself with all the opportunity of propinquity which she have lately have , have fail to provoke a repetition of the offer , be , as Mrs. Gibson say , " enough to provoke a saint . " all the rest of the day she allude to Cynthia as a disappointing and ungrateful daughter ; Molly could not make out why , and resent it for Cynthia , until the latter say , bitterly , " never mind , molly . Mamma be only vex because Mr. because I have not come back an engaged young lady . " 

 " yes ; and I be sure you might have do , there be the ingratitude ! I be not so unjust as to want you to do what you can not   do ! " say Mrs. Gibson , querulously . 

 " but where be the ingratitude , mamma ? I be very much tired , and perhaps that make I stupid ; but I can not see the ingratitude . " Cynthia speak very wearily , lean her head back on the sofa - cushion , as if she do not care to have an answer . 

 " why , do not   you see we be do all we can for you ; dress you well , and send you to London ; and when you might relieve we of the expense of all this , you do not . " 

 " no ! Cynthia , I will speak , " say Molly , all crimson with indignation , and push away Cynthia 's restrain hand . " I be sure papa do not feel , and do not mind , any expense he incur about his daughter . and I know quite well that he do not wish we to marry , unless " she falter and stop . 

 " unless what ? " say Mrs. Gibson , half - mocking . 

 " unless we love some one very dearly indeed , " say Molly , in a low , firm tone . 

 " well , after this tirade really rather indelicate , I must say I have do . I will neither help nor hinder any love - affair of you two young lady . in my day we be glad of the advice of our elder . " and she leave the room to put into fulfilment an idea which have just strike she : to write a confidential letter to Mrs. Kirkpatrick , give she her version of Cynthia 's " unfortunate entanglement , " and " delicate sense of honour , " and hint of her entire indifference to all the masculine portion of the world , Mr. Henderson be dexterously exclude from the category . 

 " oh , dear ! " say Molly , throw herself back in a chair , with a sigh of relief , as Mrs. Gibson leave the room ; " how cross I do get since I have   be ill ! but I could not   bear she to speak as if papa grudge you anything . " 

 " I be sure he do not , molly . you need not defend he on my account . but I be sorry mamma still look upon I as ' an encumbrance , ' as the advertisement in the Times always call we unfortunate child . but I have   be an encumbrance to she all my life . I be get very much into despair about everything , molly . I shall try my luck in Russia . I have   hear of a situation as english governess at Moscow , in a family own whole province of land , and serf by the hundred . I put off write my letter till I come home ; I shall be as much out of the way there as if I be married . oh , dear ! travel all night be not   good for the spirit . how be Mr. Preston ? " 

 " oh , he have take Cumnor Grange , three mile away , and he never come in to the Hollingford tea - party now . I see he once in the street , but it be a question which of we try the hard to get out of the other 's way . " 

 " you have   not say anything about Roger , yet . " 

 " no ; I do not   know if you would care to hear . he be very much older - looking ; quite a strong grow - up man . and papa say he be much graver . ask I any question , if you want to know , but I have only see he once . " 

 " I be in hope he would have leave the neighbourhood by this time . Mamma say he be go to travel again . " 

 " I can not   tell , " say Molly . " I suppose you know , " she continue , but hesitate a little before she speak , " that he wish to see you ? " 

 " no ! I never hear . I wish he would have be satisfied with my letter . it be as decide as I could make it . if I say I will not   see he , I wonder if his will or mine will be the strong ? " 

 " his , " say Molly . " but you must see he ; you owe it to he . he will never be satisfied without it . " 

 " suppose he talk I round into resume the engagement ? I should only break it off again . " 

 " surely you can not   be ' talk round ' if your mind be make up . but perhaps it be not really , Cynthia ? " ask she , with a little wistful anxiety betray itself in her face . 

 " it be quite make up . I be go to teach little russian girl ; and be never go to marry nobody . " 

 " you be not serious , Cynthia . and yet it be a very serious thing . " 

 but Cynthia go into one of her wild mood , and no more reason or sensible meaning be to be get out of she at the time . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LVI . 

 " OFF with the OLD love , and on with the NEW . " 
 

 the next morning see Mrs. Gibson in a much more contented frame of mind . she have write and post her letter , and the next thing be to keep Cynthia in what she call a reasonable state , or , in other word , to try and cajole she into docility . but it be so much labour lose . Cynthia have already receive a letter from Mr. Henderson before she come down to breakfast , a declaration of love , a proposal of marriage as clear as word could make it ; together with an intimation that , unable to wait for the slow delay of the post , he be go to follow she down to Hollingford , and would arrive at the same time that she have do herself on the previous day . Cynthia say nothing about this letter to any one . she come late into the breakfast - room , after Mr. and Mrs. Gibson have finish the actual business of the meal ; but her unpunctuality be quite account for by the fact that she have be travel all the night before . molly be not as yet strong enough to get up so early . Cynthia hardly speak , and do not touch her food . Mr. Gibson go about his daily business , and Cynthia and her mother be leave alone . 

 " my dear , " say Mrs. Gibson , " you be not eat your breakfast as you should do . I be afraid our meal seem very plain and homely to you after those in Hyde Park Street ? " 

 " no , " say Cynthia ; " I be not hungry , that be all . " 

 " if we be as rich as your uncle , I should feel it to be both a duty and a pleasure to keep an elegant table ; but limited mean be a sad clog to one 's wish . I do not   suppose that , work as he will , Mr. Gibson can earn more than he do at present ; while the capability of the law be boundless . Lord Chancellor ! Titles as well as fortune ! " 

 Cynthia be almost too much absorb in her own reflection to reply , but she do say , " hundred of briefless barrister . take the other side , mamma . " 

 " well ; but I have notice that many of these have private fortune . " 

 " perhaps . Mamma , I expect Mr. Henderson will come and call this morning . " 

 " oh , my precious child ! but how do you know ? my darling Cynthia , be I to congratulate you ? " 

 " no ! I suppose I must tell you . I have have a letter this morning from he , and he be come down by the ' Umpire ' to - day . " 

 " but he have offer ? he surely must mean to offer , at any rate ? " 

 Cynthia play with her teaspoon before she reply ; then she look up , like one startle from a dream , and catch the echo of her mother 's question . 

 " offer ! yes , I suppose he have . " 

 " and you accept he ? say ' yes , ' Cynthia , and make I happy ! " 

 " I shall not   say ' yes ' to make any one happy except myself , and the russian scheme have great charm for I . " she say this to plague her mother , and lessen Mrs. Gibson 's exuberance of joy , it must be confess ; for her mind be pretty well make up . but it do not affect Mrs. Gibson , who affix even less truth to it than there really be . the idea of a residence in a new , strange country , among new , strange people , be not without allurement to Cynthia . 

 " you always look nice , dear ; but do not   you think you have well put on that pretty lilac silk ? " 

 " I shall not vary a thread or a shred from what I have get on now . " 

 " you dear , wilful creature ! you know you always look lovely in whatever you put on . " so , kiss her daughter , Mrs. Gibson leave the room , intent on the lunch which should impress Mr. Henderson at once with an idea of family refinement . 

 Cynthia go upstairs to Molly ; she be inclined to tell she about Mr. Henderson , but she find it impossible to introduce the subject naturally , so she leave it to time to reveal the future as gradually as it might . molly be tired with a bad night ; and her father , in his fly visit to his darling before go out , have advise she to stay upstairs for the great part of the morning , and to keep quiet in her own room till after her early dinner , so Time have not a fair chance of tell she what he have in store in his budget . Mrs. Gibson send an apology to Molly for not pay she her usual morning visit , and tell Cynthia to give Mr. Henderson 's probable come as a reason for her occupation downstairs . but Cynthia do no such thing . she kiss molly , and sate silently by she , hold her hand ; till at length she jump up , and say , " you shall be leave alone now , little one . I want you to be very well and very bright this afternoon : so rest now . " and Cynthia leave she , and go to her own room , lock the door , and begin to think . 

 some one be think about she at the same time , and it be not Mr. Henderson . Roger have hear from Mr. Gibson that Cynthia have come home , and he be resolve to go to she at once , and have one strong , manly attempt to overcome the obstacle whatever they might be and of their nature he be not fully aware that she have conjure up against the continuance of their relation to each other . he leave his father he leave they all and go off into the wood , to be alone until the time come when he might mount his horse and ride over to put his fate to the touch . he be as careful as ever not to interfere with the morning hour that be taboo to he of old ; but wait be very hard work when he know that she be so near , and the time so near at hand . 

 yet he ride slowly , compel himself to quietness and patience when he be once really on the way to she . 

 " Mrs. Gibson at home ? Miss Kirkpatrick ? " he ask of the servant , Maria , who open the door . she be confused , but he do not notice it . 

 " I think so I be not sure ! will you walk up into the drawing - room , sir ? Miss Gibson be there , I know . " 

 so he go upstairs , all his nerve on the strain for the come interview with Cynthia . it be either a relief or a disappointment , he be not sure which , to find only molly in the room : molly , half lie on the couch in the bow - window which command the garden ; drape in soft white drapery , very white herself , and a laced half - handkerchief tie over her head to save she from any ill effect of the air that blow in through the open window . he be so ready to speak to Cynthia that he hardly know what to say to any one else . 

 " I be afraid you be not so well , " he say to Molly , who sit up to receive he , and who suddenly begin to tremble with emotion . 

 " I be a little tired , that be all , " say she ; and then she be quite silent , hop that he might go , and yet somehow wish he to stay . but he take a chair and place it near she , opposite to the window . he think that surely Maria would tell Miss Kirkpatrick that she be want , and that at any moment he might hear her light quick footstep on the stair . he feel he ought to talk , but he could not think of anything to say . the pink flush come out on Molly 's cheek ; once or twice she be on the point of speak , but again she think well of it ; and the pause between their faint disjoint remark become long and long . suddenly , in one of these pause , the merry murmur of distant happy voice in the garden come near and nearer ; molly look more and more uneasy and flushed , and in spite of herself keep watch Roger 's face . he could see over she into the garden . a sudden deep colour overspread he , as if his heart have send its blood out course at full gallop . Cynthia and Mr. Henderson have come in sight ; he eagerly talk to she as he bend forward to look into her face ; she , her look half avert in pretty shyness , be evidently coquet about some flower , which she either would not give , or would not take . just then , for the lover have emerge from the shrubbery into comparatively public life , Maria be see approach ; apparently she have feminine tact enough to induce Cynthia to leave her present admirer , and to go a few step to meet she to receive the whisper message that Mr. Roger Hamley be there , and wish to speak to she . Roger could see her startled gesture ; she turn back to say something to Mr. Henderson before come towards the house . now Roger speak to Molly speak hurriedly , speak hoarsely . 

  Cynthia 's Last Lover . 
 Cynthia 's Last Lover . 
 click to enlarge 
 " Molly , tell I ! be it too late for I to speak to Cynthia ? I come on purpose . who be that man ? " 

 " Mr. Henderson . he only come to - day but now he be her accept lover . oh , Roger , forgive I the pain ! " 

 " tell she I have be , and be go . send out word to she . do not   let she be interrupt . " 

 and Roger run downstairs at full speed , and Molly hear the passionate clang of the outer door . he have hardly leave the house before Cynthia enter the room , pale and resolute . 

 " where be he ? " she say , look around , as if he might yet be hide . 

 " Gone ! " say Molly , very faint . 

 " Gone . oh , what a relief ! it seem to be my fate never to be off with the old lover before I be on with the new , and yet I do write as decidedly as I could . why , Molly , what be the matter ? " for now molly have faint away utterly . Cynthia fly to the bell , summon Maria , water , salt , wine , anything ; and as soon as molly , gasping and miserable , become conscious again , she write a little pencil - note to Mr. Henderson , bid he return to the " George , " whence he have come in the morning , and say that if he obey she at once , he might be allow to call again in the evening , otherwise she would not see he till the next day . this she send down by Maria , and the unlucky man never believe but that it be Miss Gibson 's sudden indisposition in the first instance that have deprive he of his charmer 's company . he comfort himself for the long solitary afternoon by write to tell all his friend of his happiness , and amongst they uncle and aunt Kirkpatrick , who receive his letter by the same post as that discreet epistle of Mrs. Gibson 's , which she have carefully arrange to reveal as much as she wish , and no more . 

 " be he very terrible ? " ask Cynthia , as she sate with Molly in the stillness of Mrs. Gibson 's dressing - room . 

 " oh , Cynthia , it be such pain to see he , he suffer so ! " 

 " I do not   like people of deep feeling , " say Cynthia , pouting . " they do not   suit I . why could not   he let I go without this fuss ? I be not worth his care for ! " 

 " you have the happy gift of make people love you . remember Mr. Preston , he too would not   give up hope . " 

 " now I will not   have you class Roger Hamley and Mr. Preston together in the same sentence . one be as much too bad for I as the other be too good . now I hope that man in the garden be the juste milieu , I be that myself , for I do not   think I be vicious , and I know I be not virtuous . " 

 " do you really like he enough to marry he ? " ask molly earnestly . " do think , Cynthia . it will not   do to go on throw your lover off ; you give pain that I be sure you do not mean to do , that you can not understand . " 

 " perhaps I can not . I be not offend . I never set up for what I be not , and I know I be not constant . I have   tell Mr. Henderson so " she stop , blush and smile at the recollection . 

 " you have ! and what do he say ? " 

 " that he like I just as I be ; so you see he be fairly warn . only he be a little afraid , I suppose , for he want I to be marry very soon , almost directly , in fact . but I do not   know if I shall give way , you hardly see he , molly , but he be come again to - night , and mind , I will never forgive you if you do not   think he very charming . I believe I care for he when he offer all those month ago , but I try to think I do not ; only sometimes I really be so unhappy , I think I must put an iron band round my heart to keep it from breaking , like the Faithful John of the german story , do you remember , molly ? how when his master come to his crown and his fortune and his lady - love , after innumerable trial and disgrace , and be drive away from the church where he have be marry in a coach and six , with Faithful John behind , the happy couple hear three great crack in succession , and on inquire , they be the iron - band round his heart , that Faithful John have wear all during the time of his master 's tribulation , to keep it from break . " 

 in the evening Mr. Henderson come . molly have be very curious to see he ; and when she see he she be not sure whether she like he or not . he be handsome , without be conceite ; gentlemanly , without be foolishly fine . he talk easily , and never say a silly thing . he be perfectly well - appoint , yet never seem to have give a thought to his dress . he be good - temper and kind ; not without some of the cheerful flippancy of repartee which belong to his age and profession , and which his age and profession be apt to take for wit . but he want something in Molly 's eye at any rate , in this first interview , and in her heart of heart she think he rather commonplace . but of course she say nothing of this to Cynthia , who be evidently as happy as she could be . Mrs. Gibson , too , be in the seventh heaven of ecstasy , and speak but little ; but what she do say , express the high sentiment in the fine language . Mr. Gibson be not with they for long , but while he be there he be evidently study the unconscious Mr. Henderson with his dark penetrate eye . Mr. Henderson behave exactly as he ought to have do to everybody : respectful to Mr. Gibson , deferential to Mrs. Gibson , friendly to Molly , devote to Cynthia . 

 the next time Mr. Gibson find Molly alone , he begin , " well ! and how do you like the new relation that be to be ? " 

 " it be difficult to say . I think he be very nice in all his bit , but rather dull on the whole . " 

 " I think he perfection , " say Mr. Gibson , to Molly 's surprise ; but in an instant afterwards she see that he have be speak ironically . he go on . " I do not   wonder she prefer he to Roger Hamley . such scent ! such glove ! and then his hair and his cravat ! " 

 " now , papa , you be not fair . he be a great deal more than that . one could see that he have very good feeling ; and he be very handsome , and very much attach to she . " 

 " so be Roger . however , I must confess I shall be only too glad to have she marry . she be a girl who will always have some love - affair on hand , and will always be apt to slip through a man 's finger if he do not   look sharp ; as I be say to Roger " 

 " you have see he , then , since he be here ? " 

 " met he in the street . " 

 " how be he ? " 

 " I do not   suppose he have be go through the pleasant thing in the world ; but he will get over it before long . he speak with sense and resignation , and do not   say much about it ; but one could see that he be feel it pretty sharply . he be have three month to think it over , remember . the squire , I should guess , be show more indignation . he be boil over , that any one should reject his son ! the enormity of the sin never seem to have be apparent to he till now , when he see how Roger be affect by it . indeed , with the exception of myself , I do not   know one reasonable father ; eh , Molly ? " 

 whatever else Mr. Henderson might be , he be an impatient lover ; he want to marry Cynthia directly next week the week after ; at any rate before the long vacation , so that they could go abroad at once . Trousseaux , and preliminary ceremony , he give to the wind . Mr. Gibson , generous as usual , call Cynthia aside a morning or two after her engagement , and put a hundred - pound note into her hand . 

 " there ! that be to pay your expense to Russia and back . I hope you will find your pupil obedient . " 

 to his surprise , and rather to his discomfiture , Cynthia throw her arm round his neck and kiss he . 

 " you be the kind person I know , " say she ; " and I do not   know how to thank you in word . " 

 " if you tumble my shirt - collar again in that way , I will charge you for the washing . just now , too , when I be try so hard to be trim and elegant , like your Mr. Henderson . " 

 " but you do like he , do not   you ? " say Cynthia , pleadingly . " he do so like you . " 

 " of course . we be all angel just now , and you be an arch - angel . I hope he will wear as well as Roger . " 

 Cynthia look grave . " that be a very silly affair , " she say . " we be two as unsuitable people " 

 " it have end , and that be enough . besides , I have   no more time to waste ; and there be your smart young man come here in all haste . " 

 Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick send all manner of congratulation ; and Mrs. Gibson , in a private letter , assure Mrs. Kirkpatrick that her ill - time confidence about Roger should be consider as quite private . for as soon as Mr. Henderson have make his appearance in Hollingford , she have write a second letter , entreat they not to allude to anything she might have say in her first ; which she say be write in such excitement on discover the real state of her daughter 's affection , that she have hardly know what she have say , and have exaggerate some thing , and misunderstood other : all that she do know now be , that Mr. Henderson have just propose to Cynthia , and be accept , and that they be as happy as the day be long , and   " excuse the vanity of a mother , "   make a most lovely couple . so Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick write back an equally agreeable letter , praise Mr. Henderson , admire Cynthia , and generally congratulatory ; insist into the bargain that the marriage should take place from their house in Hyde Park Street , and that Mr. and Mrs. Gibson and Molly should all come up and pay they a visit . there be a little postscript at the end . " surely you do not mean the famous traveller , Hamley , about whose discovery all our scientific man be so much excited . you speak of he as a young Hamley , who go to Africa . answer this question , pray , for Helen be most anxious to know . " this P.S. be in Helen 's handwriting . in her exultation at the general success of everything , and desire for sympathy , Mrs. Gibson read part of this letter to Molly ; the postscript among the rest . it make a deep impression on molly than even the propose kindness of the visit to London . 

 there be some family consultation ; but the end of they all be that the Kirkpatrick invitation be accept . there be many small reason for this , which be openly acknowledge ; but there be one general and unspoken wish to have the ceremony perform out of the immediate neighbourhood of the two man whom Cynthia have previously reject ; that be the word now to be apply to her treatment of they . so Molly be order and enjoin and entreat to become strong as soon as possible , in order that her health might not prevent she attend the marriage ; Mr. Gibson himself , though he think it his duty to damp the exultant anticipation of his wife and her daughter , be not at all averse to the prospect of go to London , and see half - a - dozen old friend , and many scientific exhibition , independently of the very fair amount of liking which he have for his host , Mr. Kirkpatrick himself . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LVII . 

 BRIDAL visit and ADIEUX . 
 

 the whole town of Hollingford come to congratulate and inquire into particular . some indeed Mrs. Goodenough at the head of this class of malcontent think that they be defraud of their right to a fine show by Cynthia 's be marry in London . even Lady Cumnor be move into action . she , who have hardly ever pay call " out of her own sphere , " who have only once be to see " Clare " in her own house she come to congratulate after her fashion . Maria have only just time to run up into the drawing - room one morning , and say , 

 " please , ma'am , the great carriage from the Towers be come up to the gate , and my lady the Countess be sit inside . " it be but eleven o'clock , and Mrs. Gibson would have be indignant at any commoner who have venture to call at such an untimely hour , but in the case of the peerage the rule of domestic morality be relax . 

 the family ' stand at arm , " as it be , till Lady Cumnor appear in the drawing - room ; and then she have to be settle in the good chair , and the light adjust before anything like conversation begin . she be the first to speak ; and Lady Harriet , who have begin a few word to Molly , drop into silence . 

 " I have be take Mary Lady Cuxhaven to the railway station on this new line between Birmingham and London , and I think I would come on here , and offer you my congratulation . Clare , which be the young lady ? " put up her glass , and look at Cynthia and Molly , who be dress pretty much alike . " I do not think it would be amiss to give you a little advice , my dear , " say she , when Cynthia have be properly point out to she as bride elect . " I have hear a good deal about you ; and I be only too glad , for your mother 's sake , your mother be a very worthy woman , and do her duty very well while she be in our family I be truly rejoice , I say , to hear that you be go to make so creditable a marriage . I hope it will efface your former error of conduct which , we will hope , be but trivial in reality and that you will live to be a comfort to your mother , for whom both Lord Cumnor and I entertain a very sincere regard . but you must conduct yourself with discretion in whatever state of life it please God to place you , whether married or single . you must reverence your husband , and conform to his opinion in all thing . look up to he as your head , and do nothing without consult he . " it be as well that Lord Cumnor be not amongst the audience ; or he might have compare precept with practice . " keep strict account ; and remember your station in life . I understand that Mr. " look about for some help as to the name she have forget " Anderson Henderson be in the law . although there be a general prejudice against attorney , I have know of two or three who be very respectable man ; and I be sure Mr. Henderson be one , or your good mother and our old friend Gibson would not have sanction the engagement . " 

 " he be a barrister , " put in Cynthia , unable to restrain herself any long . " barrister - at - law . " 

 " ah , yes . attorney - at - law . barrister - at - law . I understand without your speaking so loud , my dear . what be I go to say before you interrupt I ? when you have be a little in society you will find that it be reckon bad manner to interrupt . I have a great deal more to say to you , and you have put it all out of my head . there be something else your father want I to ask what be it , Harriet ? " 

 " I suppose you mean about Mr. Hamley ? " 

 " oh , yes ! we be intend to have the house full of Lord Hollingford 's friend next month , and Lord Cumnor be particularly anxious to secure Mr. Hamley . " 

 " the squire ? " ask Mrs. Gibson in some surprise . Lady Cumnor bow slightly , as much as to say , " if you do not interrupt I I should explain . " 

 " the famous traveller the scientific Mr. Hamley , I mean . I imagine he be son to the squire . Lord Hollingford know he well ; but when we ask he before , he decline come , and assign no reason . " 

 have Roger indeed be ask to the Towers and decline ? Mrs. Gibson could not understand it . Lady Cumnor go on 

 " now this time we be particularly anxious to secure he , and my son Lord Hollingford will not return to England until the very week before the Duke of Atherstone be come to we . I believe Mr. Gibson be very intimate with Mr. Hamley ; do you think he could induce he to favour we with his company ? " 

 and this from the proud Lady Cumnor ; and the object of it Roger Hamley , whom she have all but turn out of her drawing - room two year ago for call at an untimely hour ; and whom Cynthia have turn out of her heart . Mrs. Gibson be surprised , and could only murmur out that she be sure Mr. Gibson would do all that her ladyship wish . 

 " thank you . you know I well enough to be aware that I be not the person , nor be the tower the house , to go about solicit guest . but in this instance I bend my head ; high rank should always be the first to honour those who have distinguish themselves by art or science . " 

 " besides , mamma , " say Lady Harriet , " papa be say that the Hamleys have be on their land since before the Conquest ; while we only come into the county a century ago ; and there be a tale that the first Cumnor begin his fortune through sell tobacco in King James 's reign . " 

 if Lady Cumnor do not exactly shift her trumpet and take snuff there on the spot , she behave in an equivalent manner . she begin a low - toned but nevertheless authoritative conversation with Clare about the detail of the wedding , which last until she think it fit to go , when she abruptly pluck Lady Harriet up , and carry she off in the very midst of a description she be give to Cynthia about the delight of Spa , which be to be one of the resting - place of the newly - married couple on their wedding - tour . 

 nevertheless she prepare a handsome present for the bride : a Bible and a Prayer - book bind in velvet with silver - clasp ; and also a collection of household account - book , at the beginning of which Lady Cumnor write down with her own hand the proper weekly allowance of bread , butter , egg , meat , and grocery per head , with the London price of the article , so that the most inexperienced housekeeper might ascertain whether her expenditure exceed her mean , as she express herself in the note which she send with the handsome , dull present . 

 " if you be drive into Hollingford , Harriet , perhaps you will take these book to Miss Kirkpatrick , " say Lady Cumnor , after she have seal her note with all the straightness and correctness befit a countess of her immaculate character . " I understand they be all go up to London to - morrow for this wedding , in spite of what I say to Clare of the duty of be marry in one 's own parish - church . she tell I at the time that she entirely agree with I , but that her husband have such a strong wish for a visit to London , that she do not know how she could oppose he consistently with her wifely duty . I advise she to repeat to he my reason for think that they would be ill - advise to have the marriage in town ; but I be afraid she have be overrule . that be her one great fault when she live with we ; she be always so yielding , and never know how to say ' no . ' " 

 " Mamma ! " say Lady Harriet , with a little sly coax in her tone . " do you think you would have be so fond of she , if she have oppose you , and say ' no , ' when you wish she to say ' yes ? ' " 

 " to be sure I should , my dear . I like everybody to have an opinion of their own ; only when my opinion be base on thought and experience , which few people have have equal opportunity of acquire , I think it be but proper deference in other to allow themselves to be convince . in fact , I think it be only obstinacy which keep they from acknowledge that they be . I be not a despot , I hope ? " she ask , with some anxiety . 

 " if you be , dear mamma , " say Lady Harriet , kiss the stern uplifted face very fondly , " I like a despotism well than a republic , and I must be very despotic over my pony , for it be already get very late for my drive round by Ash - holt . " 

 but when she arrive at the gibson ' , she be detain so long there by the state of the family , that she have to give up she go to Ash - holt . 

 Molly be sit in the drawing - room pale and trembling , and keep herself quiet only by a strong effort . she be the only person there when Lady Harriet enter : the room be all in disorder , strew with present and paper , and pasteboard box , and half - display article of finery . 

 " you look like Marius sit amidst the ruin of Carthage , my dear ! what be the matter ? why have you get on that wobegone face ? this marriage be not   break off , be it ? though nothing would surprise I where the beautiful Cynthia be concern . " 

 " oh , no ! that be all right . but I have catch a fresh cold , and papa say he think I have well not go to the wedding . " 

 " poor little one ! and it be the first visit to London too ! " 

 " yes . but what I most care for be the not be with Cynthia to the last ; and then , papa " she stop , for she could hardly go on without open crying , and she do not want to do that . then she clear her voice . " Papa , " she continue , " have so look forward to this holiday , and see and , and go oh ! I can not   tell you where ; but he have quite a list of people and sight to be see , and now he say he should not be comfortable to leave I all alone for more than three day , two for travel , and one for the wedding . " just then Mrs. Gibson come in , ruffle too after her fashion , though the presence of Lady Harriet be wonderfully smooth . 

 " my dear Lady Harriet how kind of you ! ah , yes , I see this poor unfortunate child have be tell you of her ill - luck ; just when everything be go on so beautifully ; I be sure it be that open window at your back , molly , you know you would persist that it could do you no harm , and now you see the mischief ! I be sure I shall not   be able to enjoy myself and at my only child 's wedding too without you ; for I can not   think of leave you without Maria . I would rather sacrifice anything myself than think of you , uncared for , and dismal at home . " 

 " I be sure molly be as sorry as any one , " say Lady Harriet . 

 " no . I do not   think she be , " say Mrs. Gibson , with happy disregard of the chronology of event , " or she would not have sate with she back to an open window the day before yesterday , when I tell she not . but it can not   be help now . Papa too but it be my duty to make the good of everything , and look at the cheerful side of life . I wish I could persuade she to do the same "   turn and address Lady Harriet . " but , you see , it be a great mortification to a girl of her age to lose her first visit to London . " 

 " it be not that , " begin molly ; but Lady Harriet make she a little sign to be silent while she herself speak . 

 " now , Clare ! you and I can manage it all , I think , if you will but help I in a plan I have   get in my head . Mr. Gibson shall stay as long as ever he can in London ; and molly shall be well care for , and have some change of air and scene too , which be really what she need as much as anything , in my poor opinion . I can not   spirit she to the wedding and give she a sight of London ; but I can carry she off to the tower , and nurse she myself ; and send daily bulletin up to London , so that Mr. Gibson may feel quite at ease , and stay with you as long as you like . what do you say to it , Clare ? " 

 " oh , I could not go , " say molly ; " I should only be a trouble to everybody . " 

 " nobody ask you for your opinion , little one . if we wise elder decide that you be to go , you must submit in silence . " 

 meanwhile Mrs. Gibson be rapidly balance advantage and disadvantage . amongst the latter , jealousy come in predominant . amongst the former , it would sound well ; Maria could then accompany Cynthia and herself as " their maid ; " Mr. Gibson would stay long with she , and it be always desirable to have a man at her beck and call in such a place as London ; besides that , this identical man be gentlemanly and good - look , and a favourite with her prosperous brother - in - law . the " aye " have it . 

 " what a charming plan ! I can not think of anything kind or pleasanter for this poor darling . only what will Lady Cumnor say ? I be modest for my family as much as for myself . she will not   " 

 " you know mamma 's sense of hospitality be never more gratified than when the house be quite full ; and papa be just like she . besides , she be fond of you , and grateful to our good Mr. Gibson , and will be fond of you , little one , when she know you as I do . " 

 Molly 's heart sink within she at the prospect . except on the one evening of her father 's wedding - day , she have never even see the outside of the tower since that unlucky day in her childhood when she have fall asleep on Clare 's bed . she have a dread of the countess , a dislike to the house ; only it seem as if it be a solution to the problem of what to do with she , which have be perplex every one all morning , and so evidently that it have cause she much distress . she keep silence , though her lip quiver from time to time . oh , if Miss Brownings have not choose this very time of all other to pay their monthly visit to Miss Hornblower ! if she could only have go there , and live with they in their quaint , quiet , primitive way , instead of have to listen , without remonstrance , to hear plan discuss about she , as if she be an inanimate chattel ! 

 " she shall have the south pink room , open out of mine by one door , you remember ; and the dressing - room shall be make into a cosy little sitting - room for she , in case she like to be by herself . parke shall attend upon she , and I be sure Mr. Gibson must know Parkes 's power as a nurse by this time . we shall have all manner of agreeable people in the house to amuse her downstair ; and when she have get rid of this access of cold , I will drive she out every day , and write daily bulletin , as I say . pray tell Mr. Gibson all that , and let it be consider as settle . I will come for she in the close carriage to - morrow , at eleven . and now may I see the lovely bride - elect , and give her mamma 's present , and my own good wish ? " 

 so Cynthia come in , and demurely receive the very proper present , and the equally correct congratulation , without testify any very great delight or gratitude at either ; for she be quite quick enough to detect there be no great afflux of affection accompany either . but when she hear her mother quickly recapitulate all the detail of the plan for Molly , Cynthia 's eye do sparkle with gladness ; and almost to Lady Harriet 's surprise , she thank she as if she have confer a personal favour upon she , Cynthia . Lady Harriet see , too , that in a very quiet way , she have take Molly 's hand , and be hold it all the time , as if loth to think of their approach separation somehow , she and Lady Harriet be bring near together by this little action than they have ever be before . 

 if Molly have hop that her father might have raise some obstacle to the project , she be disappoint . but , indeed , she be satisfied when she perceive how he seem to feel that , by place she under the care of Lady Harriet and Parkes , he should be relieve from anxiety ; and how he speak of this change of air and scene as be the very thing he have be wish to secure for she ; country air , and absence of excitement as this would be ; for the only other place where he could have secure she these advantage , and at the same time send she as an invalid , be to Hamley Hall ; and he dread the association there with the beginning of her present illness . 

 so Molly be drive off in state the next day , leave her own home all in confusion with the assemblage of box and trunk in the hall , and all the other symptom of the approach departure of the family for London and the wedding . all the morning Cynthia have be with she in her room , attend to the arrangement of Molly 's clothe , instruct she what to wear with what , and rejoice over the pretty smartness , which , have be prepare for she as bridesmaid , be now to serve as adornment for her visit to the Towers . both Molly and Cynthia speak about dress as if it be the very object of their life ; for each dread the introduction of more serious subject ; Cynthia more for Molly than herself . only when the carriage be announce , and Molly be prepare to go downstairs , Cynthia say , 

 " I be not go to thank you , molly , or to tell you how I love you . " 

 " do not , " say Molly , " I can not   bear it . " 

 " only you know you be to be my first visitor , and if you wear brown ribbon to a green gown , I will turn you out of the house ! " so they part . Mr. Gibson be there in the hall to hand Molly in . he have ride hard ; and be now give she two or three last injunction as to her health . 

 " think of we on Thursday , " say he . " I declare I do not   know which of her three lover she may not   summon at the very last moment to act the part of bridegroom . I be determined to be surprised at nothing ; and will give she away with a good grace to whoever come . " 

 they drive away , and until they be out of sight of the house , Molly have enough to do to keep return the kiss of the hand waft to she by her stepmother out of the drawing - room window , while at the same time her eye be fix on a white handkerchief flutter out of the attic from which she herself have watch Roger 's departure nearly two year before . what change time have bring ! 

 when molly arrive at the tower she be convoy into Lady Cumnor 's presence by Lady Harriet . it be a mark of respect to the lady of the house , which the latter know that her mother would expect ; but she be anxious to get it over , and take Molly up into the room which she have be so busy arrange for she . Lady Cumnor be , however , very kind , if not positively gracious . 

 " you be Lady Harriet 's visitor , my dear , " say she , " and I hope she will take good care of you . if not , come and complain of she to I . " it be as near an approach to a joke as Lady Cumnor ever perpetrate , and from it Lady Harriet know that her mother be please by Molly 's manner and appearance . 

 " now , here you be in your own kingdom ; and into this room I shall not   venture to come without express permission . here be the last new Quarterly , and the last new novel , and the last new essay . now , my dear , you need not   come down again to - day unless you like it . parke shall bring you everything and anything you want . you must get strong as fast as you can , for all sort of great and famous people be come to - morrow and the next day , and I think you will like to see they . suppose for to - day you only come down to lunch , and if you like it , in the evening . dinner be such a wearily long meal , if one be not   strong ; and you would not   miss much , for there be only my cousin Charles in the house now , and he be the personification of sensible silence . " 

 molly be only too glad to allow Lady Harriet to decide everything for she . it have begin to rain , and be altogether a gloomy day for August ; and there be a small fire of scented wood burn cheerfully in the sitting - room appropriate to she . high up , it command a wide and pleasant view over the park , and from it could be see the spire of Hollingford Church , which give molly a pleasant idea of neighbourhood to home . she be leave alone , lie on the sofa book near she , wood crackling and blazing , waft of wind bring the beat rain against the window , and so enhance the sense of indoor comfort by the outdoor contrast . Parkes be unpack for she . Lady Harriet have introduce Parkes to Molly by say , " now , Molly , this be Mrs. Parkes , the only person I be ever afraid of . she scold I if I dirty myself with my paint , just as if I be a little child ; and she make I go to bed when I want to sit up , " Parkes be smile grimly all the time ; ' so to get rid of her tyranny I give she you as victim . parke , rule over Miss Gibson with a rod of iron ; make she eat and drink , and rest and sleep , and dress as you think wisest and good . " 

 Parkes have begin her reign by put molly on the sofa , and say , " if you will give I your key , Miss , I will unpack your thing , and let you know when it be time for I to arrange your hair , preparatory to luncheon . " for if Lady Harriet use familiar colloquialism from time to time , she certainly have not learn it from Parkes , who pique herself on the correctness of her language . 

 when molly go down to lunch she find " cousin Charles , " with his aunt , Lady Cumnor . he be a certain Sir Charles Morton , the son of Lady Cumnor 's only sister : a plain , sandy - haired man of thirty - five or so ; immensely rich , very sensible , awkward , and reserve . he have have a chronic attachment , of many year ' standing , to his cousin , Lady Harriet , who do not care for he in the least , although it be the marriage very earnestly desire for she by her mother . Lady Harriet be , however , on friendly term with he , order he about , and tell he what to do , and what to leave undo , without have even a doubt as to the willingness of his obedience . she have give he his cue about Molly . 

 " now , Charles , the girl want to be interested and amuse without have to take any trouble for herself ; she be too delicate to be very active either in mind or body . just look after she when the house get full , and place she where she can hear and see everything and everybody , without any fuss and responsibility . " 

 so Sir Charles begin this day at luncheon by take molly under his quiet protection . he do not say much to she ; but what he do say be thoroughly friendly and sympathetic ; and molly begin , as he and Lady Harriet intend that she should , to have a kind of pleasant reliance upon he . then in the evening while the rest of the family be at dinner after Molly 's tea and hour of quiet repose , Parkes come and dress she in some of the new clothe prepare for the Kirkpatrick visit , and do her hair in some new and pretty way , so that when molly look at herself in the cheval - glass , she scarcely know the elegant reflection to be that of herself . she be fetch down by Lady Harriet into the great long formidable drawing - room , which as an interminable place of pacing , have haunt her dream ever since her childhood . at the further end sit Lady Cumnor at her tapestry work ; the light of fire and candle seem all concentrate on that one bright part where presently Lady Harriet make tea , and Lord Cumnor go to sleep , and Sir Charles read passage aloud from the Edinburgh Review to the three lady at their work . 

 when molly go to bed she be constrain to admit that stay at the tower as a visitor be rather pleasant than otherwise ; and she try to reconcile old impression with new one , until she fall asleep . there be another comparatively quiet day before the expect guest begin to arrive in the evening . Lady Harriet take molly a drive in her little pony - carriage ; and for the first time for many week molly begin to feel the delightful spring of return health ; the dance of youthful spirit in the fresh air clear by the previous day 's rain . 

 

 

 CHAPTER LVIII . 

 revive hope and brightening prospect . 
 

 " if you can without fatigue , dear , do come down to dinner to - day ; you will then see the people one by one as they appear , instead of have to encounter a crowd of stranger . hollingford will be here too . I hope you will find it pleasant . " 

 so molly make her appearance at dinner that day ; and get to know , by sight at least , some of the most distinguished of the visitor at the tower . the next day be Thursday , Cynthia 's wedding - day ; bright and fine in the country , whatever it might be in London . and there be several letter from the home - people await molly when she come downstairs to the late breakfast . for , every day , every hour , she be gain strength and health , and she be unwilling to continue her invalid habit any long than be necessary . she look so much well that Sir Charles notice it to Lady Harriet ; and several of the visitor speak of she this morning as a very pretty , lady - like , and graceful girl . this be Thursday ; on Friday , as Lady Harriet have tell she , some visitor from the more immediate neighbourhood be expect to stay over the Sunday ; but she have not mention their name , and when molly go down into the drawing - room before dinner , she be almost startle by perceive Roger Hamley in the centre of a group of gentleman , who be all talk together eagerly , and , as it seem to she , make he the object of their attention . he make a hitch in his conversation , lose the precise meaning of a question address to he , answer it rather hastily , and make his way to where Molly be sit , a little behind Lady Harriet . he have hear that she be stay at the Towers , but he be almost as much surprise by her , as she be by his unexpected appearance , for he have only see she once or twice since his return from Africa , and then in the guise of an invalid . now in her pretty evening dress , with her hair beautifully dress , her delicate complexion flush a little with timidity , yet her movement and manner bespeak quiet ease , Roger hardly recognize she , although he acknowledge her identity . he begin to feel that admire deference which most young man experience when converse with a very pretty girl : a sort of desire to obtain her good opinion in a manner very different to his old familiar friendliness . he be annoy when Sir Charles , whose especial charge she still be , come up to take she in to dinner . he could not quite understand the smile of mutual intelligence that pass between the two , each be aware of Lady Harriet 's plan of shelter molly from the necessity of talk , and act in conformity with her wish as much as with their own . Roger find himself puzzle , and watch they from time to time during dinner . again in the evening he seek she out , but find she again pre - occupy with one of the young man stay in the house , who have have the advantage of two day of mutual interest , and acquaintance with the daily event and joke and anxiety of the family circle . molly could not help wish to break off all this trivial talk and to make room for Roger : she have so much to ask he about everything at the Hall ; he be , and have be such a stranger to they all for these last two month , and more . but though each want to speak to the other more than to any one else in the room , it so happen that everything seem to conspire to prevent it . Lord Hollingford carry off Roger to the cluster of middle - aged man ; he be want to give his opinion upon some scientific subject . Mr. Ernulphus Watson , the young man refer to above , keep his place by Molly , as the prettiest girl in the room , and almost daze she by his never - cease flow of clever small - talk . she look so tired and pale at last that the ever - watchful Lady Harriet send Sir Charles to the rescue , and after a few word with Lady Harriet , Roger see Molly quietly leave the room ; and a sentence or two which he hear Lady Harriet address to her cousin make he know that it be for the night . those sentence might bear another interpretation than the obvious one . 

 " really , Charles , consider that she be in your charge , I think you might have save she from the chatter and patter of Mr. Watson ; I can only stand it when I be in the strong health . " 

 why be Molly in Sir Charles 's charge ? why ? then Roger remember many little thing that might serve to confirm the fancy he have get into his head ; and he go to bed puzzle and annoyed . it seem to he such an incongruous , hastily - get - up sort of engagement , if engagement it really be . on Saturday they be more fortunate : they have a long tete - a - tete in the most public place in the house on a sofa in the hall where Molly be rest at Lady Harriet 's command before go upstairs after a walk . Roger be pass through , and see she , and come to she . stand before she , and make pretence of play with the gold - fish in a great marble basin close at hand , 

 " I be very unlucky , " say he . " I want to get near you last night , but it be quite impossible . you be so busy talk to Mr. Watson , until Sir Charles Morton come and carry you off with such an air of authority ! have you know he long ? " 

 now this be not at all the manner in which Roger have pre - determined that he would speak of Sir Charles to Molly ; but the word come out in spite of himself . 

 " no ! not long . I never see he before I come here on Tuesday . but Lady Harriet tell he to see that I do not get tired , for I want to come down ; but you know I have not be strong . he be a cousin of Lady Harriet 's , and do all she tell he to do . " 

 " oh ! he be not handsome ; but I believe he be a very sensible man . " 

 " yes ! I should think so . he be so silent though , that I can hardly judge . " 

 " he bear a very high character in the county , " say Roger , willing now to give he his full due . 

 molly stand up . 

 " I must go upstairs , " she say ; " I only sate down here for a minute or two because Lady Harriet bid I . " 

 " stop a little long , " say he . " this be really the pleasant place ; this basin of water - lily give one the idea , if not the sensation , of coolness ; besides it seem so long since I see you , and I have a message from my father to give you . he be very angry with you . " 

 " angry with I ? " say molly in surprise . 

 " yes ! he hear that you have come here for change of air ; and he be offend that you have not   come to we to the Hall , instead . he say that you should have remember old friend ! " 

 molly take all this quite gravely , and do not at first notice the smile on his face . 

 " oh ! I be so sorry ! " say she . " but will you please tell he how it all happen . Lady Harriet call the very day when it be settle that I be not to go to " Cynthia 's wedding , she be go to add , but she suddenly stop short , and , blush deeply , change the expression , " go to London , and she plan it all in a minute , and convince mamma and papa , and have her own way . there be really no resist she . " 

 " I think you will have to tell all this to my father yourself if you mean to make your peace . why can you not come on to the Hall when you leave the tower ? " 

 to go in the cool manner suggest from one house to another , after the manner of a royal progress , be not at all accord to Molly 's primitive home - keep notion . she make answer , 

 " I should like it very much , some time . but I must go home first . they will want I more than ever now " 

 again she feel herself touch on a sore subject , and stop short . Roger become annoyed at she so constantly conjecture what he must be feel on the subject of Cynthia 's marriage . with sympathetic perception she have discern that the idea must give he pain ; and perhaps she also know that he would dislike to show the pain ; but she have not the presence of mind or ready wit to give a skilful turn to the conversation . all this annoyed Roger , he could hardly tell why . he determine to take the metaphorical bull by the horn . until that be do , his footing with Molly would always be insecure ; as it always be between two friend , who mutually avoid a subject to which their thought perpetually recur . 

 " ah , yes ! " say he . " of course you must be of double importance now Miss Kirkpatrick have leave you . I see her marriage in the Times yesterday . " 

 his tone of voice be change in speak of she , but her name have be name between they , and that be the great thing to accomplish . 

 " still , " he continue , " I think I must urge my father 's claim for a short visit , and all the more , because I can really see the apparent improvement in your health since I come , only yesterday . besides , Molly , " it be the old familiar Roger of former day who speak now , " I think you could help we at home . Aimťe be shy and awkward with my father , and he have never take quite kindly to she , yet I know they would like and value each other , if some one could but bring they together , and it would be such a comfort to I if this could take place before I have to leave . " 

 " to leave be you go away again ? " 

 " yes . have you not hear ? I do not   complete my engagement . I be go again in September for six month . " 

 " I remember . but somehow I fancy you seem to have settle down into the old way at the Hall . " 

 " so my father appear to think . but it be not likely I shall ever make it my home again ; and that be partly the reason why I want my father to adopt the notion of Aimťe 's live with he . ah , here be all the people come back from their walk . however , I shall see you again ; perhaps this afternoon we may get a little quiet time , for I have a great deal to consult you about . " 

 they separate then , and Molly go upstairs very happy , very full and warm at her heart ; it be so pleasant to have Roger talk to she in this way , like a friend ; she have once think that she could never look upon the great brown - bearded celebrity in the former light of almost brotherly intimacy , but now it be all come right . there be no opportunity for renew confidence that afternoon . molly go a quiet decorous drive as fourth with two dowager and one spinster ; but it be very pleasant to think that she should see he again at dinner , and again to - morrow . on the Sunday evening , as they all be sit and loiter on the lawn before dinner , Roger go on with what he have to say about the position of his sister - in - law in his father 's house : the mutual bond between the mother and grandfather be the child ; who be also , through jealousy , the bone of contention and the severance . there be many little detail to be give in order to make Molly quite understand the difficulty of the situation on both side ; and the young man and the girl become absorb in what they be talk about , and wander away into the shade of the long avenue . Lady Harriet separate herself from a group and come up to Lord Hollingford , who be saunter a little apart , and put her arm within his with the familiarity of a favourite sister , she say , 

 " do not   you think that your pattern young man , and my favourite young woman , be find out each other 's good quality ? " 

 he have not be observe as she have be . 

 " who do you mean ? " say he . 

 " look along the avenue ; who be those ? " 

 " Mr. Hamley and be it not Miss Gibson ? I can not   quite make out . oh ! if you be let your fancy run off in that direction , I can tell you it be quite waste of time . Roger Hamley be a man who will soon have an european reputation ! " 

 " that be very possible , and yet it do not   make any difference in my opinion . molly Gibson be capable of appreciate he . " 

 " she be a very pretty , good little country - girl . I do not   mean to say anything against she , but " 

 " remember the Charity Ball ; you call she ' unusually intelligent ' after you have dance with she there . but , after all , we be like the genie and the fairy in the Arabian Nights ' Entertainment , who each cry up the merit of the Prince Caramalzaman and the Princess Badoura . " 

 " Hamley be not a marry man . " 

 " how do you know ? " 

 " I know that he have very little private fortune , and I know that science be not a remunerative profession , if profession it can be call . " 

 " oh , if that be all a hundred thing may happen some one may leave he a fortune or this tiresome little heir that nobody want , may die . " 

 " Hush , Harriet , that be the bad of allow yourself to plan far ahead for the future ; you be sure to contemplate the death of some one , and to reckon upon the contingency as affect event . " 

 " as if lawyer be not always do something of the kind ! " 

 " leave it to those to whom it be necessary . I dislike planning marriage or look forward to death about equally . " 

 " you be get very prosaic and tiresome , Hollingford ! " 

 " only get ! " say he smile ; " I think you have always look upon I as a tiresome matter - of - fact fellow . " 

 " now , if you be go to fish for a compliment I be go . only remember my prophecy when my vision come to pass ; or make a bet , and whoever win shall spend the money on a present to Prince Caramalzaman or Princess Badoura , as the case may be . " 

 Lord Hollingford remember his sister 's word as he hear Roger say to Molly as he be leave the tower on the follow day , 

 " then I may tell my father that you will come and pay he a visit next week ? you do not   know what pleasure it will give he . " he have be on the point of say " will give we , " but he have an instinct which tell he it be as well to consider Molly 's promise visit as exclusively make to his father . 

 the next day molly go home ; she be astonish at herself for be so sorry to leave the tower ; and find it difficult , if not impossible , to reconcile the long - fix idea of the house as a place wherein to suffer all a child 's torture of dismay and forlornness with her new and fresh conception . she have gain health , she have have pleasure , the faint fragrance of a new and unacknowledged hope have steal into her life . no wonder that Mr. Gibson be strike with the improvement in her look , and Mrs. Gibson impress with her increase grace . 

 " ah , Molly , " say she , " it be really wonderful to see what a little good society will do for a girl . even a week of association with such people as one meet with at the tower be , as somebody say of a lady of rank whose name I have forget , ' a polite education in itself . ' there be something quite different about you a je ne sais quoi that would tell I at once that you have be mingle with the aristocracy . with all her charm , it be what my darling Cynthia want ; not that Mr. Henderson think so , for a more devoted lover can hardly be conceive . he absolutely buy she a parure of diamond . I be oblige to say to he that I have study to preserve her simplicity of taste , and that he must not corrupt she with too much luxury . but I be rather disappointed at their go off without a maid . it be the one blemish in the arrangement the spot in the sun . Dear Cynthia , when I think of she , I do assure you , molly , I make it my nightly prayer that I may be able to find you just such another husband . and all this time you have never tell I who you meet at the Towers ? " 

 molly run over a list of name . Roger Hamley 's come last . 

 " upon my word ! that young man be push his way up ! " 

 " the Hamleys be a far old family than the cumnor , " say Molly , flush up . 

 " now , Molly , I can not   have you democratic . Rank be a great distinction . it be quite enough to have dear papa with democratic tendency . but we will not   begin to quarrel . now that you and I be leave alone , we ought to be bosom friend , and I hope we shall be . Roger Hamley do not say much about that unfortunate little Osborne Hamley , I suppose ? " 

 " on the contrary , he say his father dot on the child ; and he seem very proud of he , himself . " 

 " I think the squire must be get very much infatuate with something . I daresay the french mother take care of that . why ! he have scarcely take any notice of you for this month or more , and before that you be everything . " 

 it be about six week since Cynthia 's engagement have become publicly know , and that might have have something to do with the Squire 's desertion , Molly think . but she say , 

 " the Squire have send I an invitation to go and stay there next week if you have no objection , mamma . they seem to want a companion for Mrs. Osborne Hamley , who be not very strong . " 

 " I can hardly tell what to say , I do not   like your have to associate with a Frenchwoman of doubtful rank ; and I can not   bear the thought of lose my child my only daughter now . I do ask Helen Kirkpatrick , but she can not   come for some time ; and the house be go to be alter . Papa have consent to build I another room at last , for Cynthia and Mr. Henderson will , of course , come and see we ; we shall have many more visitor , I expect , and your bedroom will make a capital lumber - room ; and Maria want a week 's holiday . I be always so unwilling to put any obstacle in the way of any one 's pleasure , weakly unwilling , I believe , but it certainly would be very convenient to have you out of the house for a few day ; so , for once , I will waive my own wish for your companionship , and plead your cause with papa . " 

 Miss Brownings come to call and hear the double batch of news . Mrs. Goodenough have call the very day on which they have return from Miss Hornblower 's , to tell they the astounding fact of Molly Gibson have go on a visit to the tower ; not to come back at night , but to sleep there , to be there for two or three day , just as if she be a young lady of quality . so Miss Brownings come to hear all the detail of the wedding from Mrs. Gibson , and the history of Molly 's visit at the tower as well . but Mrs. Gibson do not like this divide interest , and some of her old jealousy of Molly 's intimacy at the tower have return . 

 " now , Molly , " say Miss Browning , " let we hear how you behave among the great folk . you must not be set up with all their attention ; remember that they pay it to you for your good father 's sake . " 

 " molly be , I think , quite aware , " put in Mrs. Gibson , in her most soft and languid tone , " that she owe her privilege of visit at such a house to Lady Cumnor 's kind desire to set my mind quite at liberty at the time of Cynthia 's marriage . as soon as ever I have return home , Molly come back ; indeed , I should not have think it right to let she intrude upon their kindness beyond what be absolutely necessary . " 

 molly feel extremely uncomfortable at all this , though perfectly aware of the entire inaccuracy of the statement . 

 " well , but , Molly ! " say Miss Browning , " never mind whether you go there on your own merit , or your worthy father 's merit , or Mrs. Gibson 's merit ; but tell we what you do when you be there . " 

 so Molly begin an account of their saying and doing , which she could have make far more interesting to Miss Browning and Miss Phobe if she have not be conscious of her stepmother 's critical listening . she have to tell it all with a mental squint ; the sure way to spoil a narration . she be also subject to Mrs. Gibson 's perpetual correction of little statement which she know to be fact . but what vex she most of all be Mrs. Gibson 's last speech before the Miss Brownings leave . 

 " molly have fall into ramble way with this visit of her , of which she make so much , as if nobody have ever be in a great house but herself . she be go to Hamley Hall next week , get quite dissipate , in fact . " 

 yet to Mrs. Goodenough , the next caller on the same errand of congratulation , Mrs. Gibson 's tone be quite different . there have always be a tacit antagonism between the two , and the conversation now run as follow : 

 Mrs. Goodenough begin , 

 " well ! Mrs. Gibson , I suppose I must wish you joy of Miss Cynthia 's marriage ; I should condole with some mother as have lose their daughter ; but you be not one of that sort , I reckon . " 

 now , as Mrs. Gibson be not quite sure to which ' sort " of mother the great credit be to be attach , she find it a little difficult how to frame her reply . 

 " Dear Cynthia ! " she say . " one can not   but rejoice in her happiness ! and yet " she end her sentence by sigh . 

 " ay . she be a young woman as would always have her follower ; for , to tell the truth , she be as pretty a creature as ever I see in my life . and all the more she need skilful guidance . I be sure I , for one , be as glad as can be she be do so well by herself . folk say Mr. Henderson have a handsome private fortune over and above what he make by the law . " 

 " there be no fear but that my Cynthia will have everything this world can give ! " say Mrs. Gibson with dignity . 

 " well , well ! she be always a bit of a favourite of mine ; and as I be say to my grand - daughter there "   for she be accompany by a young lady , who look keenly to the prospect of some wedding - cake , " I be never one of those who run she down and call she a flirt and a jilt . I be glad to hear she be like to be so well off . and now , I suppose , you will be turn your mind to do something for Miss Molly there ? " 

 " if you mean by that , do anything that can , by hasten her marriage , deprive I of the company of one who be like my own child , you be very much mistaken , Mrs. Goodenough . and pray remember , I be the last person in the world to match - make . Cynthia make Mr. Henderson 's acquaintance at her uncle 's in London . " 

 " ay ! I think her cousin be very often ill , and need her nursing , and you be very keen she should be of use . I be not say but what it be right in a mother ; I be only put in a word for Miss Molly . " 

 " thank you , Mrs. Goodenough , " say molly , half - angry , half - laugh . " when I want to be marry , I will not trouble mamma . I will look out for myself . " 

 " molly be become so popular , I hardly know how we shall keep she at home , " say Mrs. Gibson . " I miss she sadly ; but , as I say to Mr. Gibson , let young people have change , and see a little of the world while they be young . it have be a great advantage to she be at the tower while so many clever and distinguished people be there . I can already see a difference in her tone of conversation : an elevation in her choice of subject . and now she be go to Hamley Hall . I can assure you I feel quite a proud mother , when I see how she be seek after . and my other daughter my Cynthia write such letter from Paris ! " 

 " thing be a deal change since my day , for sure , " say Mrs. Goodenough . " so , perhaps , I be no judge . when I be marry first , he and I go in a postchaise to his father 's house , a matter of twenty mile off at the outside ; and sate down to as good a supper amongst his friend and relation as you would wish to see . and that be my first wedding jaunt . my second be when I well know my worth as a bride , and think that now or never I must see London . but I be reckon a very extravagant sort of a body to go so far , and spend my money , though Harry have leave I uncommon well off . but now young folk go off to Paris , and think nothing of the cost : and it be well if wilful waste do not   make woeful want before they die . but I be thankful somewhat be be do for Miss Molly 's chance , as I say afore . it be not quite what I should have like to have do for my Annabella though . but time be change , as I say just now . " 

 

 

 CHAPTER LIX . 

 MOLLY gibson AT HAMLEY HALL . 
 

 the conversation end there for the time . wedding - cake and wine be bring in , and it be Molly 's duty to serve they out . but those last word of Mrs. Goodenough 's tingle in her ear , and she try to interpret they to her own satisfaction in any way but the obvious one . and that , too , be destine to be confirm ; for directly after Mrs. Goodenough take she leave , Mrs. Gibson desire Molly to carry away the tray to a table close to an open corner window , where the thing might be place in readiness for any future caller ; and underneath this open window go the path from the house - door to the road . molly hear Mrs. Goodenough say to her grand - daughter , 

 " that Mrs. Gibson be a deep ' un . there be Mr. Roger Hamley as like as not to have the Hall estate , and she send molly a - visit " and then she pass out of hearing . molly could have burst out cry , with a full sudden conviction of what Mrs. Goodenough have be allude to : her sense of the impropriety of Molly 's go to visit at the Hall when Roger be at home . to be sure , Mrs. Goodenough be a commonplace , unrefined woman . Mrs. Gibson do not seem to have even notice the allusion . Mr. Gibson take it all as a matter of course that molly should go to the Hall as simply now , as she have do before . Roger have speak of it in so straightforward a manner as show he have no conception of its be an impropriety , this visit , this visit until now so happy a subject of anticipation . molly feel as if she could never speak to any one of the idea to which Mrs. Goodenough 's word have give rise ; as if she could never be the first to suggest the notion of impropriety , which presuppose what she blush to think of . then she try to comfort herself by reasoning . if it have be wrong , forward , or indelicate , really improper in the slight degree , who would have be so ready as her father to put his veto upon it ? but reasoning be of no use after Mrs. Goodenough 's word have put fancy into Molly 's head . the more she bid these fancy begone the more they answer she   as Daniel O'Rourke do the man in the moon , when he bid Dan get off his seat on the sickle , and go into empty space : " the more ye ask we the more we will not   stir . " one may smile at a young girl 's misery of this kind ; but they be very real and sting misery to she . all that molly could do be to resolve on a single eye to the dear old squire , and his mental and bodily comfort ; to try and heal up any breach which might have occur between he and Aimťe ; and to ignore Roger as much as possible . Good Roger ! Kind Roger ! Dear Roger ! it would be very hard to avoid he as much as be consistent with common politeness ; but it would be right to do it ; and when she be with he she must be as natural as possible , or he might observe some difference ; but what be natural ? how much ought she avoid be with he ? would he even notice if she be more chary of her company , more calculate of her word ? alas ! the simplicity of their intercourse be spoilt henceforward ! she make law for herself ; she resolve to devote herself to the squire and to Aimťe , and to forget Mrs. Goodenough 's foolish speech ; but her perfect freedom be go ; and with it half her chance that be to say , half her chance would have be lose over any stranger who have not know she before ; they would probably have think her stiff and awkward , and apt to say thing and then retract they . but she be so different from her usual self that Roger notice the change in she as soon as she arrive at the Hall . she have carefully measure out the day of her visit ; they be to be exactly the same number as she have spend at the tower . she fear lest if she stay at the Hall a short time the squire might be annoy . yet how charming the place look in its early autumnal glow as she drive up ! and there be Roger at the hall - door , wait to receive she , watch for she come . and now he retreat , apparently to summon his sister - in - law , who come now timidly forwards in her deep widow 's mourning , hold her boy in her arm as if to protect her shyness ; but he struggle down , and run towards the carriage , eager to greet his friend the coachman , and to obtain a promise ride . Roger do not say much himself ; he want to make Aimťe feel her place as daughter of the house ; but she be too timid to speak much . and she only take Molly by the hand and lead she into the drawing - room , where , as if by a sudden impulse of gratitude for all the tender nursing she have receive during her illness , she put her arm round molly and kiss she long and well . and after that they come to be friend . 

 it be nearly lunch - time , and the squire always make his appearance at that meal , more for the pleasure of see his grandson eat his dinner than for any hunger of his own . to - day molly quickly see the whole state of the family affair . she think that even have Roger say nothing about they at the Towers , she should have see that neither the father nor the daughter - in - law have as yet find the clue to each other 's character , although they have now be live for several month in the same house . Aimťe seem to forget her English in her nervousness ; and to watch with the jealous eye of a dissatisfied mother all the proceeding of the squire towards her little boy . they be not of the wise kind , it must be own ; the child sip the strong ale with evident relish and clamour for everything which he see the other enjoy . Aimťe could hardly attend to Molly for her anxiety as to what her boy be do and eat ; yet she say nothing . Roger take the end of the table opposite to that at which sit grandfather and grandchild . after the boy 's first want be gratify the squire address himself to Molly . 

 " well ! and so you can come here a - visit though you have be among the grand folk . I think you be go to cut we , Miss Molly , when I hear you be go to the Towers . could not   find any other place to stay at while father and mother be away , but an earl 's , eh ? " 

 " they ask I , and I go , " say molly ; " now you have   ask I , and I have   come here . " 

 " I think you might ha ' know you would be always welcome here , without wait for ask . why , Molly ! I look upon you as a kind of a daughter more than Madam there ! " drop his voice a little , and perhaps suppose that the child 's babble would drown the signification of his word . " Nay , you need not   look at I so pitifully , she do not   follow English readily . " 

 " I think she do ! " say Molly , in a low voice , not look up , however , for fear of catch another glimpse at Aimťe 's sudden forlornness of expression and deepen colour . she feel grateful , as if for a personal favour , when she hear Roger speak to Aimťe the moment afterwards in the tender tone of brotherly friendliness ; and presently these two be sufficiently engage in a separate conversation to allow Molly and the squire to go on talk . 

 " he be a sturdy chap , be not   he ? " say the Squire , stroke the little Roger 's curly head . " and he can puff four puff at grandpapa 's pipe without be sick , can not   he ? " 

 " I s'ant puff any more puff , " say the boy , resolutely . " Mamma say ' no . ' I s'ant . " 

 " that be just like she ! " say the Squire , drop his voice this time however . " as if it could do the child any harm ! " 

 molly make a point of turn the conversation from all personal subject after this , and keep the Squire talk about the progress of his drainage during the rest of lunch . he offer to take she to see it ; and she accede to the proposal , thinking , meantime , how little she need have anticipate the be throw too intimately with Roger , who seem to devote himself to his sister - in - law . but , in the evening , when Aimťe have go upstairs to put her boy to bed , and the squire be asleep in his easy - chair , a sudden flush of memory bring Mrs. Goodenough 's word again to her mind . she be virtually tete - a - tete with Roger , as she have be dozen of time before , but now she could not help assume an air of constraint ; her eye do not meet his in the old frank way ; she take up a book at a pause in the conversation , and leave he puzzle and annoy at the change in her manner . and so it go on during all the time of her visit . if sometimes she forget , and let herself go into all her old naturalness , by - and - by she check herself , and become comparatively cold and reserved . Roger be pain at all this more pained day after day ; more anxious to discover the cause . Aimťe , too , silently notice how different Molly become in Roger 's presence . one day she could not help say to Molly , 

 " do not   you like Roger ? you would , if you only know how good he be ! he be learn , but that be nothing : it be his goodness that one admire and love . " 

 " he be very good , " say Molly . " I have know he long enough to know that . " 

 " but you do not   think he agreeable ? he be not like my poor husband , to be sure ; and you know he well , too . ah ! tell I about he once again . when you first know he ? when his mother be alive ? " 

 molly have grow very fond of Aimťe ; when the latter be at her ease she have very charming and attach way ; but feel uneasy in her position in the Squire 's house , she be almost repellent to he ; and he , too , put on his bad side to she . Roger be most anxious to bring they together , and have several consultation with Molly as to the good mean of accomplish this end . as long as they talk upon this subject , she speak to he in the quiet sensible manner which she inherit from her father ; but when their discussion on this point be end , she fall back into her piquant assumption of dignified reserve . it be very difficult for she to maintain this strange manner , especially when once or twice she fancy that it give he pain ; and she would go into her own room and suddenly burst into tear on these occasion , and wish that her visit be end , and that she be once again in the eventless tranquillity of her own home . yet presently her fancy change , and she cling to the swiftly pass hour , as if she would still retain the happiness of each . for , unknown to she , Roger be exert himself to make her visit pleasant . he be not willing to appear as the instigator of all the little plan for each day , for he feel as if , somehow , he do not hold the same place in her regard as formerly . still , one day Aimťe suggest a nutting expedition another day they give little Roger the unheard - of pleasure of tea out - of - door there be something else agreeable for a third ; and it be Roger who arrange all these simple pleasure such as he know molly would enjoy . but to she he only appear as the ready forwarder of Aimťe 's device . the week be nearly go , when one morning the squire find Roger sit in the old library with a book before he , it be true , but so deep in thought that he be evidently startle by his father 's unexpected entrance . 

 " I think I should find thee here , my lad ! we will have the old room do up again before winter ; it smell musty enough , and yet I see it be the place for thee ! I want thee to go with I round the five - acre . I be think of lay it down in grass . it be time for you to be get into the fresh air , you look quite wobegone over book , book , book ; there never be a thing like them for steal a man 's health out of he ! " 

 so Roger go out with his father , without say many word till they be at some distance from the house . then he bring out a sentence with such abruptness that he repay his father for the start the latter have give he a quarter of an hour before . 

 " Father , you remember I be go out again to the cape next month ! you speak of do up the library . if it be for I , I shall be away all the winter . " 

 " can not   you get off it ? " plead his father . " I think maybe you would forget all about it . " 

 " not likely ! " say Roger , half smile . 

 " well , but they might have find another man to finish up your work . " 

 " no one can finish it but myself . besides , an engagement be an engagement . when I write to Lord Hollingford to tell he I must come home , I promise to go out again for another six month . " 

 " ay . I know . and perhaps it will put it out of thy mind . it will always be hard on I to part from thee . but I daresay it be good for you . " 

 Roger 's colour deepen . " you be allude to to Miss Kirkpatrick Mrs. Henderson , I mean . Father , let I tell you once for all , I think that be rather a hasty affair . I be pretty sure now that we be not suit to each other . I be wretched when I get her letter at the cape I mean but I believe it be for the good . " 

 " that be right . that be my own boy , " say the Squire turn round and shake hand with his son with vehemence . " and now I will tell you what I hear the other day , when I be at the magistrate ' meeting . they be all say she have jilt Preston . " 

 " I do not   want to hear anything against she ; she may have her fault , but I can never forget how I once love she . " 

 " well , well ! perhaps it be right . I be not so bad about it , be I , Roger ? poor Osborne need not ha ' be so secret with I . I ask your Miss Cynthia out here and her mother and all my bark be bad than my bite . for , if I have a wish on earth , it be to see Osborne marry as befit one of an old stock , and he go and choose out this french girl , of no family at all , only a " 

 " never mind what she be ; look at what she be ! I wonder you be not more take with her humility and sweetness , father ! " 

 " I do not   even call she pretty , " say the Squire uneasily , for he dread a repetition of the argument which Roger have often use to make he give Aimťe her proper due of affection and position . " now your Miss Cynthia be pretty , I will say that for she , the baggage ! and to think that when you two lad fly right in your father 's face , and pick out girl below you in rank and family , you should neither of you have set your fancy on my little molly there . I daresay I should ha ' be angry enough at the time , but the lassie would ha ' find her way to my heart , as never this french lady , nor t ' other one , could ha ' do . " 

 Roger do not answer . 

 " I do not   see why you might not   put up for she still . I be humble enough now , and you be not heir as Osborne be who marry a servant - maid . do not   you think you could turn your thought upon Molly Gibson , Roger ? " 

 " no ! " say Roger , shortly . " it be too late too late . do not   let we talk any more of my marrying . be not   this the five - acre field ? " and soon he be discuss the relative value of meadow , arable and pasture land with his father , as heartily as if he have never know molly , or love Cynthia . but the squire be not in such good spirit , and go but heavily into the discussion . at the end of it he say apropos de botte , 

 " but do not   you think you could like she if you try , Roger ? " 

 Roger know perfectly well to what his father be allude , but for an instant he be on the point of pretend to misunderstand . at length , however , he say , in a low voice , 

 " I shall never try , father . do not   let we talk any more about it . as I say before , it be too late . " 

 the squire be like a child to whom some toy have be refuse ; from time to time the thought of his disappointment in this matter recur to his mind ; and then he take to blame Cynthia as the primary cause of Roger 's present indifference to womankind . 

 it so happen that on Molly 's last morning at the Hall , she receive her first letter from Cynthia Mrs. Henderson . it be just before breakfast - time ; Roger be out of door , Aimťe have not as yet come down ; Molly be alone in the dining - room , where the table be already lay . she have just finish read her letter when the squire come in , and she immediately and joyfully tell he what the morning have bring to she . but when she see the squire 's face , she could have bite her tongue out for have name Cynthia 's name to he . he look vex and depressed . 

 " I wish I might never hear of she again I do . she be be the bane of my Roger , that be what she have . I have not   sleep half the night , and it be all her fault . why , there be my boy say now that he have no heart for ever marry , poor lad ! I wish it have be you , molly , my lad have take a fancy for . I tell Roger so t'other day , and I say that for all you be beneath what I ever think to see they marry , well it be of no use it be too late , now , as he say . only never let I hear that baggage 's name again , that be all , and no offence to you either , lassie . I know you love the wench ; but if you will take an old man 's word , you be worth a score of she . I wish young man would think so too , " he mutter as he go to the side - table to carve the ham , while molly pour out the tea her heart very hot all the time , and effectually silence for a space . it be with the great difficulty that she could keep tear of mortification from fall . she feel altogether in a wrong position in that house , which have be like a home to she until this last visit . what with Mrs. Goodenough 's remark , and now this speech of the Squire 's , imply at least to her susceptible imagination that his father have propose she as a wife to Roger , and that she have be reject she be more glad than she could express , or even think , that she be go home this very morning . Roger come in from his walk while she be in this state of feeling . he see in an instant that something have distress molly ; and he long to have the old friendly right of ask she what it be . but she have effectually keep he at too great a distance during the last few day for he to feel at liberty to speak to she in the old straightforward brotherly way ; especially now , when he perceive her effort to conceal her feeling , and the way in which she drink her tea in feverish haste , and accept bread only to crumble it about her plate , untouched . it be all that he could do to make talk under these circumstance ; but he back up her effort as well as he could until Aimťe come down , grave and anxious : her boy have not have a good night , and do not seem well ; he have fall into a feverish sleep now , or she could not have leave he . immediately the whole table be in a ferment . the squire push away his plate , and could eat no more ; Roger be try to extract a detail or a fact out of Aimťe , who begin to give way to tear . molly quickly propose that the carriage , which have be order to take her home at eleven , should come round immediately she have everything ready pack up , she say , and bring back her father at once . by leave directly , she say , it be probable they might catch he after he have return from his morning visit in the town , and before he have set off on his more distant round . her proposal be agree to , and she go upstairs to put on her thing . she come down all ready into the drawing - room , expect to find Aimťe and the squire there ; but during her absence word have be bring to the anxious mother and grandfather that the child have waken up in a panic , and both have rush up to their darling . but Roger be in the drawing - room await Molly , with a large bunch of the choice flower . 

 " look , Molly ! " say he , as she be on the point of leave the room again , on find he there alone . " I gather these flower for you before breakfast . " he come to meet her reluctant advance . 

 " thank you ! " say she . " you be very kind . I be very much oblige to you . " 

 " then you must do something for I , " say he , determine not to notice the restraint of her manner , and make the re - arrangement of the flower which she hold a sort of link between they , so that she could not follow her impulse , and leave the room . 

 " tell I , honestly as I know you will if you speak at all , have not   I do something to vex you since we be so happy at the tower together ? " 

 his voice be so kind and true , his manner so win yet wistful , that molly would have be thankful to tell he all . she believe that he could have help she more than any one to understand how she ought to behave rightly ; he would have disentangle her fancy , if only he himself have not lain at the very core and centre of all her perplexity and dismay . how could she tell he of Mrs. Goodenough 's word trouble her maiden modesty ? how could she ever repeat what his father have say that morning , and assure he that she , no more than he , wish that their old friendliness should be trouble by the thought of a nearer relationship ? 

 " no , you never vex I in my whole life , Roger , " say she , look straight at he for the first time for many day . 

 " I believe you , because you say so . I have no right to ask far . molly , will you give I back one of those flower , as a pledge of what you have say ? " 

 " take whichever you like , " say she , eagerly offer he the whole nosegay to choose from . 

 " no ; you must choose , and you must give it I . " 

 just then the squire come in . Roger would have be glad if molly have not go on so eagerly to ransack the bunch for the choice flower in his father 's presence ; but she exclaim : 

 " oh , please , Mr. Hamley , do you know which be Roger 's favourite flower ? " 

 " no . a rose , I daresay . the carriage be at the door , and , molly my dear , I do not   want to hurry you , but " 

 " I know . here , Roger , here be a rose ! 

  " and red as a rose be she . " 
 I will find papa as soon as ever I get home . how be the little boy ? " 

 " I be afraid he be begin of some kind of a fever . " 

 and the squire take she to the carriage , talk all the way of the little boy ; Roger follow , and hardly heed what he be do in the answer to the question he keep ask himself : " too late or not ? can she ever forget that my first foolish love be give to one so different ? " 

 while she , as the carriage roll away , keep say to herself , " we be friend again . I do not   believe he will remember what the dear squire take it into his head to suggest for many day . it be so pleasant to be on the old term again ! and what lovely flower ! " 

 

 

 CHAPTER LX . 

 ROGER HAMLEY 'S CONFESSION . 
 

 Roger have a great deal to think of as he turn away from look after the carriage as long as it could be see . the day before , he have believe that Molly have come to view all the symptom of his grow love for she , symptom which he think have be so patent , as disgusting inconstancy to the inconstant Cynthia ; that she have feel that an attachment which could be so soon transfer to another be not worth have ; and that she have desire to mark all this by her change treatment of he , and so to nip it in the bud . but this morning her old sweet , frank manner have return in their last interview , at any rate . he puzzle himself hard to find out what could have distress she at breakfast - time . he even go so far as to ask Robinson whether Miss Gibson have receive any letter that morning ; and when he hear that she have have one , he try to believe that the letter be in some way the cause of her sorrow . so far so good . they be friend again after their unspoken difference ; but that be not enough for Roger . he feel every day more and more certain that she , and she alone , could make he happy . he have feel this , and have partly give up all hope , while his father have be urge upon he the very course he most desire to take . no need for " try " to love she , he say to himself , that be already do . and yet he be very jealous on her behalf . be that love worthy of she which have once be give to Cynthia ? be not this affair too much a mocking mimicry of the last again just on the point of leave England for a considerable time if he follow she now to her own home , in the very drawing - room where he have once offer to Cynthia ? and then by a strong resolve he determine on this course . they be friend now , and he kiss the rose that be her pledge of friendship . if he go to Africa , he run some deadly chance ; he know well what they be now than he have do when he go before . until his return he would not even attempt to win more of her love than he already have . but once safe home again , no weak fancy as to what might or might not be her answer should prevent his run all chance to gain the woman who be to he the one who excel all . his be not the poor vanity that think more of the possible mortification of a refusal than of the precious jewel of a bride that may be win . somehow or another , please God to send he back safe , he would put his fate to the touch . and till then he would be patient . he be no long a boy to rush at the coveted object ; he be a man capable of judging and abide . 

 molly send her father , as soon as she could find he , to the Hall ; and then sate down to the old life in the home drawing - room , where she miss Cynthia 's bright presence at every turn . Mrs. Gibson be in rather a querulous mood , which fasten itself upon the injury of Cynthia 's letter be address to Molly , and not to herself . 

 " consider all the trouble I have with her trousseau , I think she might have write to I . " 

 " but she do her first letter be to you , mamma , " say Molly , her real thought still intent upon the Hall upon the sick child upon Roger , and his begging for the flower . 

 " yes , just a first letter , three page long , with an account of her crossing ; while to you she can write about fashion , and how the bonnet be wear in Paris , and all sort of interesting thing . but poor mother must never expect confidential letter , I have find that out . " 

 " you may see my letter , mamma , " say Molly , " there be really nothing in it . " 

 " and to think of her writing , and cross to you who do not   value it , while my poor heart be yearn after my lose child ! really , life be somewhat hard to bear at time . " 

 then there be silence for a while . 

 " do tell I something about your visit , molly . be Roger very heart - break ? do he talk much about Cynthia ? " 

 " no . he do not mention she often ; hardly ever , I think . " 

 " I never think he have much feeling . if he have have , he would not have let she go so easily . " 

 " I do not   see how he could help it . when he come to see she after his return , she be already engage to Mr. Henderson he have come down that very day , " say Molly , with perhaps more heat than the occasion require . 

 " my poor head ! " say Mrs. Gibson , put her hand up to her head . " one may see you have   be stop with people of robust health , and excuse my say it , Molly , of your friend of unrefined habit , you have   get to talk in so loud a voice . but do remember my head , molly . so Roger have quite forget Cynthia , have he ? oh ! what inconstant creature man be ! he will be fall in love with some grandee next , mark my word ! they be make a pet and a lion of he , and he be just the kind of weak young man to have his head turn by it all ; and to propose to some fine lady of rank , who would no more think of marry he than of marry her footman . " 

 " I do not   think it be likely , " say Molly , stoutly . " Roger be too sensible for anything of the kind . " 

 " that be just the fault I always find with he ; sensible and cold - hearted ! now , that be a kind of character which may be very valuable , but which revolt I . give I warmth of heart , even with a little of that extravagance of feeling which mislead the judgment , and conduct into romance . poor Mr. Kirkpatrick ! that be just his character . I use to tell he that his love for I be quite romantic . I think I have tell you about his walk five mile in the rain to get I a muffin once when I be ill ? " 

 " yes ! " say Molly . " it be very kind of he . " 

 " so imprudent , too ! just what one of your sensible , cold - hearted , commonplace people would never have think of do . with his cough and all . " 

 " I hope he do not   suffer for it ? " reply molly , anxious at any cost to keep off the subject of the Hamleys , upon which she and her stepmother always disagree , and on which she find it difficult to keep her temper . 

 " yes , indeed , he do ! I do not   think he ever get over the cold he catch that day . I wish you have know he , molly . I sometimes wonder what would have happen if you have be my real daughter , and Cynthia dear papa 's , and Mr. Kirkpatrick and your own dear mother have all live . People talk a good deal about natural affinity . it would have be a question for a philosopher . " she begin to think on the impossibility she have suggest . 

 " I wonder how the poor little boy be ? " say Molly , after a pause , speak out her thought . 

 " poor little child ! when one think how little his prolonged existence be to be desire , one feel that his death would be a boon . " 

 " Mamma ! what do you mean ? " ask Molly , much shocked . " why , every one care for his life as the most precious thing ! you have never see he ! he be the bonny , sweetest little fellow that can be ! what do you mean ? " 

 " I should have think that the Squire would have desire a well - bear heir than the offspring of a servant , with all his idea about descent and blood and family . and I should have think that it be a little mortifying to Roger who must naturally have look upon himself as his brother 's heir to find a little interlope child , half french , half English , step into his shoe ! " 

 " you do not   know how fond they be of he , the Squire look upon he as the apple of his eye . " 

 " molly ! molly ! pray do not   let I hear you use such vulgar expression . when shall I teach you true refinement that refinement which consist in never even think a vulgar , commonplace thing ! proverb and idiom be never use by people of education . ' apple of his eye ! ' I be really shocked . " 

 " well , mamma , I be very sorry ; but after all , what I want to say as strongly as I could be , that the Squire love the little boy as much as his own child ; and that Roger oh ! what a shame to think that Roger " and she stop suddenly short , as if she be choke . 

 " I do not   wonder at your indignation , my dear ! " say Mrs. Gibson . " it be just what I should have feel at your age . but one learn the baseness of human nature with advance year . I be wrong , though , to undeceive you so early but depend upon it , the thought I allude to have cross Roger Hamley 's mind ! " 

 " all sort of thought cross one 's mind it depend upon whether one give they harbour and encouragement , " say Molly . 

 " my dear , if you must have the last word , do not   let it be a truism . but let we talk on some more interesting subject . I ask Cynthia to buy I a silk gown in Paris , and I say I would send her word what colour I fix upon I think dark blue be the most become to my complexion ; what do you say ? " 

 molly agree , soon than take the trouble of think about the thing at all ; she be far too full of her silent review of all the trait in Roger 's character which have lately come under her notice , and that give the lie direct to her stepmother 's supposition . just then they hear Mr. Gibson 's step downstairs . but it be some time before he make his entrance into the room where they be sit . 

 " how be little Roger ? " say Molly , eagerly . 

 " begin with scarlet fever , I be afraid . it be well you leave when you do , molly . you have   never have it . we must stop up all intercourse with the Hall for a time . if there be one illness I dread , it be this . " 

 " but you go and come back to we , papa . " 

 " yes . but I always take plenty of precaution . however , no need to talk about risk that lie in the way of one 's duty . it be unnecessary risk that we must avoid . " 

 " will he have it badly ? " ask Molly . 

 " I can not   tell . I shall do my good for the wee laddie . " 

 whenever Mr. Gibson 's feeling be touch , he be apt to recur to the language of his youth . molly know now that he be much interested in the case . 

 for some day there be imminent danger to the little boy ; for some week there be a more chronic form of illness to contend with ; but when the immediate danger be over and the warm daily interest be past , Molly begin to realize that , from the strict quarantine her father evidently think it necessary to establish between the two house , she be not likely to see Roger again before his departure for Africa . oh ! if she have but make more of the uncared - for day that she have pass with he at the Hall ! bad than uncared for ; day on which she have avoid he ; refuse to converse freely with he ; give he pain by her change of manner ; for she have read in his eye , hear in his voice , that he have be perplex and pain , and now her imagination dwelt on and exaggerate the expression of his tone and look . 

 one evening after dinner , her father say , 

 " as the country - people say , I have   do a stroke of work to - day . Roger Hamley and I have lay our head together , and we have   make a plan by which Mrs. Osborne and her boy will leave the Hall . " 

 " what do I say the other day , molly ? " say Mrs. Gibson , interrupting , and give molly a look of extreme intelligence . 

 " and go into lodging at Jennings ' farm ; not four hundred yard from the Park - field gate , " continue Mr. Gibson . " the Squire and his daughter - in - law have get to be much well friend over the little fellow 's sick - bed ; and I think he see now how impossible it would be for the mother to leave her child , and go and be happy in France , which have be the notion run in his head all this time . to buy she off , in fact . but that one night , when I be very uncertain whether I could bring he through , they take to cry together , and condole with each other ; and it be just like tear down a curtain that have be between they ; they have be rather friend than otherwise ever since . still Roger "   Molly 's cheek grow warm and her eye soft and bright ; it be such a pleasure to hear his name   " and I both agree that his mother know much well how to manage the boy than his grandfather do . I suppose that be the one good thing she get from that hard - hearted mistress of her . she certainly have be well train in the management of child . and it make her impatient , and annoyed , and unhappy , when she see the squire give the child nut and ale , and all sort of silly indulgence , and spoil he in every possible way . yet she be a coward , and do not   speak out her mind . now by be in lodging , and have her own servant nice pretty room they be , too ; we go to see they , and Mrs. Jennings promise to attend well to Mrs. Osborne Hamley , and be very much honour , and all that sort of thing not ten minute ' walk from the Hall , too , so that she and the little chap may easily go backwards and forwards as often as they like , and yet she may keep the control over the child 's discipline and diet . in short , I think I have   do a good day 's work , " he continue , stretch himself a little ; and then with a shake rouse himself , and make ready to go out again , to see a patient who have send for he in his absence . 

 " a good day 's work ! " he repeat to himself as he run downstairs . " I do not   know when I have be so happy ! " for he have not tell Molly all that have pass between he and Roger . Roger have begin a fresh subject of conversation just as Mr. Gibson be hasten away from the Hall , after complete the new arrangement for Aimťe and her child . 

 " you know that I set off next Tuesday , Mr. Gibson , do not   you ? " say Roger , a little abruptly . 

 " to be sure . I hope you will be as successful in all your scientific object as you be the last time , and have no sorrow await you when you come back . " 

 " thank you . yes . I hope so . you do not   think there be any danger of infection now , do you ? " 

 " no ! if the disease be to spread through the household , I think we should have have some sign of it before now . one be never sure , remember , with scarlet fever . " 

 Roger be silent for a minute or two . " should you be afraid , " he say at length , " of see I at your house ? " 

 " thank you ; but I think I would rather decline the pleasure of your society there at present . it be only three week or a month since the child begin . besides , I shall be over here again before you go . I be always on my guard against symptom of dropsy . I have know it supervene . " 

 " then I shall not see Molly again ! " say Roger , in a tone and with a look of great disappointment . 

 Mr. Gibson turn his keen , observant eye upon the young man , and look at he in as penetrate a manner as if he have be begin with an unknown illness . then the doctor and the father compress his lip and give vent to a long intelligent whistle . " whew ! " say he . 

 Roger 's bronzed cheek take a deep shade . 

 " you will take a message to she from I , will not   you ? a message of farewell ? " he plead . 

 " not i. I be not go to be a message - carrier between any young man and young woman . I will tell my womenkind I forbid you to come near the house , and that you be sorry to go away without bid good - by . that be all I shall say . " 

 " but you do not disapprove ? I see you guess why . oh ! Mr. Gibson , just speak to I one word of what must be in your heart , though you be pretend not to understand why I would give world to see Molly again before I go . " 

 " my dear boy ! " say Mr. Gibson , more affected than he like to show , and lay his hand on Roger 's shoulder . then he pull himself up , and say gravely enough , 

 " Mind , Molly be not Cynthia . if she be to care for you , she be not one who could transfer her love to the next comer . " 

 " you mean not as readily as I have do , " reply Roger . " I only wish you could know what a different feeling this be to my boyish love for Cynthia . " 

 " I be not   think of you when I speak ; but , however , as I might have remember afterwards that you be not a model of constancy , let we hear what you have to say for yourself . " 

 " not much . I do love Cynthia very much . her manner and her beauty bewitch I ; but her letter , short , hurried letter , sometimes show that she really have not   take the trouble to read mine through , I can not tell you the pain they give I ! twelve month ' solitude , in frequent danger of one 's life face to face with death sometimes age a man like many year ' experience . still I long for the time when I should see her sweet face again , and hear her speak . then the letter at the Cape ! and still I hop . but you know how I find she , when I go to have the interview which I trust might end in the renewal of our relation , engage to Mr. Henderson . I see she walk with he in your garden , coquet with he about a flower , just as she use to do with I . I can see the pitying look in Molly 's eye as she watch I ; I can see it now . and I could beat myself for be such a blind fool as to what must she think of I ? how she must despise I , choose the false Duessa . " 

 " come , come ! Cynthia be not   so bad as that . she be a very fascinating , faulty creature . " 

 " I know ! I know ! I will never allow any one to say a word against she . if I call she the false Duessa it be because I want to express my sense of the difference between she and molly as strongly as I could . you must allow for a lover 's exaggeration . besides , all I want to say be , do you think that Molly , after see and know that I have love a person so inferior to herself , could ever be bring to listen to I ? " 

 " I do not   know . I can not   tell . and even if I could , I would not . only if it be any comfort to you , I may say what my experience have teach I . woman be queer , unreasone creature , and be just as likely as not to love a man who have be throw away his affection . " 

 " thank you , sir ! " say Roger , interrupt he . " I see you mean to give I encouragement . and I have resolve never to give molly a hint of what I feel till I return , and then to try and win she by every mean in my power . I determine not to repeat the former scene in the former place , in your drawing - room , however I might be tempt . and perhaps , after all , she avoid I when she be here last . " 

 " now , Roger , I have   listen to you long enough . if you have   nothing well to do with your time than to talk about my daughter , I have . when you come back it will be time enough to inquire how far your father would approve of such an engagement . " 

 " he himself urge it upon I the other day but then I be in despair I think it be too late . " 

 " and what mean you be likely to have of maintain a wife ? I always think that point be pass too lightly over when you form your hurried engagement to Cynthia . I be not mercenary , molly have some money independently of I , that she by the way know nothing of , not much ; and I can allow her something . but all these thing must be leave till your return . " 

 " then you sanction my attachment ? " 

 " I do not   know what you mean by sanction it . I can not   help it . I suppose lose one 's daughter be a necessary evil . still " see the disappointed expression on Roger 's face " it be but fair to you to say , I would rather give my child , my only child , remember ! to you , than to any man in the world ! " 

 " thank you ! " say Roger , shake hand with Mr. Gibson , almost against the will of the latter . " and I may see she , just once , before I go ? " 

 " decidedly not . there I come in as doctor as well as father . no ! " 

 " but you will take a message , at any rate ? " 

 " to my wife and to she conjointly . I will not separate they . I will not in the slight way be a go - between . " 

 " very well , " say Roger . " tell they both as strongly as you can how I regret your prohibition . I see I must submit . but if I do not   come back , I will haunt you for have be so cruel . " 

 " come , I like that . give I a wise man of science in love ! no one beat he in folly . good - by . " 

 " good - by . you will see molly this afternoon ! " 

 " to be sure . and you will see your father . but I do not   heave such portentous sigh at the thought . " 

 Mr. Gibson give Roger 's message to his wife and to Molly that evening at dinner . it be but what the latter have expect , after all her father have say of the very great danger of infection ; but now that her expectation come in the shape of a final decision , it take away her appetite . she submit in silence ; but her observant father notice that after this speech of his , she only play with the food on her plate , and conceal a good deal of it under her knife and fork . 

 " Lover versus father ! " think he , half sadly . " Lover win . " and he , too , become indifferent to all that remain of his dinner . Mrs. Gibson patter on ; and nobody listen . 

 the day of Roger 's departure come . molly try hard to forget it in work away at a cushion she be prepare as a present to Cynthia ; people do worst - work in those day . one , two , three . one , two , three , four , five , six , seven ; all wrong : she be think of something else , and have to unpick it . it be a rainy day , too ; and Mrs. Gibson , who have plan to go out and pay some call , have to stay indoor . this make her restless and fidgety . she keep go backwards and forwards to different window in the drawing - room to look at the weather , as if she imagine that while it rain at one window , it might be fine weather at another . 

 " molly come here ! who be that man wrap up in a cloak , there , near the Park wall , under the beech - tree he have be there this half - hour and more , never stir , and look at this house all the time ! I think it be very suspicious . " 

 molly look , and in an instant recognize Roger under all his wrap . her first instinct be to draw back . the next to come forwards , and say " why , mamma , it be Roger Hamley ! look now he be kiss his hand ; he be wish we good - by in the only way he can ! " and she respond to his sign ; but she be not sure if he perceive her modest quiet movement , for Mrs. Gibson become immediately so demonstrative that molly fancy that her eager foolish pantomimic motion must absorb all his attention . 

 " I call this so attentive of he , " say Mrs. Gibson , in the midst of a volley of kiss of her hand . " really , it be quite romantic . it remind I of former day but he will be too late ! I must send he away ; it be half - past twelve ! " and she take out her watch and hold it up , tap it with her forefinger , and occupy the very centre of the window . molly could only peep here and there , dodge now up , now down , now on this side , now on that , of the perpetually - move arm . she fancy she see something of a correspond movement on Roger 's part . at length he go away slowly , slowly , and often look back , in spite of the tap watch . Mrs. Gibson at last retreat , and Molly quietly move into her place to see his figure once more before the turn of the road hide it from her view . he , too , know where the last glimpse of Mr. Gibson 's house be to be obtain , and once more he turn , and his white handkerchief float in the air . molly wave her high up , with eager longing that it should be see . and then , he be go ! and Molly return to her worst - work , happy , glowing , sad , content , and think to herself how sweet be friendship ! 

 when she come to a sense of the present , Mrs. Gibson be say , 

 " upon my word , though Roger Hamley have never be a great favourite of mine , this little attention of his have remind I very forcibly of a very charming young man a soupirant , as the French would call he Lieutenant Harper you must have hear I speak of he , molly ? " 

 " I think I have ! " say Molly , absently . 

 " well , you remember how devoted he be to I when I be at Mrs. Duncombe 's , my first situation , and I only seventeen . and when the recruiting party be order to another town , poor Mr. Harper come and stand opposite the schoolroom window for nearly an hour , and I know it be his do that the band play ' the girl I leave behind I , ' when they march out the next day . poor Mr. Harper ! it be before I know dear Mr. Kirkpatrick ! dear I . how often my poor heart have have to bleed in this life of mine ! not but what dear papa be a very worthy man , and make I very happy . he would spoil I , indeed , if I would let he . still he be not as rich as Mr. Henderson . " 

 that last sentence contain the germ of Mrs. Gibson 's present grievance . have marry Cynthia , as her mother put it take credit to herself as if she have have the principal part in the achievement she now become a little envious of her daughter 's good fortune in be the wife of a young , handsome , rich , and moderately fashionable man , who live in London . she naively express her feeling on this subject to her husband one day when she be really not feel quite well , and when consequently her annoyance be much more present to her mind than her source of happiness . 

 " it be such a pity ! " say she , " that I be bear when I be . I should so have like to belong to this generation . " 

 " that be sometimes my own feeling , " say he . " so many new view seem to be open in science , that I should like , if it be possible , to live till their reality be ascertain , and one see what they lead to . but I do not   suppose that be your reason , my dear , for wish to be twenty or thirty year young . " 

 " no , indeed . and I do not put it in that hard unpleasant way ; I only say I should like to belong to this generation . to tell the truth , I be think of Cynthia . without vanity , I believe I be as pretty as she be when I be a girl , I mean ; I have not her dark eyelash , but then my nose be straight . and now look at the difference ! I have to live in a little country town with three servant , and no carriage ; and she with her inferior good look will live in Sussex Place , and keep a man and a brougham , and I do not   know what . but the fact be , in this generation there be so many more rich young man than there be when I be a girl . " 

 " oh , ho ! so that be your reason , be it , my dear ? if you have be young now you might have marry somebody as well off as Walter ? " 

 " yes ! " say she . " I think that be my idea . of course I should have like he to be you . I always think if you have go to the bar you might have succeed well , and live in London , too . I do not   think Cynthia care much where she live , yet you see it have come to she . " 

 " what have London ? " 

 " oh , you dear , facetious man . now that be just the thing to have captivate a jury . I do not   believe Walter will ever be so clever as you be . yet he can take Cynthia to Paris , and abroad , and everywhere . I only hope all this indulgence will not   develope the fault in Cynthia 's character . it be a week since we hear from she , and I do write so particularly to ask she for the autumn fashion before I buy my new bonnet . but rich be a great snare . " 

 " be thankful you be spar temptation , my dear . " 

 " no , I be not . everybody like to be tempt . and , after all , it be very easy to resist temptation , if one wish . " 

 " I do not   find it so easy , " say her husband . 

 " here 's medicine for you , mamma , " say Molly , enter with a letter hold up in her hand . " a letter from Cynthia . " 

 " oh , you dear little messenger of good news ! there be one of the heathen deity in Mangnall 's Questions whose office it be to bring news . the letter be date from Calais . they be come home ! she be buy I a shawl and a bonnet ! the dear creature ! always think of other before herself : good fortune can not spoil she . they have   a fortnight left of their holiday ! their house be not quite ready ; they be come here . oh , now , Mr. Gibson , we must have the new dinner - service at Watts 's I have   set my heart on so long ! ' home ' Cynthia call this house . I be sure it have be a home to she , poor darling ! I doubt if there be another man in the world who would have treat his step - daughter like dear papa ! and , Molly , you must have a new gown . " 

 " come , come ! remember I belong to the last generation , " say Mr. Gibson . 

 " and Cynthia will not notice what I wear , " say Molly , bright with pleasure at the thought of see she again . 

 " no ! but Walter will . he have such a quick eye for dress , and I think I rival papa ; if he be a good stepfather , I be a good stepmother , and I could not bear to see my molly shabby , and not look her good . I must have a new gown too . it will not   do to look as if we have nothing but the dress which we wear at the wedding ! " 

 but Molly stand out against the new gown for herself , and urge that if Cynthia and Walter be to come to visit they often , they have well see they as they really be , in dress , habit , and appointment . when Mr. Gibson have leave the room , Mrs. Gibson softly reproach molly for her obstinacy . 

 " you might have allow I to beg for a new gown for you , Molly , when you know how much I have admire that figure silk at Brown 's the other day . and now , of course , I can not   be so selfish as to get it for myself , and you to have nothing . you should learn to understand the wish of other people . still , on the whole , you be a dear , sweet girl , and I only wish well , I know what I wish ; only dear papa do not like it to be talk about . and now cover I up close , and let I go to sleep , and dream about my dear Cynthia and my new shawl ! "