Will Warburton 


 by 

 George Gissing 


 CHAPTER 1 

 the sea - wind in his hair , his eye agleam with the fresh memory of Alpine snow , Will Warburton spring out of the cab , pay the driver a double fare , fling on to his shoulder a heavy bag and run up , two step at a stride , to a flat on the fourth floor of the many - tenant building hard by Chelsea Bridge . his rat - tat - tat bring to the door a thin yellow face , cautious in espial , through the narrow opening . 

 " be it you , sir ? " 

 " all right , Mrs. Hopper ! how be you ? how be you ? " 

 he throw his bag into the passage , and cordially grasp the woman 's hand . 

 " dinner ready ? savagely hungry . give I three minute , and serve . " 

 for about that length of time there sound in the bedroom a splashing and a blowing ; then Warburton come forth with red cheek . he seize upon a little pile of letter and packet which lie on his writing - table , break envelope , rent wrapper , and read with now an ejaculation of pleasure , now a grunt of disgust , and again a mirthful half roar . then , dinner the feeding of a famished man of robust appetite and digestion , a man three or four year on the green side of thirty . it be a speedy business , in not much more than a quarter of an hour there disappear a noble steak and its appurtenance , a golden - crust apple tart , a substantial slice of ripe Cheddar , two bottle of creamy Bass . 

 " now I can talk ! " cry Will to his servant , as he throw himself into a deep chair , and begin light his pipe . " what be the news ? I seem to have be away three month rather than three week . " 

 " Mr. Franks call yesterday , sir , late in the afternoon , when I be here clean . he be very glad to hear you would be back to - day , and say he might look in to - night . " 

 " good ! what else ? " 

 " my brother - in - law wish to see you , sir . he be in trouble again lose his place at Boxon 's a few day ago . I do not   exac'ly know how it happen , but he will explain everything . he be very unfortunate , sir , be Allchin . " 

 " tell he to come before nine to - morrow morning , if he can . " 

 " yes , sir . I be sure it be very kind of you , sir . " 

 " what else ? " 

 " nothing as I can think of just now , sir . " 

 Warburton know from the woman 's way of speak that she have something still in her mind ; but his pipe be well lit , and a pleasant lassitude creep over he , he merely nod . Mrs. Hopper clear the table , and withdraw . 

 the window look across the garden of Chelsea Hospital   old - time Ranelagh   to the westward reach of the river , beyond which lie Battersea Park , with its lawn and foliage . a beam of the July sunset strike suddenly through the room . Warburton be aware of it with half - close eye ; he wish to stir himself , and look forth , but languor hold his limb , and wreathe tobacco - smoke keep his thought among the mountain . he might have quite doze off have not a sudden noise from within arouse he the unmistakable crash of fall crockery . it make he laugh , a laugh of humorous expostulation . a minute or two pass , then come a timid tap at his door , and Mrs. Hopper show her face . 

 " another accident , sir , I be sorry to say , " be her falter word . 

 " extensive ? " 

 " a dish and two plate , I be sorry to say , sir . " 

 " oh , that be nothing . " 

 " of course I shall make they good , sir . " 

 " Pooh ! be not   there plat enough ? " 

 " oh , quite enough just yet , sir . " 

 Warburton subdue a chuckle , and look with friendly smile at his domestic , who stand squeeze herself between the edge of the door and the jamb her habit when embarrassed . Mrs. Hopper have serve he for three year ; he know all her weakness , but think more of her virtue , chief of which be honest intention and a moderate aptitude for plain cooking . a glance about this room would have prove to any visitor that Mrs. Hopper 's idea of cleanliness be by no mean rigid , her master have make himself to a certain extent responsible for this defect ; he pay little attention to dust , provide that thing be in their wonte order . Mrs. Hopper be not a resident domestic ; she come at state hour . obviously a widow , she have a poor , loose - hung , trail little body , which no nourishment could plump or fortify . her visage be habitually doleful , but contract itself at moment into a grin of quaint drollery , which betray she for something of a humorist . 

 " my finger be all go silly to - day , sir , " she pursue . " I daresay it be because I have not   have much sleep these last few night . " 

 " how be that ? " 

 " it be my poor sister , sir my sister Liza , I mean she be have one of her bad headache the extra special , we call them . this time it be last more than three day , and not one minute of rest have the poor thing get . " 

 Warburton be all sympathy ; he inquire about the case as though it be that of an intimate friend . change of air and repose be obvious remedy ; no less obviously , these thing be out of the question for a work woman who live on a few shilling a week . 

 " do you know of any place she could go to ? " ask Warburton , add carelessly , " if the mean be provide . " 

 Mrs. Hopper squeeze herself more tightly than ever between door and jamb . her head be bent in an abashed way , and when she speak it be in a thick , gurgle tone , only just intelligible . 

 " there be a little lodge ' ouse at Southend , sir , where we use to go when my ' usband could afford it . " 

 " well , look here . get a doctor 's opinion whether Southend would do ; if not , which place would . and just send she away . do not   worry about the money . " 

 experience enable Mrs. Hopper to interpret this advice . she stammer gratitude . 

 " how be your other sister Mrs. Allchin ? " Warburton inquire kindly . 

 " why , sir , she be do pretty well in her ' ealth , sir , but her baby die yesterday week . I hope you will excuse I , sir , for all this bad news just when you come back from your holiday , and when it be natural as you do not   feel in very good spirit . " 

 will have much ado not to laugh . on his return from a holiday , Mrs. Hopper always presume he to be despondent in view of the resumption of daily work . he be begin to talk of Mrs. Allchin 's trouble , when at the outer door sound a long nervous knock . 

 " ha ! that be Mr. Franks . " 

 Mrs. Hopper run to admit the visitor . 




 CHAPTER 2 

 " Warburton ! " cry a high - pitch voice from the passage . " have you see the Art World ? " 

 and there rush into the room a tall , auburn - head young man of five - and - twenty , his comely face glow in excitement . with one hand he grasp his friend 's , in the other he hold out a magazine . 

 " you have not   see it ! look here ! what d'you think of that , confound you ! " 

 he have open the magazine so as to display an illustration , entitle " Sanctuary , " and state to be after a painting by Norbert Franks . 

 " be not   it good ? do not   it come out well ? deuce take you , why do not   you speak ? " 

 " not bad for a photogravure , " say Warburton , who have the air of a grave elder in the presence of this ebullient youth . 

 " be hang ! we know all about that . the thing be that it be there . do not   you feel any surprise ? have not   you get anything to say ? do not   you see what this mean , you old ragamuffin ? " 

 " should not   wonder if it mean coin of the realm for your shrewd dealer . " 

 " for I too , my boy , for I too ! not out of this thing , of course . but I have   arrive , I be lance , the way be clear ! why , you do not   seem to know what it mean get into the Art World . " 

 " I seem to remember , " say Warburton , smile , " that a month or two ago , you have not   language contemptuous enough for this magazine and all connect with it . " 

 " do not   be an ass ! " shrill the other , who be all this time circle about the little room with much gesticulation . " of course one talk like that when one have not   enough to eat and can not   sell a picture . I do not   pretend to have alter my opinion about photogravure , and all that . but come now , the thing itself ? be honest , Warburton . be it bad , now ? can you look at that picture , and say that it be worthless ? " 

 " I never say anything of the kind . " 

 " no , no ! you be too deucedly good - natured . but I always detect what you be think , and I see it do not   surprise you at all when the Academy muff refuse it . " 

 " there you be wrong , " cry Warburton . " I be really surprised . " 

 " confound your impudence ! well , you may think what you like . I maintain that the thing be not   half bad . it grow upon I . I see its merit more and more . " 

 Franks be hold up the picture , eye it intently . " Sanctuary " represent the interior of an old village church . on the ground against a pillar , crouch a young and beautiful woman , her dress and general aspect indicate the last degree of vagrant wretchedness ; wear out , she have fall asleep in a most graceful attitude , and the ray of a winter sunset smote upon her pallid countenance . before she stand the village clergyman , who have evidently just enter , and find she here ; his white head be bent in the wonte attitude of clerical benevolence ; in his face blend a gentle wonder and a compassionate tenderness . 

 " if that have be hang at Burlington House , Warburton , it would have be the picture of the year . " 

 " I think it very likely . " 

 " yes , I know what you mean , you sarcastic old ruffian . but there be another point of view . be the drawing good or not ? be the colour good or not ? of course you know nothing about it , but I tell you , for your information , I think it be a confoundedly clever bit of work . there remain the subject , and where be the harm in it ? the incident be quite possible . and why should not   the girl be good - look ? " 

 " Angelic ! " 

 " well why not ? there be girl with angelic face . do not   I know one ? " 

 Warburton , who have be sit with a leg over the arm of his chair suddenly change his position . 

 " that remind I , " he say . " I come across the Pomfrets in Switzerland . " 

 " where ? when ? " 

 " at Trient ten day ago . I spend three or four day with they . have not   Miss Elvan mention it ? " 

 " I have not   hear from she for a long time , " reply Franks . " well , for more than a week . do you meet they by chance ? " 

 " quite . I have a vague idea that the pomfret and their niece be somewhere in Switzerland . " 

 " vague idea ! " cry the artist " why , I tell you all about it , and growl for five or six hour one evening here because I could not   go with they . " 

 " so you do , " say Warburton , " but I be afraid I be think of something else , and when I start for the Alps , I have really forget all about it . I make up my mind suddenly , you know . we be have a troublesome time in Ailie Street , and it be holiday now or never . by the bye , we shall have to wind up . Sugar spell ruin . we must get out of it whilst we can do so with a whole skin . " 

 " ah , really ? " mutter Franks . " tell I about that presently ; I want to hear of Rosamund . you see a good deal of she , of course ? " 

 " I walk from Chamonix over the Col de Balme grand view of Mont Blanc there ! then down to Trient , in the valley below . and there , as I go in to dinner at the hotel , I find the three . good old Pomfret would have I stay awhile , and I be glad of the chance of long talk with he . Queer old bird , Ralph Pomfret . " 

 " yes , yes , so he be , " mutter the artist , absently . " but Rosamund be she enjoy herself ? " 

 " very much , I think . she certainly look very well . " 

 " have much talk with she ? " ask Franks , as if carelessly . 

 " we discuss you , of course . I forget whether our conclusion be favourable or not . " 

 the artist laugh , and stride about the room with his hand in his pocket . 

 " you know what ? " he exclaim , seem to look closely at a print on the wall . " I be go to be marry before the end of the year . on that point I have   make up my mind . I go yesterday to see a house at Fulham Mrs. Cross 's , by the bye , it be to let at Michaelmas , rent forty - five . all but settle that I shall take it . risk be hang . I be go to make money . what an ass I be to take that fellow 's first offer for ' sanctuary ' ! it be low water with I , and I feel bilious . fifty guineas ! your fault , a good deal , you know ; you make I think bad of it than it deserve . you will see ; Blackstaffe'll make a small fortune out of it ; of course he have all the right idiot that I be ! well , it be too late to talk about that . and I say , old man , do not   take my growl too literally . I do not   really mean that you be to blame . I should be an ungrateful cur if I think such a thing . " 

 " how be ' the Slummer ' get on ? " ask Warburton good - humouredly . 

 " well , I be go to say that I shall have it finish in a few week . if Blackstaffe want ' the Slummer ' he will have to pay for it . of course it must go to the Academy , and of course I shall keep all the right unless Blackstaffe make a really handsome offer . why , it ought to be worth five or six hundred to I at least . and that would start we . but I do not   care even if I only get half that , I shall be marry all the same . Rosamund have plenty of pluck . I could not   ask she to start life on a pound a week about my average for the last two year ; but with two or three hundred in hand , and a decent little house , like that of Mrs. Cross 's , at a reasonable rent well , we shall risk it . I be sick of wait . and it be not   fair to a girl that be my view . two year now ; an engagement that last more than two year be not   likely to come to much good . you will think my behaviour pretty cool , on one point . I do not   forget , you old usurer , that I owe you something more than a hundred pound " 

 " Pooh ! " 

 " be poohe yourself ! but for you , I should have go without dinner many a day ; but for you , I should most likely have have to chuck paint altogether , and turn clerk or dock - labourer . but let I stay in your debt a little long , old man . I can not   put off my marriage any long , and just at first I shall want all the money I can lay my hand on . " 

 at this moment Mrs. Hopper enter with a lamp . there be a pause in the conversation . Franks light a cigarette , and try to sit still , but be very soon pace the floor again . a tumbler of whisky and soda reanimate his flagging talk . 

 " no ! " he exclaim . " I be not go to admit that ' Sanctuary ' be cheap and sentimental , and all the rest of it . the more I think about it , the more convinced I be that it be nothing to be ashamed of . People have get hold of the idea that if a thing be popular it must be bad art . that be all rot . I be go in for popularity . look here ! suppose that be what I be mean for ? what if it be the good I have in I to do ? should not   I be a jackass if I scorn to make money by what , for I , be good work , and prefer to starve whilst I turn out pretentious stuff that be worth nothing from my point of view ? " 

 " I should not   wonder if you be right , " say Warburton reflectively . " in any case , I know as much about art as I do about the differential calculus . to make money be a good and joyful thing as long as one do not   bleed the poor . so go ahead , my son , and luck be with you ! " 

 " I can not   find my model yet for the Slummer 's head . it must not   be too like the ' sanctuary ' girl , but at the same time it must be a popular type of beauty . I have   be haunt refreshment bar and florist ' shop ; lot of good material , but never quite the thing . there be a damsel at the Crystal Palace but this do not   interest you , you old misogynist . " 

 " old what ? " exclaim Warburton , with an air of genuine surprise . 

 " have I get the word wrong ? I be not much of a classic " 

 " the word be all right . but that be your idea of I , be it ? " 

 the artist stand and gaze at his friend with an odd expression , as if a joke have be arrest on his lip by graver thought . 

 " be not   it true ? " 

 " perhaps it be ; yes , yes , I daresay . " 

 and he turn at once to another subject . 




 CHAPTER 3 

 the year be 1886 . 

 when at business , Warburton sit in a high , bare room , which look upon little Ailie Street , in Whitechapel ; the air he breathe have a taste and odour strongly saccharine . if his eye stray to one of the wall , he see a map of the West Indies ; if to another , it fall upon a map of St. Kitts ; if to the third , there be before he a plan of a sugar estate on that little island . here he sit for certain hour of the solid day , issue order to clerk , receive commercial caller , study trade journal in sundry language often read some book which have no obvious reference to the sugar - refining industry . it be not Will 's ideal of life , but hither he have suffer himself to be lead by circumstance , and his musing suggest no practicable issue into a more congenial world . 

 the death of his father when he be sixteen have leave he with a certain liberty for shape a career . what he see definitely before he be a small share in the St. Kitts property of Messrs. Sherwood Brothers , a small share in the London business of the same firm , and a small sum of ready money these thing to be his when he attain his majority . his mother and sister , who live in a little country house down in Huntingdonshire , be modestly but securely provide for , and will might have go quietly on with his study till he could resolve upon a course in life . but no soon be he free from paternal restraint than the lad grow restive ; nothing would please he but an adventure in foreign land ; and when it become clear that he be only waste his time at school , Mrs. Warburton let he go to the West Indies , where a place be find for he in the house of Sherwood Brothers . at St. Kitts , will remain till he be one - and - twenty . long before that , he have grow heartily tired of his work disgust with the climate , and oppress with home sickness , but pride forbid he to return until he could do so as a free man . 

 one thing this apprenticeship to life have teach he that he be not make for subordination . " I do not   care how poor I be , " thus he write to his mother , " but I will be my own master . to be at other people 's order bring out all the bad in I ; it make I sullen and bearish , and all sort of ugly thing , which I certainly be not when my true self have play . so , you see , I must find some independent way of life . if I have to live by carry round a Punch and Judy show , I should vastly prefer it to make a large income as somebody 's servant . " 

 meanwhile , unfortunately for a young man of this temperament , his prospect have become less assured . there be perturbation in the sugar world ; income from St. Kitts and from Whitechapel have sensibly diminish , and it seem but too likely , would continue to do so . for some half - year will live in London , " look about he , " then he announce that Godfrey Sherwood , at present sole representative of Sherwood Brothers , have offer he an active partnership in Little Ailie Street , and that he have accept it . he enter upon this position without zeal , but six month ' investigation have teach he that to earn money without surrender his independence be no very easy thing ; he probably might wait a long time before an opening would present itself more attractive than this at the sugar - refinery . 

 Godfrey Sherwood be a schoolfellow of his , but some two or three year old ; much good feeling exist between they , their taste and temper have just that difference in similarity which be the sure bond of friendship . judge by his talk , Sherwood be all vigour , energy , fire ; his personal habit , on the other hand , incline to tranquillity and ease a great reader , he love the literature of romance and adventure , know by heart author such as Malory and Froissart , have on his shelf all the book of travel and adventure he could procure . as a boy he seem destine to any life save that of humdrum commerce , of which he speak with contempt and abhorrence ; and there be no reason why he should not have gratify his desire of see the world , of lead what he call " the life of a man . " yet here he be , sit each day in a counting - house in Whitechapel , with nothing behind he but a few ramble on the continent , and certainly with no immediate intention of go far afield . his father 's death leave he in sole command of the business , and his reasonable course would have be to retire from it as soon as possible , for foreign competition be make itself feel in the english trade , and many firm more solidly establish than that in Little Ailie Street have either come to grief or withdraw from the struggle . but Godfrey 's inertia keep he in the familiar routine , with day - to - day postponement of practical decision . when Warburton come back from St. Kitts , and their friendship be renew , Godfrey 's talk give full play to his imaginative energy . yes , yes , the refining business be at a bad pass just now , but this be only temporary ; those firm that could weather the storm for a year or two long would enter upon a time of brilliant prosperity . be it to be suppose that the Government would allow a great industry to perish out of mere regard for the fetish of Free Trade ? city man with first - hand information declare that " measure " be be prepare ; in one way or another , the english trade would be rescue and make triumphant over those bounty - feed foreigner . 

 " hold on ? " cry Sherwood . " of course I mean to hold on . there 's pleasure and honour in the thing . I enjoy the fight . I have   have thought of get into Parliament , to speak for sugar . one might do bad , you know . there will be a dissolution next year , certain . first - rate fun , fight a constituency . but in that case I must have a partner here why that be an idea . how would it suit you ? why not join I ? " 

 and so the thing come about . the term which Godfrey offer be so generous that will have to reduce they before he accept : even thus , he find his income , at a stroke , all but double . Sherwood , to be sure , do not stand for Parliament , nor be anything definite hear about that sugar - protect budget which he still believe in . in Little Ailie Street business steadily decline . 

 " it be a disgrace to England ! " cry Godfrey . " monstrous that not a finger should be lift to save one of our most important industry . you , of course , be free to retire at any moment , will . for my own part , here I stand , come what may . if it be ruin , ruin let it be . I will fight to the last . a man owe I ten thousand pound . when I recover it , and I may any day I shall put every penny into the business . " 

 " ten thousand pound ! " exclaim Warburton in astonishment . " a trade debt , do you mean ? " 

 " no , no . a friend of mine , son of a millionaire , who get into difficulty some time ago , and borrow of I to clear himself . good interest , and principal safe as Consols . in a year at most I shall have the money back , and every penny shall go into the business . " 

 will have his private view of the matter , and not seldom suffer a good deal of uneasiness as he see the inevitable doom approach . but already it be too late to withdraw his share from the concern ; that would have be merely to take advantage of Sherwood 's generosity , and will be himself not less chivalrous . in Godfrey 's phrase , they continue " to fight the ship , " and perhaps would have hold out to the moment of sink , have not the accession of the Liberals to power in the spring of this present year cause Sherwood so deep a disgust that he turn despondent and begin to talk of surrender to hopeless circumstance . 

 " it be all up with we , Will . this Government spell ruin , and will count it one of its chief glory if we come to grief . but , by Heaven , they shall not   have that joy . we will square up , quietly , comfortably , with dignity . we will come out of this fight with arm and baggage . it be still possible , you know . we will sell the St. Kitts estate to the Germans . we will find some one to buy we up here the place would suit a brewer . and then by Jove ! we will make jam . " 

 " Jam ? " 

 " be not   it an idea ? cheap sugar have do for the refiner , but it be a fortune for the jam trade . why not put all we can realize into a jam factory ? we will go down into the country ; find some delightful place where land be cheap ; start a fruit farm ; run up a building . do not   it take you , will ? think of go to business every day through lane overhang with fruit - tree blossom ! well that than the filth and stench and gloom and uproar of Whitechapel what ? we might found a village for our workpeople the ideal village , perfectly healthy , every cottage beautiful . eh ? what ? how do it strike you , will ? " 

 " pleasant . but the money ? " 

 " we shall have enough to start ; I think we shall . if not , we will find a moneyed man to join we . " 

 " what about that ten thousand pound ? " suggest Warburton . 

 Sherwood shake his head . 

 " can not   get it just yet . to tell you the truth , it depend on the death of the man 's father . no , but if necessary , some one will easily be find . be not   the idea magnificent ? how it would rile the government if they hear of it ! Ho , ho ! " 

 one could never be sure how far Godfrey be serious when he talk like this ; the humorous impulse so blend with the excitability of his imagination , that people who know he little and hear he talk at large thought he something of a crack - brain . the odd thing be that , with all his peculiarity , he have many of the characteristic of a sound man of business ; indeed , have it be otherwise , the balance - sheet of the refinery must long ago have show a disastrous deficit . as Warburton know , thing have be manage with no little prudence and sagacity ; what he do not so clearly understand be that Sherwood have simply adhere to the tradition of the firm , follow very exactly the path mark out for he by his father and his uncle , both notable trader . concern Godfrey 's private resource , Warburton know little or nothing ; it seem probable that the eld Sherwood have leave a considerable fortune , which his only son must have inherit . no doubt , say Will to himself , this large reserve be the explanation of his partner 's courage . 

 so the St. Kitts estate be sell , and , with all the deliberate dignity demand by the fact that the Government 's eye be upon they , Sherwood Brothers proceed to terminate their affair in Whitechapel . in July , Warburton take his three week ' holiday , there be nothing well for he to do . and among the letter he find on his table when he return , be one from Sherwood , which contain only these word : 

 " great opportunity in view . our fortune be make ! " 




 CHAPTER 4 

 when Franks be go , Warburton take up the Art World , which his friend have leave , and glance again at the photogravure of " Sanctuary . " he know , as he have declare , nothing about art , and judge picture as he judge book , emotionally . his bent be to what be call the realistic point of view , and " Sanctuary " make he smile . but very good - naturedly ; for he like Norbert Franks , and believe he would do well thing than this . unless ? 

 the thought break off with an uneasy interrogative . 

 he turn to the few line of text devote to the painter . Norbert Franks , he read , be still a very young man ; " Sanctuary , " now on exhibition at Birmingham , be his first important picture ; hitherto he have be chiefly occupy with work in black and white . there follow a few critical comment , and prophecy of achievement to come . 

 yes . but again the uneasy interrogative . 

 their acquaintance date from the year after Warburton 's return from St. Kitts . will have just establish himself in his flat near Chelsea Bridge , delight to be a Londoner , and be spend most of his leisure in exploration of London 's vastness . he look upon all his early year as waste , because they have not be pass in the city on the Thames . the history of London , the multitudinous life of London as it lie about he , with marvel and mystery in every highway and byway , occupy his mind , and work upon his imagination . be a stout walker , and care little for any other form of exercise , in his free hour he cover many a league of pavement . a fine summer morning would see he set forth , long before milk - cart have begin to rattle along the street , and on one such expedition , as he step briskly through a poor district south of the river , he be surprised to see an artist at work , paint seriously , his easel in the dry gutter . he slacken his pace to have a glimpse of the canvas , and the painter , a young , pleasant - look fellow , turn round and ask if he have a match . able to supply this demand , Warburton talk whilst the other relit his pipe . it rejoice he , he say , to see a painter engage upon such a subject as this a bit of squalid London 's infinite picturesqueness . 

 the next morning Warburton take the same walk , and again find the painter at work . they talk freely ; they exchange invitation ; and that same evening Norbert Franks climb the staircase to Will be flat , and smoke his first pipe and drink his first whisky - and - soda in the pleasant room overlook Ranelagh . his own quarter be in Queen 's Road , Battersea , at no great distance . the two young man be soon see a great deal of each other . when their friendship have ripen through a twelvemonth , Franks , always impecunious , cheerily borrow a five - pound note ; not long after , he mirthfully double his debt ; and this grow to a habit with he . 

 " you be a capitalist , Warburton , " he remark one day , " and a generous fellow , too . of course I shall pay what I owe you when I sell a big picture . meanwhile , you have the gratification of support a man of genius , without the least inconvenience to yourself . excellent idea of yours to strike up a friendship , be not   it ? " 

 the benefit be reciprocal . Warburton do not readily form intimacy ; indeed Godfrey Sherwood have till now be almost the only man he call friend , and the peculiarity of his temper expose he to the risk of be too much alone . though neither arrogant nor envious , will find little pleasure in the society of people who , from any point of view , be notably his superior ; even as he could not subordinate himself in money - earn relation , so do he become ill - at - ease , lose all spontaneity , in company above his social or intellectual level . such a man 's danger be obvious ; he might , in default of congenial associate , decline upon inferior ; all the more that a softness of heart , a fineness of humanity , ever dispose he to feel and show special kindness for the poor , the distressed , the unfortunate . Sherwood 's acquaintance have little attraction for he ; they be mostly people who live in a luxurious way , go in for sport , talk about the money market all of which thing fascinate Godfrey , though in truth he be far from belong by nature to that particular world . with Franks , will could be wholly himself , enjoy the slight advantage of his large mean , extend his knowledge without undue obligation , and get all the good that come to a man from the exercise of his kindliest feeling . 

 with less of geniality , because more occupy with himself , Norbert Franks resemble his new friend in a distaste for ordinary social pleasure and an enjoyment of the intimacy of life . he stand very much alone in the world , and from the age of eighteen he have in one way or another support himself , chiefly by work on illustrate paper . his father , who belong to what be call a good family , begin life in easy circumstance , and gain some reputation as a connoisseur of art ; imprudence and misfortune have oblige he to sell his collection , Mr. Franks take to buy picture and bric - a - brac for profit , and during the last ten year of his life be associate in that capacity with a London firm . Norbert , motherless from infancy and an only child , receive his early education at expensive school , but , show little aptitude for study and much for use of the pencil , be take by his father at twelve year old to Paris , and there set to work under a good art - teacher . at sixteen he go to Italy , where he remain for a couple of year . then , on a journey in the East , the eld Franks die . Norbert return to England , learn that a matter of fifty pound be all his heritage , and pluckily turn to the task of keep himself alive . Herein his foreign sketch - book prove serviceable , but the struggle be long and hard before he could house himself decently , and get to serious work as a painter . later on , he be will not to say that this poverty have be the well possible thing for he , its enforce abstinence have come just at the time when he have begin to " wallow " his word for any sort of excess ; and " wallow " be undoubtedly a peril to which Norbert 's temper particularly expose he . short common make he , as they have make many another youth , sober and chaste , at all event in practice ; and when he begin to lift up his head , a little ; when , at the age of three - and - twenty , he earn what seem to he at first the luxurious income of a pound or so a week ; when , in short , the inclination to " wallow " might again have take hold upon he , it be his chance to fall in love so seriously and hopefully that all the well feature of his character be draw out , emphasize , and , as it seem , for good and all establish in predominance . 

 not long after his first meeting with Warburton , he one day receive , through the publisher of a book he have illustrate , a letter sign " Ralph Pomfret , " the writer of which ask whether " Norbert Franks " be the son of an old friend of whom he have lose sight for many year . by way of answer , Franks call upon his correspondent , who live in a pleasant little house at Ashtead , in Surrey ; he find a man of something less than sixty , with a touch of eccentricity in his thought and way , by whom he be hospitably receive , and invite to return whenever it please he . it be not very long before Franks ask permission to make the pomfret acquaint with his friend Warburton , a step which prove entirely justifiable . together or separately , the two young man be often to be see at Ashtead , whither they be attract not only by the kindly and amusing talk of Ralph Pomfret , but at least as much by the grace and sweetness and sympathetic intelligence of the mistress of the house , for whom both entertain respect and admiration . 

 one Sunday afternoon , Warburton , tempt as usual by the thought of tea and talk in that delightful little garden , go out to Ashtead , and , as he push open the gate , be confused and vex at the sight of stranger ; there , before the house , stand a middle - aged gentleman and a young girl , chat with Mrs. Pomfret . he would have turn away and take himself off in disappointment , but that the clank of the gate have attract attention , and he have no choice but to move forward . the stranger prove to be Mrs. Pomfret 's brother and his daughter ; they have be spend half a year in the south of France , and be here for a day or two before return to their home at Bath . when he have recover his equanimity , Warburton become aware that the young lady be fair to look upon . her age seem about two - and - twenty ; not very tall , she bear herself with perhaps a touch of conscious dignity and impressiveness ; perfect health , a warm complexion , magnificent hair , eye that shine with gaiety and good - nature , make of Rosamund Elvan a live picture such as Will Warburton have not often see ; he be shy in her presence , and by no mean do himself justice that afternoon . his downcast eye presently notice that she wear shoe of a peculiar kind white canvas with sol of plait cord ; in the course of conversation he learn that these be a memento of the basque country , about which Miss Elvan talk with a very pretty enthusiasm . will go away , after all , in a dissatisfied mood . girl be to he merely a source of disquiet . " if she be not fair for I " be his ordinary thought ; and he have never yet succeed in persuade himself that any girl , fair or not , be at all likely to conceive the idea of devote herself to his happiness . in this matter , an excessive modesty subdue he . it have something to do with his holding so much apart from general society . 

 on the evening of the next day , there be a thunderous knock at Warburton 's flat , and in rush Franks . 

 " you be at Ashtead yesterday , " he cry . 

 " I be . what of that ? " 

 " and you do not   come to tell I about the Elvans ! " 

 " about Miss Elvan , I suppose you mean ? " say will . 

 " well , yes , I do . I go there by chance this afternoon . the two man be away somewhere , I find Mrs. Pomfret and that girl alone together . never have such a delightful time in my life ! but I say , Warburton , we must understand each other . be you do you I mean , do she strike you particularly ? " 

 will threw back his head and laugh . 

 " you mean that ? " shout the other , joyously . " you really do not   care it be nothing to you ? " 

 " why , be it anything to you ? " 

 " anything ? Rosamund Elvan be the most beautiful girl I ever see , and the sweetest , and the bright , and the altogether flooringest ! and , by heaven and earth , I be resolve to marry she ! " 




 CHAPTER 5 

 as he sit muse , the Art World still in his hand , Warburton could hear his friend 's voice ring out that audacious vow . he could remember , too , the odd little pang with which he hear it , a half spasm of altogether absurd jealousy . of course the feeling do not last . there be no recurrence of it when he hear that Franks have again see Miss Elvan before she leave Ashtead ; nor when he learn that the artist have be spend a day or two at Bath . Less than a month after their first meeting , Franks win Rosamund 's consent . he be frantic with exultation . arrive with the news at ten o'clock one night , he shout and madden about Warburton 's room until finally turn out at two in the morning . his circumstance be what they be , he could not hope for marriage yet awhile ; he must work and wait . never mind ; see what work he would produce ! yet it appear to his friend that all through the next twelvemonth he merely waste time , such work as he do finish being of very slight value . he talk and talk , now of Rosamund , now of what he be go to do , until Warburton , lose patience , would cut he short with " oh , go to Bath ! " an old can not phrase revive for its special appropriateness in this connection . Franks go to Bath far oftener than he could afford , money for his journey be generally borrow from his long - endure friend . 

 Rosamund herself have nothing , and but the small expectation should her father die . two year before this , it have occur to she that she should like to study art , and might possibly find in it a means of self - support . she be allow to attend class at South Kensington , but little come of this except a close friendship with a girl of her own age , by name Bertha Cross , who be follow the art course with more serious purpose . when she have be betroth for about a year , Rosamund chance to spend a week in London at her friend 's house , and this lead to acquaintance between Franks and the Crosses . for a time , Warburton see and hear less of the artist , who make confidante of Mrs. Cross and her daughter , and spend many an evening with they talk , talk , talk about Rosamund ; but this intimacy do not endure very long , Mrs. Cross be a person of marked peculiarity , which in the end overtrie Norbert 's temper . only on the fourth story flat by Chelsea Bridge could the lover find that sort of sympathy which he really need , solace yet tonic . but for Warburton he would have work even less . to will it seem an odd result of fortunate love that the artist , though in every other respect a well man than before , should have become , to all appearance , less zealous , less efficient , in his art . have Rosamund Elvan the right influence on her lover ; in spite of Norbert 's lyric eulogy , have she serve merely to confuse his aim , perhaps to bring he down to a low level of thought ? 

 there be his picture , " Sanctuary . " before he know Rosamund , Franks would have scoff at such a subject , would have howl at such treatment of it . there be notable distance between this and what Norbert be paint in that summer sunrise four year ago , with his portable easel in the gutter . and Miss Elvan admire " Sanctuary " at least , Franks say she do . true , she also admire the picture of the pawnshop and the public - house ; will have himself hear she speak of it with high praise , and with impatient wonder that no purchaser could be find for it . most likely she approve of everything Norbert do , and have no more serious criterion . unless , indeed , her private test of artistic value be the financial result . 

 Warburton could not altogether believe that . annoyance with the artist now and then incline he to slighting thought of Rosamund ; yet , on the whole , his view of she be not depreciatory . the disadvantage to his mind be her remarkable comeliness . he could not but fear that so much beauty must be inconsistent with the sterling quality which make a good wife . 

 will 's eye fall on Sherwood 's note , and he go to bed wonder what the project might be which be to make their fortune . 




 CHAPTER 6 

 he have breakfast , and be smoke his pipe as he write a letter , when Mrs. Hopper announce the visit , by appointment , of her brother - in - law , Allchin . there enter a short , sturdy , red - headed young fellow , in a Sunday suit of respectable antiquity ; his feature be rude , his aspect dog ; but a certain intelligence show in his countenance , and a not unamiable smile respond to the bluff heartiness of Warburton 's greeting . by original calling , Allchin be a grocer 's assistant , but a troublesome temper have more than once set he adrift , the outcast of grocerdom , to earn a living as good he could by his vigorous thews , and it be in one of these interval that , have need of a porter at the work , Warburton have engage he , on Mrs. Hopper 's petition . after a month or so of irreproachable service , Allchin fight with a foreman , and take his discharge . the same week , Mrs. Allchin present he with their first child ; the family fall into want ; Mrs. Hopper   squeeze between door and jamb   draw her master 's attention to the lamentable case , and help be of course forthcoming . then , by good luck , Allchin be enable to resume his vocation ; he get a place at a grocer 's in Fulham Road , and in a few week present himself before his benefactor , bring half - a - crown as a first instalment toward the discharge of his debt ; for only on this condition have he accept the money . half a year elapse without troublesome incident ; the man make regular repayment in small sum ; then come the disaster which Mrs. Hopper have yesterday announce . 

 " well , Allchin , " cry Warburton , " what be the late ? " 

 before speak , the other press his lip tightly together and puff out his cheek , as if it cost he an effort to bring word to the surface . his reply come forth with explosive abruptness . 

 " lost my place at Boxon 's , sir . " 

 " and how be that ? " 

 " it happen last Saturday , sir . I do not   want to make out as I be not   at all to blame . I know as well as anybody that I have   get a will of my own . but we be open late , as perhaps you know , sir , on Saturday night , and Mr. Boxon well , it be only the truth he be never quite himself after ten o'clock . I have work from eight in the morning to something past midnight of course I do not   think nothing of that , 'cause it be reg'lar in the trade . but well , in come a customer , sir , a woman as do not   rightly know what she want ; and she go out without buy , and Mr. Boxon he see it , and he come up to I and call I the foul name he could turn his tongue to . and so well , sir , there be unpleasantness , as they say " 

 he hesitate , Warburton eye he with a twinkle of subdue amusement . 

 " a quarrel , in fact , eh ? " 

 " it do about come to that , sir ! " 

 " you lose your temper , of course . " 

 " that be about the truth , sir . " 

 " and Boxon turn you out ? " 

 Allchin look hurt . 

 " well , sir , I have   no doubt he would have like to , but I be a bit beforehand with he . when I see he last , he be settin ' on the pavement , sir , rubbin ' his ' ead . " 

 in spite of his inclination to laugh , will keep a grave countenance . 

 " I be afraid that kind of thing will not   do , Allchin . you will be in serious trouble one of these day . " 

 " that be what my wife say , sir . I know well enough as it be hard on she , just after we have   lose the baby as perhaps Mrs. Hopper'll have tell you , sir . " 

 " I be very sorry to hear it , Allchin . " 

 " thank you , sir . you have   always something kind to say . and I be that vexed , because I be get on well with pay my debt . but Mr. Boxon , sir , he be many a time make I that mad that I have   go out into the back yard and kick the wall till my toe be sore , just to ease my feeling , like . to tell the truth , sir , I do not   think he be ever rightly sober , and I have   hear other say the same . and his business be fallin ' off , something shockin ' . customer do not   like to be insult ; that be only natural . he be always go down to Kempton Park , or Epsom , or some such place . they do say as he lose ' undred of pound at Kempton Park last week . it be my opinion the shop can not   go on much long . well , sir , I think I just ought to come and tell you the truth of thing , and I will not   disturb you no long . I shall do my good to find another place . " 

 Warburton 's impulse be to offer temporary work in Little Ailie Street , but he remember that the business be not in a position to increase expense , and that the refinery might any day be close . 

 " all right , " he answer cheerily , " let I know how you get on . " 

 when Allchin 's heavy footstep have echo away down the stair , Mrs. Hopper answer her master 's call . 

 " I suppose they have a little money to go on with ? " Warburton inquire . " I mean , enough for a week or so . " 

 " yes , I think they have that , sir . but I see how it will be . my poor sister'll end in the work'us . Allchin'll never keep a place . not that I can blame he , sir , for givin ' it to that Boxon , 'cause every one say he be a brute . " 

 " well , just let I know if they begin to be in want . but of course Allchin can always get work as a porter . he must learn to keep his fist down , if he do not   want to be perpetually out of employment . " 

 " that be what I tell he , sir . and my poor sister , sir , she be never stop talkin ' to he , day or night you may say , ever since it happen " 

 " Merciful Heavens ! " groan Warburton to himself . 




 CHAPTER 7 

 at half - past nine he reach Little Ailie Street . 

 " Mr. Sherwood not here yet , I suppose ? " ask Will . 

 " oh yes , he be , sir , " reply the manager ; " be here for half an hour . " 

 Warburton go on to the senior partner 's room . there sit Godfrey Sherwood bend over a book which , to judge from the smile upon his face , could have nothing to do with the sugar - refining question . 

 " how do , will ? " he exclaim , with even more than his usual cheerfulness . " do you ever read ' the Adventures of a young Son ' ? oh , you must . listen here . he be describe how he thrash an assistant master at school ; thrash he , he say , till ' the sweat drop from his brow like rain - drop from the eave of a pig - sty ! ' Ho - ho - ho ! what do you think of that for a comparison ? be not   it strong ? by Jove ! a brace book ! Trelawny , you know ; the friend of Byron . as breezy a book as I know . it do one good . " 

 Godfrey Sherwood be , as regard his visage , what be call a plain young man , but his smile tell of infinite good - nature , and his voice , notwithstanding its frequent note of energy or zeal , have a natural softness of intonation which suggest other quality than the practical and vigorous . 

 " enjoy your holiday ? " he go on , rise , stretch himself , and offer a box of cigarette . " you look well . do any summit ? when we get our affair in order , I must be off somewhere myself . Northward , I think . I want a little brace cold . I should like to see Iceland . you know the icelandic saga ? magnificent ! there be the saga of Grettir the Strong by Jove ! but come , this be not   business . I have news for you , real , substantial , hopeful news . " 

 they seat themselves in roundbacked chair , and will light a cigarette . 

 " you know my thought be run on jam ; jam be our salvation ; of that I have long be convince . I look about , make a few inquiry , and by good luck , not long after you go off for your holiday , meet just the man I want . you have   hear of Applegarth 's jam ? " 

 will say he have see they advertise . 

 " well , I come across Applegarth himself . I be talk to Linklater and jam come up . ' you ought to see my friend Applegarth , ' say he ; and he arrange for we to meet . Applegarth happen to be in town , but he live down in Somerset , and his factory be at Bristol . we all din together at the Junior Carlton , and Applegarth and I get on so well that he ask I down to his place . Oxford man , clever , a fine musician , and an astronomer ; have build himself a little observatory magnificent telescope . by Jove ! you should hear he handle the violin . astonishing fellow ! not much of a talker ; rather dry in his manner ; but no end of energy , bubble over with vital force . he begin as a barrister , but could not   get on , and see his capital melt . ' hang it ! ' say he , ' I must make some use of what money I have ' ; and he think of jam . brilliant idea ! he begin in a very modest way , down at Bristol , only aim at local trade . but his jam be good ; the demand grow ; he build a factory ; profit become considerable . and now , he want to withdraw from active business , keep an interest . want to find some one who would run and extend the concern put in a fair capital , and leave he to draw his income quietly . you see ? " 

 " seem a good opportunity , " say Warburton . 

 " good ? it be simply superb . he take I over the work a really beautiful sight , everything so admirably arrange . then we have more private talk . of course I speak of you , say I could do nothing till we have consult together . I do not   seem too eager not good policy . but we have   have some correspondence , and you shall see the letter . " 

 he hand they to his partner . Warburton see that there be a question of a good many thousand pound . 

 " of course , " he remark , " I could only stand for a very small part in this . " 

 " well , we must talk about that . to tell you the truth , will , " Sherwood continue , cross his leg and clasp his hand behind his head , " I do not   see my way to find the whole capital , and yet I do not   want to bring in a stranger . Applegarth could sell to a company any moment , but that be not   his idea ; he want to keep the concern in as few hand as possible . he have a first - rate manager ; the mere jam - making would not   worry we at all ; and the office work be largely a matter of routine . will you take time to think about it ? " 

 the figure which Warburton have before he be decidedly stimulating ; they make a very pleasant contrast to the balance - sheet with which he have recently have to deal . he know roughly what sum be at his disposal for investment ; the winding - up of the business here could be complete at any moment , and involve no risk of surprise . but a thought have occur to he which keep he silently reflect for some minute . 

 " I suppose , " he say presently , " this affair have about as little risk as anything one could put money in ? " 

 " I should say , " Godfrey answer , with his man - of - business air , " that the element of risk be non - existent . what can be more solid than jam ? there 's competition to be sure ; but Applegarth be already a good name throughout England , and in the West they swear by it . at Bristol , Exeter , Dorchester all over there Applegarth hold the field . very seriously speak , I see in this proposal nothing but sure and increase gain . " 

 " you know as well as I do , " will resume , " how I stand . I have no resource of my own beyond what you be aware of . but I have   be think " 

 he break off , star at the window , drum on the arm of his chair , Sherwood wait with a patient smile . 

 " it be my mother and sister I have in mind , " will resume . " that property of theirs ; it bring they about a hundred and fifty pound a year in cash , and three time that in worry . at any moment they might sell . a man at St. Neots offer four thousand pound ; I suspect more might be get if Turnbull , their lawyer , take the matter in hand . suppose I advise they to sell and put the money in Applegarth ? " 

 " by Jove ! " cry Sherwood . " how could they do well ? splendid idea ! " 

 " yes if all go well . Bear in mind , on the other hand , that if they lose this money , they would have nothing to live upon , or as good as nothing . they draw some fifty pound a year from another source , and they have their own house that be all . ought I to take this responsibility ? " 

 " I do not   hesitate to guarantee , " say Sherwood , with glow gravity , " that in two year ' time their four thousand pound shall produce three time what it do now . only think , my dear fellow ! Jam think what it mean ! " 

 for ten minute Godfrey rhapsodise on the theme . Warburton be move by his eloquence . 

 " I shall run down to St. Neots , " say will at length . 

 " do . and then we will both of we go down to Bristol . I be sure you will like Applegarth . by the bye , you never go in for astronomy , do you ? I feel ashamed of my ignorance . why , it be one of the most interesting subject a man can study . I shall take it up . one might have a little observatory of one 's own . do you know Bristol at all ? a beastly place , the town , but perfectly delightful country quite near at hand . Applegarth live in an ideal spot you will see . " 

 there be a knock at the door and the manager enter . other business claim their attention . 




 CHAPTER 8 

 Warburton often return from Whitechapel to Chelsea on foot , enjoy the long walk after his day in the office . this evening , a heavily clouded sky and sob wind tell that rain be not far off ; nevertheless , wish to think hard , which he could never do so well as when walk at a brisk pace , he set off in the familiar direction a straight cut across South London . 

 in low Kennington Lane he stop , as his habit be , at a little stationer 's shop , over which be the name Potts . during his last year in the West Indies , he have befriend an english lad whose health be suffer from the climate , and eventually have pay his passage to the United States , whither the young adventurer wish to go in pursuit of his fortune . not long after he receive a letter of thank from the lad 's father , and , on come to London , he seek out Mr. Potts , whose gratitude and its quaint expression have please he . the acquaintance continue ; whenever Warburton pass the shop he step in and make purchase generally of thing he do not in the least want . Potts have all the characteristic which be will not to interest Will , and touch his sympathy ; he be poor , weak of body , humble - spirited , and of an honest , simple mind . nothing more natural and cordial than Will 's bear as he enter and hold out his hand to the shopkeeper . how be business ? any news lately from Jack ? Jack , it seem , be do pretty well at Pittsburgh ; would Mr. Warburton care to read a long letter that have arrive from he a week ago ? to his satisfaction , will find that the letter have enclose a small sum of money , for a present on the father 's birthday . have , as usual , lade himself with newspaper , periodical and notepaper , he go his way . 

 at grimy Vauxhall he cross the river , and pursue his course along Grosvenor Road . rain have begin to fall , and the driving of the wind oblige he to walk with the umbrella before his face . happen to glance ahead , when not far from home , he see , at a distance of twenty yard , a man whom he take for Norbert Franks . the artist be come toward he , but suddenly he turn round about , and walk rapidly away , disappear in a moment down a side street . Franks it certainly be ; impossible to mistake his figure , his gait ; and Warburton feel sure that the abrupt change of direction be cause by his friend 's desire to avoid he . at the end of the byway he look , and there be the familiar figure , march with quick step into the rainy distance . Odd ! but perhaps it simply mean that Franks have not see he . 

 he reach home , write some letter , make preparation for leave town by an early train next morning , and din with his customary appetite . whilst smoke his after - dinner pipe , he think again of that queer little incident in Grosvenor Road , and resolve of a sudden to go and see Franks . it still rain , so he take advantage of a pass hansom , and drive in a few minute to the artist 's lodge on the south side of Battersea Park . the door be open to he by the landlady , who smile recognition . 

 " no , sir , Mr. Franks be not   at home , and have not   be since after breakfast this morning . and I do not   understand it ; because he tell I last night that he would be work all day , and I be to get meal for he as usual . and at ten o'clock the model come that rough man he be put into the new picture , you know , sir ; and I have to send he away , when he have wait more than an hour . " 

 Warburton be puzzle . 

 " I will take my turn at wait , " he say . " will you please light the gas for I in the studio ? " 

 the studio be merely , in lodge - house language , the first floor front ; a two - windowed room , with the advantage of north light . on the wall hang a few framed painting , several unframed and unfinished , water - colour sketch , study in crayon , photograph , and so on . in the midst stand the easel , support a large canvas , the artist 's work on which show already in a state of hopeful advancement . " the Slummer " be his provisional name for this picture ; he have not yet hit upon that more decorous title which might suit the Academy catalogue . a glance discover the subject . in a typical London slum , between small and vile house , which lower upon the narrow way , stand a tall , graceful , prettily - clothe young woman , obviously a visitant from other sphere ; her one hand carry a book , and the other be hold by a ragged , cripple child , who gaze up at she with a look of innocent adoration . hard by stand a miserable creature with an infant at her breast , she too adore the representative of health , wealth , and charity . behind , a costermonger , out of work , sprawl on the curbstone , view the invader ; he , with resentful eye , his lip suggestive of word unreportable . where the face of the central figure should have shine , the canvas still remain blank . 

 " I be afraid he be worried about she , " say the landlady , when she have light the gas , and stand with Warburton survey the picture . " he can not   find a model good - look enough . I say to Mr. Franks why not make it the portrait of his own young lady ? I be sure she be good - look enough for anything and " 

 Whilst speak , the woman have turn to look at a picture on the wall . word die upon her lip ; consternation appear in her face ; she stand with finger extend . Warburton , glance where he be accustomed to see the portrait of Rosamund Elvan , also feel a shock . for , instead of the face which should have smile upon he , he see an ugly hole in the picture , the canvas have be violently cut , or rent with a blow . 

 " Hallo ! what the deuce have he be do ? " 

 " well , I never ! " exclaim the landlady . " it must be himself that be do it ! what do that mean now , I wonder ? " 

 Warburton be very uneasy . he no long doubt that Franks have purposely avoid he this afternoon . 

 " I daresay , " he add , with a pretence of carelessness , " the portrait have begin to vex he . he be often speak of it discontentedly , and talk of paint another . it be not   very good . " 

 Accepting , or seem to accept this explanation , the landlady withdraw , and will pace thoughtfully about the floor . he be back in Switzerland , in the valley which rise to the glacier of Trient . before he ramble Ralph Pomfret and his wife ; at his side be Rosamund Elvan , who listen with a flattering air of interest to all he say , but herself speak seldom , and seem , for the most part , preoccupy with some anxiety . he speak of Norbert Franks ; Miss Elvan reply mechanically , and at once make a remark about the landscape . at the time , he have think little of this ; now it revive in his memory , and disturb he . 

 an hour pass . his patience be nearly at an end . he wait another ten minute , then leave the room , call to the landlady that he be go , and let himself out . 

 Scarcely have he walk half a dozen yard , when he stand face to face with Franks . 

 " ah ! here you be ! I wait as long as I could " 

 " I will walk with you , " say the artist , turn on his heel . 

 he have shake hand but limply . his look avoid Warburton 's . his speech be flat , weary . 

 " what be wrong , Franks ? " 

 " as you have   be in the studio , I daresay you know . " 

 " I see something that surprise I . " 

 " do it surprise you ? " ask Norbert , in a half - sullen undertone . 

 " what do you mean by that ? " say Will with subdue resentment . 

 the rain have cease ; a high wind buffet they as they go along the almost desert street . the necessity of clutch at his hat might have explain Norbert 's silence for a moment ; but he stride on without speak . 

 " of course , if you do not   care to talk about it , " say will , stop short . 

 " I have   be walk about all day , " Franks reply ; " and I have   get hell inside I ; I would rather not have meet you to - night , that be the truth . but I can not   let you go without ask a plain question . do it surprise you to see that portrait smash ? " 

 " very much . what do you hint at ? " 

 " I have a letter this morning from Rosamund , say she could not   marry I , and that all must be over between we . do that surprise you ? " 

 " yes , it do . such a possibility have never enter my mind . " 

 Franks check his step , just where the wind roar at an unprotected corner . 

 " I have   no choice but to believe you , " he say , irritably . " and no doubt I be make a fool of myself . that be why I shoot out of your way this afternoon I want to wait till I get calm . let us say good - night . " 

 " you be tired out , " say Warburton . " do not   go any far this way , but let I walk back with you I will not   go in . I can not   leave you in this state of mind . of course I begin to see what you mean , and a wilder idea never get into any man 's head . whatever the explanation of what have happen , I have nothing to do with it . " 

 " you say so , and I believe you . " 

 " which mean , that you do not . I shall not   cut up rough ; you be not yourself , and I can make all allowance . think over what I have   say , and come and have another talk . not to - morrow ; I have to go down to St. Neots . but the day after , in the evening . " 

 " very well . good - night . " 

 this time they do not shake hand . Franks turn abruptly , with a wave of the arm , and walk off unsteadily , like a man in liquor . observe this , Warburton say to himself that not improbably the artist have be try to drown his misery , which might account for his strange delusion . yet this explanation do not put Will 's mind at ease . gloomily he make his way homeward through the roar night . 




 CHAPTER 9 

 ten o'clock next morning see he alight from the train at St. Neots . a conveyance for which he have telegraph await he at the station ; its driver , a young man of his own age   they have know each other from boyhood , grin his broad as he run toward Will on the platform , and relieve he of his bag . 

 " well , Sam , how go it ? everybody flourish ? drive first to Mr. Turnbull 's office . " 

 Mr. Turnbull be a grey - head man of threescore , much trouble with lumbago , which make he stoop as he walk . he have a visage of extraordinary solemnity , and seem to regard every one , no matter how prosperous or cheerful , with anxious commiseration . at the sight of will , he endeavour to smile , and his handshake , though the flabby possible , be mean for a cordial response to the young man 's heartiness . 

 " I be on my way to the Haws , Mr. Turnbull , and want to ask if you could come up and see we this evening ? " 

 " oh , with pleasure , " answer the lawyer , his tone that of one invite to a funeral . " you may count on I . " 

 " we be wind up at Sherwood 's . I do not   mean in bankruptcy ; but that would not   be far off if we keep go . " 

 " ah ! I can well understand that , " say Mr. Turnbull , with a gleam of satisfaction . though a thoroughly kind man , it always brighten he to hear of misfortune , especially when he have himself foretold it ; and he have always take the dark view of Will 's prospect in Little Ailie Street . 

 " I have a project I should like to talk over with you " 

 " ah ? " say the lawyer anxiously . 

 " as it concern my mother and Jane " 

 " ah ? " say Mr. Turnbull , with profound despondency . 

 " then we shall expect you . will it rain , do you think ? " 

 " I fear so . the glass be very low indeed . it would not   surprise I if we have rain through the whole month of August . " 

 " Good Heavens ! I hope not , " reply will laugh . 

 he drive out of the town again , in a different direction , for about a mile . on rise ground , overlook the green valley of the Ouse , stand a small , plain , solidly - build house , shelter on the cold side by a row of fine hawthorn , nearly as high as the top of its chimney . in front , border along the road by holly as impenetrable as a stone wall , lie a bright little flower garden . the Haws , originally build for the bailiff of an estate , long since break up , be nearly a century old . here Will 's father be bear , and here , after many wandering , he have spend the great part of his married life . 

 " Sam , " say will , as they draw up at the gate , " I do not   think I shall pay for this drive . you be much rich than I be . " 

 " very good , sir , " be the chuckle reply , for Sam know he always have to expect a joke of this kind from young Mr. Warburton . " as you please , sir . " 

 " you could not   lend I half - a - crown , Sam ? " 

 " I daresay I could , sir , if you really want it . " 

 " do then . " 

 will pocket the half - crown , jump off the trap , and take his bag . 

 " after all , Sam , perhaps I would well pay . your wife might grumble . here you be . " 

 he hand two shilling and sixpence in small change , which Sam take and examine with a grin of puzzlement . 

 " well , what be the matter ? do not   you say thank you , nowadays ? " 

 " yes , sir thank you , sir it be all right , Mr. Will . " 

 " I should think it be indeed . be here to - morrow morning , to catch the 6.30 up train , Sam . " 

 as will enter the garden , there come forward a girl of something and twenty , rather short , square shoulder , firmly plant on her foot , but withal brisk of movement ; her face be remarkable for nothing but a grave good - humour . she wear a broad - brim straw hat , and her gardening glove show how she be occupy . something of shyness appear in the mutual greeting of brother and sister . 

 " of course , you get my letter this morning ? " say will . 

 " yes . " 

 " Mr. Turnbull be come up to - night . " 

 " I be glad of that , " say Jane thoughtfully , rub her glove together to shake off moist earth . 

 " of course he will prophesy disaster , and plunge you both into the depth of discouragement . but I do not   mind that . I feel so confident myself that I want some one to speak on the other side . he will have to make inquiry , of course . where 's mother ? " 

 the question be answer by Mrs. Warburton herself , who at that moment come forth from the house ; a tall , graceful woman , prematurely white - headed , and enfeeble by ill - health . between she and Jane there be little resemblance of feature ; will , on the other hand , have inherit her oval face , arch brow and sensitive mouth . Emotion have touch her cheek with the faint glow , but ordinarily it be pale as her hand . nothing , however , of the invalid declare itself in her tone or language ; the voice , soft and musical , might have be that of a young woman , and its vivacity be only less than that which mark the speech of her son . 

 " come and look at the orange lily , " be her first word , after the greeting . " they have   never be so fine . " 

 " but notice Pompey first , " say Jane . " he will be offend in a minute . " 

 a St. Bernard , who have already make such advance as his dignity permit , stand close by Will , with eye fix upon he in grave and surprised reproach . the dog 's name indicate a historical preference of Jane in her childhood ; she have always champion Pompey against Caesar , follow therein her brother 's guidance . 

 " Hallo , old Magnus ! " cry the visitor , cordially repair his omission . " come along with we and see the lily . " 

 it be only when all the sight of the little garden have be visit , Mrs. Warburton forget her weakness as she draw will hither and thither , that the business for which they have meet come under discussion . Discussion , indeed , it could hardly be call , for the mother and sister be quite content to listen whilst will talk , and accept his view of thing . small as their income be , they never think of themselves as poor ; with one maid - servant and the occasional help of a gardener , they have all the comfort they wish for , and be able to bestow of their superfluity in vegetable and flower upon less fortunate acquaintance . until a year or two ago , Mrs. Warburton have lead a life of ceaseless activity , indoor and out ; such be the habit of her daughter , who enjoy vigorous health , and care little for sedentary pursuit and amusement . their property , land and cottage hard by , have of late give they a good deal of trouble , and the proposal to sell have more than once be consider , but Mr. Turnbull , most cautious of counsellor , urge delay . now , at length , the hop - for opportunity of a good investment seem to have present itself ; Will 's sanguine report of what he have learn from Sherwood be gladly accept . 

 " it will be a good thing for you as well , " say Jane . " yes , it come just in time . Sherwood know what he be do ; now and then I have   think he be risk too much , but he be a clear - head fellow . the way he have keep thing go so long in Ailie Street be really remarkable . " 

 " I daresay you have your share in that , will , " say Mrs. Warburton . 

 " a very small one ; my work have never be more than routine . I do not   pretend to be a man of business . if it have depend upon I , the concern would have fall to piece year ago , like so many other . House after house have go down ; our turn must have come very soon . as it be , we shall clear out with credit , and start afresh gloriously . by the bye , do not   get any but Applegarth 's jam in future . " 

 " that depend , " say Jane laughing , " if we like they . " 

 in their simple and wholesome way of living , the Warburtons of course din at midday , and Will , who rarely eat without appetite , surpass himself as trencherman ; nowhere have food such a savour for he as under this roof . the homemade bread and home - grow vegetable he be never tired of praise ; such fragrant and toothsome loaf , he loudly protest , be to be eat nowhere else in England . he begin to talk of his holiday abroad , when all at once his countenance fall , his lip close ; in the pleasure of be " at home , " he have forget all about Norbert Franks , and very unwelcome be the thought which attach themselves to this recollection of his day at Trient . 

 " what be the matter ? " ask Jane , notice his change of look . 

 " oh , nothing a stupid affair . I write to you about the Pomfrets and their niece . I be afraid that girl be an idiot . she use the opportunity of her absence , I find , to break with Franks . no excuse whatever ; simply send he about his business . " 

 " oh ! " exclaim both the lady , who have be interested in the artist 's love story , as narrate to they , rather badly , by Will on former occasion . 

 " of course , I do not   know much about it . but it look bad . perhaps it be the good thing that could have happen to Franks , for it may mean that he have not   make money fast enough to please she . " 

 " but you give we quite another idea of Miss Elvan , " say his mother . 

 " yes , I daresay I do . who know ? I do not   pretend to understand such thing . " 

 a little before sunset come Mr. Turnbull , who take supper at the Haws , and be fetch away by his coachman at ten o'clock . with this old friend , who in Will 's eye look no old now than when he first know he in early childhood , they talk freely of the Applegarth business , and Mr. Turnbull promise to make inquiry at once . of course , he take a despondent view of jam . Jam , he incline to think , be be overdone ; after all , the country could consume only a certain quantity of even the most wholesome preserve , and a glut of jam already threaten the market . applegarth ? by the bye , do he not remember proceeding in bankruptcy connect with that unusual name ? he must look into the matter . and , talk about bankruptcy oh ! how bad his lumbago be to - night ! poor Thomas Hart , of Three Ash Farm , be go to be sell up . dear , dear ! on every side , look where one would , nothing but decline and calamity . what be England come to ? day by day he have expect to see the failure of Sherwood Brothers ; how have they escape the common doom of sugar refiner ? free trade , free trade ; all very fine in theory , but look at its result on corn and sugar . for his own part he favour a policy of moderate protection . 

 all this be not more than will have foresee . it would be annoying if Mr. Turnbull ultimately take an adverse view of his proposal ; in that case , though his mother be quite free to manage her property as she choose , will feel that he should hot venture to urge his scheme against the lawyer 's advice , and money must be seek elsewhere . a few day would decide the matter . as he go upstairs to bed , he dismiss worry from his mind . 

 the old quiet , the old comfort of home . not a sound but that of patter rain in the still night . as always , the room smell of lavender , blend with that indescribable fragrance which come of extreme cleanliness in an old country house . but for change wall paper and carpet , everything be as Will remember it ever since he could remember anything at all ; the same simple furniture , the same white curtain , the same picture , the same little hang shelf , with book give to he in childhood . he think of the eld brother who have die at school , and lie in the little churchyard far away . his only dark memory , that of the poor boy 's death after a very short illness , before that other blow which make he fatherless . 

 the early retrospect be one of happiness unbroken ; for all childish sorrow lose themselves in the very present sense of peace and love envelop those far - away year . his parent ' life , as he see it then , as in reflection he see it now , remain an ideal ; he do not care to hope for himself , or to imagine , any other form of domestic contentment . as a child , he would have hold nothing less conceivable than a moment 's discord between father and mother , and manhood 's meditation do but confirm he in the same view . 

 the mutual loyalty of kindre heart and mind that be the good life have to give . and will 's thought turn once more to Norbert Franks ; he , poor fellow , doubtless now rag against the faithlessness which have blacken all his sky . in this moment of soften feeling , of lucid calm , Warburton see Rosamund 's behaviour in a new light . perhaps she be not blameworthy at all , but rather deserving of all praise ; for , if she have come to know , beyond doubt , that she do not love Norbert Franks as she have think , then to break the engagement be her simple duty , and the courage with which she have take this step must be set to her credit . naturally , it would be some time before Franks himself take that view . a third person , whose vanity be not concern , might moralise thus 

 will check himself on an unpleasant thought . be his vanity , in truth , unconcerned in this story ? why , then , have he be conscious of a sub - emotion , quite unavowable , which contradict his indignant sympathy during that talk last night in the street ? if the lover 's jealousy be as ridiculous as he pretend , why do he feel what now he could confess to himself be an unworthy titillation , when Franks seem to accuse he of some part in the girl 's disloyalty ? vanity , that , sure enough ; vanity of a very weak and futile kind . he would stamp the last trace of it out of his being . happily it be but vanity , and no deep feeling . of this he be assure by the reposeful sigh with which he turn his head upon the pillow , drowse to oblivion . 

 one unbroken sleep bring he to sunrise ; a golden glimmer upon the blind in his return to consciousness tell he that the rain be over , and tempt he to look forth . what he see be decisive ; with such a sky as that gleam over the summer world , who could lie in bed ? will always dress as if in a fury ; second suffice he for detail of the toilet , which , have he spend minute over they , would have fret his nerve intolerably . his bath be one wild welter not even the ceiling be safe from splash ; he clothe himself in a brief series of plunge ; his shaving might have earn the applause of an assembly gather to behold feat of swift dexterity . quietly he descend the stair , and find the house - door already open ; this might only mean that the servant be already up , but he suspect that the early riser be Jane . so it prove ; he walk toward the kitchen garden , and there stand his sister , the sun make her face rosy . 

 " come and help to pick scarlet runner , " be her greeting , as he approach . " be not   they magnificent ? " 

 her eye sparkle with pleasure as she point to the heavy cluster of dark - green pod , hang amid leaf and scarlet bloom . 

 " splendid crop ! " exclaim will , with answer enthusiasm . 

 " do not   the scent do one good ? " go on his sister . " when I come into the garden on a morning like this , I have a feeling oh , I can not   describe it to you perhaps you would not   understand " 

 " I know , " say Will , nod . 

 " it be as if nature be call out to I , like a friend , to come and admire and enjoy what she have do . I feel grateful for the thing that earth offer I . " 

 not often do Jane speak like this ; as a rule she be anything but effusive or poetical . but a peculiar animation shine in her look this morning , and sound in her voice . very soon the reason be manifest ; she begin to speak of the Applegarth business , and declare she great satisfaction with it . 

 " there will be an end of mother 's worry , " she say , " and I can not   tell you how glad I shall be . it seem to I that woman ought not   to have to think about money , and mother hat the name of it ; she always have do . oh , what a blessing when it be all off our hand ! we should not   care , even if the new arrangement bring we less . " 

 " and it be certain to bring you more , " remark Will , " perhaps considerably more . " 

 " well , I shall not   object to that ; there be lot of us for money ; but it do not   matter . " 

 Jane 's sincerity be evident . she dismiss the matter , and her basket be full of bean , seize a fork to dig potato . 

 " here , let I do that , " cry Will , interpose . 

 " you ? well then , as a very great favour . " 

 " of course I mean that . it be grand to turn up potato . what sort be these ? " 

 " pink - eyed fluke , " reply Jane , watch he with keen interest . " we have not   touch they yet . " 

 " Mealy , eh ? " 

 " ball of flour ! " 

 their voice join in a cry of exultation , as the fork throw out even a fine root than they have expect . when enough have be dig , they stroll about , look at other vegetable . Jane point to some Savoy seedling , which she be go to plant out to - day . then there sound a joyous bark , and Pompey come bound toward they . 

 " that mean the milk - boy be here , " say Jane . " pompey always go to meet he in the morning . come and drink a glass warm . " 




 CHAPTER 10 

 back at Chelsea , will send a note to Norbert Franks , a line or two without express reference to what have happen , ask he to come and have a talk . three day pass , and there be no reply . will grow uneasy ; for , though the artist 's silence perhaps mean only sullenness , danger might lurk in such a man 's thwart passion . on the fourth evening , just as he have make up his mind to walk over to Queen 's Road , the familiar knock sound . Mrs. Hopper have leave ; will go to the door , and greet his visitor in the usual way . but Franks enter without speak . the lamplight show a pitiful change in he ; he be yellow and fishy - eye , unshaven , disorderly in dress indeed , so well do he look the part of the despairing lover that Warburton suspect a touch of theatric consciousness . 

 " if you have not   come to - night , " say will , " I should have look you up . " 

 Franks lie limply in the armchair , star blankly . 

 " I ought to have come before , " he reply in low , toneless voice . " that night when I meet you , I make a fool of myself . for one thing , I be drunk , and I have   be drunk ever since . " 

 " ha ! that account for your dirty collar , " remark Will , in his note of dry drollery . 

 " be it dirty ? " say the other , pass a finger round his neck . " what do it matter ? a little dirt more or less , in a world so full of it " 

 Warburton could not contain himself ; he laugh , and laugh again . and his mirth be contagious ; Franks chuckle , unwillingly , dolefully . 

 " you be not extravagant in sympathy , " say the artist , move with fretful nervousness . 

 " if I be , would it do you any good , old fellow ? look here , be we to talk of this affair or not ? just as you like . for my part , I would rather talk about ' the Slummer . ' I have a look at it the other day . uncommonly good , the blackguard on the curbstone , you have   get he . " 

 " you think so ? " Franks sit a little straight , but still with vacant eye . " yes , not bad , I think . but who know whether I shall finish the thing . " 

 " if you do not , " reply his friend , in a matter - of - fact tone , " you will do something well . but I should finish it , if I be you . if you have the courage to paint in the right sort of face the girl , you know . " 

 " what sort of face , then ? " 

 " sharp - nosed , thin - lip , rather anaemic , with a universe of self - conceit in the eye . " 

 " they would not   hang it , and nobody would buy it . besides , Warburton , you be wrong if you think the slummer be always that sort . still , I be not sure I shall not   do it , out of spite . there be another reason , too I hate beautiful woman ; I do not   think I shall ever be able to paint another . " 

 he spring up , and pace , as of old , about the room . will purposely keep silence . 

 " I have   confess , " Franks begin again , with effort , " that I make a fool of myself the other night . but I wish you would tell I something about your time at Trient . do not   you notice anything ? do not   anything make you suspect what she be go to do ? " 

 " I never for a moment foresaw it , " reply Will , with unemphasised sincerity . 

 " yet she must have make up her mind whilst you be there . her astounding hypocrisy ! I have a letter a few day before , the same as usual " 

 " quite the same ? " 

 " absolutely ! well , there be no difference that strike I . then all at once she declare that for month she have feel her position false and painful . what a monstrous thing ! why do she go on pretend , play a farce ? I could have swear that no girl live who be more thoroughly honest in word and deed and think . it be awful to think how one can be deceive . I understand now the novel about unfaithful wife , and all that kind of thing . I always say to myself ' Pooh , as if a fellow would not   know if his wife be deceive he ' ! by Jove this have make I afraid of the thought of marriage . I shall never again trust a woman . " 

 Warburton sit in meditation , only half smile . 

 " of course , she be ashamed to face I . for fear I should run after she , she write that they be just leave Trient for another place , not mention . if I write , I be to address to Bath , and the letter would be forward . I write of course a fool 's letter ; I only wish I would never send it . sometimes I think I will never try to see she again ; sometimes I think I will make she see I , and tell she the truth about herself . the only thing be I be half afraid I have   go through torture enough ; I do not   want to begin again . yet if I see she " 

 he take another turn across the room , then check himself before Warburton . 

 " tell I honestly what you think about it . I want advice . what be your opinion of she ? " 

 " I have no opinion at all . I do not   pretend to know she well enough . " 

 " well , but , " persist Franks , " your impression your feeling . how do the thing strike you ? " 

 " why , disagreeably enough ; that be a matter of course . " 

 " you do not   excuse she ? " ask Norbert , his eye fix on the other . 

 " I can imagine excuse " 

 " what ? what excuse can there be for deliberate hypocrisy , treachery ? " 

 " if it be deliberate , " reply Warburton , " there be nothing to be say . in your position since you ask advice I should try to think that it be not , but that the girl have simply change her mind , and go on and on , struggle with herself till she could stand it no long . I have   no taste for melodrama quiet comedy be much more in my line comedy end with mutual tolerance and forgiveness . to be sure , if you feel you can not   live without she , if you be determined to fight for her " 

 " fight with whom ? " cry Franks . 

 " with she ; then read Browning , and blaze away . it may be the good ; who can tell ? only on this point I be clear no self - deception ! do not   go in for heroic just because they seem fine . settle with yourself whether she be indispensable to you or not . indispensable ? why , no woman be that to any man ; soon or later , it be a matter of indifference . and if you feel , talk plainly with yourself , that the bad be over already , that it do not   after all matter as much as you think ; why , get back to your painting . if you can paint only ugly woman , so much the well , I have   no doubt . " 

 Franks stand reflect . then he nod . 

 " all that be sensible enough . but , if I give she up , I shall marry some one else straight away . " 

 then he abruptly say good - night , leave Warburton not unhopeful about he , and much console by the disappearance of the shadow which have threaten their good understanding . 




 CHAPTER 11 

 the Crosses , mother and daughter , live at Walham Green . the house be less pleasant than another which Mrs. Cross own at Putney , but it also represent a low rental , and poverty oblige they to take this into account . when the second house stand tenantless , as have now be the case for half a year , Mrs. Cross ' habitually querulous comment on life rise to a note of acrimony very afflictive to her daughter Bertha . the two bore as little resemblance to each other , physical or mental , as mother and child well could . Bertha Cross be a sensible , thoughtful girl , full of kindly feeling , and blest with a humorous turn that enable she to see the amusing rather than the cark side of her pinched life . these virtue she have from her father . Poor Cross , who supplement a small income from office routine by occasional comic journalism , and even write a farce   which bring money to a theatrical manager , make on his deathbed a characteristic joke . he have just sign his will , and be leave alone with his wife . " I be sure I have , always wish to make your life happy , " pip the afflicted woman . " and I your , " he faintly answer ; add , with a sad , kind smile , as he point to the testamentary document , " take the will for the deed . " 

 the two son have emigrate to British Columbia , and Bertha would not have be sorry to join her brother there , for domestic labour on a farm , in peace and health , seem to she considerably well than the quasi - genteel life she painfully support . she have never dream of be an artist , but , show some facility with the pencil , be send by her father to South Kensington , where she meet and make friend with Rosamund Elvan . her necessity and her application be great than Rosamund 's , Bertha before long succeed in earn a little money ; without this help , life at home would scarcely have be possible for she . they might , to be sure , have take a lodger , have spare room , but Mrs. Cross could only face that possibility if the person receive into the house be " respectable " enough to be call a pay guest , and no such person offer . so they live , as no end of " respectable " family do , a life of penury and seclusion , sometimes go without a meal that they might have decent clothing to wear abroad , never able to buy a book , to hear a concert , and only by painful sacrifice able to entertain a friend . when , on a certain occasion , Miss Elvan pass a week at their house   Mrs. Cross approve of this friendship , and hop it might be a mean of discover the pay guest , it mean for they a near approach to starvation during the month that ensue . 

 Time would have weigh heavily on Mrs. Cross but for her one recreation , which be perennial , ever fresh , constantly full of surprise and excitement . poor as she be , she contrive to hire a domestic servant ; to say that she " keep " one would come near to a verbal impropriety , see that no servant ever remain in the house for more than a few month , whilst it occasionally happen that the space of half a year would see a succession of some half dozen " general . " Underpaid and underfed , these person   they vary in age from fourteen to forty   be of course incompetent , careless , rebellious , and Mrs. Cross find the sole genuine pleasure of her life in the war she wag with they . have no reasonable way of spend her hour , she be thus supply with occupation ; be of acrid temper , she be thus supply with a subject upon whom she could fearlessly exercise it ; be remarkably mean of disposition , she see in the paring - down of her servant 's ration to a work minimum , at once profit and sport ; lastly , be fond of the most trivial gossip , she have a never - fail topic of discussion with such lady as could endure her society . 

 Bertha , have be accustom to this domestic turbulence all her life long , for the most part pay no heed to it . she know that if the management of the house be in her hand , instead of her mother 's , thing would go much more smoothly , but the mere suggestion of such a change   venture once at a moment of acute crisis   have so amazed and exasperate Mrs. Cross , that Bertha never again look in that direction . yet from time to time a revolt of common sense force she to speak , and as the only possible way , if quarrel be to be avoid , she begin her remonstrance on the humorous note . then when her mother have be weary she for half an hour with complaint and lamentation over the misdoing of one Emma , Bertha as the alternative to throw up her hand and rush out of the house , begin laugh to herself , whereat Mrs. Cross indignantly beg to be inform what there be so very amusing in a state of affair which would assuredly bring she to her grave . 

 " if only you could see the comical side of it , mother , " reply Bertha . " it really have one , you know . Emma , if only you would be patient with she , be a well - mean creature , and she say the funniest thing . I ask she this morning if she do not   think she could find some way of remember to put the salt on the table . and she look at I very solemnly , and say , ' indeed , I will , miss . I will put it into my prayer , just after ' our daily bread . ' " 

 Mrs. Cross see nothing in this but profanity . she turn the attack on Bertha , who , by her soft way of speak , simply encourage the servant , she declare , in negligence and insolence . 

 " look at it in this way , mother , " reply the girl , as soon as she be suffer to speak . " to be badly serve be bad enough , in itself ; why make it bad by ceaseless talk about it , so leave ourselves not a moment of peace and quiet ? I be sure I would rather put the salt on the table myself at every meal , and think no more about it , than worry , worry , worry over the miss salt - cellar from one meal to the next . do not   you feel , dear mother , that it be shocking waste of life ? " 

 " what nonsense you talk , child ! be we to live in dirt and disorder ? be I never to correct a servant , or teach she her duty ? but of course everything I do be wrong . of course you could do everything so very much well . that be what child be nowadays . " 

 Whilst Mrs. Cross pip on , Bertha regard she with eye of humorous sadness . the girl often feel it a dreary thing not to be able to respect nay , not to be able to feel much love for her mother . at such time , her thought turn to the other parent , with whom , have he and she be leave alone , she could have live so happily , in so much mutual intelligence and affection . she sigh and move away . 

 the unlet house be a very serious matter , and when one day Norbert Franks come to talk about it , say that he would want a house very soon , and think this of Mrs. Cross 's might suit he , Bertha rejoice no less than her mother . in consequence of the artist 's announcement , she write to her friend Rosamund , say how glad she be to hear that her marriage approach . the reply to this letter surprise she . Rosamund have be remiss in correspondence for the last few month ; her few and brief letter , though they be as affectionate as ever , make no mention of what have formerly be an inexhaustible topic the genius , goodness , and brilliant hope of Franks . now she write as if in utter despondency , a letter so confused in style and vague in expression , that Bertha could gather from it little or nothing except a grave doubt whether Franks ' marriage be as near as he suppose . a week or two pass , and Rosamund again write from Switzerland ; again the letter be an unintelligible maze of dreary word , and a mere moaning and sighing , which puzzle Bertha as much as it distress she . Rosamund 's epistolary style , when she write to this bosom friend , be always pitch in a key of lyrical emotion , which now and then would have be try to Bertha 's sense of humour but for the sincerity manifest in every word ; hitherto , however , she have express herself with perfect lucidity , and this sudden change seem ominous of alarming thing . just when Bertha be anxiously wonder what could have happen , of course incline to attribute blame , if blame there be , to the artist rather than to his betroth a stranger come to inquire about the house to let . it be necessary to ascertain at once whether Mr. Franks intend to become their tenant or not . Mrs. Cross write to he , and receive the brief possible reply , to the effect that his plan be change . 

 " how vexatious ! " exclaim Mrs. Cross . " I have very much rather have let to people we know I suppose he be see a house that suit he well . " 

 " I think there be another reason , " say Bertha , after gaze for a minute or two at the scribble , careless note . " the marriage be put off . " 

 " and you know that , " cry her mother , " all the time , and never tell I ! and I might have miss twenty chance of let . really , Bertha , I never do see anything like you . there be that house stand empty month after month , and we hardly know where to turn for money , and you know that Mr. Franks would not   take it , and yet you say not a word ! how can you behave in such an extraordinary way ? I think you really find pleasure in worry I . any one would fancy you wish to see I in my grave . to think that you know all the time ! " 




 CHAPTER 12 

 there pass a fortnight . Bertha hear nothing more of Miss Elvan , till a letter arrive one morning in an envelope , show on the back an address at Teddington . Rosamund write that she have just return from Switzerland , and be stay for a few day with friend ; would it be possible for Bertha to come to Teddington the same afternoon , for an hour or two 's talk ? the writer have so much to say that could not be convey in a letter , and long above all thing to see Bertha , the only be in whom , at a very grave juncture in her life , she could absolutely confide . " we shall be quite alone Mr. and Mrs. Capron be go to town immediately after lunch . this be a lovely place , and we shall have it to ourselves all the afternoon . so do not   be frighten I know how you hate stranger but come , come , come ! " 

 Bertha take train early in the afternoon . by an avenue of elm she pass into a large and beautiful garden , and so come to the impose front door . lead into the drawing - room , she have time to take breath , and to gaze at splendour such as she have never see before ; then with soundless footfall , enter a slim , prettily - dress girl who run towards she , and catch her hand , and kiss she with graceful tenderness . 

 " my dear , dear old Bertha ! what a happiness to see you again ! how good of you to come ! be not   it a lovely place ? and the nice people . you have   hear I speak of Miss Anderton , of Bath . she be Mrs. Capron marry half a year ago . and they be just go to Egypt for a year , and what do you think ? I be go with they . " 

 Rosamund 's voice sink and falter . she stand hold Bertha 's hand , and gaze into her face with eye which grow large as if in a distressful appeal . 

 " to Egypt ? " 

 " yes . it be decide whilst I be in Switzerland . Mrs. Capron want a friend to be with she ; one who can help she in water - colour . she think , of course , that I could not   go ; write to I just wish it be possible . and I catch at the chance ! oh , catch at it ! " 

 " that be what I do not   understand , " say Bertha . 

 " I want to explain it all . come into this cosy corner . nobody will disturb we except when they bring tea . do you know that picture of Leader 's ? be not   it exquisite ! be you tired , Bertha ? you look so , a little . I be afraid you walk from the station , and it be such a hot day . but oh , the loveliness of the tree about here ! do you remember our first walk together ? you be shy , stiff ; do not   feel quite sure whether you like I or not . and I think you just a little critical . but before we get back again , I think we have begin to understand each other . and I wonder whether you will understand I now . it would be dreadful if I feel you disapprove of I . of course if you do , I would much rather you say so . you will will not   you ? " 

 she again fix her eye upon Bertha with the wide , appeal look . 

 " whether I say it or not , " reply the other , " you will see what I think . I never could help that . " 

 " that be what I love in you ! and that be what I have   be think of , all these week of misery your perfect sincerity . I have   ask myself whether it would be possible for you to find yourself in such a position as mine ; and how you would act , how you would speak . you be my ideal of truth and rightness , Bertha ; I have   often enough tell you that . " 

 Bertha move uncomfortably , her eye avert . 

 " suppose you just tell I what have happen , " she add quietly . 

 " yes , I will . I hope you have not   be think it be some fault of his ? " 

 " I could not   help think that . " 

 " oh ! put that out of your mind at once . the fault be altogether mine . he have do nothing whatever he be good and true , and all that a man should be . it be I who be behave badly ; so badly that I feel hot with shame now that I come to tell you . I have break it off . I have   say I could not   marry he . " 

 their eye meet for an instant . Bertha look rather grave , but with her wonte kindliness of expression ; Rosamund 's brow be wrinkle in distress , and her lip tremble . 

 " I have   see it come since last Christmas , " she continue , in a hurried , tremulous undertone . " you know he come down to Bath ; that be our last meeting ; and I feel that something be wrong . ah , so hard to know oneself ! I want to talk to you about it ; but then I say to myself what can Bertha do but tell I to know my own mind ? and that be just what I could not   come to , to understand my own feeling . I be change , I know that . I dread to look into my own thought , from day to day . above all , I dread to sit down and write to he . oh , the hateful falsity of those letter yet what could I do , what could I do ? I have no right to give such a blow , unless I feel that anything else be utterly , utterly impossible . " 

 " and at last you do feel it ? " 

 " in Switzerland yes . it come like a flash of lightning . I be walk up that splendid valley you remember my description up toward the glacier . that morning I have have a letter , name the very day for our marriage , and speak of the house your house at Putney he mean to take . I have say to myself ' it must be ; I can do nothing . I have not   the courage . ' then , as I be walk , a sort of horror fall upon I , and make I tremble ; and when it pass I see that , so far from not have the courage to break , I should never dare to go through with it . and I go back to the hotel , and sit down and write , without another moment 's thought or hesitation . " 

 " what else could you have do ? " say Bertha , with a sigh of relief . " when it come to horror and trembling ! " 

 there be a light in her eye which seem the precursor of a smile ; but her voice be not unsympathetic , and Rosamund know that one of Bertha Cross smile be worth more in the way of friendship than another 's tragic emotion . 

 " have patience with I , " she continue , " whilst I try to explain it all . the bad of my position be , that so many people will know what I have do , and so few of they , hardly any one , will understand why . one can not   talk to people about such thing . even Winnie and father I be sure they do not   really understand though I be afraid they be both rather glad . what a wretched thing it be to be misjudge . I feel sure , Bertha , that it be just this kind of thing that make a woman sit down and write a novel where she can speak freely in disguise , and do herself justice . do not   you think so ? " 

 " I should not   wonder , " reply the listener , thoughtfully . " but do it really matter ? if you know you be only do what you must do ? " 

 " but that be only how it seem to I . another , in my place , would very likely see the must on the other side . of course it be a terribly complicated thing a situation like this . I have not   the slight idea how one ought to be guide . one could argue and reason all day long about it as I have do with myself for week past . " 

 " try just to tell I the reason which seem to you the strong , " say Bertha . 

 " that be very simple . I think I love he , and I find I do not . " 

 " exactly . but I hardly see how the change come about . " 

 " I will try to tell you , " reply Rosamund . " it be that picture , ' sanctuary , ' that begin it . when I first see it , it give I a shock . you know how I have always think of he an artist live for his own idea of art , paint just as he like , what please he , without care for the public taste . I get enthusiastic ; and when I see that he seem to care for my opinion and my praise of course all the rest follow . he tell I about his life as an art student Paris , Rome , all that ; and it be my ideal of romance . he be very poor , sometimes so poor that he hardly have enough to eat , and this make I proud of he , for I feel sure he could have get money if he would have condescend to do inferior work . of course , as I too be poor , we could not think of marry before his position improve . at last he paint ' Sanctuary . ' he tell I nothing about it . I come and see it on the easel , nearly finish . and this be the shocking thing I pretend to admire it . I be astonish , pain yet I have the worldliness to smile and praise . there be the fault of my character . at that moment , truth and courage be want , and I have neither . the dreadful thing be to think that he degrade himself on my account . if I have say at once what I think , he would have confess would have tell I that impatience have make he untrue to himself . and from that day ; oh , this be the bad of all , Bertha he have adapt himself to what he think my low mind and low aim ; he have consciously debase himself , out of thought for I . horrible ! of course he believe in his heart that I be a hypocrite before . the astonishing thing be that this do not   cause he to turn cold to I . he must have feel that , but somehow he overcome it . all the bad ! the very fact that he still care for I show how bad my influence have be . I feel that I have wreck his life , Bertha and yet I can not give he my own , to make some poor sort of amend . " 

 Bertha be listen with a face that change from puzzled interest to wonder confusion . 

 " good gracious ! " she exclaim when the speaker cease . " be it possible to get into such entanglement of reasoning about what one think and feel ? it be beyond I . oh they be bring the tea . perhaps a cup of tea will clear my wit . " 

 Rosamund at once begin to speak of the landscape by Leader , which hang near they , and continue to do so even after the servant have withdraw . her companion be silent , smile now and then in an absent way . they sip tea . 

 " the tea be do I so much good , " Bertha say , " I begin to feel equal to the most complicated reflection . and so you really believe that Mr. Franks be on the way to perdition , and that you be the cause of it ? " 

 Rosamund do not reply . she have half avert her look ; her brow be knit in an expression of trouble ; she bite she low lip . a moment pass , and 

 " suppose we go into the garden , " she say , rise . " do not   you feel it a little close here ? " 

 they stroll about the path . her companion , seem to have dismiss from mind their subject of conversation , begin to talk of Egypt , and the delight she promise herself there . 

 presently Bertha revert to the unfinished story . 

 " oh , it do not   interest you . " 

 " do not   it indeed ! please go on . you have just explain all about ' Sanctuary ' which be not   really a bad picture at all . " 

 " oh , Bertha ! " cry the other in pained protest . " that be your good nature . you never can speak severely of anybody 's work . the picture be shameful , shameful ! and its successor , I be too sure , will be bad still , from what I have hear of it . oh , I can not   bear to think of what it all mean now that it be too late , I see what I ought to have do . in spite of everything and everybody I ought to have marry he in the first year , when I have courage and hope enough to face any hardship . we speak of it , but he be too generous . what a splendid thing to have starve with he to have work for he whilst he be work for art and fame , to have go through and that together , and have come out triumphant ! that be a life worth live . but to begin marriage at one 's ease on the profit of picture such as ' Sanctuary ' oh , the shame of it ! do you think I could face the friend who would come to see I ? " 

 " how many friend , " ask Bertha , " would be aware of your infamy ? I credit myself with a little imagination . but I should never have suspect the black baseness which have poison your soul . " 

 again Rosamund bite her lip , and keep a short silence . 

 " it only show , " she say with some abruptness , " that I shall do well not to speak of it at all , and let people think what they like of I . if even you can not   understand . " 

 Bertha stand still , and speak in a change voice . 

 " I understand very well or think I do . I be perfectly sure that you could never have break your engagement unless for the grave reason and for I it be quite enough to know that . many a girl ought to do this , who never have the courage . try not to worry about explanation , the thing be do , and there be an end of it . I be very glad indeed you be go quite away ; it be the good thing possible . when do you start ? " she add . 

 " in three day . listen , Bertha , I have something very serious to ask of you . it be possible be not   it ? that he may come to see you some day . if he do , or if by chance you see he alone , and if he speak of I , I want you to make he think you easily can that what have happen be all for his good . remind he how often artist have be spoil by marriage , and hint you surely could that I be rather too fond of luxury , and that kind of thing . " 

 Bertha wear an odd smile . 

 " trust I , " she reply , " I will blacken you most effectually . " 

 " you promise ? but , at the same time , you will urge he to be true to himself , to endure poverty " 

 " I do not   know about that . why should not   poor Mr. Franks have enough to eat it he can get it ? " 

 " well but you promise to help he in the other way ? you need not   say very bad thing ; just a smile , a hint " 

 " I quite understand , " say Bertha , nodding . 




 CHAPTER 13 

 Warburton have never see Godfrey Sherwood so restless and excitable as during these week when the business in Little Ailie Street be be bring to an end , and the detail of the transfer to Bristol be be settle . have it not be inconsistent with all the hopeful fact of the situation , as well as with the man 's temper , one would have think that Godfrey suffer from extreme nervousness ; that he live under some oppressive anxiety , which it be his constant endeavour to combat with resolute high spirit . it seem an odd thing that a man who have go through the very real care and peril of the last few year without a sign of perturbation , nay , with the cheery equanimity , should let himself be throw into disorder by the mere change to a more promising state of thing . now and then Warburton ask himself whether his partner could be conceal some troublesome fact with regard to Applegarth 's concern ; but he dismiss the idea as too improbable ; Sherwood be far too good a fellow , far too conscientious a man of business , to involve his friend in obvious risk especially since it have be decide that Mrs. Warburton 's and her money should go into the affair . the inquiry make by Mr. Turnbull have result so satisfactory that even the resolute pessimist could not but grudgingly admit his inability to discover storm - signal . though a sense of responsibility make a new element in his life , which would not let he sleep quite so soundly as hitherto , will persuade himself that he have but to get to work , and all would be right . 

 the impression make upon he by Applegarth himself be very favourable . the fact that the jam manufacturer be a university man , an astronomer , and a musician , have touch Warburton 's weak point , and he go down to Bristol the first time with an undeniable prejudice at the back of his mind ; but this do not survive a day or two 's intercourse . Applegarth recommend himself by an easy and humorous geniality of bear which Warburton would have be the last man to resist ; he talk of his affair with the utmost frankness . 

 " the astonishing thing to I be , " he say , " that I have   make this business pay . I go into it on abstract principle . I know nothing of business . at school , I rather think , I learn something about ' single and double entry , ' but I have forget it all just as I find myself forget how to multiply and divide , now that I be accustom to the high mathematic . however , I have to earn a little money , somehow , and I think I would try jam . and it go by itself , I really do not   understand it , mere good luck , I suppose . I hear of fellow who have try business , and come shocking cropper . perhaps they be classical man nothing so hopeless as your classic . I beg your pardon ; before say that , I ought to have find out whether either of you be a classic . " 

 the listener both shake their head , and laugh . 

 " so much the well . an astronomer , it be plain , may manufacture jam ; a fellow bring up on Greek and latin verse could not   possibly . " 

 they be together at Bristol for a week , then Sherwood receive a telegram , and tell Warburton that he must return to London immediately . 

 " something that bother you ? " say Will , note a peculiar tremor on his friend 's countenance . 

 " no , no ; a private affair ; nothing to do with we . you stay on till Saturday ? I might be back in twenty - four hour . " 

 " good . yes ; I want to have some more talk with Applegarth about that advertising proposal . I do not   like to start with quite such a heavy outlay . " 

 " nor I either , " reply Godfrey , his eye wander . he pause , bit the end of his moustache , and add . " by the bye , the St. Neots money will be pay on Saturday , you say ? " 

 " I believe so . or early next week . " 

 " that be right . I want to get do . Queer how these detail fidget I . nerve ! I ought to have have a holiday this summer . you be wise . " 

 the next day Warburton go out with Applegarth to his house some ten mile south of Bristol , and din there , and stay over night . it have not yet be settle where he and Sherwood should have their permanent abode ; there be a suggestion that they should share a house which be to let not far from Applegarth 's , but will feel uneasy at the thought of a joint tenancy , doubt whether he could live in comfort with any man . he be vex at have to leave his flat in Chelsea , which so thoroughly suit his habit and his taste . 

 Warburton and his host talk much of Sherwood . 

 " when I first meet he , " say the jam - manufacturer , " he strike I as the queer man of business except myself that I have ever see . he talk about Norse sagas , witchcraft , and so on , and when he begin about business , I feel uneasy . of course I know he well now . " 

 " there be not many steady and shrewd man than Sherwood , " remark Will . 

 " I feel sure of that , " reply the other . and he add , as if to fortify himself in the opinion : " yes , I feel sure of it . " 

 " in spite of all his energy , never rash . " 

 " no , no ; I can see that . yet , " add Applegarth , again as if for self - confirmation , " he have energy of an uncommon kind . " 

 " that will soon show itself , " reply Warburton , smile . " he be survey the field like a general before battle . " 

 " yes . no end of bright idea . some of they perhaps not immediately practicable . " 

 " oh , Sherwood look far ahead . " 

 Applegarth nod , and for a minute or two each be occupy with his own reflection . 




 CHAPTER 14 

 Godfrey have telegraph that he must remain in town , Warburton soon join he . his partner be more cheerful and sanguine than ever ; he have clear off numberless odd and end of business ; there remain little to be do before the day , a week hence , appoint for the signature of the new deed , for which purpose Applegarth would come to London . Mr. Turnbull , act with his wonted caution , have at length conclude the sale of Mrs. Warburton 's property , and on the day after his return , will receive from St. Neots a letter contain a cheque for four thousand pound ! all his own available capital be already in the hand of Sherwood ; a sum not much great in amount than that invest by his mother and sister . Sherwood , for his part , put in sixteen thousand , with regret that it be all he have at command just now ; before long , he might see his way greatly to increase their capital , but they have enough for moderate enterprise in the meanwhile . 

 not half an hour after the post which bring he the cheque , Warburton be surprise by a visit from his friend . 

 " I think you would not   have leave home yet , " say Godfrey , with a nervous laugh . " I have a letter from Applegarth last night , which I want you to see at once . " 

 he hand it , and will , glance over the sheet , find only an unimportant discussion of a small detail . 

 " well , that be all right , " he say , " but I do not   see that it need have bring you from Wimbledon to Chelsea before nine o'clock in the morning . be not   you get a little overstrung , old man ? " 

 Godfrey look it . his face be noticeably thin than a month ago , and his eye have a troubled fixity such as come of intense preoccupation . 

 " Daresay I be , " he admit with a show of careless good - humour . " can not   get much sleep lately . " 

 " but why ? what the deuce be there to fuss about ? sit down and smoke a cigar . I suppose you have   have breakfast ? " 

 " no yes , I mean , yes , of course , long ago . " 

 will do not believe the correct statement . he gaze at his friend curiously and with some anxiety . 

 " it be an unaccountable thing that you should fret your gizzard out about this new affair , which seem all so smooth , when you take the Ailie Street worry without turn a hair . " 

 " stupid nerve out of order , " mutter Godfrey , as he cross , uncrossed , recrosse his leg , and bit at a cigar , as if he mean to breakfast on it . " I must get away for a week or two as soon as we have   sign . " 

 " yes , but look here . " Warburton stand before he , hand on hip , regard he gravely , and speak with decision . " I do not   quite understand you . you be not like yourself . be there anything you be keep from I ? " 

 " nothing nothing whatever , I assure you , Warburton . " 

 but will be only half satisfied . 

 " you have no doubt of Applegarth ? " 

 " Doubts ! " cry the other . " not a shadow of doubt of any sort , I declare and protest . no , no ; it be entirely my own idiotic excitability . I can not   account for it . just do not   notice it , there be a good fellow . " 

 " there be a pause . will glance again at Applegarth 's note , whilst Sherwood go , as usual , to stand before the bookcase , and run his eye along the shelf . 

 " anything new in my way ? " he ask . " I want a good long quiet read . Palgrave 's Arabia ! where do you pick up that ? one of the most glorious book I know . that and Layard 's early Travels send I to heaven for a month , once upon a time . you do not   know Layard ? I must give it to you . the essence of romance ! as good in its way as the Arabian Nights . " 

 thus he talk on for a quarter of an hour , and it seem to relieve he . return to matter of the day , he ask , half abruptly : 

 " have you the St. Neots cheque yet ? " 

 " come this morning . " 

 " payable to Sherwood Brothers , I suppose ? " say Godfrey . " right . it be most convenient so . " 

 will hand he the cheque , and he gaze at it as if with peculiar satisfaction . he sit smile , cheque in one hand , cigar in the other , until Warburton ask what he be think over . 

 " nothing nothing . well , I suppose I would well take it with I ; I be on my way to the bank . " 

 as will watch the little slip of paper disappear into his friend 's pocket - book , he have an unaccountable feeling of disquiet . nothing could be more unworthy than distrust of Godfrey Sherwood ; nothing less consonant with all his experience of the man ; and , have the money be his , he would have hand it over as confidently as when , in fact , deal with his own capital the other day . but the sense of responsibility to other be a new thing to which he could not yet accustom himself . it occur to he for the first time that there be no necessity for accumulate these fund in the hand of Sherwood ; he might just as well have retain his own money and this cheque until the day of the signing of the new deed . to be sure , he have only to reflect a moment to see the foolishness of his misgiving ; yet , have he think of it before 

 he , too , be perhaps a little overstrung in the nerve . not for the first time , he mentally throw a malediction at business , and all its sordid appurtenance . 

 a change come over Sherwood . his smile grow more natural ; his eye lose its fixity ; he puff at his cigar with enjoyment . 

 " what news of Franks ? " be his next word . 

 " nothing very good , " answer will , frown . " he seem to be still play the fool . I have   see he only once in the last fortnight , and then it be evident he have be drink . I could not   help say a plain word or two , and he turn sullen . I call at his place last night , but he be not   there ; his landlady tell I he be be out of town several time lately , and he be do no work . " 

 " have the girl go ? " 

 " a week ago . I have a letter from Ralph Pomfret . the good old chap worry about this affair ; so do Mrs. Pomfret . he do not   say it plainly , but I suspect Franks have be behave theatrically down at Ashstead ; it be possible he go there in the same state in which I see he last . Pomfret would have do well to punch his head , but I have   no doubt they have   stroke and pat and poor - fellow'd he the very bad thing for Franks . " 

 " or for any man , " remark Sherwood . 

 " bad for he than for most . I wish I have more of the gift of brutality ; I see a way in which I might do he good ; but it go against the grain with I . " 

 " that I can believe , " say Godfrey , with his pleasant look and nod . 

 " I be afraid he might somehow scrape together money enough to pursue she to Egypt . perhaps he be try for that . the pomfret want I to go down to Ashstead and have a talk with they about he . whether he manage to see the girl before she leave England , I do not   know . " 

 " after all , he have be badly treat , " say Sherwood sympathetically . 

 " well , yes , he have . but a fellow must have common sense , most of all with regard to woman . I be rather afraid Franks might think it a fine thing to go to the devil because he be be jilt . it be not   fashionable nowadays ; there might seem to be a sort of originality about it . " 

 they talk for a few minute of business matter , and Sherwood briskly go his way . 

 four day pass . Warburton pay a visit to the pomfret , and have from they a confirmation of all he suspect regard Norbert Franks . the artist 's behaviour at Ashstead have be very theatrical indeed ; he talk much of suicide , preferably by the way of drink , and , when dissuade from this , with a burst of tear veritable tear beg Ralph Pomfret to lend he money enough to go to Cairo ; on which point , also , he meet with kindliest opposition . thereupon , he have rag for half an hour against some treacherous friend , unnamed . who this could be , the Pomfrets have no idea . Warburton , though he affect equal ignorance , could not doubt but that it be himself , and he grow inwardly angry . Franks have be to Bath , and have obtain a private interview with Winifred Elvan , in which   Winifred write to her aunt   he have demean himself very humbly and pathetically , first of all implore the sister 's help with Rosamund , and , when she declare she could do nothing , entreat to be tell whether or not he be oust by a rival . rather impatient with the artist 's folly than troubled about his suffering , will come home again . he write a brief , not unfriendly letter to Franks , urge he to return to his well mind the half - disdainful , half - philosophical resignation which he seem to have attain a month ago . the answer to this be a couple of line ; " thank . your advice , no doubt , be well mean , but I have rather not have it just now . do not   let we meet for the present . " will shrug his shoulder , and try to forget all about the affair . 

 he do not see Sherwood , but have a note from he write in high spirit . Applegarth would be in town two day hence , and all three be to dine at his hotel . have no occupation , Warburton spend most of his time in walk about London ; but these ramble do not give he the wonted pleasure , and though at night he be very tired , he do not sleep well . an inexplicable nervousness interfere with all his habit of mind and body he be on the point of run down to St. Neots , to get through the last day of intolerable idleness , when the morning post again bring a letter from Sherwood . 

 " confound the fellow ! " he mutter , as he tear open the envelope . " what else can he have to say ? no infernal postponement , I hope " 

 he read the first line and draw himself up like a man pierce with pain . 


 " my dear Warburton " thus write his partner , in a hand less legible than of will not " I have such bad news for you that I hardly know how to tell it . if I dare , I would come to you at once , but I simply have not the courage to face you until you know the bad , and have have time to get accustomed to it . it be seven o'clock ; an hour ago I learn that all our money be lose all your , all that from St. Neots , all mine every penny I have . I have be guilty of unpardonable folly how explain my behaviour ? the truth be , after the settlement in Little Ailie Street ; I find myself much bad off than I have expect . I go into the money market , and make a successful deal . count on be able to repeat this , I guarantee the sixteen thousand for Bristol ; but the second time I lose . so it have go on ; all these last week I have be speculate , win and losing . last Tuesday , when I come to see you , I have about twelve thousand , and hop somehow to make up the deficiency . as the devil would have it , that same morning I meet a City acquaintance , who speak of a great coup to be make by any one who have some fifteen thousand at command . it mean an immediate profit of 25 per cent . like a fool , I be persuade as you will see when I go into detail , the thing look horribly tempting . I put it all every penny that lie at our bank in the name of Sherwood Bros. and now I learn that the house I trust have smash . it be in the paper this evening Biggles , Thorpe and Biggles you will see it . I dare not ask you to forgive I . of course I shall at once take step to raise the money owe to you , and hope to be able to do that soon , but it be all over with the Bristol affair . I shall come to see you at twelve to - morrow . 

 " your , 
 " G. F. SHERWOOD . " 




 CHAPTER 15 

 " after all , there be something in presentiment . " 

 this be the first thought that take shape in Will 's whirl mind . the second be , that he might rationally have foresee disaster . all the point of strangeness which have strike he in Sherwood 's behaviour come back now with such glaring significance that he accuse himself of inconceivable limpness in have allow thing to go their way above all in trust Godfrey with the St. Neots cheque . on this moment of painful lucidity follow blind rage . why , what a grovel imbecile be this fellow ! to plunge into wild speculation , on the word of some City shark , with money not his own ! but could one credit the story ? be it not more likely that Sherwood have get involve in some cunning thievery which he durst not avow ? perhaps he be a mere liar and hypocrite . that story of the ten thousand pound he have lend to somebody how improbable it sound ; why might he not have invent it , to strengthen confidence at a critical moment ? the incredible baseness of the man ! he , who know well all that depend upon the safe investment of the St. Neots money to risk it in this furiously reckless way . in all the record of City scoundrelism , be there a blacker case ? 

 rag thus , Warburton become aware that Mrs. Hopper speak to he . she have just lay breakfast , and , as usual when she wish to begin a conversation , have draw back to the door , where she pause . 

 " that Boxon , the grocer , have have a bad accident , sir . " 

 " Boxon ? grocer ? " 

 " in the Fulham Road , sir ; he as Allchin be with . " 

 " ah ! " 

 Heedless of her master 's gloomy abstraction , Mrs. Hopper continue . she relate that Boxon have be at certain race where he have lose money and get drunk ; drive away in a trap , he have run into something , and be throw out , with serious injury , which might prove fatal . 

 " so much the bad for he , " mutter Warburton . " I have   no pity to spare for fool and blackguard . " 

 " I should think not , indeed sir . I just mention it , sir , because Allchin be tell we about it last night . he and his wife look in to see my sister , Liza , and they both say they never see such a change in anybody . and they say how grateful we ought to be to you , sir , and that I be sure we be , for Liza'd never have be able to go away without your kindness . " 

 listen as if this talk sound from a vague distance , Warburton be suddenly remind of what have befall himself ; for as yet he have think only of his mother and sister . he be ruin . some two or three hundred pound , his private bank account , represent all he have in the world , and all prospect of make money have be take away from he . henceforth , small must be his charity . if he gain his own living , he must count himself lucky ; nothing more difficult than for a man of his age and position , unexpectedly cut adrift , to find work and payment . by good fortune , his lease of this flat come to an end at Michaelmas , and already he have give notice that he do not mean to renew . Mrs. Hopper know that he be on the point of leave London , and mot a little lamented it , for to she the loss would be serious indeed . Warburton 's habitual generosity lead she to hope for some signal benefaction ere his departure ; perhaps on that account she be specially emphatic in gratitude for her sister 's restoration to health . 

 " we be wonder , sir , " she add , now have wedge herself between door and jamb , " whether you would be so kind as to let my sister Liza see you just for a minute or two , to thank you herself as I be sure she ought ? she could come any time as would not   be ill - convenient to you . " 

 " I be extremely busy , Mrs. Hopper , " will reply . " please tell your sister I be delighted to hear she be do so well at Southend , and I hope to see she some day ; but not just now . by the bye , I be not go out this morning , so do not   wait , when you have   finish . " 

 by force of habit he eat and drank . Sherwood 's letter lie open before he ; he read it through again and again . but he could not fix his thought upon it . he find himself occupy with the story of Boxon , wonder whether Boxon would live or die . Boxon , the grocer why , what an ass a man must be , a man with a good grocery business , to come to grief over drink and bet ! shopkeepe what a sound and safe life it be ; independent , as far as any money - earn life can be so . there must be a pleasure in count the content of one 's till every night . Boxon ! of course , a mere brute . there come into Will 's memory the picture of Boxon land on the pavement one night , by Allchin 's fist or toe and of a sudden he laugh . when he have half - smoke his pipe , comparative calmness fall upon he . Sherwood speak of at once raise the money he owe , and , if he succeed in do so , much of the mischief would be undo . the four thousand pound might be safely invest somewhere , and life at the Haws would go on as usual . but be it certain that Sherwood could " raise " such sum , be himself , as he declare , penniless ? this disclosure show he in an unpleasantly new light , as anything but the cautious man of business , the loyal friend , he have seem to be . who could put faith in a money - market gambler ? why , there be no difference to speak of between he and Boxon . and if his promise prove futile what be to be do ? 

 for a couple of hour , will star at this question . when the clock on his mantelpiece strike eleven , he happen to notice it , and be surprised to find how quickly time have pass . by the bye , he have never think of look at his newspaper , though Sherwood refer he to that source of information on the subject of biggle , Thorpe and Biggles . yes , here it be . a firm of broker ; unfortunate speculation ; failure of another house all the old story . as likely as not , the financial trick of a cluster of thief . will throw the paper aside . he have always scorn that cunning of the Stock Exchange , now he think of it with fiery hatred . 

 another hour pass in feverish waiting ; then , just at mid - day , a knock sound at the outer door . anything but a loud knock ; anything but the confident summon of a friend . will go to open . there stand Godfrey Sherwood , shrunk together like a man suffer from cold ; he scarcely raise his eye . 

 will 's purpose , on find Sherwood at his door , be to admit he without a word , or any form of greeting ; but the sight of that change face and pitiful attitude overcome he ; he offer a hand , and feel it warmly press . 

 they be together in the room ; neither have speak . will point to a chair , but do not himself sit down . 

 " I suppose it be all true , Warburton , " begin the other in a low voice , " but I can not   believe it yet . I seem to be walk in a nightmare ; and when you give I your hand at the door , I think for a second that I would just wake up . " 

 " sit down , " say will , " and let us have it out . give I the detail . " 

 " that be exactly what I wish to do . of course I have not   be to bed , and I have   spend the night in write out a statement of all my dealing for the past fifteen month . here it be and here be my pass - book . " 

 will take the paper , a half - sheet of foolscap , one side almost cover with figure . at a glance he see that the statement be perfectly intelligible . the perusal of a few line cause he to look up in astonishment . 

 " you mean to say that between last September and the end of the year you lose twenty - five thousand pound ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " and you mean to say that you still go on with your gambling ? " 

 " thing be get bad in Ailie Street , you know . " 

 " and you do your good to make they desperate . " Sherwood 's head seem try to bury itself between his shoulder ; his foot hide themselves under the chair , he hold his hat in a way suggestive of the man who come to beg . 

 " the devil of the City get hold of I , " he reply , with a miserable attempt to look Warburton in the face . 

 " yes , " say will , " that be clear . then , a month ago , you really possess only nine thousand pound ? " 

 " that be all I have leave , out of nearly forty thousand . " 

 " what astonish I be , that you win from time to time . " 

 " I do ! " exclaim Godfrey , with sudden animation . " look at the fifth of February that be a great day ! it be that kind of thing that tempt a man on . afterwards I lose steadily but I might have win any day . and I have to make a good deal , if we be to come to term with Applegarth . I nearly do it . I be as cautious as a man could be content with small thing . if only I have not   be press for time ! it be only the want of time that make I use your money . of course , it be criminal . do not   think I wish to excuse myself for one moment . absolutely criminal . I know what be at stake . but I think the thing be sure . it promise at the least twenty - five per cent . we should have start brilliantly at Bristol several thousand for advertisement , beyond our estimate . I do not   think the Biggles people be dishonest " 

 " you do not   think so ! " interrupt will , contemptuously . " if there be any doubt we know on which side it weigh . just tell I the fact . what be the security ? " 

 Sherwood reply with a brief , clear , and obviously honest account of the speculation into which he have be draw . to the listener it seem astounding that any responsible man should be lure by such gambler 's chance ; he could hardly find patience to point out the manifest risk so desperately incur . and Sherwood admit the full extent of his folly ; he could only repeat that he have act on an irresistible impulse , to be explain , though not defend , by the embarrassment in which he find himself . 

 " thank Heaven , this be over ! " he exclaim at last , pass his handkerchief over a moist forehead . " I do not   know how I get through last night . More than once , I think it would be easy to kill myself than to come and face you . but there be the certainty that I could make good your loss . I may be able to do so very soon . I have   write to " 

 he check himself on the point of utter a name ; then with eye down , reflect for a moment . 

 " no ; I have not   the right to tell you , though I should like to , to give you confidence . it be the story of the ten thousand pound , you remember ? when I lend that money , I promise never to let any one know . even if I can not   realise your capital at once , I can pay you good interest until the money 's forthcoming . that would be the same thing to you ? " 

 Warburton give he a keen look , and say gravely 

 " let us understand each other , Sherwood . have you any income at all ? " 

 " none whatever now , except the interest on the ten thousand ; and that well , I be sorry to say it have not   be pay very regularly . but in future it must be it shall be . between two and three thousand be owe to I for arrear . " 

 " it be a queer story . " 

 " I know it be , " admit Godfrey . " but I hope you do not   doubt my word ? " 

 " no , I do not   what be to be do about Applegarth ? " 

 " I must see he , " reply Sherwood with a groan . " of course you have no part in the miserable business . I must write at once , and then go and face he . " 

 " of course I shall go with you . " 

 " you will ? that be kind of you . luckily he be a civilised man , not one of the City brute one might have have to deal with . " 

 " we must hope he will live up to his reputation , " say Warburton , with the first smile , and that no cheery one , which have rise to his lip during this interview . 

 from that point the talk become easy . all the aspect of their position be consider , without stress of feeling , for Will have recover his self - control ; and Sherwood , soothe by the sense of have discharge an appalling task , tend once more to sanguine thought . to be sure , neither of they could see any immediate way out of the gulf in which they find themselves ; all hope of resume business be at an end ; the only practical question be , how to earn a living ; but both be young man , and neither have ever know privation ; it be difficult for they to believe all at once that they be really face to face with that grim necessity which they have think of as conquer other , but never they . certain unpleasant step , however , have at once to be take . Sherwood must give up his house at Wimbledon ; Warburton must look about for a cheap lodging into which to remove at Michaelmas . worse still , and more urgent , be the duty of make know to Mrs. Warburton what have happen . 

 " I suppose I must go down at once , " say will gloomily . 

 " I see no hurry , " urge the other . " as a matter of fact , your mother and sister will lose nothing . you undertake to pay they a minimum of three per cent . on their money , and that you can do ; I guarantee you that , in any case . " 

 will muse . if indeed it be possible to avoid the disclosure ? but that would involve much lying , a thing , even in a good cause , little to his taste . still , when he think of his mother 's weak health , and how she might be affect by the news of this catastrophe , he begin seriously to ponder the practicability of well - mean deception . that , of course , must depend upon their difficulty with Applegarth remain strictly private ; and even so , could Mr. Turnbull 's scent for disaster be successfully reckon with ? 

 " do not   do anything hastily , Warburton , I beg of you , " continue the other . " thing be never so bad as they look at first sight . wait till I have see you know who . I might even be able to but it be well not to promise . wait a day or two , at all event . " 

 and this Warburton resolve to do ; for , if the bad come to the bad , he have some three hundred pound of his own still in the bank , and so could assure , for two year at all event , the income of which his mother and Jane have absolute need . for himself , he should find some way of earn bread and cheese ; he could no long stand on his dignity , and talk of independence , that be plain . 

 when at length his calamitous partner have go , he make an indifferent lunch on the cold meat he find in Mrs. Hopper 's precinct , and then decide that he have well take a walk ; to sit still and brood be the bad possible way of face such a crisis . there be no friend with whom he could discuss the situation ; none whose companionship would just now do he any particular good . well to walk twenty mile , and tire himself out , and see how thing look after a good night 's sleep , so he put on his soft hat , and take his walking - stick , and slam the door behind he . some one be come up the stair ; sink in his own thought he pay no heed , even when the other man stand in front of he . then a familiar voice claim his attention . 

 " do you want to cut I , Warburton ? " 




 CHAPTER 16 

 Warburton stop , and look into the speaker 's face , as if he hardly recognise he . 

 " you be go out , " add Franks , turn round . " I will not   keep you . " 

 and he seem about to descend the stair quickly . but will at length find voice . 

 " come in . I be think of something , and do not   see you . " 

 they enter , and pass as usual into the sitting - room , but not with the wonte exchange of friendly word . the interval since their last meeting seem to have alienate they more than the event which precede it . Warburton be try to smile , but each glance he take at the other 's face make his lip less inclined to relax from a certain severity rarely see in they ; and Franks succeed but ill in his attempt to lounge familiarly , with careless casting of the eye this way and that . it be he who break silence . 

 " I have   find a new drink gin and laudanum . first rate for the nerve . " 

 " ah ! " reply Warburton gravely . " my late tipple be oil of vitriol with a dash of strychnine . splendid pick - I - up . " 

 Franks laugh loudly , but unmirthfully . 

 " no , but I be quite serious , " he continue . " it be the only thing that keep I go . if I have not   find the use of laudanum in small dos , I should have try a very large one before now . " 

 his language have a note of bravado , and his attitude betray the self - conscious actor , but there be that in his countenance which could only have come of real misery . the thin cheek , heavy - lidded and bloodshot eye , ill - colour lip , make a picture anything but agreeable to look upon ; and quite in keep with it be the shabbiness of his garb . after an intent and stern gaze at he , will ask bluntly : 

 " when do you last have a bath ? " 

 " bath ? good God how do I know ? " 

 and again Franks laugh in the key of stage recklessness . 

 " I should advise a turkish , " say will , " follow by rhubarb of the same country . you would feel vastly well next day . " 

 " the remedy , " answer Franks , smile disdainfully , " of one who have never be through moral suffering . " 

 " yet efficacious , even morally , I can assure you . and , by the bye , I want to know when you be go to finish ' the Slummer . ' " 

 " finish it ? why , never ! I could as soon turn to and build a bridge over the Thames . " 

 " what do you mean ? I suppose you have to earn your living ? " 

 " I see no necessity for it . what do I care , whether I live or not ? " 

 " well , then , I be oblige to ask whether you feel it incumbent upon you to pay your debt ? " 

 the last word come out with a jerk , after a little pause which prove what it cost Warburton to speak they . to save his countenance , he assume an unnatural grimness of feature , star Franks resolutely in the face . and the result be the artist 's utter subjugation ; he shuffle , drop his head , make confused effort to reply . 

 " of course I shall do so somehow , " he mutter at length . 

 " have you any other way honest way except by work ? " 

 " very well , then , I will find work . real work . not that curse daubing , which it turn my stomach to think of . " 

 Warburton pause a moment , then say kindly : 

 " that be the talk of a very sore and daze man . before long , you will be yourself again , and you will go back to your painting with an appetite and the soon you try the well . I do not   particularly like dun people for money , as I think you know , but , when you can pay that debt of your , I shall be glad . I have   have a bit of bad luck since last we see each other . " 

 Franks gaze in heavy - eyed wonder , uncertain whether to take this as a joke or not . 

 " bad luck ? what sort of bad luck ? " 

 " why , neither on the turf nor at Monte Carlo . but a speculation have go wrong , and I be adrift . I shall have to leave this flat . how I be go to keep myself alive , I do not   know yet . the Bristol affair be of course off . I be as good as penniless , and a hundred pound or so will come very conveniently , whenever you can manage it . " 

 " be you serious , Warburton ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " you have   really lose everything ? you have   get to leave this flat because you can not   afford it ? " 

 " that , my boy , be the state of the case . " 

 " by Jove ! no wonder you do not   see I as I come upstairs . what the deuce ! you in Queer Street ! I never dream of such a thing as a possibility . I have   always think of you as a flourish capitalist sound as the Mansion House . why do not   you begin by tell I this ? I be about as miserable as a fellow can be , but I should never have bother you with my misery . Warburton in want of money ? why , the idea be grotesque ; I can not   get hold of it . I come to you as man go to a bank . of course , I mean to pay it all , some day , but you be so generous and so rich , I never think there would be any hurry . I be astounded I be floor ! " 

 with infinite satisfaction , Warburton see the well man rise again in his friend , note the change of countenance , of bearing , of tone . 

 " you see , " he say , with a nod and a smile , " that you have   no choice but to finish ' the Slummer ! ' " 

 Franks look about he uneasily , fretfully . 

 " either that or something else , " he mutter . 

 " no that ! it will bring you two or three hundred pound without much delay . " 

 " I daresay it would . but if you know how I loathe and curse the very sight of the thing why I have not   burn it I do not   know . " 

 " probably , " say will , " because in summer weather you take your gin and laudanum cold . " 

 this time the artist 's laugh be more genuine . 

 " the hideous time I have be go through ! " he continue . " it be no use try to give you an idea of it . of course you would say it be all damned foolery . well , I shall not   go through it again , that be one satisfaction . I have   do with woman . one reason why I loathe the thought of go on with that picture be because I still have the girl 's head to put in . but I will do it . I will go back and get to work at once . if I can not   find a model , I will fake the head get it out of some woman 's paper where the fashion be illustrate ; that will do very well . I will go and see how the beastly thing look . it be turn against the wall , and I wonder I have not   put my boot through it . " 




 CHAPTER 17 

 Warburton wait for a quarter of an hour after the artist have go , then set out for his walk . the result of this unexpected conversation with Franks be excellent ; the foolish fellow seem to have recover his common sense . but will feel ashamed of himself . of course he have act solely with a view to the other 's good , see no hope but this of rescue Franks from the slough in which he wallow ; nevertheless , he be sting with shame . for the first time in his life he have ask repayment of money lend to a friend . and he have do the thing blunderingly , without tact . for the purpose in view , it would have be enough to speak of his own calamity ; just the same effect would have be produce on Franks . he see this now , and writhe under the sense of his grossness . the only excuse he could urge for himself be that Franks ' behaviour provoke and merit rough handling . still , he might have have perspicacity enough to understand that the artist be not so sink in squalor as he pretend . 

 " just like I , " he growl to himself , with a nervous twitching of the face . " I have   no presence of mind . I see the right thing when it be too late , and when I have   make myself appear a bounder . how many thousand time have I blunder in this way ! a man like I ought to live alone as I have   a very fair chance of do in future . " 

 his walk do he no good , and on his return he pass a black evening . with Mrs. Hopper , who come as usual to get dinner for he , he hold little conversation ; in a few day he would have to tell she what have befall he , or invent some lie to account for the change in his arrangement , and this again torture Will 's nerve . in one sense of the word , no man be less pretentious ; but his liberality of thought and behaviour consist with a personal pride which be very much at the mercy of circumstance . even as he could not endure subjection , so do he shrink from the thought of lose dignity in the eye of his social inferior . mere poverty and lack of ease do not frighten he at all ; he have hardly give a thought as yet to that aspect of misfortune . what most of all distress his imagination   put aside thought of his mother and sister   be the sudden fall from a position of genial authority , of beneficent command , with all the respect and gratitude and consideration attach thereto . he could do without personal comfort , if need be , but it pain he horribly to think of be no long a patron and a master . with a good deal more philosophy than the average man , and vastly more benevolence , he could not attain to the humility which would have see in this change of fortune a mere surrender of privilege perhaps quite unjustifiable . social grade be an inseparable part of his view of life ; he recognise the existence of his superior though resolve to have as little to do with they as possible , and take it as a matter of course that multitude of man should stand below his level . to imagine himself an object of pity for Mrs. Hopper and Allchin and the rest of they work upon his bile , disorder his digestion . 

 he who have regard so impatiently the trial of Norbert Franks now have to go through an evil time , with bad result upon his temper , his health , and whole being , than he would have think conceivable . for a whole fortnight he live in a state of suspense and force idleness , which help he to understand the artist 's recourse to gin and laudanum . the weather be magnificent , but for he no sun rise in the sky . if he walk about London , he see only ugliness and wretchedness , his eye seem to have lose the power of perceive other thing . every two or three day he hear from Sherwood , who write that he be do his utmost , and continue to hold out hope that he would soon have money : but these letter be not reassure . the disagreeable interview with Applegarth have pass off well than might have be expect . though greatly astonish , and obviously in some doubt as to the fact of the matter , Applegarth behave as a gentleman , resign all claim upon the defaulter , and bring the affair to a decent close as quickly as possible . but Warburton come away with a face so yellow that he seem on the point of an attack of jaundice . for he to be the object of another man 's generous forbearance be something new and intolerable . before part with Sherwood , he speak to he bitterly , all but savagely . a few hour later , of course , repentance come upon he , and he write to ask pardon . an evil time . 

 at length Sherwood come to Chelsea , have write to ask for a meeting . will 's foreboding be but too well justified . the disastrous man come only to say that all his effort have fail . his debtor for ten thousand pound be himself in such strait that he could only live by desperate expedient , and probably would not be able to pay a penny of interest this year . 

 " happily , " say Sherwood , " his father 's health be break . one be oblige to talk in this brutal way , you know . at the father 's death it will be all right ; I shall then have my legal remedy , if there be need of it . to take any step of that sort now would be ruinous ; my friend would be cut off with a shilling , if the affair come to his father 's ear . " 

 " so this be how we stand , " say Warburton , grimly . " it be all over . " 

 Sherwood lay on the table a number of bank - note , say simply : 

 " there be two hundred and sixty pound the result of the sale of my furniture and thing . will you use that and trust I a little long ? " 

 Warburton writhe in his chair . 

 " what have you to live upon ? " he ask with eye downcast . 

 " oh , I shall get on all right . I have   one or two idea . " 

 " but this be all the money you have ? " 

 " I have   keep about fifty pound , " answer the other , " out of which I can pay my debt they be small and the rent of my house for this quarter . " 

 Warburton push back the note . 

 " I can not   take it you know I can not . " 

 " you must . " 

 " how the devil be you go to live ? " cry will , in exasperation . 

 " I shall find a way , " reply Sherwood with an echo of his old confident tone . " I need a little time to look about I , that be all , there be a relative of mine , an old fellow who live comfortably in North Wales , and who invite I down every two or three year . the good thing will be for I to go and spend a short time with he , and get my nerve into order I be shaky , there be no disguising it . I have not   exhaust all the possibility of raise money ; there be hope still in one or two direction ; if I get a little quietness and rest I shall be able to think thing out more clearly do not   you think this justifiable ? " 

 as to the money he remain inflexible . very reluctantly Warburton consent to keep this sum , give a receipt in form . 

 " you have not   say anything to Mrs. Warburton yet ? " ask Sherwood nervously . 

 " not yet , " mutter Will . 

 " I wish you could postpone it a little long . could you do you think without too much strain of conscience ? do not   it seem a pity when any day may enable I to put thing right ? " 

 will mutter again that he would think of it ; that assuredly he prefer not to disclose the matter if it could decently be keep secret . and on this Sherwood take his leave , go away with a bright face than he have bring to the interview ; whilst will remain brood gloomily , his eye fix on the bank - note , in an unconscious stare . 

 little of a man of business as he be , Warburton know very well that thing at the office be pass in a flagrantly irregular way : he know that any one else in his position would have put this serious affair into legal hand , if only out of justice to Sherwood himself . More than once he have think of communicate with Mr. Turnbull , but shame withhold he . it seem improbable , too , that the solicitor would connive at keep his friend at the Haws ignorant of what have befall they , and with every day that pass will feel more disposed to hide that catastrophe , if by any mean that be possible . already he have half commit himself to this deception , have write to his mother   without mention of any other detail   that he might , after all , continue to live in London , where Applegarth 's be about to establish a warehouse . the question be how ; if he put aside all the money he have for payment of pretend dividend to his mother and sister , how , in that case , be he himself to live ? at the thought of go about apply for clerk 's work , or anything of that kind , cold water flow down his back ; rather than that , he would follow Allchin 's example , and turn porter an independent position compare with bent - back slavery on an office - stool . some mean of earn money he must find without delay . to live on what he have , one day long than could be help , would be sheer dishonesty . Sherwood might succeed in bring he a few hundred of the ten thousand will think not at all , so fantastic do the whole story sound but that would be merely another small instalment of the sum due to the unsuspecting victim at St. Neots . strictly speak , he own not a penny ; his very meal to - day be at the expense of his mother and Jane . this think goad he . his sleep become a mere nightmare ; his waking , a dry - throate misery . 

 in spite of loathing and dread , he begin to read the thick - serrie column of newspaper advertisement , Wanted ! want ! want ! want by the thousand ; but many more those of the would - be employ than those of the would - be employer , and under the second head not one in a hundred that offer he the slight hint or hope . want ! want . to glance over these column be like listen to the clamour of a hunger - drive multitude ; the ear sing , the head turn giddy . after a quarter of an hour of such search , will fling the paper aside , and stamp like a madman about his room . a horror of life seize he ; he understand , with fearful sympathy , the impulse of those who , rather than be any long hustle in this howl mob dash themselves to destruction . 

 he think over the list of his friend . friend what man have more than two or three ? at this moment he know of no one who wish he well who could be of the slight service . his acquaintance be of course more numerous . there lie on his table two invitation just receive the kind of invitation receive by every man who do not live the life of a hermit . but what human significance have they ? not a name rise in his mind which symbolise helpfulness . true , that might be to some extent his own fault ; the people of whom he see most be such as need , not such as could offer , aid . he think of Ralph Pomfret . there , certainly , a kindly will would not be lack , but how could he worry with his foolish affair a man on whom he have no shadow of claim ? no : he stand alone . it be a lesson in social science such as reading could never have afford he . his insight into the order of a man 's world have all at once be marvellously quicken , the scope of his reflection incredibly extend . some vague consciousness of this now and then arrest he in his long purposeless walk ; he begin to be aware of see common thing with new eye . but the perception be akin to fear ; he start and look nervously about , as if suddenly aware of some peril . 

 one afternoon he be on his way home from a westward trudge , plod along the remoter part of Fulham Road , when word speak by a woman whom he pass catch his ear . 

 " see ' ere ! the shutter be up . Boxon must be dead . " 

 Boxon ? how do he come to know that name ? he slacken his pace , reflect . why , Boxon be the name of the bet and drinking grocer , with whom Allchin use to be . he stop , and see a group of three or four woman star at the closed shop . do not   Mrs. Hopper say that Boxon have be nearly kill in a carriage accident ? doubtless he be dead . 

 he walk on , but before he have go a dozen yard , stop abruptly , turn , cross to the other side of the road , and go back till he stand opposite the closed shop . the name of the tradesman in great gilt letter prove that there be no mistake . he examine the building ; there be two story above the shop ; the first seem to be use for storage ; white blind at the window of the second show it to be inhabit . for some five minute will stand gaze and reflect ; then , with head bent as before , he pursue his way . 

 when he reach home , Mrs. Hopper regard he compassionately ; the good woman be much disturb by the strangeness of his demeanour lately , and fear he be go to be ill . 

 " you look dre'ful tired , sir , " she say . " I will make you a cup of tea at once . it will do you good . " 

 " yes , get I some tea , " answer Warburton , absently . then , as she be leave the room , he ask , " be it true that the grocer Boxon be dead ? " 

 " I be go to speak of it this morning , sir , " reply Mrs. Hopper , " but you seem so busy . yes , sir , he be die die the day before yesterday , they say , and it would be surprising to hear as anybody be sorry . " 

 " who will take his business ? " ask Warburton . 

 " we be talk about that last night , sir , I and my sister Liza , and the Allchins . it be fall off a great deal lately , what else could you expect ? since Boxon get into his bad way . but anybody as have a little money might do well there . Allchin be say he wish he have a few ' undred . " 

 " a few hundred would be enough ? " interrupt the listener , without notice the look of peculiar eagerness on Mrs. Hopper 's face . 

 " Allchin think the goodwill can be have for about a ' undred , sir ; and the rent , it be only eighty pound " 

 " shop and house ? " 

 " yes , sir ; so Allchin say . it be not   much of a ' ouse , of course . " 

 " what profit could be make , do you suppose , by an energetic man ? " 

 " when Boxon begin , sir , " reply Mrs. Hopper , with grow animation , " he use to make so Allchin say a good five or six ' undred a year . there be a good deal of profit in the grocery business , and Boxon 's situation be good ; there be no other grocer near he . but of course as Allchin say you want to lay out a good deal at start " 

 " yes , yes , of course , you must have stock . " say will carelessly . " bring I some tea at once , Mrs. Hopper . " 

 it have suddenly occur to he that Allchin might think of try to borrow the capital wherewith to start this business , and that Mrs. Hopper might advise her brother - in - law to apply to he for the loan . 

 but this be not at all the idea which have prompt Will 's inquiry . 




 CHAPTER 18 

 another week go by . Warburton be still live in the same restless way , but do not wear quite so gloomy a countenance ; now and then he look almost cheerful . that be the case when one morning he receive a letter from Sherwood . Godfrey write that , no soon have he arrive at his relative 's in North Wales than he be seize with a violent liver - attack , which for some day prostrate he ; he be now recover , and well news still , have succeed in borrow a couple of hundred pound . half of this sum he send to Warburton ; the other half he beg to be allow to retain , as he have what might prove a very fruitful idea for the use of the money detail presently . to this letter will immediately reply at some length . the cheque he pay into his account , which thus reach a total of more than six hundred pound . 

 a few day later , after breakfast as usual , he let his servant clear the table , then say with a peculiar smile . 

 " I want to have a little talk with you , Mrs. Hopper . please sit down . " 

 to seat herself in her master 's presence go against all Mrs. Hopper 's idea of propriety . see she hesitate , will point steadily to a chair , and the good woman , much flurry , place herself on the edge of it . 

 " you have notice , " Warburton resume , " that I have not   be quite myself lately . there be a good reason for it . I have   have a misfortune in business ; all my plan be change ; I shall have to begin quite a new life a different life altogether from that I have lead till now . " 

 Mrs. Hopper seem to have a sudden pain in the side . she groan under her breath , star at the speaker pitifully . 

 " there be no need to talk about it , you know , " will go on with a friendly nod . " I tell you , because I be think of go into a business in which your brother - in - law could help I , if he care to . " 

 he pause . Mrs. Hopper keep she wide eye on he . 

 " Allchin'll be very glad to hear of that , sir . what be I say ? of course I do not   mean he will be glad you have   have misfortune , sir , and I be that sorry to hear it , I can not   tell you . but it do just happen as he be out of work , through that nasty temper of his . not , " she correct herself hastily , " as I ought to call he nasty - temper . with a good employer , I be sure he would never get into no trouble at all . " 

 " do he still wish to get back into the grocery business ? " 

 " he would be only too glad , sir , but , of course , any place as you offer he " 

 " well , it happen , " say Warburton , " that it be the grocery business I be think about . " 

 " you , sir ? " gasp Mrs. Hopper . 

 " I think I shall take Boxon 's shop . " 

 " you , sir ? take a grocer 's shop ? you mean , you would put Allchin in to manage it ? " 

 " no , I do not , Mrs. Hopper , " reply Will , smile mechanically . " I have more than my own living to earn ; other people be dependent upon I , so I must make as much money as possible . I can t afford to pay a manager . I shall go behind the counter myself , and Allchin , if he care for the place , shall be my assistant . " 

 the good woman could find no word to express her astonishment . 

 " suppose you have a word with Allchin , and send he to see I this evening ? I say again , there be no need to talk about the thing to anybody else . we will just keep it quiet between we . " 

 " you can depend upon I , sir , " declare Mrs. Hopper . " but do you hever ! it be come upon I so sudden like . and what will Allchin say ! why , he will think I be have a game with he . " 

 to this point have Will Warburton bring himself , urge by conscience and fear . little by little , since the afternoon when he gaze at Boxon 's closed shop , have this purpose grow in his mind , until he see it as a possibility a desirability a fact . by shopkeepe , he might hope to earn sufficient for supply of the guarantee income to his mother and sister , and at the same time be no man 's servant . his acquaintance with Allchin enable he to disregard his lack of grocery experience ; with Allchin for an assistant , he would soon overcome initial difficulty . only to Godfrey Sherwood have he communicate his project . " what difference be there , " he write , " between sell sugar from an office in Whitechapel , and sell it from behind a counter in Fulham Road ? " and Sherwood who be still repose in North Wales write a long , affectionate , admire reply . " you be splendid ! what energy ! what courage ! I could almost say that I do not   regret my criminal recklessness , see that it have give the occasion for such a magnificent display of character . " he add , " of course it will be only for a short time . even if the plan I be now work out detail shortly come to nothing   a very unlikely thing , I be sure to recover my ten thousand pound in a year or so . " " of course , " he write in a postscript , " I breathe no word of it to any mortal . " 

 this letter so be we make do Warburton good . it strengthen he in carry through the deception of his relative and of Mr. Turnbull , for he see himself as splendide mendax . in Sherwood 's plan and assurance he have no shadow of faith , but Sherwood 's admiration be worth have , and it throw a gilding upon the name of grocer . should he impart the secret to Norbert Franks ? that question he could not decide just yet . in any case , he should tell no one else ; all other acquaintance must be content if they care to inquire with vague reference to an " agency , " or something of the sort . neither his mother nor Jane ever come to London for they , his change of address to a poor district would have no significance . in short , London , be London , it seem perfectly feasible to pass his life in a grocer 's shop without the fact become know to any one from whom he wish to conceal it . 

 the rent of the shop and house be eighty - five pound an increase upon that pay by Boxon . " Plant " be estimate at a hundred and twenty - five ; the stock at one hundred and fifty , and the goodwill at a round hundred . this make a total of four hundred and sixty pound , leave Warburton some couple of hundred for all the expense of his start . the landlord have consent to do certain repair , include a repainting of the shop , and this work have already begin . not a day must be lose . will know that the first half - year would decide his fate as a tradesman . do he come out at the end of six month with sufficient profit to pay a bare three per cent . on the St. Neots money , all would be safe and well . if the balance go against he , why then the whole battle of life be lose , and he might go hide his head in some corner even more obscure . 

 of course he count largely on the help of Allchin . Allchin , though pig - headed and pugnacious , have a fair knowledge of the business , to which he have be breed , and of business matter in general always talk shrewdly . unable , whatever his own strait , to deal penuriously with my one , will have think out a liberal arrangement , whereby all the dwelling part of the house should be give over , rent free , to Allchin and his wife , with permission to take one lodger ; the assistant to be pay a small salary , and a percentage on shop taking when they reach a certain sum per month . this proposal , then , he set before the muscular man on his present himself this afternoon . Allchin 's astonishment at the story he have hear from Mrs. Hopper be not less than that of the woman herself . with difficulty persuade to sit down , he show a countenance in which the gloom he think decorous struggle against jubilation on his own account : and Warburton have not talk long before his listener 's feature irresistibly expand in a happy grin . 

 " how would something of this kind suit you ? " ask Will . 

 " I , sir ? " Allchin slap his leg . " you ask how it suit I ? " 

 his feeling be too much for he . he grow very red , and could say no more . 

 " then suppose we settle it so . I have   write out the term of your engagement . read and sign . " 

 Allchin pretend to read the paper , but obviously pay no attention to it . he seem to be struggle with some mental obstacle . 

 " something you want to alter ? " ask Warburton . 

 " why , sir , you have   altogether forget as I be in your debt . it stand to reason as you must take that money out before you begin to pay I anything . " 

 " oh , we will not   say anything more about that trifle . we be make a new beginning . but look here , Allchin , I do not   want you to quarrel with I , as you do with every one else " 

 " with you , sir ? Ho , ho ! " 

 Allchin guffaw , and at once look ashamed of himself . 

 " I quarrel , " he add , " with people as be insulting , or as try to best I . it go against my nature , sir , to be insult and to be best . " 

 they talk about the detail of the business , and presently Allchin ask what name be to be put up over the shop . 

 " I have   think of that , " answer Will . " what do you say to Jollyman ? " 

 the assistant be delighted ; he repeat the name a dozen time , snort and choke with appreciation of the joke . next morning , they meet again , and go together to look at the shop . here Allchin make great play with his valuable quality . he point out the error and negligencie of the late Boxon , declare it a scandal that a business such as this should have be allow to fall off , and be full of ingenious idea for a brilliant opening . among other form of inexpensive advertisement , he suggest that , for the first day , a band should be engage to play in the front room over the shop , with the window open ; and he undertake to find amateur bandsman who would undertake the job on very moderate term . 

 not many day elapse before the old name have disappear from the house front , give place to that of Jollyman . whilst this be be paint up , Allchin stand on the opposite side of the way , watch delightedly . 

 " when I think as the name use to be Boxon , " he exclaim to his employer , " why , I can not   believe as any money be ever make here . Boxon ! why , it be enough to drive customer away ! if you ever hear a bad name , sir , for a shopkeeper , I should be glad to be tell of it . but Jollyman ! why , it will bring people from Putney , from Battersea , from who know how far . Jollyman 's Teas , Jollyman 's sugar can not   you hear them say it , already ? it be a fortune in itself , that name . why , sir , if a grocer call Boxon come at this moment , and offer to take I into partnership on half profit , I would not   listen to he there ! " 

 naturally , all this do not pass without many a pang in Warburton 's sensitive spot . he have set his face like brass , or try to do so ; but in the night season he could all but have shed tear of humiliation , as he toss on his comfortless pillow . the day be spend in visit to wholesale grocery establishment , in study of trade journal , in calculate innumerable petty question of profit and loss . when nausea threaten he : when an all but horror of what lie before he assail his mind ; he think fixedly of the Haws , and make a picture to himself of that peaceful little home devastate by his own fault . and to think that all this sweat and misery arise from the need of gain less than a couple of hundred pound a year ! life at the Haws , a life of refinement and goodness and tranquillity such as can seldom be find , demand only that a sum which the wealthy vulgar throw away upon the foolish amusement of an hour . Warburton have a tumultuous mind in reflect on these thing ; but the disturbance be salutary , bear he through trial of nerve and patience and self - respect which he could not otherwise have endure . 

 Warburton have now to find cheap lodging for himself , unfurnished room in some poor quarter not too far from the shop . 

 at length , in a new little street of very red brick , not far from Fulham Palace Road at the Hammersmith end , he come upon a small house which exhibit in its parlour window a card inscribe : " two unfurnished room to be let to single gentleman only . " the precision of this notice make he hopeful , and a certain cleanliness of aspect in the woman who open to he be an add encouragement ; but he find negotiation not altogether easy . the landlady , a middle - aged widow , seem to regard he with some peculiar suspicion ; before even admit he to the house , she question he closely as to his business , his present place of abode , and so on , and Warburton be all but turn away in impatience , when at last she draw aside , and cautiously invite he to enter . further acquaintance with Mrs. Wick lead he to understand that the cold , misgive in her eye , the sour rigidity of her lip , and her generally repellant manner , be characteristic which mean nothing in particular save as they result from a more or less hard life amid London 's crowd ; at present , the woman annoy he , and only the clean freshness of her vacant room induce he to take the trouble of come to term with she . 

 " there be one thing I must say to you quite plain , to begin with , " remark Mrs. Wick , whose language , though not disrespectful , have a certain bluntness . " I can not   admit female visitor not on any excuse . " 

 speak thus , she set her face at its rigid and sour , and star past Warburton at the wall . he , unable to repress a smile , declare his perfect readiness to accept this condition of tenancy . 

 " another thing , " pursue the landlady , " be that I do not   like late hour . " and she eye he as one might a person catch in flagrant crapulence at one o'clock a.m. 

 " why , neither do I , " will reply . " but for all that , I may be oblige to come home late now and then . " 

 " from the theatre , I suppose ? " 

 " I very seldom go to the theatre . "   Mrs. Wick look sanguine for an instant , but at once relapse into dark suspicion than ever .   " but as to my hour of return home , I must have entire liberty . " 

 the woman meditate , profound gloom on her brow . 

 " you have not   tell I , " she resume , shoot a glance of keen distrust , " exactly what your business may be . " 

 " I be in the sugar line , " respond Will . 

 " Sugar ? you would not   mind give I the name of your employer ? " 

 the word so rasp on Warburton 's sensitive temper that he seem about to speak angrily . this the woman observe , and add at once : 

 " I do not   doubt but that you be quite respectable , sir , but you can understand as I have to be careful who I take into my house . " 

 " I understand that , but I must ask you to be satisfied with a reference to my present landlord . that , and a month 's payment in advance , ought to suffice . " 

 evidently it do , for Mrs. Wick , after shoot one or two more of her sharp look , declare herself willing to enter into discussion of detail . he require attendance , do he ? well it all depend upon what sort of attendance he expect ; if he want cook at late hour . Warburton cut short these anticipatory objection , and make known that his want be few and simple : plain breakfast at eight o'clock , cold supper on the table when he come home , a mid - day meal on Sundays , and the keeping of his room in order ; that be all . after morose reflection , Mrs. Wick put her demand for room and service at a pound a week , but to this Warburton demur . it cost he agony to debate such a matter ; but , as he know very well , the price be excessive for unfurnished lodging , and need constrain he . he offer fifteen shilling , and say he would call for Mrs. Wick 's decision on the morrow . the landlady allow he to go to the foot of the stair , then stop he . 

 " I would not   mind take fifteen shilling , " she say , " if I know it be for a permanency . " 

 " I can not   bind myself more than by the month . " 

 " would you be willing to leave a deposit ? " 

 so the matter be settle , and Warburton arrange to enter into possession that day week . 

 without delay the shop repair be finish , inside and out ; order for stock be complete ; in two day as a great bill on the shutter announce " Jollyman 's Grocery Stores " would be open to the public . Allchin plead strongly for the engagement of the brass band ; it would not   cost much , and the effect would be immense . Warburton shrug , hesitate , give way , and the band be engage . 




 CHAPTER 19 

 Rosamund Elvan be what lady call a good correspondent . she write often , she write at length , and be satisfied with few or brief letter in reply . Scarcely have she be a week at Cairo , when some half dozen sheet of thin paper , cover with her small swift writing , be dispatch to Bertha Cross , and , thence onwards , about once a fortnight such a letter arrive at Walham Green . sit by a fire keep , for economical reason , as low as possible , with her mother 's voice sound querulously somewhere in the house , and too often a clammy fog at the window , Bertha read of egyptian delight and wonder , set glowingly before she in Rosamund 's fluent style . she be glad of the letter , for they manifest a true affection , and be in every way more interesting than any other that she receive ; but at time they make the cheerless little house seem more cheerless still , and the pang of contrast between her life and Rosamund 's call at such moment for all Bertha 's sense of humour to make it endurable . 

 not that Miss Elvan represent herself as happy . in her very first letter she besought Bertha not to suppose that her appreciation of strange and beautiful thing mean forgetfulness of what must be a lifelong sorrow . " I be often bad than depressed . I sleep very badly , and in the night I often shed wretched tear . though I do only what conscience compel I to do , I suffer all the misery of remorse . and how can I wish that it should be otherwise ? it be well , surely , to be capable of such suffering , than to go one 's way in light - hearted egoism . I be not sure that I do not   sometimes encourage despondency . you can understand that ? I know you can , dear Bertha , for many a time I have detect the deep feeling which lie beneath your joking way . " passage such as this Bertha be careful to omit when read from the letter to her mother . Mrs. Cross take very little interest in her daughter 's friend , and regard the broken engagement with no less disapproval than surprise ; but it would have gravely offend she if Bertha have keep this correspondence altogether to herself . 

 " I suppose , " she remark , on one such occasion , " we shall never again see Mr. Franks . " 

 " he would find it rather awkward to call , no doubt , " reply Bertha . 

 " I shall never understand it ! " Mrs. Cross exclaim , in a vexed tone , after think awhile . " no doubt there be something you keep from I . " 

 " about Rosamund ? nothing whatever , I assure you , mother . " 

 " then you yourself do not   know all , that be quite certain . " 

 Mrs. Cross have make the remark many time , and always with the same satisfaction . her daughter be content that the discussion should remain at this point ; for the feeling that she have say something at once unpleasant and unanswerable make Mrs. Cross almost good humour for at least an hour . 

 few be the distressful lady 's source of comfort , but one sure way of soothe her mind and temper , be to suggest some method of save money , no matter how little . one day in the winter , Bertha pass along the further part of Fulham Road , notice a new - look grocer 's , the window full of price ticket , some of they very attractive to a housekeeper 's eye ; on return home she speak of this , mention figure which move her mother to a sour effervescence of delight . the shop be rather too far away for convenience , but that same evening Mrs. Cross go to inspect it , and come back quite flurried with what she have see . 

 " I shall most certainly deal at Jollyman 's , " she exclaim . " what a pity we do not   know of he before ! such a gentlemanly man indeed , quite a gentleman . I never see a shopkeeper who behave so nicely . so different from billing a man I have always thoroughly dislike , and his coffee have be get bad and bad . Mr. Jollyman be quite willing to send even the small order . be not   that nice of he such a distance ! billing be quite insolent to I the day before yesterday , when I ask he to send ; yet it be nearly a two - shilling order . never go into that shop again , Bertha . it be really quite a pleasure to buy of Mr. Jollyman ; he know how to behave ; I really almost feel as if I be talk to some one of our own class . without his apron , he must be a thorough gentleman . " 

 Bertha could not restrain a laugh . 

 " how thoughtless of he to wear an apron at all ! " she exclaim merrily . " could not   one suggest to he discreetly , that but for the apron " 

 " do not   be ridiculous , Bertha ! " interrupt her mother . " you always make nonsense of what one say . Mr. Jollyman be a shopkeeper , and it be just because he do not   forget that , after all , that his behaviour be so good . do you remember that horrid Stokes , in King 's Road ? there be a man who think himself too good for his business , and in reality be nothing but an underbred , impertinent creature . I can hear his ' yes , Mrs. Cross no , Mrs. Cross thank you , Mrs. Cross ' and once , when I protest against an overcharge , he cry out , ' oh , my dear Mrs. Cross ! ' the insolence of that man ! now , Mr. Jollyman " 

 it be not long before Bertha have an opportunity of see this remarkable shopkeeper , and for once she be able to agree with her mother . Mr. Jollyman bear very little resemblance to the typical grocer , and each visit to his shop strengthen Bertha 's suspicion that he have not grow up in this way of life . it cost she some constraint to make a very small purchase of he , pay a few copper , and still more when she ask he if he have nothing cheap than this or that ; all the more so that Mr. Jollyman seem to share her embarrassment , lower his voice as if involuntarily , and be careful not to meet her eye . one thing Bertha notice be that , though the grocer invariable address her mother as " madam , " in speak to she he never use the grocerly " miss " and when , by chance , she hear he bestow this objectionable title upon a servant girl who be make purchase at the same time , Bertha not only feel grateful for the distinction , but see in it a fresh proof of Mr. Jollyman 's good breeding . 

 the winter pass , and with the spring come event in which Bertha be interested . Mr. Elvan , who for his health 's sake spend the winter in the south - west of France , fall so ill early in the year that Rosamund be summon from Egypt . with all speed she travel to St. Jean de Luz . when she arrive , her father be no long in danger ; but there seem no hope of his be able to return to England for some month , so Rosamund remain with he and her sister , and be soon write to her friend at Walham Green in a strain of revive enthusiasm for the country of the basque . a postscript to one of these letter , write in the middle of May , run as follow : " I hear that N. F. have a picture in the Academy call ' a Ministering Angel , ' and that it promise to be one of the most popular of the year . have you see it ? " to this , Rosamund 's correspondent be able to reply that she have see " N.F 's " picture , and that it certainly be a good deal talk about ; she add no opinion as to the merit of the painting , and , in her next letter , Miss Elvan leave the subject untouched . Bertha be glad of this . " a Ministering Angel " seem to she by no mean a very remarkable production , and she like much well to say nothing about it than to depreciate the painter ; for to do this would have be like seek to confirm Rosamund in her attitude towards Norbert Franks , which be not at all Bertha 's wish . 

 a few week later , Rosamund return to the topic . " N. F 's picture , " she write , " be evidently a great success and you can imagine how I feel about it . I see it , you remember , at an early stage , when he call it ' the Slummer , ' and you remember too , the effect it have upon I . oh , Bertha , this be nothing less than a soul 's tragedy ! when I think what he use to be , what I hop of he , what he hop for himself ! be it not dreadful that he should have fall so low , and in so short a time ! a popular success ! oh , the shame of it , the bitter shame ! " 

 at this point , the reader 's smile threaten laughter . but , feel sure that her friend , if guilty of affectation , be quite unconscious of it , she compose her face to read gravely on . 

 " a soul 's tragedy , Bertha , and I the cause of it one can see now , but too well , what be before he . all his hardship be over , and all his struggle . he will become a popular painter one of those whose name be familiar to the crowd , like " instance be cite . " I can say , with all earnestness , that I have rather have see he starve to death . poor , poor N. F. ! something whisper to I that perhaps I be always under an illusion about he . could he so rapidly sink to this , if he be indeed the man I think he ? would he not rather have oh , have do anything ? yet this may be only a temptation of my low self , a way of give ease to my conscience . despair may account for his degradation . and when I remember that a word , one word , from I , the right moment , would have check he on the dangerous path ! when I see ' sanctuary , ' why have I not the courage to tell he what I think ? no , I become the accomplice of his suicide , and I , alone , be the cause of this wretched disaster . before long he will be rich . can you imagine N. F. rich ? I shudder at the thought . " 

 the paper rustle in Bertha 's hand ; her shoulder shake ; she could no long restrain the merry laugh . when she sit down to answer Rosamund , a roguish smile play about her lip . 

 " I grieve with you " thus she begin " over the shocking prospect of N. F. 's become rich . alas ! I fear the thing be past pray for ; I can all but see the poor young man in a shiny silk hat and an overcoat trim with the most expensive fur . his Academy picture be everywhere produce ; a large photogravure will soon be publish ; all day long a crowd stand before it at Burlington House , and his name shall we ever again dare to speak it ? be on the lip of casual people in train and ' bus and tram . how shall I write on such a painful subject ? you see that my hand be unsteady . do not   blame yourself too much . the man capable of become rich will become so , whatever the noble influence which endeavour to restrain he . I suspect I feel all but convince that N. F. could not help himself ; the misfortune be that his fatal turn for moneymaking do not show itself early , and so warn you away . I do not   know whether I dare send you a paragraph I have cut from yesterday 's Echo . yet I will it will serve to show you that as you use to write from Egypt all this be Kismet . " 

 the newspaper cutting show an item of news interesting alike to the fashionable and the artistic world . Mr. Norbert Franks , the young painter whose Academy picture have be so much discuss , be about to paint the portrait of Lady Rockett , recently espouse wife of Sir Samuel Rockett , the australian millionaire . as every one know , Lady Rockett have make a brilliant figure in the now close Season , and her image have be in all the society journal . Mr. Franks might be congratulate on this excellent opportunity for the display of his admirable talent as an exponent of female beauty . " Exponent " be the word . 




 CHAPTER 20 

 in these summer day , whilst Norbert Franks be achieve popularity , success in humbler guise come to the humorous and much - endure artist at Walham Green . for a year or two , Bertha Cross have spend what time she could spare upon the illustration of a quaint old story - book , a book which have amuse her own childhood , and still hold its place in her affection . the work be now finish ; she show it to a publisher of her acquaintance , who at once offer to purchase it on what seem to bertha excellent term . of her own ability she think very modestly in deed , and have always be surprised when any one consent to pay oftener in shilling than in pound for work which have cost she an infinity of conscientious trouble ; now , however , she suspect that she have do something not altogether bad , and she speak of it in a letter to Rosamund Elvan , still in the country of the basque . 

 " as you know , " Rosamund reply , " I have never doubt that you would make a success one day , for you be wonderfully clever , and only need a little more self - confidence in make yourself know . I wish I could feel anything like so sure of earn money . for I shall have to , that be now certain . poor father , who get weak and weak , talk to we the other day about what we could expect after his death ; and it will be only just a little sum for each of we , nothing like enough to invest and live upon . I be work at my water - colour , and I have be try pastel there be no end of good material here . when the end come and it can not   be long I must go to London , and see whether my thing have any market value . I do not   like the prospect of life in a garret on bread and water by myself , that be . you know how joyfully , gladly , proudly , I would have accept it , under other circumstance . if I have real talent myself but I feel more than doubtful about that . I pray that I may not fall too low . can I trust you to overwhelm I with scorn , if I seem in danger of do vulgar work ? " 

 Bertha yield to the temptation of a later summer rich in warmth and hue , and make little excursion by herself into the country , leave home before her mother be up in the morning , and come back after sunset . her sketch material and a packet of sandwich be but a light burden ; she be a good walker ; and the shilling or two spend on the railway , which formerly she could not have spar , no long frighten she . 

 in this way , one morning of September , she go by early train as far as Epsom , walk through the street , and come into that high - bank lane which lead up to the down . blackberry shine thick upon the bramble , and above , even to the very top of the hedge - row tree , climb the hoary clematis . glad in this leafy solitude , Bertha ramble slowly on . she make no unpleasing figure against the rural background , for she be straight and slim , graceful in her movement , and have a face from which no one would have turn indifferently , so bright be it with youthful enjoyment and with old thought . 

 Whilst thus she linger , a footstep approach , that of a man who be walk in the same direction . when close to she , this pedestrian stop , and his voice startle Bertha with unexpected greeting . the speaker be Norbert Franks . 

 " how glad I be to see you ! " he exclaim , in a tone and with a look which vouch for his sincerity . " I ought to have be to Walham Green long ago . again and again I mean to come . but this be jolly ; I like chance meeting . be you often down here in Surrey ? " 

 with amusement Bertha remark the evidence of prosperity in Franks ' dress and bearing ; he have change notably since the day when he use to come to their little house to talk of Rosamund , and be glad of an indifferent cup of tea . he seem to be in very fair health , his countenance give no hint of sentimental sorrow . 

 Franks notice a bunch of tinted leafage which she be carry , and speak of its beauty . 

 " go to make use of they , no doubt . what be you work at just now ? " 

 Bertha tell of her recent success with the illustrate story - book , and Franks declare himself delight . clearly , he be in the mood to be delighted with everything . between his remark , which be utter in the sprightly tone , he hum phrase of melody . 

 " your Academy picture be a great success , " say Bertha , discreetly watch he as she speak . 

 " yes , I suppose it be , " he answer , with a light - hearted laugh . " do you see it ? and what do you think of it ? no , seriously ; I should like your real opinion . I know you have opinion . " 

 " you mean it to be successful , " be Bertha 's reply . 

 " well , yes , I do . at the same time I think some of the critic the high and mighty one , you know be altogether wrong about it . perhaps , on the whole , you take their view ? " 

 " oh no , I do not , " answer his companion , cheerfully . " I think the picture very clever , and very true . " 

 " I be delighted ! I have   always maintain that it be perfectly true . a friend of mine why , you remember I speak of Warburton Warburton want I to make the Slummer ugly . but why ? it be just the prettiest girl of that kind who go slum nowadays . still , you be quite right . I do mean it to be ' successful . ' I have to make a success , that be the fact of the matter . you know what bad time I be have . I get sick of it , that be the truth . then , I owe money , and money that have to be pay back , one way or another . now I be out of debt , and see my way to live and work in decent comfort . and I maintain that I have   do nothing to be ashamed of . " 

 Bertha smile approvingly . 

 " I have   just finish a portrait a millionaire 's wife , Lady Rockett , " go on Franks . " of course it be my Slummer that get I the job . woman have be rave about that girl 's head ; and it be not   bad , though I say it . I have to take a studio at a couple of day ' notice could not   ask Lady Rockett to come and sit at that place of mine in Battersea ; a shabby hole . she be not   really anything out of the way , as a pretty woman ; but I have   make she well , you will see it at some exhibition this winter , if you care to . please ? be not   she please ! and her husband , the podgy old millionaire baronet , use to come every day and stare in delight . to tell you the truth , I think it be rather a remarkable bit of painting . I do not   quite know I could turn out anything so chic . I should not   be surprised if I make a specialty of woman 's portrait . how many man can flatter , and still keep a good likeness ? that be what I have   do . but wait till you see the thing . " 

 Bertha be bubble over with amusement ; for , whilst the artist talk , she think of Rosamund 's farewell entreaty , that she would do she good , if occasion offer , to strengthen Norbert Franks under his affliction , even by depreciatory comment on the faithless girl ; there come into her mind , too , those many passage of Rosamund 's letter where Franks be speak of in term of profound compassion mingle with dark remorse . perhaps her smile , which quiver on the verge of laughter , betray the nature of her thought . of a sudden , Franks cease to talk ; his countenance change , overcast with melancholy ; and when , after some moment ' silence , Bertha again speak of the landscape , he give only a dull assent to her word . 

 " and it all come too late , " fall from he , presently . " too late . " 

 " your success ? " 

 " what be the good of it to I ? " he smite his leg with the rattan he be swing . " a couple of year ago , money would have mean everything . now what do I care about it ! " 

 Bertha 's surprise oblige she to keep an unnaturally solemn visage . 

 " do not   you think it will grow upon you , " she say , " if you give it time ? " 

 " grow upon I ? why , I be only afraid it may . that be just the danger . to pursue success vulgar success when all the well part have go out of life " 

 he end on a sigh and again whack his leg with the stick . 

 " but " urge his companion , as though gravely , " be not   it easy not to pursue success ? I mean if it really make you uncomfortable . there be so many kind of work in art which would protect you against the peril of rich . " 

 Franks be watch she as she speak . 

 " Miss Cross " he say , " I suspect you be satirical . I remember you use to have a turn that way . well , well , never mind ; I do not   expect you to understand I . " 

 they have pass out of Ashtead Park and be now ascend by the lane which lead up to Epsom Common . 

 " I suppose we be both go the same way , " say Franks , who have recover all his cheerfulness . " there be a train at something after five , if we can catch it . splendid idea of yours to have a whole day 's walking . I do not   walk enough . be you likely to be go again before long ? " 

 Bertha reply that she never make plan beforehand . her mood and the weather decide an excursion . 

 " of course . that be the only way . well , if you will let I , I must come to Walham Green , one of these day . how be Mrs. Cross ? I ought to have ask before , but I never do the right thing . have you any particular day for be at home ? all right . if you have have , I should have ask you to let I come on some other . I do not   care much , you know , for general society ; and ten to one , when I do come I shall be rather gloomy . old memory , you know . really very jolly , this meeting with you . I should have do the walk to Epsom just as a constitutional , without enjoy it a bit . as it be " 




 CHAPTER 21 

 it be a week or two after the day in Surrey , that Bertha Cross , need a small wooden box in which to pack a present for her brother in British Columbia , bethink herself of Mr. Jollyman . the amiable grocer could probably supply her want , and she go off to the shop . there the assistant and an errand boy be unload good just arrive by cart , and behind the counter , read a newspaper for it be early in the morning stand Mr. Jollyman himself . see the young lady enter , he smile and bow ; not at all with tradesmanlike emphasis , but rather , it seem to Bertha , like a man tired and absent - minded , perform a civility in the well - breed way . the newspaper throw aside , he stand with head bent and eye cast down , listen to her request . 

 " I think I have something that will do very well , " he reply . " excuse I for a moment . " 

 from region behind the shop , he produce a serviceable box just of the right dimension . 

 " it will do ? then you shall have it in about half an hour . " 

 " I be ashamed to trouble you , " say Bertha " I could carry it " 

 " on no account . the boy will be free in a few minute . " 

 " and I owe you ? " ask Bertha , purse in hand . 

 " the box have no value , " reply Mr. Jollyman , with that smile , suggestive of latent humour , which always cause she to smile responsively . " and at the same time , " he continue , a peculiar twinkle in his eye , " I will ask you to accept one of these packet of chocolate . I be give one to - day to every customer to celebrate the anniversary of my opening shop . " 

 " thank you very much , " say Bertha . and , on an impulse , she add : " I will put it with what I be send in the box a present for two brother of mine who be a long way off in Canada . " 

 his hand upon the counter , his body bend forward , Mr. Jollyman look she for a moment in the face . a crease appear on his forehead , as he say slowly and dreamily : 

 " Canada ? do they like their life out there ? " 

 " they seem to enjoy it , on the whole . but it evidently be not   an easy life . " 

 " not many kind of life be . " rejoin the grocer . " but the open air the liberty " 

 " oh yes , that must be the good side of it , " assent Bertha . 

 " on a morning like this " 

 Mr. Jollyman 's eye wander to a gleam of sunny sky visible through the shop window . the girl 's glance pass quickly over his feature , and she be on the point of say something ; but discretion interpose . instead of the too personal remark , she repeat she thank , bent her head with perhaps a little more than the wonte graciousness , and leave the shop . the grocer stand look toward the doorway . his countenance have fall . something of bitterness show in the hardness of his lip . 




 CHAPTER 22 

 just a year since the day when Allchin 's band play at the first floor window above Jollyman 's new grocery store . 

 from the very beginning , business promise well . he and his assistant have plenty of work ; there be little time for meditation ; when not serve customer , he be busy with practical detail of grocerdom , often such as he have not foresee , matter which call for all his energy and ingenuity . a gratifying aspect of the life be that , day by day , he handle his return in solid cash . Jollyman 's give no credit ; all good have to be pay for on purchase or delivery ; and to turn out the till when the shop have close to make pile of silver and mountain of copper , with a few piece of gold beside they put a cheering end to the day 's labour . Warburton find himself clink handfuls of coin , please with the sound . only at the end of the first three month , the close of the year , do he perceive that much less than he have hop of the cash take could be reckon as clear profit . he have much to learn in the cunning of retail trade , and it be a kind of study that go sorely against the grain with he . happily , at Christmas time come Norbert Franks   whom will have decide not to take into his confidence   and pay his debt of a hundred and twenty pound . this set thing right for the moment . will be able to pay a three - and - a - half per cent . dividend to his mother and sister , and to fare ahead hopefully . 

 he would rather not have go down to the Haws that Christmastide , but fear that his failure to do so might seem strange . the needful prevarication cost he so many pang that he come very near to confess the truth ; he probably would have do so , have not his mother be ail , and , it seem to he , little able to bear the shock of such a disclosure . so the honest deception go on . will be suppose to be manage a London branch of the Applegarth business . great expenditure on advertising have to account for the smallness of the dividend at first . no one less likely than the lady at the Haws to make trouble in such a matter . they have what suffice to they , and be content with it . think over this in shame - face solitude , Warburton feel a glow of proud thankfulness that his mother and sister be so unlike the vulgar average of mankind that rapacious multitude , whom nothing animate but a chance of gain , with whom nothing weigh but a commercial argument . a new tenderness stir within he , and resolutely he stamp under foot the impulse of self - esteem , of self - indulgence , which make his life hard to bear . 

 it be with a hard satisfaction that he return to the shop , and find all go on in the usual way , Allchin grin a hearty welcome as he weigh out sugar . will 's sister talk of the scent of her garden , how they refresh and inspirit she to he , the odour of the shop new - roasted coffee predominate to - day have its invigorate effect ; it mean money , and money mean life , the peaceful , fruitful life of those dear to he . he scarcely give himself time to eat dinner , lay for he , as usual , by Mrs. Allchin , in the sitting - room behind the shop ; so eager be he to get on his apron , and return to profitable labour . 

 at first , he have endure a good deal of physical fatigue . stand for so many hour a day weary he much more than walk would have do , and with bodily exhaustion come at time a lowness of spirit such as he have never feel . his resource against this misery be conversation with Allchin . in Allchin he have a henchman whose sturdy optimism and gross common sense be of the utmost value . the brawny assistant , have speedily find a lodger accord to the agreement , see himself in clover , and determine that , if he could help it , his fortune should never again suffer eclipse . he and his wife feel a reasonable gratitude to the founder of their prosperity whom , by the bye , they invariably speak of as " Mr. Jollyman " and do their good to smooth for he the unfamiliar path he be treading . 

 the success with which Warburton keep his secret , merely prove how solitary most man be amid the crowd of London , and how easy it be for a Londoner to disappear from among his acquaintance whilst continue to live openly amid the city 's roar . no one of those who care enough about he to learn that he have fall on ill - luck harbour the slight suspicion of what he be do ; he simply drop out of sight , except for the two or three who , in a real sense of the word , could be call his friend . the pomfret , whom he go to see at very long interval , suppose he to have some sort of office employment , and see nothing in his demeanour to make they anxious about he . as for Norbert Franks , why , he be very busy , and come not oftener than once a month to his friend 's obscure lodging ; he ask no intrusive question , and , like the pomfret , could only suppose that Warburton have find a clerkship somewhere . they be not quite on the old term , for each have go through a crisis of life , and be not altogether the same as before ; but their mutual liking subsist . oblige to retrench his hospitality , Warburton never seem altogether at his ease when Franks be in his room ; nor could he overcome what seem to he the shame of have ask payment of a debt from a needy friend , notwithstanding the fact , loudly declare by Franks himself , that nothing could have be more beneficial to the debtor 's moral health . so will listen rather than talk , and be sometimes too obviously in no mood for any sort of converse . 

 Sherwood he have not see since the disastrous optimist 's flight into Wales ; nor have there come any remittance from he since the cheque for a hundred pound . two or three time , however , Godfrey have write thoroughly characteristic letter warm , sanguine , self - reproachful . from Wales he have cross over to Ireland , where he be work at a scheme for make a fortune out of irish egg and poultry . in what the " work " consist , be not clear , for he have no money , beyond a small loan from his relative which enable he to live ; but he send a sheet of foolscap cover with computation whereby his project be prove to be thoroughly practical and vastly lucrative . 

 meanwhile , he have make one new acquaintance , which be at first merely a source of amusement to he , but little by little become something more . in the winter day , when his business be new , there one day come into the shop a rather sour - lipped and querulous - voice lady , who after much discussion of price , make a modest purchase and ask that the good might be send for she . on hear her name Mrs. Cross the grocer smile , for he remember that the Crosses of whom he know from Norbert Franks , live at Walham Green , and the artist 's description of Mrs. Cross tally very well with the aspect and manner of this customer . once or twice the lady return ; then , on a day of very bad weather , there come in her place a much young and decidedly more pleasing person , whom will take to be Mrs. Cross 's daughter . facial resemblance there be none discoverable ; in bear , in look , in tone , the two be different as woman could be ; but at the young lady 's second visit , his surmise be confirm , for she beg he to change a five - pound note , and , as the custom be in London shop , endorse it with her name " Bertha Cross . " Franks have never speak much of Miss Cross ; " rather a nice sort of girl , " be as far as his appreciation go . and with this judgment will at once agree ; before long , he would have incline to be more express in his good opinion . before summer come , he find himself look forward to the girl 's appearance in the shop , with a sense of disappointment when as generally happen Mrs. Cross come in person . the charm of the young face lie for he in its ever - present suggestion of a roguishly winsome smile , which make it difficult not to watch too intently the play of her eye and lip . then , her way of speaking , which be altogether her own . it infuse with a humorous possibility the dry , most matter - of - fact remark , and will have to guard himself against the temptation to reply in a corresponding note . 

 " I suppose you see no more of those people what be their name the Crosses ? " he let fall , as if casually , one evening when Franks have come to see he . 

 " lost sight of they altogether , " be the reply . " why do you ask ? " 

 " I happen to think of they , " say will ; and turn to another subject . 




 CHAPTER 23 

 be he to be a grocer for the rest of his life ? this question , which at first scarcely occur to he , absorb as he be in the problem of money - earn for immediate need , at length begin to press and worry . of course he have mean nothing of the kind ; his imagination have see in the shop a temporary expedient ; he have not trouble to pursue the ultimate probability of the life that lie before he , but content himself with the vague assurance of his hopeful temper . yet where be the way out ? to save money , to accumulate sufficient capital for his release , be an impossibility , at all event within any reasonable time . and for what windfall could he look ? Sherwood 's ten thousand pound hover in his memory , but no more substantial than any fairy - tale . no man live , it seem to he , have less chance of be signally favour by fortune . he have don his apron and aprone he must remain . 

 suppose , then , he so far succeed in his business as to make a little more than the household at St. Neots require ; suppose it become practicable to well , say , to think of marriage , of course on the most modest basis ; could he quite see himself offer to the girl he choose the hand and heart of a grocer ? he laugh . it be well to laugh ; merriment be the great digestive , and an unspeakable boon to the man capable of it in all but every situation ; but what if she also laugh , and not in the sympathetic way ? bad still , what if she could not laugh , but look wretchedly embarrassed , confused , sham ? that would be a crisis it need some philosophy to contemplate . 

 for the present , common sense make it rigorously plain to he that the less he think of these thing , the well . he have not a penny to spare . only by exercise an economy which in the old day would have appal he , could he send his mother and sister an annual sum just sufficient to their need . he who scorn and loathe all kind of parsimony have learn to cut down his expenditure at every possible point . he still smoke his pipe ; he buy newspaper ; he grant himself an excursion , of the cheap , on fine sunday ; but these surely be necessity of life . in food and clothing and the common expense of a civilised man , he pinch remorselessly ; there be no choice . his lodging cost he very little ; but Mrs. Wick , whose profound suspiciousness be ally with unperfect honesty , now and then make paltry overcharge in her bill , and he be angry with himself for his want of courage to resist they . it mean only a shilling or two , but retail trade have teach he the importance of shilling . he have to remind himself that , if he be poor , his landlady be poor still , and that in cheat he she do but follow the tradition of her class . to debate an excess of sixpence for paraffin , of ninepence for bacon , would have make he flush and grind his tooth for hour afterwards ; but he notice the effect upon himself of the new habit of niggardliness how it dispose he to acerbity of temper . no matter how pure the motive , a man can not devote his day to squeeze out pecuniary profit without some moral detriment . formerly this woman , Mrs. Wick , with her gimlet eye , and her leech lip , with her spying and eavesdropping , with her sour civility , her stint discharge of obligation , her pilfering and mendacity , would have rather amuse than annoy he . " poor creature , be not   it a miserable as well as a sordid life . let she have her picking , however illegitimate , and much good may they do she . " now he too often find himself regard she with something like animosity , whereby , to be sure , he bring himself to the woman 's level . be it not a struggle between he and she for a share of life 's poor comfort ? when he look at it in that light , his cheek be hot . 

 a tradesman must harden himself . why , in the early month , it cost he a wrench somewhere to take copper at the counter from very poor folk who perhaps make up the odd halfpenny in farthing , and look at the coin reluctantly as they lay they down . More than once , he say , " oh never mind the ha'penny , " and be meet with a look not of gratitude but of blank amazement . Allchin happen to be a witness of one such incident , and , in the first moment of privacy , venture a respectful yet a most energetic , protest . " it be the kindness of your ' eart , sir , and if anybody know how much of that you have , I be sure it be I , and I ought to be the last to find fault with it . but that will never do behind the counter , sir , never ! why , just think . the profit on what that woman buy be just three farthing . " he detail the computation . " and there you have   be and give she a whole ha'penny , so that you have   only one bless farthing over on the whole transaction ! that be not   business , sir ; that be charity ; and Jollyman 's be not   a charitable institution . you really must not , sir . it be unjust to yourself . " and will , with an uneasy shrug , admit his folly . but he be ashamed to the core . only in the second half - year do he really accustom himself to disregard a customer 's poverty . he have think the thing out , face all its most sordid aspect . yes , he be fight with these people for daily bread ; he and his could live only if his three farthing of profit be pluck out of that toil wear hand of charwoman or sempstress . accept the necessity , and think no more of it . he be a man behind the counter ; he see face to face the people who support he . with this exception have not thing be just the same when he sit in the counting - house at the sugar refinery ? it be an unpleasant truth , which appearance have formerly veil from he . 

 with the beginning of his second winter come a new anxiety , a new source of bitter and degrading reflection . at not more than five minute ' walk away , another grocer start business ; happily no great capitalist , but to all appearance a man of enterprise who know what he be about . morning and evening , Warburton pass the new shop and feel his very soul turn sour in the thought that he must do what in he lie to prevent that man from gain custom ; if he could make his business a failure , destroy all his hope , so much the well . with Allchin , he hold long and eager conference . the robust assistant be of course trouble by no scruple ; he warm to the combat , chuckle over each good idea for the enemy 's defeat ; every nerve must be strain for the great Christmas engagement ; as much money as possible must be spend in make a brave show . and it be only by pause every now and then to remember why he stand here , in what cause he be so debase the manner of his life , that Warburton could find strength to go through such a trial of body and of spirit . when , the Christmas fight well over , with manifest triumph on his side he go down for a couple of day to St. Neots , once more he have his reward . but the struggle be tell upon his health ; it show in his face , in his bearing . mother and sister speak uneasily of a change they notice ; surely he be work too hard ; what do he mean by take no summer holiday ? will laugh . 

 " business , business ! a good deal to do at first , you know . Things'll be smooth next year . " 

 and the comfort , the quiet , the simple contentment of that little house by the Ouse , send he back to Fulham Road , once more resign , courageous . 

 naturally , he sometimes contrast his own sordid existence with the unforeseen success which have make such change in the life of Norbert Franks . it be more than three month since he and Franks have meet , when , one day early in January , he receive a note from the artist . " what have become of you ? I have not   have a chance of get your way work and social foolery . could you come and lunch with I here , on Sunday , alone , like the old day ? I have a portrait to show you . " so on Sunday , Warburton go to his friend 's new studio , which be in the Holland Park region . formerly it be always he who play the host , and he do not like this change of position ; but Franks , however sensible of his good luck , and incline at time to take himself rather seriously , have no touch of the snob in his temper ; when with he , will generally lose sight of unpleasant thing in good - natured amusement . to - day , however , grocerdom lie heavily on his soul . on the return journey from St. Neots he have catch a cold , and a week of sore throat behind the counter a week too , of quarrel with a wholesale house which have be cheat he leave his nerve in a bad state . for reply to the artist 's cordial greeting he could only growl inarticulately . 

 " out of sort ? " ask the other , as they enter the large well - warm studio " you look rather bad . " 

 " leave I alone , " mutter Warburton . 

 " all right . sit down here and thaw yourself . " 

 but Will 's eye have fall on a great canvas , show the portrait of a brilliant lady who recline at ease and caress the head of a great deer - hound . he go and stand before it . 

 " who be that ? " 

 " Lady Caroline I tell you about she do not   you think it be rather good ? " 

 " yes . and for that very reason I be afraid it be bad . " 

 the artist laugh . 

 " that be good satire on the critic . when anything strike they as good by a new man , that be they be ashamed to say so , just because they never dare trust their own judgment . but it be good , Warburton ; uncommonly good . if there be a weak point , it be doggy ; I can not   come the Landseer . still , you can see it be mean for a doggy , eh ? " 

 " I guess it , " reply Will , warm his hand . 

 " Lady Caroline be superb , " go on Franks , stand before the canvas , head aside and hand in his pocket . " this be my specialty , old boy lovely woman make yet lovely , without loss of likeness . she will be the fury of the next Academy . see that something in the eye , Warburton ? do not   know how to call it . my enemy call it claptrap . but they can not   do the trick , my boy , they can not   do it . they would give the end of their nose if they could . " 

 he laugh gaily , boyishly . how well he be look ! Warburton , have glance at he , smile with a surly kindness . 

 " all your doing , you know , " pursue Franks , who have catch the look and the smile . " you have   make I . but for you I should have go to the devil . I be say so yesterday to the Crosses . " 

 " the Crosses ? " 

 will have sharply turn his head , with a curious surprise . 

 " do not   you remember the Crosses ? " say Franks , smile with a certain embarrassment , " Rosamund 's friend at Walham Green . I meet they by chance not long ago , and they want I to go and see they . the old lady 's a bore , but she can be agreeable when she like ; the girl 's rather clever do picture for child 's book , you know . she seem to be get on well lately . but they be wretchedly poor . I be say to they oh , but that remind I of something else . you have not   see the pomfret lately ? " 

 " no . " 

 " then you do not   know that Mr. Elvan 's dead ? " 

 " no . " 

 " he die a month ago , over there in the South of France . Rosamund have go back to Egypt , to stay with that friend of her at Cairo . Mrs. Pomfret hint to I that the girl will have to find a way of earn their living ; Elvan have leave practically nothing . I wonder whether " 

 he smile and break off . 

 " whether what ? " ask the listener . 

 " oh , nothing . what be the time ? " 

 " whether what ? " repeat Warburton , savagely . 

 " well whether Rosamund do not   a little regret ? " 

 " do you ? " ask Will , without look round . 

 " I ? not for a moment , my dear boy ! she do I the great possible kindness only you even do I a great . at this moment I should have be curse and smoke cheap tobacco in Battersea unless I have get sick of it all and do the hic jacet business , a strong probability . never do a girl behave more sensibly . some day I hope to tell she so ; of course when she have marry somebody else . then I will paint her portrait , and make she the envy of a season by Jove , I will ! splendid subject , she would be . . . . when I think of that beastly so - call portrait that I put my foot through , the day I be in hell ! Queer how one develop all at a jump . two year ago I could no more paint a woman 's portrait than I could build a cathedral . I catch the trick in the Slummer , but do not   see all it mean till Blackstaffe ask I to paint Lady Rockett . Rosamund ought to have give I the sack when she see that daub , mean for she . good little girl ; she hold as long as she could . oh , I will paint she divinely , one of these day . " 

 the soft humming of a gong summon they to another room , where lunch be ready . never have Warburton show such lack of genial humour at his friend 's table . he eat mechanically , and speak hardly at all . little by little , Franks feel the depressing effect of this companionship . when they return to the studio , to smoke by the fireside , only a casual word break the cheerless silence . 

 " I ought not   to have come to - day , " say will , at length , half apologetically . " I feel like a bear with a sore head . I think I be go . " 

 " shall I come and see you some evening ? " ask the other in his friendly tone . 

 " no I mean not just yet . I will write and ask you . " 

 and will go out into the frosty gloom . 




 CHAPTER 24 

 by way of Allchin , who know all the gossip of the neighbourhood , Warburton learn that his new competitor in trade be a man with five child and a wife give to drink ; he have be in business in another part of London , and be suspect to have remove with the hope that new surrounding might help his wife to overcome her disastrous failing . a very respectable man , people say ; kind husband , good father , honest dealer . but Allchin report , with a twinkle of the eye , that all his capital have go in the new start , and it be already clear that his business do not thrive . 

 " we shall starve he out ! " cry the assistant , snap his thumb and finger . 

 " and what will become of he then ? " ask Will . 

 " oh , that be for he to think about , " reply Allchin . " would not   he starve we , if he could , sir ? " 

 and Warburton , brood on this matter , stand appal at the ferocity of the struggle amid which he live , in which he have his part . go be all his old enjoyment of the street of London . in look back upon his mood of that early day , he see himself as an incredibly ignorant and careless man ; marvel at the lightness of heart which have enable he to find amusement in ramble over this vast slaughter - strew field of battle . picturesque , forsooth ! where be its picturesqueness for that struggle , soon - to - be - defeat tradesman , with his tipsy wife , and band of child who look to he for bread ? " and I myself be crush the man as surely as if I have my hand on his gullet and my knee on his chest ! crush he I must ; otherwise , what become of that little home down at St. Neots dear to I as his child be to he . there be no room for both of we ; he have come too near ; he must pay the penalty of his miscalculation . be there not the workhouse for such people ? " and will go about repeat to himself . " there be the workhouse do not   I pay poor - rate ? the workhouse be an admirable institution . " 

 he lie awake many an hour of these winter night , see in vision his own life and the life of man . he remember the office in Little Ailie Street ; see himself and Godfrey Sherwood sit together , talk , laugh , make a jest of their effort to support a doom house . Godfrey use to repeat legend , saga , story of travel , as though existence have not a care , or the possibility of one ; and he , in turn , talk about some bit of London he have be explore , show an old map he have pick up , an old volume of London topography . the while , world - wide force , the hunger - struggle of nation , be shake the roof above their head . theoretically they know it . but they could escape in time ; they have a cosy little corner preserve for themselves , safe from these pestilent worry . Fate have a grudge against the foolishly secure . if he laugh now , it be in self - mockery . 

 the night of London , always rife with mysterious sound , speak dreadfully to his strain ear . he hear voice near and far , cry of pain or of misery , shout savage or bestial ; over and through all , that low , far - off rumble or roar , which never for a moment cease , the groan , as it seem , of suffer multitude . there trip before his dream eye a procession from the world of wealth and pleasure , and the amazement with which he view it change of a sudden to fiery wrath ; he toss upon the bed , utter his rage in a loud exclamation , feel his heart pierce with misery which bring he all but to tear . close upon astonishment and indignation follow dread . give health and strength , he might perhaps continue to hold his own in this merciless conflict ; perhaps , only ; but what if some accident , such as befall this man or that in every moment of time , throw he among the weakling ? he see his mother , in her age and ill - health , reduce to the pittance of the poor ; his sister go forth to earn her living ; himself , a helpless burden upon both . Nay , be there not rat - poison to be purchase ? 

 how he cry within himself how , in the name of sense and mercy , be mankind content to live on in such a world as this ? by what devil be they hunt , that , not only do they neglect the mean of solace suggest to every humane and rational mind , but , the vast majority of they spend all their strength and ingenuity in embitter the common lot ? overwhelmed by the hateful unreason of it all , he feel as though his brain reel on the verge of madness . 

 every day , and all the day long , the shop , the counter . have he choose , he might have take a half - holiday , now and then ; on certain day Allchin be quite able , and abundantly willing , to manage alone ; but what be the use ? to go to a distance be merely to see with more distinctness the squalor of his position . never for a moment be he tempt to abandon this work ; he see no hope whatever of earn money in any other way , and money he must need earn , as long as he live . but the life weigh upon he with a burden such as he have never imagine . never have he understand before what be mean by the sicken weariness of routine ; his fretfulness as a youth in the West Indies seem to he now inconceivable . his own master ? why , he be the slave of every kitchen wench who come into the shop to spend a penny ; he tremble at the thought of fail to please she , and so lose her custom . the grocery odour , once pleasant to he , have grow nauseating . and the ever repeat task , the weighing , parcel making , string cutting ; the parrot phrase a thousand time repeat ; the idiot bow and smile how these thing gnaw at his nerve , till he quiver like a beat horse . he try to console himself by think that thing be now at the bad ; that he be subdue himself , and would soon reach a happy , dull indifference ; but in truth it be with fear that he look forward fear of unknown possibility in himself ; fear that he might sink yet more wretchedly in his own esteem . 

 for the bad part of his suffering be self - scorn . when he embark upon this strange enterprise , he know , or think he know , all the trial to which he would be expose , and not slight would have be his indignation have any one venture to hint that his character might prove unequal to the test . Sherwood 's letter have please he so much , precisely because it praise his resolve as courageous , manly . on manliness of spirit , will have always pique himself ; it be his pride that he carry a heart equal to any lot impose upon he by duty . yet little more than a twelvemonth of shopkeeping have so undermine his pluck , enfeeble his temper , that he could not regard himself in the glass without shame . he try to explain it by failure of health . assuredly his physical state have for month be decline and the bad cold from which he have recently suffer seem to complete his moral downfall . in this piercing and gloom - wrap month of February , coward thought continually beset he . in his cold lodging , in the cold street , in the draught of the shop , he feel soul and body shrink together , till he become as the mean of starveling huckster . 

 then something happen , which rescue he for awhile from this haunt self . one night , just at closing time a night of wild wind and drive rain Mrs. Hopper come rush into the shop , her face a tale of woe . Warburton learn that her sister " Liza , " the ail girl whom he have befriend in his comfortable day , have be seize with lung hemorrhage , and lie in a lamentable state ; the help of Mrs. Allchin be call for , and any other that might be forthcoming . two year ago will would have respond to such an appeal as this with lavish generosity ; now , though the impulse of compassion blind he for a moment to his change circumstance , he soon remember that his charity must be that of a poor man , of a debtor . he pay for a cab , that the two woman might speed to their sister through the stormy night as quickly as possible , and he promise to think of what could be do for the invalid with the result that he lose a night 's sleep in calculate what sum he might spare . on the morrow come the news he have expect ; the doctor suggest Brompton Hospital , if admission could be obtain ; home treatment at this time of the year , and in the patient 's circumstance , be not likely to be of any good . Warburton take the matter in hand , go about make inquiry , find that there must necessarily be delay . right or wrong , he put his hand in his pocket , and Mrs. Hopper be enable to nurse her sister in a way otherwise impossible . he visit the sick - room , and for half an hour manage to talk as of old , in the note of gallant sympathy and encouragement . let there be no stint of fire , of food , of anything the doctor might advise . meanwhile , he would ask about other hospital do everything in his power . as indeed he do , with the result that in a fortnight 's time , the sufferer be admit to an institution to which , for the nonce , Warburton have become a subscriber . 

 he see her doctor . " not much chance , I be afraid . of course , if she be able to change climate that kind of thing . but , under the circumstance " 

 and through a whole Sunday morning will pace about his little sitting - room , not care to go forth , nor care to read , care for nothing at all in a world so full of needless misery . " of course , if she be able to change climate " yes , the accident of possess money ; a life to depend upon that ! in another station though , as likely as not , with no moral superiority to justify the privilege the sick woman would be guard , soothe , fortify by every expedient of science , every resource of humanity . Chance to be poor , and not only must you die when you need not , but must die with the minimum of comfort , the extreme of bodily and mental distress . this commonplace strike so forcibly upon Will 's imagination , that it be as a new discovery to he . he stand amazed , bewildered as man of any thinking power be will not to do when experience make real to they the truism of life . a few coin , or piece of print paper to signify all that ! an explosion of angry laughter break the mood . 

 Pacing , pacing , back and fro in the little room , for hour after hour , till his head whirl , and his leg ache . out of door there be fitfully glint sunshine upon the wet roof ; a pale blue now and then reveal amid the grey rack . two year ago he would have walk twenty mile on a day like this , with eye for nothing but the beauty and joy of earth . be he not he suddenly ask himself a wise man now than then ? do he not see into the truth of thing ; whereas , formerly , he have see only the deceptive surface ? there should be some solace in this reflection , if he take it well to heart . 

 then his mind wander away to Norbert Franks , who at this moment be somewhere enjoy himself . this afternoon he might be call upon the Crosses . why should that thought be disagreeable ? it be , as he perceive , not for the first time . if he picture the artist chat side by side with Bertha Cross , something turn cold within he . by the bye , it be rather a long time since he have see Miss Cross ; her mother have be do the shopping lately . she might come , perhaps , one day this week ; the chance give he something to look forward to . 

 how often have he call himself a fool for pay heed to Bertha Cross 's visit ? 




 CHAPTER 25 

 again come springtime , and , as he stand behind the counter , Warburton think of all that be go on in the world he have forsake . amusement for which he have never much care haunt his fancy ; feel himself shut out from the life of grace and intellect , he suffer a sense of dishonour , as though his position result from some personal baseness , some crime . he number the acquaintance he have drop , and picture they as mention his name if ever they do so with cold disapproval . Godfrey Sherwood have cease to write ; it be six month since his last letter , in which he hint a fear that the irish enterprise would have to be abandon for lack of capital . even Franks , good fellow as he be , seem to grow lukewarm in friendship . the painter have an appointment for a Sunday in May at Will 's lodging , to smoke and talk , but on the evening before he send a telegram excuse himself . vex , humiliate , Warburton waste the Sunday morning , and only after his midday meal yield to the temptation of a brilliant sky , which call he forth . walk westward , with little heed to distance or direction , he presently find himself at Kew ; on the bridge he linger awhile , idly gaze at boat , and ; as he thus lean over the parapet , the sound of a voice behind he fall startlingly upon his ear . he turn , just in time to catch a glimpse of the feature which that voice have bring before his mind 's eye , Bertha Cross be pass , with her mother . probably they have not see he . and even if they have , if they have recognise he do he flatter himself that the Crosses would give any sign in public of know their grocer ? 

 with his eye on the graceful figure of Bertha , he slowly follow . the lady be cross Kew Green ; doubtless they would enter the Gardens to spend the afternoon there . would it not be pleasant to join they , to walk by Bertha 's side , to talk freely with she , forget the counter , which always restrain their conversation ? Bertha be nicely dress , though one see that her clothe cost nothing . in the old day , if he have notice she at all she would have seem to he rather a pretty girl of the low middle class , perhaps a little less insignificant than she like ; now she shine for he against a background of " customer , " the one in whom he see a human being of his own kind , and who , within the impose limit , have give proof of admit his humanity . he see her turn to look at her mother , and smile ; a smile of infinite kindness and good - humour . involuntarily his own lip respond ; he walk on smile smile . 

 they pass through the gate ; he , at a distance of a dozen yard , still follow . there be no risk of detection ; indeed he be do no harm ; even a grocer might observe , from afar off , a girl walk with her mother . but , after stroll for a quarter of an hour , they pause beside a bench , and there seat themselves . Mrs. Cross seem to be complain of something ; Bertha seem to soothe she . when he be near enough to be aware of this will see that he be too near . he turn abruptly on his heel , and stand face to face with Norbert Franks . 

 " Hallo ! " exclaim the painter , with an air of embarrassment . " I think that be your back ! " 

 " your engagement be here ? " ask will bluntly , refer to the other 's telegram of excuse . 

 " yes . I be oblige to " 

 he break off , his eye fix on the figure of Bertha and her mother . 

 " you be oblige ? " 

 " you see the lady there , " say Franks in a low voice , " there , on the seat ? it be Mrs. Cross and her daughter you remember the Crosses ? I call to see they yesterday , and only Mrs. Cross be at home , and the fact be , I as good as promise to meet they here , if it be fine . " 

 " very well , " reply Warburton carelessly , " I will not   keep you . " 

 " go , but " 

 Franks be in great confusion . he look this way and that , as if seek for an escape . as Will begin to move away , he keep at his side . 

 " look here , Warburton , let I introduce you to they . they be very nice people ; I be sure you would like they ; do let I " 

 " thank you , no . I do not   want any new acquaintance . " 

 " why ? come along old man , " urge the other . " you be get too grumpy ; you live too much alone . just to please I " 

 " no ! " answer will , resolutely , walk on . 

 " very well just as you like . but , I say , should I find you at home this evening ? Say , nine o'clock . I particularly want to have a talk . " 

 " good . I will be there , " reply Will , and so , with knit brow stride away . 

 very punctually do the visitor arrive that evening . he enter the room with that same look of embarrassment which he have wear during the brief colloquy at Kew ; he shake hand awkwardly , and , as he seat himself , talk about the fall of temperature since sunset , which make a fire agreeable . Warburton , ashamed of the sullenness he could not overcome , roll this way and that in his chair , hold the poker and make lunge with it at a piece of coal which would not break . 

 " that be a lucky chance , " begin Franks at length , " our meeting this afternoon . " 

 " lucky ? why ? " 

 " because it have give I the courage to speak to you about something . queer chance I ever know that you should be there close by the Crosses . " 

 " do they ask who I be ? " inquire Warburton after a violent lunge with the poker , which send piece of coal fly into the room . 

 " they do not   happen to see I whilst I be talk with you . but , in any case , " add Franks , " they would not   have ask . they be well - breed people , you know really lady . I suspect you have   have a different idea of they . be not   that why you would not   let I introduce you ? " 

 " not at all , " answer will , with a force laugh . " I have   no doubt of their ladyhood . " 

 " the fact of the matter be , " continue the other , crossing and uncrossing , and re - cross his leg in nervous restlessness , " that I have   be see they now and then since I tell you I be go to call there . you guess why ? it be not   Mrs. Cross , depend upon it . " 

 " Mrs. Cross 's tea , perhaps ? " say will , with a hard grin . 

 " not exactly . it be the bad tea I ever taste . I must advise she to change her grocer . " 

 Warburton explode in a roar of laughter , and cry , as Franks star wonderingly at he : 

 " you will never make a well joke in your life than that . " 

 " show what I can do when I try , " answer the artist . " however , the tea be shockingly bad . " 

 " what can you expect for one and sevenpence halfpenny per pound ? " cry Will . 

 " how do you know what she pay ? " 

 Warburton 's answer be another peal of merriment . 

 " well , I should not   wonder , " Franks go on . " the fact be , you know , they be very poor . it be a miserable sort of a life for a girl like Bertha Cross . she be clever , in her way ; do you ever see any of her work ? Children 's book - illustrating ? it be more than passable , I assure you . but of course she be wretchedly pay . apart from that , a really nice girl . " 

 " so this be what you have to tell I ? " say Warburton , in a subdue voice , when the speaker hesitate . 

 " I want to talk about it , old man , that be the truth . " 

 Franks accompany these word with a shy smile look of such friendly appeal that will feel his hard and surly humour begin to soften , and something of the old geniality stir under the dull weight that have so long oppress he . 

 " I suppose it be settle , " he ask , star at the fire . 

 " settle ? how ? " 

 " when it come to meeting at Kew Gardens " 

 " oh do not   misunderstand , " exclaim Franks nervously , " I tell you that it be with the mother I make the appointment not with Bertha herself . I be quite sure Bertha never hear a word of it . " 

 " well , it come to the same thing . " 

 " not at all ! I half wish it do . " 

 " half ? " ask Warburton , with a quick glance . 

 " can not   you see that I have not   really make up my mind , " say Franks , fidget in his chair . " I be not sure of myself and I be still less sure of she . it be all in the air . I have   be there perhaps half a dozen time but only like any other acquaintance . and , you know , she be not   the kind of girl to meet one half way . I be sorry you do not   know she . you would be able to understand well . then , you see , there be something a little awkward in her position and mine . she be the intimate friend of of the other one , you know ; at least , I suppose she still be ; of course we have not   say anything about that . it make misunderstanding very possible . suppose she think I make friend with she in the hope of get round to the other again ? you see how difficult it be to judge her behaviour to come to any conclusion . " 

 " yes , I see , " Warburton let fall , musingly . 

 " and , even if I be sure of understand she there be myself . look at the position , now . I suppose I may call myself a successful man ; well on the way to success , at all event . unless fortune play I a dirty trick , I ought soon to be make my three or four thousand a year ; and there be the possibility of double that . think what that mean , in the way of opportunity . once or twice , when I be go to see the Crosses , I have   pull myself up and ask what the deuce I be do but I go all the same . the truth be , there be something about Bertha I wish you know she , Warburton ; I really wish you do . she be the kind of girl any man might marry . nothing brilliant about she but well , I can not   describe it . as different as could be from the other . in fact , it be not   easy to see how they become such close friend . of course , she know all about I what I be do , and so on . in the case of an ordinary girl in her position , it would be irresistible ; but I be not at all sure that she look at it in that way . she behave to one well , in the most natural way possible . now and then I rather think she make fun of I . " 

 Warburton allow a low chuckle to escape he . 

 " why do you laugh ? I do not   mean that she do it disagreeably . it be her way to look at thing on the humorous side and I rather like that . do not   you think it a good sign in a girl ? " 

 " that depend , " mutter Will . 

 " well , that be how thing be . I want to tell you . there be nobody else I should think of talk to about it . " 

 Silence hang between they for a minute or two . 

 " you will have to make up your mind pretty soon , I suppose , " say Warburton at length , in a not unpleasant voice . 

 " that be the bad of it . I do not   want to be in a hurry it be just what I do not   want . " 

 " do not   it occur to you , " ask Will , as if a sudden idea have strike he , " that perhaps she be no more in a hurry than you be ? " 

 " it be possible . I should not   wonder . but if I seem to be play the fool ? " 

 " that depend on yourself . but , " will add , with a twinkle in his eye , " there be just one piece of advice I should like to offer you . " 

 " let I have it , " reply the other eagerly . " very good of you , old man , not to be bore . " 

 " do not , " say Warburton , in an impressive undertone , " do not   persuade Mrs. Cross to change her grocer . " 




 CHAPTER 26 

 this conversation bring Warburton a short relief . Laughter , even though it come from the throat rather than the midriff , tend to dispel morbid humour , and when he wake next morning , after unusually sound sleep , will have a pleasure in the sunlight such as he have not know for a long time . he think of Norbert Franks , and chuckle ; of Bertha Cross , and smile . for a day or two the toil of the shop be less irksome . then come sordid trouble which again overcast the sky . act against his trusty henchman 's advice , will have make a considerable purchase of good from a bankrupt stock ; and what seem to be a great bargain be begin to prove a serious loss . customer grumble about the quality of article supply to they out of this unlucky venture , and among the dissatisfied be Mrs. Cross , who come and talk for twenty minute about some tapioca that have be send to she , oblige Mr. Jollyman to make repeat apology and promise that such a thing should never occur again . when the querulous - voice lady at length withdraw , will be boil over with rage . 

 " Idiot ! " he exclaim , regardless of the fact that Allchin overhear he . 

 " you see , sir , " remark the assistant . " it be just as I say ; but I could not   persuade you . " 

 will hold his lip tight and star before he . 

 " there will be a net loss of ten pound on that transaction , " pursue Allchin . " it be a principle of honest business , never buy a bankrupt stock . but you would not   listen to I , sir " 

 " that will do , Allchin , that will do ! " break in the master , quiver with the restraint he impose upon himself . " can not   you see I be not in a mood for that sort of thing ? " 

 this same day , there be a leakage of gas on the premise , due to bad workmanship in some new fitting which have cost will more than he like . then the shop awning give way , and fall upon the head of a passer - by , who come into the shop swear at large and demand compensation for his damage hat . sundry other thing go wrong in the course of the week , and by closing - time on Saturday night Warburton 's nerve be in a state of tension which threaten catastrophe . he go to bed at one o'clock ; at six in the morning , not have close his eve for a moment , he tumble out again , dress with fury , and rush out of the house . 

 it be a morning of sunny shower ; one moment the stone be cover with shin moisture , and the next be steam themselves dry under unclouded ray . heedless whither he go , so he do but move quickly enough , will cross the river , and strike southward , till he find himself by Clapham Junction . the sun have now triumph ; the day would be brilliant . feel already well for his exercise , he stand awhile reflect , and decide at length to go by rail into the country . he might perhaps call on the pomfret at Ashtead ; that would depend upon his mood . at all event he would journey in that direction . 

 it be some three month since he have see the pomfret . he have a stand invitation to the pleasant little house , where he be always receive with simple , cordial hospitality . about eleven o'clock , after a ramble about Ashtead Common , he push open the garden wicket , and knock at the door under the leafy porch . so quiet be the house , that he half fear he would find nobody at home ; but the servant at once lead he in , and announce he at the door of her master 's sanctum . 

 " Warburton ? " cry a high , hearty voice , before he have enter . " good fellow . every day this week I have   be want to ask you to come ; but I be afraid ; it be so long since we see you , I fancy you must have be bore the last time you be here . " 

 a small , thin , dry - feature man , with bald occiput and grizzle beard , Ralph Pomfret sit deep in an easy chair , his leg rest on another . humour and kindliness twinkle in his grey eye . the room , which be full of book , have a fair view of meadow , and hill . garden perfume float in at the open window . 

 " kind fellow , to come like this , " he go on . " you see that the old enemy have a grip on I . he pinch , he pinch . he will get at my vital one of these day , no doubt . and I have   not even the satisfaction of have get my gout in an honourable way . if it have come to I from a fine old three - bottle ancestor ! but I , who never have a grandfather , and hardly taste wine till I be thirty year old why , I feel ashamed to call myself gouty . sit down , my wife 's at church . strange thing that people still go to church but they do , you know . force of habit , force of habit . Rosamund 's with she . " 

 " Miss Elvan ? " ask Warburton , with surprise . 

 " ah , yes I forget you do not   know she be here . come back with those friend of her from Egypt a week ago . she have no home in England now ; do not   know where she will decide to live . " 

 " have you see Norbert lately ? " continue Mr. Pomfret , all in one breath . " he be too busy to come out to Ashtead , perhaps too prosperous . but no , I will not   say that ; I will not   really think it . a good lad , Norbert well , I suspect , than his work . there be a strange thing now ; a painter without enthusiasm for art . he use to have a little ; more than a little ; but it be all go . or so it seem to I . " 

 " he be very honest about it , " say Warburton . " make no pretence call his paint a trick , and really feel surprised , I be sure , that he be so successful . " 

 " poor Norbert ! a good lad , a good lad . I wonder do you think if I write a line , mention , by the way , that Rosamund 's here , do you think he would come ? " 

 the speaker accompany his word with an intimate glance . will avert his eye , and gaze for a moment at the sunny landscape . 

 " how long will Miss Elvan stay ? " he ask . 

 " oh , as long as she like . we be very glad to have she . " 

 their look meet for an instant . 

 " a pity , a pity ! " say Ralph , shake his head and smile . " do not   you think so ? " 

 " why , yes . I have   always think so . " 

 will knew that this be not strictly the truth . but in this moment he refuse to see anything but the dimly suggest possibility that Franks might meet again with Rosamund Elvan , and again succumb to her charm . 

 " Heaven forbid ! " resume Ralph , " that one should interfere where life be at stake ! nothing of that , nothing of that . you be as little disposed for it as I be . but simply to acquaint he with the fact ? " 

 " I see no harm . if I meet he ? " 

 " ah ! to be sure . it would be natural to say " 

 " I owe he a visit , " remark Will . 

 they talk of other thing . all at once Warburton have become aware that he be hungry ; he have not break his fast to - day . happily , the clock on the mantelpiece point towards noon . and at this moment there sound voice within the house , follow by a tap at the study door which open , admit Mrs. Pomfret . the lady advance with hospitable greeting ; homely of look and speech , she have catch her husband 's smile , and something of his manner testimony to the happiness of a long wed life . behind she come the figure of youth and grace which Warburton 's eye expect ; very little change since he last see it , in the Valley of Trient , Warburton be conscious of an impression that the young lady see he again with pleasure . in a minute or two , Mrs. Pomfret and her niece have leave the room , but Warburton still see those pure , pale feature , the emotional eye and lip , the slight droop of the head to one side . far indeed so he say within himself from his ideal ; but , he easily understand , strong in seductiveness for such a man as Franks , whom the old passion have evidently leave lukewarm in his thought of other woman . 

 the bell give a welcome summon to lunch or dinner , as it be call in this household of simple tradition . help by his friend 's arm , Ralph manage to hobble to table ; he eat little , and talk throughout the meal in his wonted vein of cheerful reflection . will enjoy everything that be set before he ; the good , wholesome food , which do credit to Mrs. Pomfret 's housekeeping , have a rare savour after month of dining in the little parlour behind his shop , vary only by Mrs. Wick 's cooking on Sundays . one thing , however , interfere with his ease ; seat opposite to Rosamund Elvan , he call to mind the fact that his toilet this morning have be of the most summary description ; he be unshaven , and his clothing be precisely what he have wear all yesterday at the counter . the girl 's eye pass observantly over he now and then ; she be critical of appearance , no doubt . that his aspect and demeanour might be in keep , he bear himself somewhat bluffly , throw out brief , blunt phrase , and meet Miss Elvan 's glance with a confident smile . no resentment of this behaviour appear in her look or speech ; as the meal go on , she talk more freely , and something of frank curiosity begin to reveal itself in her countenance as she listen to he . 

 Ralph Pomfret have hobble back to his study chair , to doze , if might be , for an hour or two , the other presently stroll out into the garden , where rustic chair await they on the shadowy side . 

 " you have your pipe , I hope ? " say the hostess , as Warburton stretch himself out with a sigh of content . 

 " I have . " 

 " and match ? " 

 " yes no ! the box be empty . " 

 " I will send you some . I have one or two thing to see to indoor . " 

 so Will and Rosamund sit alone , gaze idly at the summer sky , hear the twitter of a bird , the hum of insect , whilst the scent of flower and leaf lull they to a restful intimacy . without a word of ceremony , will use the match that be bring he , and puff a cloud into the warm air . they be talk of the beauty of this neighbourhood , of the delightful position of the house . 

 " you often come out to see my uncle , I suppose , " say Rosamund . 

 " not often , I be seldom free , and not always in the humour . " 

 " not in the humour for this ? " 

 " it sound strange , do not   it ? " say will , meet her eye . " when I be here , I want to be here always ; winter or summer , there be nothing more enjoyable in the way of enjoyment that do only good . do you regret Egypt ? " 

 " no , indeed . I shall never care to go there again . " 

 " or the Pyrenees ? " 

 " have you see they yet ? " ask Rosamund . 

 will shook his head . 

 " I remember your saying , " she remark , " you would go for your next holiday to the basque country . " 

 " do I ? yes when you have be talk much about it . but since then I have   have no holiday . " 

 " no holiday all this time ? " 

 Rosamund 's brow betray her sympathy . 

 " how long be it since we be together in Switzerland ? " ask Will , dreamily , between puff . " this be the second summer , be not   it ? one lose count of time , there in London . I be say to Franks the other day " 

 he stop , but not abruptly ; the word seem to murmur away as his thought wander . Rosamund 's eye be for a moment cast down . but for a moment only ; then she fix they upon he in a steady , untroubled gaze . 

 " you be say to Mr. Franks ? " 

 the quiet sincerity of her voice draw Warburton 's look . she be sit straight in the cane chair , her hand upon her lap , with an air of pleasant interest . 

 " I be say oh , I forget it be go . " 

 " do you often see he ? " Rosamund inquire in the same calmly interested tone . 

 " now and then . he be a busy man , with a great many friend like most man who succeed . " 

 " but you do not   mean , I hope , that he care less for his friend of the old time , before he succeed ? " 

 " not at all , " exclaim Will , roll upon his chair , and gaze at the distance . " he be the same as ever . it be my fault that we do not   meet oftener . I be always a good deal of a solitary , you know , and my temper have not   be improve by ill - luck . " 

 " Ill - luck ? " 

 again there be sympathy in Rosamund 's knit brow ; her voice touch a note of melodious surprise and pain . 

 " that be neither here nor there . we be talk of Franks . if anything , he be improve , I should say . I can not   imagine any one bear success well just the same bright , good - nature , sincere fellow . of course , he enjoy his good fortune he be be through hard time . " 

 " which would have be hard still , but for a friend of his , " say Rosamund , with eye thoughtfully droop . 

 Warburton watch she as she speak . her look and her voice carry he back to the Valley of Trient ; he hear the foaming torrent ; see the dark fir - wood , feel a cool breath from the glacier . thus have Rosamund be will not to talk ; then , as now , touch his elementary emotion , but move his reflective self to a smile . 

 " have you see Miss Cross since you come back ? " he ask , as if casually . 

 " oh , yes . if I stay in England , I hope to live somewhere near she . perhaps I shall take room in London , and work at water - colour and black - and - white . unless I go to the basque country , where my sister be . do not   you think , Mr. Warburton , one might make a lot of drawing in the Pyrenees , and then have an exhibition of they in London ? I have to earn my living , and I must do something of that kind . " 

 Whilst Will be shape his answer Mrs. Pomfret come toward they from the house , and the current of the conversation be turn . presently Ralph summon his guest to the book - room , where they talk till the kindly hour of tea . but before set out for his homeward journey , Warburton have another opportunity of exchange word with Miss Elvan in the garden . 

 " well , I shall hear what you decide to do , " he say , bluffly . " if you go to the Pyrenees but I do not   think you will . " 

 " no , perhaps not . London rather tempt I , " be the girl 's dreamy reply . 

 " I be glad to hear it . " 

 " I must get Bertha 's advice Miss Cross ' . " 

 will nod . he be about to say something , but alter his mind ; and so the colloquy end . 




 CHAPTER 27 

 toward ten o'clock that evening , Warburton alight from a train at Notting Hill Gate , and walk through heavy rain to the abode of Norbert Franks . with satisfaction , he see the light at the great window of his studio , and learn from the servant who admit he that Franks have no company . his friend receive he with surprise , so long be it since Warburton have look in unexpectedly . 

 " nothing amiss ? " say Franks , examine the hard - set face , with its heavy eye , and cheek sink . 

 " all right . come to ask for news , that be all . " 

 " News ? ah , I understand . there be no news . " 

 " still reflect ? " 

 " yes . keep away , just to see how I like it . sensible that , do not   you think ? " 

 Warburton nod . the conversation do not promise much vivacity , for Franks look tired , and the visitor seem much occupy with his own thought . after a few word about a canvas which stand on the easel another woman the artist be boldly transform into loveliness will remark carelessly that he have spend the day at Ashtead . 

 " by Jove , I ought to go and see those people , " say Franks . 

 " well wait a little , perhaps , " return the other with a smile . " Miss Elvan be with they . " 

 " ah ! Lucky you tell I not that it matter much , " add Franks , after a moment 's reflection , " at all event as far as I be concerned . but it might be a little awkward for she . how long be she stay ? " 

 will tell all he know of Miss Elvan 's project . he go on to say that she seem to he more thoughtful , more serious , than in the old time ; to be sure , she have but recently lose her father , and the subduing influence of that event might have do she good . 

 " you have a lot of talk ? " say Franks . 

 " oh , we gossip in the garden . poor old Pomfret have his gout , and could not   come out with we . what do you think , by the bye , of her chance of live by art ? she say she will have to . " 

 " by that , or something else , no doubt , " Franks reply disinterestedly . " I know her father have nothing to leave , nothing to make an income . " 

 " be her water - colour worth anything ? " 

 " not much , I be afraid , I can not   quite see she live by anything of that sort . she be the amateur , pure and simple . now , Bertha Cross there be the kind of girl who do work and get pay for it . in her modest line , Bertha be a real artist . I do wish you know she , Warburton . " 

 " so you have say a good many time , " remark Will . " but I do not   see how it would help you . I know Miss Elvan , and " 

 he pause , as if muse on a thought . 

 " and what ? " ask Franks impatiently . 

 " nothing except that I like she well than I use to . " 

 as he speak , he stand up . 

 " well , I can not   stay . it be rain like the devil . I want to know whether you have do anything decisive , that be all . " 

 " I will let you know when I do , " answer Franks , suppress a yawn . " good - night , old man . " 

 for a fortnight , Warburton lead his wonted life , shut off as usual from the outer world . about this time , Allchin begin to observe with anxiety the change in his master 's aspect and general behaviour . 

 " I be afraid you be not feel quite yourself , sir , " he say at closing time one night . " I have   notice lately you do not   seem quite well . " 

 " have you ? well , perhaps you be right . but it do not   matter . " 

 " if you will excuse I , sir , " return the assistant , " I be afraid it do matter . I hope , sir , you will not   think I speak disrespectful , but I have   be notice that you do not   seem to care about wait on customer lately . " 

 " you have   notice that ? " 

 " I have , sir , if the truth must be tell . and I keep say to myself as it be not   like you . what I be afraid of , sir , if you do not   mind I say it , be that the customer themselves be begin to notice it . Mrs. Gilpin say to I yesterday ' what be come to Mr. Jollyman ? ' she say . ' he have not   a civil word for I ! ' she say . of course , I make out as you have be suffer from a bad ' eadache , and I should not   wonder if that be the truth , sir . " 

 Warburton set his tooth and say nothing . 

 " you would not   like to take just a little ' oliday , sir ? " return Allchin . " this next week , I could manage well enough . it might do you good , sir , to have a mouthful of sea air " 

 " I will think about it , " break in the other abruptly . 

 he be go away without another word , but , in cross the shop , he catch his henchman 's eye fix on he with a troublous gaze . self - reproach check his step . 

 " you be quite right , Allchin , " he say in a confidential tone . " I be not quite up to the mark , and perhaps I should do well to take a holiday . thank you for speak about it . " 

 he walk home , and there , on his table , he find a letter from Franks , which he eagerly tear open . " I have as good as decide , " write the artist . " yesterday , I go to Ashtead , and see R. we meet like old friend just as I wish . talk as naturally as you and I. I suspect only suspect of course that she know of my visit to Walham Green , and smile at they ! yes , as you say , I think she have improve decidedly . the upshot of it all be that I shall call on the Crosses again , and , when an opportunity offer , try my chance . I think I be act sensibly , do not   you ? " 

 after read this , will pace about his room for an hour or two . then he fling himself into bed , but get no sleep until past dawn . rise at the usual hour , he tell himself that this would not do ; to live on in this way be mere moral suicide ; he resolve to run down to St. Neots , whence , if his mother be capable of the journey , she and Jane might go for a week or two to the seaside . so , have pack his travel bag , he walk to the shop , and arrange with Allchin for a week 's absence , greatly to the assistant 's satisfaction . before noon he be at the Haws . but the idea of a family expedition to the seaside could not be carry out : Mrs. Warburton be not strong enough to leave home , and Jane have just invite a friend to come and spend a week with they . disguise as good he could his miserable state of mind and body , will stay for a couple of day . the necessity for detailed lie about his affair in London lying which would long ago have be detect , but for the absolute confidence of his mother and sister , and the retired habit of their life add another cause of unrest to those already torment he , and he be glad to escape into solitude . though with little faith in the remedy , he betake himself to a quiet spot on the coast of Norfolk , associate with memory of holiday in childhood , and there for the rest of the time he have allow himself do what a man could do to get benefit from sea and sky . 

 and in these endless hour of solitude there grow upon he a perception of the veritable cause of his illness . not loss of station , not overwork , not love ; but simply the lie to which he be commit . there be the root of the matter . slowly , dimly , he grope toward the fact that what render his life intolerable be its radical dishonesty . live openly , avowedly , it would have involve hardship indeed , but nothing of this dull wretchedness which make the world a desert . he begin to see how much well , how much easy , it would have be to tell the truth two year ago . his mother be not so weak - minded a woman as to be stricken down by loss of money ; and as for Sherwood , his folly merit more than the unpleasantness that might have result to he from disclosure . Grocerdom with a clear conscience would have be a totally different thing from grocerdom surreptitiously embrace . instead of slink into a corner for the performance of an honourable act , he should have declare it , frankly , unaffectedly , to all who have any claim upon he . at once , the enterprise become amusing , interesting . if it disgrace he with any of his acquaintance , so much the bad for they ; all whose friendship be worth have would have show only the more his friend ; as thing stand , he be ashamed , degrade , not by circumstance , but by himself . 

 to undo it all ? to proclaim the truth ? be it not easy enough ? he have prove now that his business would yield income sufficient for his mother and sister , as well as for his own need ; the crisis be surmount ; why not cast off this load of mean falsehood , which be crush he to the ground ? by Heaven ! he would do so . 

 not immediately . well wait till he have hear from Jane that their mother be a little strong , which would probably be the case in a week or two . but   he declare ill his mind   the resolve be take . at the first favourable moment he would undo his folly . before take this step , he must of course announce it to Godfrey Sherwood ; an unpleasant necessity ; but no matter . 

 he walk about the beach in a piping wind , wave his arm , talk to himself , now and then raise a great shout . and that night he sleep soundly . 




 CHAPTER 28 

 he get back to Fulham Road in time for the press of Saturday night . Allchin declare that he look much well , and customer be once more gratified by Mr. Jollyman 's studious civility . on Sunday morning he write a long letter to Sherwood , which , for lack of other address , he send to the care of Godfrey 's relative in Wales . this be something do . in the afternoon he take a long walk , which lead he through the Holland Park region . he call to see Franks , but the artist be not at home ; so he leave a card ask for news . and the next day bring Franks ' telegraphic reply . " nothing definite yet . shall come to see you late one of these evening . I have not be to Walham Green . " though he have all but persuade himself that he care not at all , one way or the other , this message do Warburton good . midway in the week , business be slack , he grant himself a half holiday , and go to Ashtead , merely in friendliness to Ralph Pomfret so he say to himself . 

 from Ashtead station to the pomfret ' house be a good twenty minute ' walk . as he stride along , eye upon the ground , will all at once see the path darken by a shadow ; he then become conscious of a female figure just in front of he , and heedlessly glance at the face , be arrest by a familiar smile . 

 " you be come to see we ? " ask Miss Elvan , offer her hand . " what a pity that I have to go to town ! only just time to catch the train . " 

 " then I will walk back to the station with you may I ? " 

 " I shall be delighted , if you do not   mind the trouble . I have an appointment with Miss Cross . she have find room which she think will suit I , and we be go to look at they together . " 

 " so you have decide for London ? " 

 " I think so . the room be at Chelsea , in Oakley Crescent . I know how fond you be of London , and how well you know it . and I know so little ; only a street or two here and there . I mean to remedy my ignorance . if ever you have an afternoon to spare , Mr. Warburton , I should be so glad if you would let I go with you to see interesting place . " 

 for an instant , Will be surprised , confused , but Rosamund 's entire simplicity and directness of manner rebuke this sensation . he reply in a corresponding tone that nothing would please he more . they be now at the railway station , and the train approach . Rosamund have spring into a carriage , give her hand through the window , say : 

 " I may be settle in a day or two . you will hear " 

 with the sentence unfinishe , she draw back , and the train roll away . for a minute or two , Warburton stand on the platform , his lip mechanically prolong the smile which have answer Miss Elvan 's , and his thought echo her last word . when he turn , he at first walk slowly ; then his pace quicken , and he arrive at the pomfret ' house , as though on urgent business . in the garden he catch sight of Ralph , recover from his attack of gout , sit at his ease , pipe in mouth . will tell of his meeting with Miss Elvan . 

 " yes , yes ; she be off to London town want to live there , like all the rest of the young people . in thirty year ' time she will have have enough of it , and be glad to creep into a quiet corner like this . my wife 's in the house , teach our new maid to make tea - cake you shall have some at five o'clock . I wonder whether any girl could be find nowadays who know how to make tea - cakes ? there be Rosamund she know no more about that kind of thing than of ship - building . do you know any young lady who could make a toothsome tea - cake ? " 

 " I be not quite sure , " answer will reflectively , " but I have one in mind who perhaps do it would not   surprise I . " 

 " that be to your credit . by the bye , you know that Norbert have be here . " 

 " yes , I hear of it . he write to tell I . " 

 " Aye , but he be be twice do you know that ? he be here yesterday . " 

 " indeed ? " 

 Ralph look at the other with an odd smile . 

 " one might have expect a little awkwardness between they , " he continue . " not a bit of it . there again your girl of to - day ; she have a way of her own with all this kind of thing . why they just shake hand as if they would never be anything but pleasant friend . all the same , as I tell you , Norbert have be a second time . " 

 " I be glad to hear it , " say Warburton . 

 will have purpose get back to the shop about seven o'clock . he be , indeed , back in London at that hour , but his state of mind tempt he to shirk squalid duty ; instead of turn toward Fulham Road , he take his way into the Strand , and there loitered in the evening sunshine , self - reproachful , yet enjoy the unwonted liberty . it be dinner - time ; restaurant exhale their pungent odour , and will feel sharpen appetite . for the first time since his catastrophe , he grant himself the dinner of a well - to - do man , and , as would naturally befall in such a case , make his indulgence large . 

 several day pass and bring no letter from any one . but at midnight on Saturday , there lie await he a letter address in Sherwood 's well - know hand . Godfrey begin by excuse himself for his delay in reply ; he have have rather a nasty attack of illness , and be only now able to hold his pen . but it be lucky he have not write before ; this very morning there have reach he the very good news . " the father of the man who owe I ten thousand pound be die . off and on he have be ill for a long time , but I hear at length that there can be no doubt whatever that the end be near . I can not   pretend to any human feeling in this matter ; the man 's death mean life for we so the world go . any day now , you may have a telegram from I announce the event . of the prompt payment of the debt as soon as my friend inherit , there be no shadow of doubt . I therefore urge you very strongly not to make a disclosure . it will be needless . wait till we see each other . I be still in Ireland for a reason which I will explain when we meet . " 

 will drew a long breath . if ever news come opportunely , it be this . he throw up the window of his stuffy little sitting - room , and look out into the summer night . the murmur of London once more make music to his ear . 




 CHAPTER 29 

 Rosamund take the Chelsea lodging propose to she by Bertha Cross , and in a few day go to live there . the luggage which she bring from Ashtead enable she to add a personal touch to the characterless room : in the place of the landlady 's ornament , which be not thing of beauty , she scatter her own bibelot , and about the wall she hang a number of her own drawing , frame for the purpose , as well as several which bear the signature , " Norbert Franks . " something less than a year ago , when her father go abroad , their house at Bath have be give up , and the furniture warehouse ; for the present , Rosamund and her sister be content to leave thing thus . the inheritance of each amount only to a few hundred pound . 

 " it be enough to save one from worry for a year or two , " say Rosamund to her friend Bertha . " I be not extravagant ; I can live here very comfortably . and there be a pleasure in the thought that one 's work not only may succeed but must . " 

 " I be sure I hope so , " reply Bertha , " but where be the must ? " 

 " what be I to do if it do not ? " ask Miss Elvan , with her sweet smile , and in a tone of irresistible argument . 

 " true , " concede her humorous friend . " there be no other way out of the difficulty . " 

 this be on the day of Rosamund 's come to Chelsea . a week later , Bertha find the sitting - room brighten with the hang water - colour , with curtain of some delicate fabric at the window , with a new rug before the fire place . 

 " these thing have cost so little , " say Rosamund , half apologetically . " and yes , I be oblige to buy this little tea service ; I really could not   use Mrs. Darby 's ; it spoil the taste of the tea . trifle , but they really have their importance ; they help to keep one in the right mind . oh , I must show you an amusing letter I have   have from Winnie . Winifred be prudence itself . she would not   spend a sixpence unnecessarily . ' suppose one fall ill , ' she write , ' what a blessing it would be to feel that one be not   helpless and dependent . oh , do be careful with your money , and consider very , very seriously what be the good course to take in your position . ' poor , dear old Winnie ! I know she fret and worry about I , and picture I throw gold away by the handful . yet , as you know , that be not   my character at all . if I lay out a few sovereign to make myself comfortable here , I know what I be do ; it will all come back again in work . as you know , Bertha , I be not afraid of poverty not a bit ! I have very much rather be shockingly poor , live in a garret and half starve , than just keep myself tidily go in lodging such as these be before I make the little change . Winnie have a terror of find herself destitute . she jump for joy when she be offer that work , and I be sure she would be content to live there in the same way for year . she feel safe as long as she need not   touch her money . " 

 Winifred Elvan , since her father 's death , have find an engagement as governess in an english family at St. Jean de Luz . this , in the young sister 's eye , involve a social decline , more disagreeable to she than she choose to confess . 

 " the one thing , " pursue Rosamund , " that I really dread , be the commonplace . if I be utterly , wretchedly , grindingly poor , there would be at all event a savour of the uncommon about it . I can not   imagine myself marry a prosperous shopkeeper ; but if I care for a clerk who have nothing but a pound a week , I would marry he to - morrow . " 

 " the result , " say Bertha , " might be lamentably commonplace . " 

 " not if it be the right sort of man . tell I what you think of that bit . " she point to a framed drawing . " it be in the valley of Bidassoa . " 

 they talk art for a little , then Rosamund fall into musing , and presently say : 

 " do not   you think Norbert have behave very well . " 

 " how well ? " 

 " I mean , it would have be excusable , perhaps , if he have betray a little unkind feeling toward I . but nothing of the kind , absolutely nothing . I be afraid I do not   give he credit for so much manliness . when he come to Ashtead the second time , of course I understand his motive at once . he wish to show I that his behaviour at the first meeting be not   mere bravado and to assure I that I need not   be afraid of he . there be a great deal of delicacy in that ; it really please I . " 

 Bertha Cross be gaze at her friend with a puzzled smile . 

 " you be a queer girl , " she remark . 

 " Queer ? why ? " 

 " do you mean that you be really and truly surprised that Mr. Franks behave like a gentleman ? " 

 " oh , Bertha ! " protest the other . " what a word ! " 

 " well , like a man , then . " 

 " perhaps I ought not   to have feel that , " admit Rosamund thoughtfully . " but I do , and it mean a good deal . it show how very right I be when I free myself . " 

 " be you quite sure of that ? " ask Bertha , raise her eyebrow and speak more seriously than usual . 

 " I never be more sure of anything . " 

 " do you know , I can not   help think it an argument on the other side . " 

 Rosamund look her friend in the eye . 

 " suppose it mean that you be altogether mistake about Mr. Franks ? " go on Bertha , in the same pleasant tone between jest and earnest . 

 " I be not   mistake in my own feeling , " say Rosamund in her melodious undertone . 

 " no ; but your feeling , you have always say , be due to a judgment you form of Mr. Franks ' character and motif . and now you confess that it look very much as if you have judge he wrongly . " 

 Rosamund smile and shake her head . 

 " do you know , " ask Bertha , after a pause , " that he have be come to our house lately ? " 

 " you never mention it . but why should not   he go to your house ? " 

 " rather , why should he ? " ask Bertha , with a laugh . " do not   trouble to guess . the reason be plain enough . he come to talk about you . " 

 " oh ! " exclaim the listener with amused deprecation . 

 " there be no doubt of it ; no shadow of doubt . in fact , we have   have very pleasant little chat about you . of course I say all the disagreeable thing I could ; I know that be what you would wish . " 

 " certainly , " fall from Rosamund . 

 " I do not   positively calumniate you , but just the unpleasant little hint that a friend be so well able to throw out ; the sort of thing likely to chill any one . I hope you quite approve ? " 

 " quite . " 

 " well , the odd thing be that they do not   quite have the effect I aim at . he talk of you more and more , instead of less and less . be not   it provoke , Rosamund ? " 

 again their eye encounter . 

 " I wish , " continue Miss Elvan , " I know how much of this be truth , and how much Bertha 's peculiar humour . " 

 " it be substantial truth . that there may be humour in it , I do not   deny , but it be not   of my importing . " 

 " when do he last come to see you ? " Rosamund inquire . 

 " let I see . just before he go to see you . " 

 " it do not   occur to you , " say Rosamund , slowly meditative , " that he have some other reason not the apparent one for come to your house ? " 

 " it do not   occur to I , and never will occur to I , " be Bertha 's amused answer . 

 when it be time for Bertha to walk home ward , Rosamund put her hat on , and they go out together . turn to the west , they pass along Cheyne Walk , and pause awhile by old Chelsea Church . the association of the neighbourhood move Miss Elvan to a characteristic display of enthusiasm . delightful to live here ! a joy to work amid such memory , of ancient and of latter time ! 

 " I must get Mr. Warburton to come and walk about Chelsea with I , " she add . 

 " Mr. Warburton ? " 

 " he be a great authority on London antiquity . Bertha , if you happen to see Norbert these day , do ask he for Mr. Warburton 's address . " 

 " why not ask your people at Ashtead ? " say Bertha . 

 " I shall not   be go there for two or three week . promise to ask Norbert will you ? for I , of course . " 

 Bertha have turn to look at the river . her face wear a puzzled gravity . 

 " I will try to think of it , " she reply , walk slowly on . 

 " he be a great mystery , " be Rosamund 's next word . " my uncle have no idea what he do , and Norbert , they tell I , be just as ignorant , or at all event , profess to be . be not   it a queer thing ? he come to grief in business two year ago , and since then he have live out of sight . Uncle Ralph suppose he have to take a clerk 's place somewhere , and that he do not   care to talk about it . " 

 " be he such a snob ? " ask Bertha , disinterestedly . 

 " no one would think so who know he . I be convinced there be some other explanation . " 

 " perhaps the truth be yet more awful , " say Bertha solemnly . " he may have get a place in a shop . " 

 " hush ! hush ! " exclaim the other , with a pained look . " do not   say such thing ! a poor clerk be suggestive it be possible to see he in a romantic light but a shopman ! if you know he , ' you would laugh at the idea . mystery suit he very well indeed ; to tell the truth , he be much more interesting now than when one know he as a partner in a manufactory of some kind . you see he be unhappy there be line in his face " 

 " perhaps , " suggest Bertha , " he have marry a rich widow and dare not   confess it . " 




 CHAPTER 30 

 it be on Saturday night that Godfrey Sherwood come at length to Warburton 's lodging . reach home between twelve and one o'clock will see a man who pace the pavement near Mrs. Wick 's door ; the man , at sight of he , hasten forward ; there be exclamation of surprise and of pleasure . 

 " I come first of all at nine o'clock , " say Sherwood . " the landlady say you would not   be back before midnight , so I come again . be to the theatre , I suppose ? " 

 " yes , " answer will , " take part in a play call ' the Grocer 's Saturday Night . ' 

 " I would forget . poor old fellow ! you will not   have much more of that thank Heaven ! be you too tired to talk to - night ? " 

 " no , no ; come in . " 

 the house be silent and dark . will strike a match to light the candle place for he at the foot of the stair , and lead the way up to his sitting - room on the first floor . here he light a lamp , and the two friend look at each other . each see a change . if Warburton be thin and heavy - eye , Sherwood 's visage show an even more noticeable fall - off in health . 

 " what be be the matter with you ? " ask Will . " your letter say you have have an illness , and you look as if you have not   get over it yet . " 

 " oh , I be all right now , " cry the other . " Liver get out of order or the spleen , or something I forget . the good medicine be the news I get about old Strangwyn . there , by Jove ! I have   let the name out . the wonder be I never do it before , when we be talk . it do not   matter now . yes , it be Strangwyn , the whisky man . he will die worth a million or two , and Ted be his only son . I be a fool to lend that money to Ted , but we see a great deal of each other at one time , and when he come ask for ten thousand a mere nothing for a fellow of his expectation nobody think his father could live a year , but the old man have hold out all this time , and Ted , the rascal , keep swear he could not   pay the interest on his debt . of course I could have make he ; but he know I should not   dare to risk the thing come to his father 's ear . I have   have altogether about three hundred pound , instead of the four hundred a year he owe I it be at four per cent . now , of course , I shall get all the arrear but that will not   pay for all the mischief that be be do . " 

 " be it certain , " ask Will , " that Strangwyn will pay ? " 

 " certain ? if he do not   I sue he . the case be plain as daylight . " 

 " there be no doubt that he will have his father 's money ? " 

 " none whatever . for more than a year now , he be be on good term with the old man . Ted be a very decent fellow , of his sort . I do not   say that I care as much for he now as I use to ; we have   both of we alter ; but his bad fault be extravagance . the old man , it must be confess , be not   very good form ; he smell rather of the distillery ; but Ted Strangwyn might come of the good family in the land . oh , you need not   have the least anxiety . strangwyn will pay , principal and interest , as soon as the old man have retire ; and that may happen any day , any hour . how glad I be to see you again , Will ! I have   know one or two plucky man , but no one like you . I could not   have go through it ; I should have turn coward after a month of that . well , it be over , and it will be something to look back upon . some day , perhaps , you will amuse your sister by tell she the story . to tell you the truth , I could not   bear to come and see you ; I should have be too miserably ashamed of myself . and not a soul have find you out , all this time ? " 

 " no one that I know of . " 

 " you must have suffer horribly from loneliness . but I have thing to tell you , important thing . " he wave his arm . " not to - night ; it be too late , and you look tired to death . " 

 " tell on , " say Warburton . " if I go to bed I should not   sleep where be you stay ? " 

 " Morley 's Hotel . not at my own expense , " Sherwood add hastily . " I be act as secretary to a man a man I get to know in Ireland . a fine fellow ! you will know he very soon . it be about he that I want to tell you . but first of all , that idea of mine about irish egg . the trouble be I could not   get capital enough . my cousin Hackett risk a couple of hundred pound ; it be all lose before the thing could really be set go . I have a bad time after that , Will , a bad time , I tell you . yet good result come of it . for two or three month I live on next to nothing a few penny a day , all tell . of course , if I have let strangwyn know how badly off I be , he would have send a cheque ; but I do not   feel I have any right to his money , it be your , not mine . besides , I say to myself that , if I suffer , it be only what I deserve ; I take it as a sort of expiation of the harm I have do . all that time I be in Dublin , I try to get employment but nobody have any use for I until at last , when I be all but die of hunger , somebody speak to I of a certain Milligan , a young and very rich man live in Dublin . I resolve to go and see he , and a lucky day it be . you remember Conolly Bates 's traveller ? well , Milligan be just that man , in appearance ; a thorough Irishman , and one of the well hearted fellow that ever live . though he be rich I find he live in a very plain way , in a room which look like a museum , full of fossil , stuff bird and animal , queer old picture , no end of such thing . well , I tell he plainly who I be , and where I be ; and almost without think , he cry out ' what could be simple ? come and be my secretary . ' ' you want a secretary ? ' ' I have not   think of it , ' say Milligan , ' but now it strike I it be just what I do want . I know there be something . yes , yes , come and be my secretary ; you be just the man . ' he go on to tell I he have a lot of correspondence with seller of curiosity , and it bore he to write the letter . would I come for a couple of hour a day ? he would pay I twenty pound a month . you may suppose I be not   long in accept . we begin the next day , and in a week 's time we be good friend . Milligan tell I that he would always have weak health , and he be convince his life have be save by vegetarianism . I myself be not   feel at all fit just then ; he persuade I to drop meat , and teach I all about the vegetarian way of living . I have not   try it for a month before I find the most wonderful result . never in my life have I such a clear mind , and such good spirit . it remade I . " 

 " so you have   come to London to hunt for curio ? " interpose will . 

 " no , no ; let I go on . when I get to know Milligan well , I find that he have a large estate somewhere in Connaught . and , as we talk , an idea come to I . " again he spring up from his chair . " ' if I be a landowner on that scale , ' I say , ' do you know what I should do I should make a vegetarian colony ; a self - support settlement of people who eat no meat , drink no alcohol , smoke no tobacco ; a community which , as year go on , might prove to the world that there be the true ideal of civilised life health of mind and of body , true culture , true humanity ! ' " the eye glow in his fleshless , colourless face ; he speak with arm raise , head throw back the attitude of an enthusiastic preacher . " Milligan catch at the idea catch at it eagerly . ' there be something fine in that ! ' he say . ' why should not   it be do ? ' ' you be the man that could do it , ' I tell he . ' you would be a benefactor to the human race . isolated example be all very well , but what we want be an experiment on a large scale , go on through more than one generation . let child be bear of vegetarian parent , bring up as vegetarian , and this in condition of life every way simple , natural , healthy . this be the way to convert the world . ' so that be what we be work at now , Milligan and I. of course there be endless difficulty ; the thing can not   be begin in a hurry ; we have to see no end of people , and correspond with the leader of vegetarianism everywhere . but be not   it a grand idea ? be not   it worth work for ? " 

 Warburton muse , smile . 

 " I want you to join we , " say Sherwood abruptly . 

 " Ho , ho ! that be another matter . " 

 " I shall bring you book to read . " 

 " I have   no time . I be a grocer . " 

 " Pooh ! " exclaim Sherwood . " in a few day you will be an independent man . yes , yes , I know that you will have only a small capital , when thing be settle ; but it be just people with a small capital that we want to enlist ; the very poor and the well - to - do will be no use to we . it be too late to - night to go into detail . we have time to talk , plenty of time . that you will join we , I feel sure . wait till you have   have time to think about it . for my own part , I have   find the work of my life , and I be the happy man live ! " 

 he walk round and round the table , wave his arm , and Warburton , after regard he curiously , muse again , but without a smile . 




 CHAPTER 31 

 behind his counter next morning , will think over Sherwood 's story , and laugh to himself wonderingly . not that any freak of his old partner 's of the man whom he have once regard as , above all , practical and energetic could now surprise he ; but it seem astonishing that Godfrey should have persuade a man of solid mean , even a Celt , to pledge himself to such an enterprise be the story true ? do Milligan really exist ? if any doubt be possible on this point , do it not also throw suspicion on the story of Strangwyn , and the ten thousand pound ? will grow serious at the reflection . he have never conceive a moment 's distrust of Sherwood 's honesty , nor do his misgiving now take that form ; the question which trouble he throughout to - day be whether Godfrey Sherwood might be a victim of delusion . certainly he have a very strange look ; that haggard face , those brilliant eye 

 so disquieting be the suspicion that , at dose time , will could no long resist an impulse to betake himself to Morley 's Hotel . Sherwood have say that Milligan be there only for a few day , until the wealthy Irishman could find a furnished house suitable to his need whilst he remain in London . arrive at the hotel , he inquire for his friend ; Sherwood have din and go out . will hesitate a moment , then ask whether Mr. Milligan be to be see . Mr. Milligan , he learn , have go out with Mr. Sherwood . so Milligan do exist . will 's relief at settle this point banish his doubt on all the other . he turn westward again , and through a night of soft , warm rain walk all the way to his lodging . 

 on the third day after , late in the evening , Sherwood pay he a second visit . Godfrey be in high spirit . he announce that Milligan have take a house near the Marble Arch , where he also , as secretary , would have his quarter , and that already a meeting have be convene of the lead London vegetarian . thing be splendidly in train . then he produce an evening newspaper , with a paragraph , which speak of the serious illness of Mr. Strangwyn ; recovery , it be say , could hardly be hop for . 

 " what be more , " cry Sherwood . " I have   see Ted Strangwyn himself . nobody could behave well . the old man , he assure I , could not   last more than a day or two , and he promise quite spontaneously , I do not   say a word to pay his debt in full as soon as ever his father 's will be prove , which will be do as quickly as possible . and now , have you think over what I say the other night ? " 

 " thought yes . " 

 " with not much result , I see . never mind ; you must have time . I want you to meet Milligan . could you come to lunch next Sunday ? he invite you . " 

 Warburton shake his head . he have never care for the acquaintance of rich man , and be less than ever disposed to sit at their table . all his anxiety regard Sherwood 's mental condition have be set at rest , he would go on with his grocer 's life as long as need be , strengthen with the hope that shine before he . 

 the end of July have come . after a week of rain , the weather have turn bright , with a coolness at morning and evening very pleasant at this time of year in London street . Warburton have business in the City which he must need see to personally ; he be on the point of leave the shop , dress as become a respectable citizen , silk hat and all , when in the doorway appear Miss Bertha Cross . a certain surprise mark her smile of recognition ; it mean , no doubt , that , never before have see Mr. Jollyman save bareheade and aprone , she be strike with the change in his aspect when thus equip for go abroad . immediately Mr. Jollyman doff his hat and step behind the counter . 

 " please do not   let I keep you , " say Bertha , with a glance towards Allchin , who be make parcel at the back of the shop . " I only want some some match , and one or two trifle thing . " 

 never have she seem so embarrassed in make a purchase . her eye fall , and she half turn away . Mr. Jollyman appear to hesitate , he also glance towards Allchin ; but the young lady quickly recover herself , and , take up a packet of something exhibit on the counter , ask its price . the awkwardness be at an end ; Bertha make her purchase , pay for they , and then leave the shop as usual . 

 it be by the last post on the evening after this day that Warburton receive a letter of which the exterior puzzle he . whose could be this graceful , delicate hand ? a woman 's doubtless ; yet he have no female correspondent , save those who write from St. Neots . the postmark be London . he open , " dear Mr. Warburton " a glance over the leaf show he " sincerely your , Rosamund Elvan . " H'm ! 

 " dear Mr. Warburton , I be settle in my lodging here , and get seriously to work . it have occur to I that you might be able to suggest some quaint corner of old London , unknown to I , which would make a good subject for a water - colour . London have be , I be sure , far too much neglect by artist ; if I could mark out a claim here , as the colonist say , I should be lucky . for the present , I be just sketch   to get my hand in   about Chelsea . to - morrow afternoon , about six o'clock , if this exquisite mellow weather continue , I shall be on the Embankment in Battersea Park , near the Albert Bridge , where I want to catch a certain effect of sky and water . " 

 that be all . and what exactly do it mean ? Warburton 's practical knowledge of woman do not carry he very far , but he be will not to theorise at large on the subject , and in this instance it seem to he that one of his favourite generality find neat application . Miss Elvan have in a high degree the feminine characteristic of not know her own mind . find herself without substantial mean , she of course mean to marry , and it be natural that she should think of marry Norbert Franks ; yet she could not feel at all sure that she wish to do so ; neither be she perfectly certain that Franks would again offer she the choice . in this state of doubt she incline to cultivate the acquaintance of Franks ' intimate friend , know that she might thus , very probably , gather hint as to the artist 's state of mind , and , if it seem good to she , could indirectly convey to he a suggestion of her own . Warburton conclude , then , that he be simply be make use of by this typical young lady . that point settle , he willingly lend himself to her device , for he desire nothing well than to see Franks lure back to the old allegiance , and away from the house at Walham Green . so , before go to bed , he post a reply to Miss Elvan 's letter , say that he should much like a talk with she about the artistic possibility of obscure London , and that he would walk next day along the Battersea Embankment , with the hope of meet she . 

 and thus it come to pass . through the morning there be shower , but about noon a breeze sweep the sky fair , and softly glow summer reign over the rest of the day . in his mood of hopefulness , Warburton have no scruple about abandon the shop at tea - time ; he do not even trouble himself to invent a decorous excuse , but tell Allchin plainly that he think he would have a walk . his henchman , who of late have always seem rather pleased than otherwise when Warburton absent himself , loudly approve the idea . 

 " do not   you ' urry back , sir . there will be no business as I can not   manage . do not   you think of ' urrying . the air'll do you good . " 

 as he walk away , will say to himself that no doubt Allchin would only be too glad of a chance of manage the business independently , and that perhaps he hop for the voluntary retirement of Mr. Jollyman one of these day . indeed , thing be likely to take that course . and Allchin be a good , honest fellow , whom it would be a pleasure to see flourish . how much long would old Strangwyn cumber the world ? 

 with more of elasticity than usual in his rapid stride , will pass out of Fulham Road into King 's Road , and down to the river at Cheyne Walk , whence his eye perceive a sit figure on the opposite bank . he cross Albert Bridge ; he step down into the Park ; he draw near to the young lady in grey trim with black , who be at work upon a drawing . not until he speak do she seem aware of his arrival ; then with her bright smile of welcome , she hold out a pretty hand , and in her melodious voice thank he for so kindly take the trouble to come . 

 " do not   look at this , " she add . " it be too difficult I can not   get it right " 

 what his glance discover on the block do not strengthen Will 's confidence in Rosamund 's claim to be a serious artist . he have always take for grant that her work be amateurish , and that she have little chance of live by it . on the whole , he feel glad to be confirm in this view ; Rosamund as an incompetent be more interesting to he than if she have give proof of great ability . 

 " I must not   be too ambitious , " she be say . " the river suggest dangerous comparison . I want to find little corner of the town such as no one ever thought of paint " 

 " unless it be Norbert Franks , " say will genially , lean on his stick with both hand , and look over her head . 

 " yes , I have almost forget , " she answer with a thoughtful smile . " in those day he do some very good thing . " 

 " .some remarkably good thing . of course you know the story of how he and I first meet ? " 

 " oh , yes . early morning a quiet little street I remember . where be that ? " 

 " over yonder . " will nod southward . " I hope he will take that up again some day . " 

 " oh , but let I do it first , " exclaim Rosamund , laugh . " you must not   rob I of my chance , Mr. Warburton ? Norbert Franks be successful and rich , or go to be ; I be a poor struggler . of course , in paint London , it be atmosphere one have to try for above all . our sky give value , now and then , to form which in themselves be utterly uninteresting . " 

 " exactly what Franks use to say to I . there be a thing I want he to try but then come the revolution . it be the long London street , after a hot , fine day , just when the lamp have be light . have you notice how golden the light be ? I remember stand for a long time at the end of Harley Street , enjoy that effect . Franks be go to try it but then come the revolution . " 

 " for which you mean , Mr. Warburton I be to blame . " 

 Rosamund speak in a very low voice and a very sweet , her head bent . 

 " why , yes , " reply Will , in the tone of correspond masculinity , " though I should not   myself have use that word . you , no doubt , be the cause of what happen , and so , in a sense , to blame for it . but I know it could not   be help . " 

 " indeed , it could not , " declare Rosamund , raise her eye a little , and look across the river . 

 she have not in the least the air of a coquette . impossible to associate any such trivial idea with Rosamund 's habitual seriousness of bearing , and with the stamp of her feature , which add some subtle charm to regularity and refinement . by temper critical , and especially disposed to mistrustful scrutiny by the present circumstance , Warburton be yet unable to resist the soften influence of this quintessential womanhood . in a certain degree , he have submit to it during that holiday among the Alps , then , on the whole , he incline to regard Rosamund impatiently and with slighting tolerance . now that he desire to mark her good quality , and so justify himself in the endeavour to renew her conquest of Norbert Franks , he expose himself to whatever peril might lie in her singular friendliness . true , no sense of danger occur to he , and for that very reason his state be the more precarious . 

 " you have see he lately at Ashtead ? " be his next remark . 

 " More than once . and I can not   tell you how glad we be to see each other ! I know in a moment that he have really forgive I and I have always want to be assure of that . how thoroughly good and straightforward he be ! I be sure we shall be friend all our life . " 

 " I agree with you , " he say , " that there be no well fellow living . till now , I can not   see a sign of his be spoil by success . and spoilt in the bad sense , I do not   think he ever will be , happen what may , there be a simplicity about he which make his safeguard . but , as for his painting well , I can not   be so sure , I know little or nothing about it , but it be plain that he no long take his work very seriously . it please people they pay large price for it where be the harm ? still , if he have some one to keep a high ideal before he " 

 he break off , with a vague gesture . Rosamund look up at he . 

 " we must try , " she say , with quiet earnestness . 

 " oh , I do not   know that I be any use , " reply Will , with a laugh . " I speak with no authority . but you yes . you might do much . More than any one else possibly could . " 

 " that be exaggerate , Mr. Warburton , " say Rosamund . " even in the old day my influence do not   go for much . you speak of the ' revolution ' cause by by what happen ; but the truth be that the revolution have begin before that . remember I see ' Sanctuary ' while he be paint it , and , but we will not   talk of that . " 

 " to tell you the truth , " return Warburton , meet her eye steadily , with his pleasant look , " I see no harm in ' Sanctuary . ' I think he be quite right to do what he could to earn money . he want to be marry ; he have wait quite long enough ; if he have not   do something of the kind , I should have doubt whether he be very much in earnest . no , no ; what I call the revolution begin when he have lose all hope . at the time he would have give up paint altogether , I believe ; if it have not   be that he owe I money , and know I want it . " 

 Rosamund make a quick movement of interest . 

 " I never hear about that . " 

 " Franks would not   talk about it , be sure . he see I in a hobble I lose everything , all at once and he go to work like a brick to get money for I . and that , when he feel more disposed to poison himself than to paint . do you think I should criticise the work he do under these circumstance ? " 

 " no , indeed ! thank you , Mr. Warburton , for tell I that story . " 

 " how exquisite London be at this time of the year ! " Rosamund murmur , as have declare it be time to be walk homeward , they walk slowly towards the bridge . " I be glad not to be go away . look at that lovely sky ! look at the tone of those house . oh , I must make use of it all ! real use , I mean , as splendid material for art , not only for money - making . do advise I , Mr. Warburton . where shall I go to look for bit ? " 

 walk with bent head , will reflect . 

 " do you know Camberwell ? " he ask . " there be good little corner " 

 " I do not   know it at all . could you I be afraid to ask . you could not   spare time ? " 

 " oh yes , easily . that be to say , during certain hour . " 

 " on Monday say ? in the afternoon ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " how kind of you ! " murmur Rosamund . " if I be only an amateur , amusing myself , I could not   give you the trouble ; but it be serious I must earn money before long . you see , there be nothing else I can do . my sister you know I have a sister ? she have take to teaching ; she be at St. Jean de Luz . but I be no use for anything of that kind . I must be independent . why do you smile ? " 

 " not at you , but at myself . I use to say the same thing . but I have no talent of any kind , and when the smash come " 

 they be cross the bridge . will look westward , in the direction of his shop , and it strike he how amusing it would be to startle Rosamund by a disclosure of his social status . would she still be anxious for his company in search of the picturesque ? he could not feel sure curiosity urge he to try the experiment , but an obscure apprehension close his lip . 

 " how very hard for you ! " sigh Rosamund . " but do not   think , " she add quickly , " that I have a weak dread of poverty . not at all ! so long as one can support oneself . nowadays , when every one strive and battle for money , there be a distinction in do without it . " 

 five minute more , and they be in Oakley Crescent . Rosamund pause before reach the house in which she dwelt , take the camp - stool from her companion , and offer her hand for good - bye . only then do Warburton become aware that he have say nothing since that remark of her about poverty ; he have walk in a dream . 




 CHAPTER 32 

 August come , and Strangwyn , the great whisky distiller , be yet alive . for very shame , will keep his thought from that direction . the gloomy mood have again creep upon he , in spite of all his reason for hope ; his sleep become mere nightmare , and his day behind the counter a bilious misery . 

 since the occasion last record , Bertha Cross have not be to the shop . one day , the order be bring by a servant ; a week later , Mrs. Cross herself appear . the querulous lady wear a countenance so nearly cheerful that Warburton regard she uneasily . she have come to purchase tea , and remark that it be for use during a seaside holiday ; you could never depend on the tea at seaside place . perhaps , think Will , the prospect of change suffice to explain her equanimity . but for the rest of the day he be so glum and curt , that Allchin frequently look at he with pained remonstrance . 

 at home , he find a telegram on his table . he clutch at it , rent the envelope . but no ; it be not what he expect . Norbert Franks ask he to look in that evening . so , weary and heartsick as he be , he take the train to Notting Hill Gate . 

 " what be it ? " he ask bluntly , on enter the studio . 

 " want a talk , that be all , " reply his friend . " Hope I have not   disturb you . you tell I , you remember , that you prefer come here . " 

 " all right . I think you might have news for I . " 

 " well , " say Franks , smile at the smoke of his cigarette , " there be perhaps something of the sort . " 

 the other regard he keenly . 

 " you have   do it . " 

 " no o o ; not exactly . sit down ; you be not in a hurry ? I go to Walham Green a few day ago , but Bertha be not   at home . I see her mother . they be go away for a fortnight , to Southwold , and I have a sort of idea that I may run down there . I half promise . " 

 will nod , and say nothing . 

 " you disapprove ? speak plainly , old man . what be your real objection ? of course I have   notice before now that you have an objection . out with it ! " 

 " have you see Miss Elvan again ? " 

 " no . have you ? " 

 " two or three time . " 

 Franks be surprised . 

 " where ? " 

 " oh , we have   have some walk together . " 

 " the deuce you have ! " cry Franks , with a laugh . 

 " do not   you want to know what we talk about , " pursue Warburton , look at he with half - close eyelid . " principally about you . " 

 " that be very flattering but perhaps you abuse I ? " 

 " on the whole , no . discuss you , yes , and in considerable detail , come to the conclusion that you be a very decent fellow , and we both of we like you very much . " 

 Franks laugh gaily , joyously . 

 " que vous ete aimable , tous - les - deux ! you make I imagine I be back in Paris . must I round a compliment in reply ? " 

 " that be as you like . but first I will tell you the upshot of it all , as it shape itself to I . have not   it even dimly occur to you that , under the circumstance , it would be well , say a graceful thing to give that girl a chance of change her mind again ? " 

 " what Rosamund ? " 

 " it never strike you ? " 

 " but , hang it all , Warburton ! " exclaim the artist . " how should I have think of it ? you know very well and then , it be perfectly certain she would laugh at I . " 

 " it be not   certain at all . and , do you know , it almost seem to I a point of honour . " 

 " you be not serious ? this be one of your solemn joke such as you have not   indulge in lately . " 

 " no , no . listen , " say will , with a rigid earnestness on his face as he bend forward in the chair . " she be poor , and do not   know how she be go to live . you be flourish , and have all sort of brilliant thing before you ; would not   it be a generous thing the kind of thing one might expect of a fellow with his heart in the right place ? you understand I ? " 

 Franks round his eye in amazement . 

 " but be I to understand that she expect it ? " 

 " not at all . she have not   in the remotest way betray such a thought be assure of that . she be not   the sort of girl to do such a thing . it be entirely my own thought . " 

 the artist change his seat , and for a moment wear a look of perturb reflection . 

 " how the deuce , " he exclaim , " can you come and talk to I like this when you know I have   as good as commit myself ? " 

 " yes , and in a wobbling , half - hearted way which mean you have no right even to think of commit yourself . you care nothing about that other girl " 

 " you be mistaken . I care a good deal . in fact " 

 " in fact , " echo Warburton with good - natured scorn , ' so much that you have   all but make up your mind to go down to Southwold whilst she be there ! bosh ! you care for one girl in a way you will never care for another . " 

 " well perhaps yes that may be true " 

 " of course it be true . if you do not   marry she , go in for a prize beauty or for an heiress or anything else that be brilliant . think of the scope before a man like you . " 

 Franks smile complacently once more . 

 " why , that be true , " he reply . " I be go to tell you about my social adventure . who do you think I have   be chum with ? Sir Luke Griffin the great Sir Luke . he be ask I down to his place in Leicestershire , and I think I shall go . he be really a very nice fellow . I always imagine he loud , vulgar , the typical parvenu . nothing of the kind no one would guess that he begin life in a grocer 's shop . why , he can talk quite decently about picture , and really like they . " 

 Warburton listen with a chuckle . 

 " have he daughter ? " 

 " Three , and no son . the young , about seventeen , an uncommonly pretty girl . well , as you say , why should not   I marry she and a quarter of a million ? by Jove ! I believe I could . she be here with her father yesterday . I be go to paint the three girl together . do you know , Warburton , speak without any foolish vanity , what astonish I be to think of the enormous choice of wife there be for a man of decent appearance and breeding who succeed in get himself talk about . without a joke , I be convinced I know twenty girl , and more or less nice girl , who would have I at once , if I ask they . I be not a conceited fellow be I now ? I should not   say this to any one else . I be simply convinced of its be a fact . " 

 Warburton declare his emphatic agreement . 

 " see that , " he add , " why be you in such a hurry ? your millionaire grocer be but a steppingstone ; who know but you may soon chum with duke ? if any man live ought to be cautious about his marriage , it be you . " 

 the artist examine his friend with a puzzled smile . 

 " I should like to know , Warburton , how much of this be satire , and how much serious advice . perhaps it be all satire and rather savage ? " 

 " no , no , I be speak quite frankly . " 

 " but , look here , there be the awkward fact that I really have go rather far with the Crosses . " 

 will make a movement of all but angry impatience . 

 " do you mean , " he ask quickly , " that she have commit herself in any way ? " 

 " no , that she certainly have not , " be Franks , deliberate reply , in a voice as honest as the smile which accompany it . 

 " my advice then be break decently off , and either do what I suggest , or go and amuse yourself with millionaire Sir Luke , and extend your opportunity . " 

 Franks muse . 

 " you be serious about Rosamund ? " he ask , after a glance at Warburton 's set face . 

 " think it over , " will reply , in a rather hard voice . " I see the thing like that . of course , it be no business of mine ; I do not   know why I interfere ; every man should settle these matter in his own way . but it be a thought I have , and I have   tell it you . there be no harm do . " 




 CHAPTER 33 

 when Warburton reach his lodge the next evening he find a letter on his table . again the fine feminine hand ; it be the second time that Rosamund have write to he . a vague annoyance mingle with his curiosity as he tear the envelope . she begin by tell he of a drawing she have make in Camberwell Grove not bad , it seem to she , but she wish for his opinion . then , in a new paragraph : 

 " I have see Norbert again . I call he Norbert , because I always think of he by that name , and there be an affectation in write ' Mr. Franks . ' I feel that , when we talk of he , and I really do not   know why I do not   simply call he Norbert then . I shall do so in future . you , I be sure , have little respect for silly social convention , and you will understand I . yes , I have see he again , and I feel obliged to tell you about it . it be really very amusing . you know , of course , that all embarrassment be over between we . at Ashtead we meet like the good of friend . so , when Norbert write that he want to see I , I think nothing could be more natural , and feel quite glad . but , as soon as we meet , I see something strange in he , something seem to have happen . and how shall I tell you ? it be only a guess of mine thing do not   come to foolish extremity but I really believe that the poor fellow have somehow persuade himself that it be his duty to no , I can not   go on , but I be sure you will understand . I be never so amused at anything . 

 " why do I write this to you ? I hardly know . but I have just a suspicion that the story may not come to you quite as a surprise . if Norbert think he have a certain duty strange idea ! perhaps friend of his might see thing in the same way . even the most sensible people be influence by curious idea on one subject . I need not say that , as soon as the suspicion dawn upon I , I do my good to let he understand how far astray he be go . I think he understand . I feel sure he do . at all event he get into natural talk again , and part in a thoroughly reasonable way . 

 " I beg that you will not   reply to this letter . I shall work on , and hope to be able to see you again before long . " 

 Warburton throw the sheet of paper on to the table , as if dismiss it from his thought . he begin to walk about the room then he stand motionless for ten minute . " what be the matter with I ? " this be the current of his musing . " I use to think myself a fellow of some energy ; but the truth be , I know my mind about nothing , and I be at the mercy of every one who choose to push I this way or that . " 

 he take up the letter again , and be about to re - read it , but suddenly alter his mind , and thrust the fold paper into his pocket . 

 eight day go by . will have a visit from Sherwood , who bring news that the whisky distiller have seem a little well , but could not possibly live more than a week or two . as regard the vegetarian colony all go well ; practical man be at work on the detail of the scheme ; Sherwood toil for ten hour a day at secretarial correspondence . next day , there come a postcard from Rosamund . 

 " work ready to show you . could you come and have a cup of tea to - morrow afternoon ? " 

 at the conventional hour will go to Oakley Crescent . not , however , as he have expect , to find Miss Elvan alone ; with her sit Mrs. Pomfret , in London for the afternoon . the simple and kindly lady talk as usual , but will , nervously observant , feel sure that she be not quite at her ease . on the other hand , nothing could have be more naturally graceful than Rosamund 's demeanour ; whether pour out tea , or exhibit her water - colour , or lead the talk to subject of common interest , she be charming in her own way , a way which borrow nothing from the every - day grace of the drawing - room . her voice , always subdue , have a range of melodious expression which caress the ear , no matter how trifle the word she utter , and at moment its slightly tremulous murmur on rich note suggest depth of sentiment lie beneath this familiar calm . to her aunt she speak with a touch of playful affection ; when her eye turn to Warburton , their look almost suggest the frankness of simple friendship , and her tone be that of the large confidence . 

 never have Will feel himself so lull to oblivion of thing external ; he forget the progress of time , and only when Mrs. Pomfret speak of the train she have to catch , make an effort to break the lazy spell and take his leave . 

 on the morrow , and on the day after that , he shirk business during the afternoon , excuse himself with the plea that the heat of the shop be insufferable . he know that neglect of work be grow upon he , and again he observe that Allchin seem rather pleased than vex by these needless absence . the third day see he behind the counter until five o'clock , when he be summon as usual to the back parlour to tea . lay before he a plate of watercress and slice of brown bread and butter , Mrs. Allchin , a discreetly conversational young woman , remark on the continue beauty of the weather , and add a hope that Mr. Jollyman would not feel obliged to remain in the shop this evening . 

 " no , no , it be your husband 's turn , " will reply good - naturedly . " he want a holiday more than I do . " 

 " Allchin want a ' oliday , sir ! " exclaim the woman . " why he never know what to do with himself when he be away from business . he enjoy business , do Allchin . do not   you think of he , sir . I never know a man so altered since he be be keep to regular work all the year round . I use to dread the Sundays , and still more the Bank holiday when we be here first ; you never know who he would get quarrel with as soon as he have nothing to do but now , sir , why I do not   believe you will find a less quarrelsome man anywhere , and he be say for a joke only yesterday , that he do not   think he could knock down even a coster , he be so lose the habit . " 

 will yield and steal away into the mellowing sunshine . he walk westward , till he find himself on the Embankment by Albert Bridge ; here , after hesitate awhile , he take the turn into Oakley Street . he have no thought of call to see Miss Elvan ; upon that he could not venture ; but he think it barely possible that he might meet with she in this neighbourhood , and such a meeting would have be pleasant . disappoint , he cross the river , linger a little in Battersea Park , come back again over the bridge , and , with a sudden leap of the heart , which all but make his whole body spring forward , see a slim figure in grey move by the parapet in front of Cheyne Walk . 

 they shake hand without speak , very much as though they have meet by appointment . 

 " oh , these sunset ! " be Rosamund 's first word , when they have move a few step together . 

 " they use to be my delight when I live there , " will reply , point eastward . 

 " show I just where it be , will you ? " 

 they turn , and go as far as Chelsea Bridge , where Warburton point out the window of his old flat . 

 " you be very happy there ? " say Rosamund . 

 " happy ? not unhappy , at all event . yes , in a way I enjoy my life ; chiefly because I do not   think much about it . " 

 " look at the sky , now . " 

 the sun have go down in the duskily golden haze that hang above the river 's vague horizon . above , on the violet sky , stand range over range of pleated cloud , their hue the deep rise , shade to purple in the fold . 

 " in other country , " continue the soft , murmur voice , " I have never see a sky like that . I love this London ! " 

 " as I use to , " say Warburton , " and shall again . " 

 they loiter back past Chelsea Hospital , exchange brief , insignificant sentence . then for many minute neither speak , and in this silence they come to the foot of Oakley Street , where again they stand gaze at the sky . Scarcely change in form , the western cloud have shed their splendour , and be now so coldly pale that one would have imagine they stricken with moonlight ; but no moon have rise , only in a clear space of yet blue sky glisten the evening star . 

 " I must go in , " say Rosamund abruptly , as though start from a dream . 




 CHAPTER 34 

 she be go , and Warburton stand bite his lip . have he shake hand with she ? have he say good - night ? he could not be sure . nothing be present to he but a sense of gawkish confusion , follow on a wild impulse which both ashamed and alarm he , he stand in a bumpkin attitude , bite his lip . 

 a hansom come crawl by , and the driver call his attention " Keb , sir ? " at once he step forward , spring on to the footboard , and stand there look foolish . 

 " where to , sir ? " 

 " that be just what I can not   tell you , " he answer with a laugh . " I want to go to somebody 's house , but do not   know the address . " 

 " could you find it in the Directory , sir ? they have   get one at the corner . " 

 " good idea . " 

 the cab keep alongside with he , he walk to the public - house , and there , midway in whisky - and - soda , look up in the great red volume the name of Strangwyn . there it be , a house in Kensington Gore . he jump into the hansom , and , as he be drive down Park Lane , he feel that he have enjoy nothing so much for a long time ; it be the child 's delight in " have a ride " ; the air blow deliciously on his cheek , and the trot clap of the horse 's hoof , the jingle of the bell , aid his exhilaration . and when the driver pull up , it be with an extraordinary gaiety that will pay he and shout good - night . 

 he approach the door of Mr. Strangwyn 's dwelling . some one be at that moment turn away from it , and , as they glance at each other , a cry of recognition break from both . 

 " come to make inquiry ? " ask Sherwood . " I have   just be do the same thing . " 

 " well ? " 

 " no well , no worse . but that mean , of course , nearer the end . " 

 " Queer we should meet , " say Warburton . " this be the first time I have   be here . " 

 " I can quite understand your impatience . it seem an extraordinary case ; the poor old man , by every rule , ought to have die week ago . which way be you walk ? " 

 will answer that he do not care , that he would accompany Sherwood . 

 " let we walk as far as Hyde Park Corner , then , " say Godfrey . " delighted to have a talk with you . " he slip a friendly hand under his companion 's arm . " why do not   you come , will , and make friend with Milligan ? he be a splendid fellow ; you could not   help take to he . we be get on gloriously with our work . for the first time in my life I feel as if I have something to do that be really worth do . I tell you this scheme of our have inconceivable importance ; it may have result such as one dare not talk about . " 

 " but how long will it be before you really make a start ? " ask Warburton , with more interest than he have yet show in this matter . 

 " I can not   quite say can not   quite say . the detail be of course full of difficulty the thing would not   be worth much if they be not . one of Milligan 's good point be , that he be a thoroughly practical man thoroughly practical man . it be no commercial enterprise we be about , but , if it be to succeed , it must be start on sound principle . I would give anything if I could persuade you to join we , old fellow . you and your mother and sister you be just the kind of people we want . think what a grand thing it will be to give a new start to civilisation ! do not   it touch you ? " 

 Warburton be mute , and , take this for a sign of the impressionable moment , Sherwood talk on , ardently , lyrically , until Hyde Park Corner be reach . 

 " think it over , Will . we shall have you yet ; I know we shall . come and see Milligan . " 

 they part with a warm hand - grip , and Warburton turn toward Fulham Road . 

 when Warburton enter the shop the next morning , Allchin be on the lookout for he . 

 " I want to speak to you , sir , " he say , " about this golden syrup we have   have from Rowbottom 's " 

 will listen , or seem to listen , smile at vacancy . to whatever Allchin propose , he give his assent , and in the afternoon , without dare to say a word he steal into freedom . 

 he be once more within sight of Albert Bridge . he walk or prowl for half an hour close about Oakley Crescent . then , over the bridge and into the Park . back again , and more prowling . at last , weary and worn , to the counter and apron , and Allchin 's talk about golden syrup . 

 the next day , just before sunset , he saunter on the Embankment . he lift up his eye , and there , walk towards he , come the slim figure in grey . 

 " not like the other evening , " say Rosamund , before he could speak , her eye turn to the dull , featureless west . 

 he hold her hand , until she gently draw it away , and then be frightened to find that he have hold it so long . from head to foot , he quiver , deliciously , painfully . his tongue suffer a semi - paralysis , so that , try to talk , he babble something about the sweetness of the air a scent from the garden across the river 

 " I have   have a letter from Bertha Cross , " say his companion , as she walk slowly on . " she come home to - morrow . " 

 " Bertha Cross ? ah , yes , your friend " 

 the name sound to Warburton as if from a remote past . he repeat it several time to himself . 

 they stand with face turn toward the lurid south . the air be very still . from away down the river sound the bell of Lambeth Church , their volleying clang soften by distance to a monotonous refrain , drearily at one with the sadness of the fall night . Warburton hear they , yet hear they not ; all external sound blend with that within he , which be the furious beating of his heart . he move a hand as if to touch Rosamund 's , but let it fall as she speak . 

 " I be afraid I must go . it be really rain " 

 neither have an umbrella . big drop be begin to splash on the pavement . Warburton feel one upon his nose . 

 " to - morrow , " he utter thickly , his tongue hot and dry , his lip quiver . 

 " yes , if it be fine , " reply Rosamund . 

 " early in the afternoon ? " 

 " I can not . I must go and see Bertha . " 

 they be walk at a quick step , and already get wet . 

 " at this hour then , " pant will . 

 " yes . " 

 Lambeth bell be lose amid a hollow boom of distant thunder . 

 " I must run , " cry Rosamund . " good - bye . " 

 he follow , keep she in sight until she enter the house . then he turn and walk like a madman through the hiss rain walk he know not whither his be a mere erratic chaos , a symbol of Nature 's prime impulse whirling amid London 's multitude . 




 CHAPTER 35 

 tired and sullen after the journey home from the seaside , Mrs. Cross keep her room . in the little bay - windowe parlour , Bertha Cross and Rosamund Elvan sit talk confidentially . 

 " now , do confess , " urge she of the liquid eye and sentimental accent . " this be a little plot of yours all in kindness , of course . you think it well you somehow bring he to it ? " 

 half laugh , Bertha shake her head . 

 " I have not   see he for quite a long time . and do you really think this kind of plotting be in my way ? it would as soon have occur to I to try and persuade Mr. Franks to join the fire - brigade . " 

 " Bertha ! you do not   mean anything by that ? you do not   think I be a danger to he ? " 

 " no , no , no ! to tell you the truth , I have try to think just as little about it as possible , one way or the other . third person never do any good in such case , and more often than not get into horrid scrape . " 

 " fortunately , " say Rosamund , after muse a moment with her chin on her hand , " I be sure he be not   serious . it be his good - nature , his sense of honour . I think all the well of he for it . when he understand that I be in earnest , we shall just be friend again , real friend . " 

 " then you be in earnest ? " ask Bertha , her eyelid wink mirthfully . 

 Rosamund 's reply be a very grave nod , after which she gaze awhile at vacancy . 

 " but , " resume Bertha , after read her friend 's face , " you have not succeed in make he understand yet ? " 

 " perhaps not quite . yesterday morning I have a letter from he , ask I to meet he in Kensington Gardens . I go , and we have a long talk . then in the evening , by chance , I see Mr. Warburton . " 

 " have that anything to do with the matter ? " 

 " oh , no ! " reply Miss Elvan hastily . " I mention it , because , as I tell you once before , Mr. Warburton always like to talk of Norbert . " 

 " I see . and you talk of he ? " 

 " we only see each other for a few minute . the thunder - storm come on . Bertha , I never know any one so mysterious as Mr. Warburton . be not   it extraordinary that Norbert , his intimate friend , do not   know what he do ? I can not   help think he must write . one can not   associate he with anything common , mean . " 

 " perhaps his glory will burst upon we one of these day , " say Bertha . 

 " it really would not   surprise I . he have a remarkable face the kind of face that suggest depth and force . I be sure he be very proud . he could bear any extreme of poverty rather than condescend to ignoble way of earn money . " 

 " be the poor man very threadbare ? " ask Bertha . " have his coat that greenish colour which come with old age in cheap material ? " 

 " you incorrigible ! as far as I have notice , he be quite properly dress . " 

 " oh , oh ! " protest Bertha , in a shocked tone . " properly dress ! what a blow to my romantic imagination ! I think at least his coat - cuff would be wear out . and his boot ? oh , surely he be down at heel ? do say that he be down at heel , Rosamund ! " 

 " what a happy girl you be , Bertha , " say the other after a laugh . " I sometimes think I would give anything to be like you . " 

 " ah , but you do not   know you can t see into the gloomy depth , hide from every eye but my own . for instance , while here we sit , talk as if I have not   a care in the world I be all the time think that I must go to Mr. Jollyman 's the grocer 's , that be as we have not   a lump of sugar in the house . " 

 " then let I walk with you , " say Rosamund . " I ought not   to have come worry you to - day , before you have time to settle down . just let I walk with you to the grocer 's , and then I will leave you at peace . " 

 they presently go forth , and walk for some distance westward along Fulham Road . 

 " here be Mr. Jollyman 's , " say Bertha . " will you wait for I , or come in ? " 

 Rosamund follow her friend into the shop . absorb in thought , she scarcely raise her eye , until a voice from behind the counter reply to Bertha 's " good - morning " ; then , suddenly look up , she see that which hold her motionless . for a moment she gaze like a startled deer ; the next her eye fall , her face turn away ; she flee out into the street . 

 and there Bertha find she , a few yard from the shop . 

 " why do you run away ? " 

 Rosamund have a daze look . 

 " who be that behind the counter ? " she ask , under her breath . 

 " Mr. Jollyman . why ? " 

 the other walk on . Bertha keep at her side . 

 " what be the matter ? " 

 " Bertha Mr. Jollyman be Mr. Warburton . " 

 " nonsense ! " 

 " but he be ! here be the explanation here be the mystery . a grocer in an apron ! " 

 Bertha be stand still . she , too , look astonished , perplexed . 

 " be not   it a case of extraordinary likeness ? " she ask , with a grave smile . 

 " oh , dear , no ! I meet his eye he show that he know I and then his voice . a grocer in an apron ? " 

 " this be very shocking , " say Bertha , with a recovery of her natural humour . " let we walk . let we shake off the nightmare . " 

 the word apply very well to Rosamund 's condition ; her fixed eye be like those of a somnambulist . 

 " but , Bertha ! " she suddenly exclaim , in a voice of almost petulant protest . " he know you all the time oh , but perhaps he do not know your name ? " 

 " indeed he do . he be constantly send thing to the house . " 

 " how extraordinary ! do you ever hear such an astonishing thing in your life ? " 

 " you say more than once , " remark Bertha , " that Mr. Warburton be a man of mystery . " 

 " oh , but how could I have imagine ! grocer ! " 

 " in an apron ! " add the other , with awed voice . 

 " but , Bertha , do Norbert know ? he declare he have never find out what Mr. Warburton do . be that true , or not ? " 

 " ah , that be the question . if poor Mr. Franks have have this secret upon his soul ! I can hardly believe it . and yet they be such intimate friend . " 

 " he must have know it , " declare Rosamund . 

 thereupon she become mute , and only a syllable of dismay escape she now and then during the rest of the walk to the Crosses ' house . her companion , too , be absorb in thought . at the door Rosamund offer her hand . no , she would not come in ; she have work which must positively be finish this afternoon whilst daylight last . 

 out of the by - street , Rosamund turn into Fulham Road , and there find a cab to convey her home . on enter the house , she give instruction that she be at home to nobody this afternoon ; then she sit down at the table , as though to work on a drawing , but at the end of an hour her brush have not yet be dip in colour . she rise , stand in the attitude of one who know not what to do , and at length move to the window . instantly she draw back . on the opposite side of the little square stand a man , look toward her house ; and that man be Warburton . 

 from safe retirement , she watch he . he walk this way ; he walk that ; again he stand still , his eye upon the house . would he cross over ? would he venture to knock at the door ? no , he withdraw ; he disappear . 

 presently it be the hour of dusk . every few minute Rosamund reconnoitre at the window , and at length , just perceptible to she strain eye , there again stand Warburton . he come forward . stand with hand press against her side , she wait in nervous anguish for a knock at the front door ; but it do not sound . she stand motionless for a long , long time , then draw a deep , deep breath , and tremble as she let herself sink into a chair . 

 early than usual , she go up to her bedroom . in a corner of the room stand her trunk ; this she open , and from the chest of drawer she take forth article of apparel , which she begin to pack , as though for a journey . when the trunk be half full , she cease in weariness , rest for a little , and then go to bed . 

 and in the darkness there come a sound of subdue sobbing . it last for some minute cease for some minute be again audible . then silence fall upon the chamber . 

 lie awake between seven and eight next morning , Rosamund hear the postman 's knock . at once she spring out of bed , slip on her dressing - gown , and ring the bell . two letter be bring up to she ; she receive they with tremulous hand . both be address in writing , unmistakably masculine ; the one be thick , the other be thin and this she open first . 

 " Dear Miss Elvan " it be Warburton who write " I hop to see you this evening , as we have appoint . indeed , I must see you , for , as you may imagine , I have much to say . may I come to your house ? in any case , let I know place and hour , and let it be as soon as possible . reply at once , I entreat you . ever sincerely yours " 

 she lay it aside , and break the other envelope . 

 " dear , dear Rosamund " thus begin Norbert Franks " our talk this morning have leave I in a state of mind which threaten frenzy . you know I have not   too much patience . it be out of the question for I to wait a week for your answer , though I promise . I can not   wait even a couple of day . I must see you again to - morrow must , must , must . come to the same place , there be a good , dear , sweet , beautiful girl ! if you do not , I shall be in Oakley Crescent , break door open , behave insanely . come early " 

 and so on , over two sheet of the very good notepaper , with Norbert 's respectable address handsomely stamp in red at the top .   the other missive be on paper less fashionable , with the address , sadly plebeian , in mere handwriting .   have read to the end , Rosamund finish her dressing and go down to the sitting - room . breakfast be ready , but , before give her attention to it , she pen a note . it be to Warburton . briefly she inform he that she have decide to join her sister in the south of France , and that she be start on the journey this morning . her address , she add , would be " c o Mrs. Alfred Coppinger , St. Jean de Luz , Basses Pyrenees . " and therewith she remain Mr. Warburton 's sincerely . 

 " please let this be post at once , " say Rosamund when the landlady come to clear away . 

 and post it be . 




 CHAPTER 36 

 his hand upon the counter , Warburton star at the door by which first Rosamund , then Bertha Cross , have disappear . his nerve be a - tremble ; his eye be hot . of a sudden he feel himself shake with irresistible mirth ; from the diaphragm it mount to his throat , and only by a great effort do he save himself from explode in laughter . the orgasm possess he for several minute . it be follow by a sense of light - heartedness , which set he walk about , rub his hand together , and hum tune . 

 at last the burden have fall from he ; the foolish secret be blow abroad ; once more he could look the world in the face , bid it think of he what it would . 

 they be talk now the two girl , discuss their strange discovery . when he see Rosamund this evening of course he would see she , as she have promise her surprise would already have lose its poignancy ; he have but to tell the story of his disaster , of his struggle , and then to announce the come moment of rescue . no chance could have be happy than this which betray he to these two at the same time ; for Bertha Cross 's good sense would be the well possible corrective of any shock her more sensitive companion might have receive . Bertha Cross 's good sense that be how he think of she , without touch of emotion ; whilst on Rosamund his imagination dwelt with exultant fervour . he see himself as he would appear in her eye when she know all noble , heroic . what he have do be a fine thing , beyond the reach of ordinary self - regard mortal , and who more capable than Rosamund of appreciate such courage ? after all , fate be kind . in the byway of London it have work for he a structure of romance , and amid mean pursuit it exalt he to an ideal of love . 

 and as he thus dream , and smile and glory very much like an aproned Malvolio the hour go quickly by . he find himself near Albert Bridge , pace this way and that , expect at every moment the appearance of the slim figure clothe in grey . the sun set ; the blind of Rosamund 's sit - room show that there be lamplight within ; and at ten o'clock Warburton still hang about the square , hop against his reason that she might come forth . he go home , and write to she . 

 in a score of way he explain to himself her holding aloof . it be vexation at his not have confide in she ; it be a desire to reflect before see he again ; it be and so on , all through the night , which bring he never a wink of sleep . next morning , he do not go to the shop ; it would have be impossible to stand at the counter for ten minute , he send a note to Allchin , say that he be detain by private affair , then set off for a day - long walk in the country , to kill time until the coming of Rosamund 's reply . on his return in the afternoon , he find it await he . 

 an hour later he be in Oakley Crescent . he stand look at the house for a moment , then approach , and knock at the door . he ask if Miss Elvan be at home . 

 " she be go away , " be the reply of the landlady , who speak distantly , her face a respectable blank . 

 " leave for good ? " 

 " yes , sir , " answer the woman , her eye fall . 

 " you do not   know where she have go to ? " 

 " it be somewhere abroad , sir in France , I think . she have a sister there . " 

 this be at five o'clock or so . of what happen during the next four hour , will have never a very distinct recollection . beyond doubt , he call at the shop , and speak with Allchin ; beyond doubt , also , he go to his lodging and pack a travel bag . which of his movement be perform in cab , which on foot , he could scarce have decide , have he reflect on the matter during the night that follow . that night be pass in the train , on a steamboat , then again on the railway and before sunrise he be in Paris . 

 at the railway refreshment - room , he have breakfast , eat with some appetite ; then he drive to the terminus of another line . the street of Paris , dim vista under a rosy dawn , have no reality for his eye ; the figure flit here and there , the voice speak a foreign tongue , make part of a phantasm in which he himself move no less fantastically . he be in Paris ; yet how could that be ? he would wake up , and find himself at his lodging , and get up to go to business in Fulham Road ; but the dream bear he on . now he have take another ticket . his bag be be register for St. Jean de Luz . a long journey lie before he . he yawn violently , half remembering that he have pass two night without sleep . then he find himself seat in a corner of the railway carriage , an unknown landscape slip away before his eye . 

 now for the first time do he seem to be really aware of what he be do . Rosamund have take flight to the Pyrenees , and he be in hot pursuit . he grow exhilarate in the thought of his virile energy . if the glimpse of he aprone and behind a counter have be too great a shock for Rosamund 's romantic nature , this vigorous action would more than redeem his manhood in her sight . " yes , I be a grocer ; I have live for a couple of year by sell tea and sugar not to speak of treacle ; but none the less I be the man you draw on to love you . Grocer though I be , I come to claim you ! " thus would he speak and how could the reply be doubtful ? in such a situation , all depend on the man 's strength and passionate resolve . Rosamund should be his ; he swear it in his heart . she should take he as he be , grocer 's shop and all ; not until her troth be pledge would he make known to she the prospect of well thing . the emotion of the primitive lover have tell upon he . she think to escape he , by flight across Europe ? but what if the flight be mean as a test of his worthiness ? he seize upon the idea , and rejoice in it . Rosamund might well have conceive this method of justify both he and herself . " if he love I as I would be love , let he dare to follow ! " 

 to - morrow morning he would stand before she , grocerdom a thousand mile away . they would walk together , as when they be among the Alps . why , even then , have his heart prompt , have honour permit , he could have win she . he believe now , what at the time he have refuse to admit , that Franks ' moment of jealous anger be not without its justification . again they would meet among the mountain , and the shop in Fulham Road would be see as at the wrong end of a telescope its due proportion . they would return together to England , and at once be marry . as for the grocery business 

 Reason lose itself amid ardour of the natural man . 

 he pay little heed to the country through which he be pass . he fling himself on to the dark platform , and totter drunkenly in search of the exit . billet ? why , yes , he have a billet somewhere . hotel ? yes , yes , the hotel , no matter which . it take some minute before his brain could grasp the idea that his luggage cheque be want ; he have forget that he have any luggage at all . ultimately , he be thrust into some sort of a vehicle , which set he down at the hotel door . food ? Good Heavens , no ; but something to drink , and a bed to tumble into quick . 

 he stand in a bedroom , hold in his hand a glass of he know not what beverage . before he be a waiter , to whom very much to his own surprise he discourse fluently in French , or something mean for that tongue . that it be more than sixty hour since he have sleep ; that he have start from London at a moment 's notice ; that the Channel have be very rough for the time of the year ; that he have never be in this part of France before , and hop to see a good deal of the Pyrenees , perhaps to have a run into Spain ; that first of all he want to find the abode of an english lady name Mrs. Cap Cop he could not   think of the name , but he have write it down in his pocket - book . 

 the door close ; the waiter be go ; but Warburton still talk French . 

 " Oui , oui en effet tre fatigue , horriblement fatiguee ! Trois nuit san sommeil trois nuit trois ! " 

 his clothe fall in a heap on the floor ; his body fall in another direction . he be dead asleep . 




 CHAPTER 37 

 amid struggle and gloom the scene change . he be in Kew Gardens , rush hither and thither , in search of some one . the sun still beat upon he , and he stream at every pore . not only do he seek in vain , but he could not remember who it be that he seek . this way and that , along the broad and narrow walk , he hurry in torment , until of a sudden , at a great distance , he descry a figure seat on a bench . he bound forward . in a moment he would see the face , and would know 

 when he awake a sense of strangeness hang about he , and , as he sit up in bed , he remember . this be the hotel at St. Jean de Luz . what could be the time ? he have no match at hand , and do not know where the bell be . look around , he perceive at length a thread of light , of daylight undoubtedly , which must come from the window . he get out of bed , cautiously cross the floor , find the window , and the mean of open it , then unlatche the shutter which have keep the room in darkness . at once a flood of sunshine pour in . look forth , he see a quiet little street of house and garden , and beyond , some mile away , a mountain peak rise against the cloudless blue . 

 his watch have run down . he ring the bell , and learn that the hour be nearly eleven . 

 " I have sleep well , " he say in his anglo - french . " I be hungry . bring I hot water . and find out , if you can , where live Mrs. Coppinger . I could not   remember the name last night Mrs. Coppinger . " 

 in half an hour he be downstairs . the english lady for whom he inquire live , they tell he , outside St. Jean de Luz , but not much more than a mile away . good , he would go there after lunch . and until that meal be ready , he stroll out to have a look at the sea . five minute ' walk bring he on to the shore of a rounded bay , shelter by breakwater against Atlantic storm above a sandy beach lie the little town , with grassy slope fall softly to the tide on either hand . 

 at noon , he eat and drink heroically , then , have have his way point out to he , set forth on the quest . he pass through the length of the town , cross the little river Nivelle , where he pause for a moment on the bridge , to gaze at the panorama of mountain , all but to the summit clothe in soft verdure , and presently turn into an inland road , which lead he between pasture and field of maize , gently upwards . on a height before he stand a house , which he believe to be that he seek ; he have write down its unrememberable basque name , and inquiry of a peasant assure he that he be not mistaken . have his goal in view , he stand to reflect . could he march up to the front door , and ask boldly for Miss Elvan ? but the doubt suddenly strike he what if Rosamund be not live here ? at Mrs. Coppinger 's her sister be governess ; she have bid he address letter there , but that might be merely for convenience ; perhaps she be not Mrs. Coppinger 's guest at all , but have an abode somewhere in the town . in that case , he must see her sister who perhaps , nay , all but certainly , have never hear his name . 

 he walk on . the road become a hollow lane , with fern and heather and gorse intermingle below the thicket on the bank . another five minute would bring he to the top of the hill , to the avenue of tree by which the house be approach . and the near he come , the more awkward seem his enterprise . it might have be well to write a note to Rosamund , announce his arrival , and ask for an interview . on the other hand that be a timid proceeding ; boldly to present himself before she would be much more effective . if he could only be sure of see she , and see she alone . 

 for a couple of hour do he loiter irresolutely , ever hop that chance might help he . perhaps , as the afternoon grow cool , people might come forth from the house . his patience at length wear out , he again enter the avenue , half resolve to go up to the door . 

 all at once he hear voice the voice of child , and toward he come two little girl , follow by a young lady . they draw near . stand his ground , with muscle tense , Warburton glance at the young lady 's face , and could not doubt that this be Rosamund 's sister ; the feature be much less notable than Rosamund 's , but their gentle prettiness make claim of kindre with she . forthwith he doff his hat , and advance respectfully . 

 " I think I be speak to Miss Elvan ? " 

 a nervous smile , a timidly surprised affirmative , put he a little more at his ease . 

 " my name be Warburton , " he pursue , with the half humorous air of one who take a liberty which he feel sure will be pardon . " I have the pleasure of know your relative , the pomfret , and " 

 " oh , yes , my sister have often speak of you , " say winifred quickly . then , as if afraid that she have commit an indiscretion , she cast down her eye and look embarrassed . 

 " your sister be here , I think , " fall from Warburton , as he throw a glance at the two little girl , who have draw apart . 

 " here ? oh , no . not long ago she think of come , but " 

 will stand confound . all manner of conjecture flash through his mind . Rosamund must have break her journey somewhere . that she have not leave England at all seem impossible . 

 " I be mistaken , " he force himself to remark carelessly . then , with a friendly smile , " forgive I for intrude myself . I come up here for the view " 

 " yes , be not   it beautiful ! " exclaim Winifred , evidently glad of this diversion from personal topic . and they talk of the landscape , until Warburton feel that he must take his leave . he mention where he be stay , say that he hop to spend a week or so at St. Jean de Luz and so get away , with an uneasy feeling that his behaviour have not exactly be such as to recommend he to the timid young lady . 

 Rosamund have break her journey somewhere , that be evident ; perhaps in Paris , where he know she have friend . if she do not arrive this evening , or to - morrow , her sister would at all event hear that she be come . but how be he to be inform of her arrival ? how could he keep an espial on the house ? his situation be wretchedly unlike that he have picture to himself ; instead of the romantic lover , carry all before he by the energy of passion , he have to play a plotting , almost sneak part , in constant fear of be take for a presumptuous interloper . lucky that Rosamund have speak of he to her sister . well , he must wait ; though wait be the bad torture for a man in his mood . 

 he idle through the day on the seashore . next morning he bath , and have a long walk , come back by way of the Coppingers ' house , but pass quickly , and see no one . when he return to the hotel , he be tell that a gentleman have call to see he , and have leave his card " Mr. Alfred Coppinger . " Ho , ho ! Winifred Elvan have mention their meeting , and the people wish to be friendly . excellent ! this afternoon he would present himself . splendid . Ml his difficulty be at an end . he see himself once more in a gallant attitude . 

 the weather be very hot unusually hot , say people at the hotel . as he climb the hill between three and four o'clock , the sun 's ardour remind he of old time in the tropic . he pass along the shady avenue , and the house door be open to he by a basque maid - servant , who lead he to the drawing - room . here , in a dim light which filter through the interstice of shutter , sit the lady of the house alone . 

 " be it Mr. Warburton ? " she ask , rise feebly , and speak in a thin , fatigued , but kindly voice . " so kind of you to come . my husband will be delighted to see you . how do you get up here on such a day ? oh , the terrible heat ! " 

 in a minute or two the door open to admit Mr. Coppinger , and the visitor , his eye now accustomed to the gloom , see a ruddy , vigorous , middle - aged man , dress in flannel , and wear the white shoe call espadrille . 

 " hop you would come , " he cry , shake hand cordially . " why do not   you look in yesterday ? Miss Elvan ought to have tell you that it do I good to see an Englishman . here for a holiday ? blaze hot , but it will not   last long . south wind . my wife can not   stand it . she be here because of the doctor , but it be all humbug ; there be lot of place in England would suit she just as well , and perhaps well . let us have some tea , Alice , there be a good girl . Mr. Warburton look thirsty , and I can manage a dozen cup or so . where be winifred ? let she bring in the kit . they be get shy ; it will do they good to see a stranger . " 

 will stay for a couple of hour , amuse with Mr. Coppinger 's talk , and please with the gentle society of the lady . the invitation to breakfast be seriously repeat , he rejoice to accept it . see how Providence favour the daring . when Rosamund arrive , she would find he establish as a friend of the Coppingers . he go his way exultingly . 

 but neither on the morrow , nor the day after , do Winifred receive any news from her sister . will of course keep to himself the event of his last two day in London ; he do not venture to hint at any knowledge of Rosamund 's movement . a suspicion be grow in his mind that she might not have leave England ; in which case , be ever man 's plight more ridiculous than his ? it would mean that Rosamund have deliberately mislead he ; but could he think she capable of that ? if it be so , and if her feeling toward he have undergo so abruptly violent a change simply because of the discovery she have make why , then Rosamund be not Rosamund at all , and he might write himself down a most egregious ass . 

 have not an inkling of some such thing whisper softly to he before now ? have there not be moment , during the last fortnight , when he stand , as it be , face to face with himself , and feel oddly abash by a look in his own eye ? 

 before leave his lodging he have write on a piece of paper " Poste Restante , St. Jean de Luz , France , " and have give it to Mrs. Wick , with the charge to forward immediately any letter or telegram that might arrive for he . but his inquiry at the post - office be vain . to be sure , week have often go by without bring he a letter ; there be nothing strange in this silence yet it vex and disquiet he . on the fourth day of his waiting , the weather suddenly break , rain fall in torrent , and continue for forty - eight hour . have not the Coppingers ' house be open to he he must have spend a wretched time . return to the hotel on the second evening of deluge , he look in at the post - office , and this time a letter be put into his hand . he open and read it at once . 

 " dear old boy , why the deuce have you go away to the end of the earth without let I know ? I call at your place this evening , and be amazed at the sight of the address which your evil - eyed woman show I look as if she fear I should steal it . I want particularly to see you . how long be you go to stay down yonder ? Rosamund and I start for our honeymoon on Thursday next , and we shall probably be away for a couple of month , in Tyrol . do this astonish you ? it ought not   to , see that you have   do your good to bring it about . yes , Rosamund and I be go to be marry , with the least possible delay . I will tell you all the detail some day though there be very little to tell that you do not   know . congratulate I on have come to my sens . how precious near I be to make a tremendous fool of myself . it be you I have to thank , old man . of course , as you see , I should never have care for any one but Rosamund , and it be pretty sure that she would never have be happy with any one but I . I want you to be a witness at our wedding , and now you have   bolt , confound you ! write to my London address , and it will be forward . " 

 will thrust the letter into his pocket , go out into the street , and walk to the hotel through heavy rain , without think to open his umbrella . 

 next morning , the sky be clear again , the sunny air fresh as that of spring . will rise early than usual , and set out on an excursion . he take train to Hendaye , the little frontier town , at the mouth of the Bidassoa , cross the river in a boat , step on to spanish soil , and climb the hill on which stand Fuenterabbia . 

 later he pass again to the french shore , and lunch at the hotel . then he take a carriage , and drive up the gorge of Bidassoa , enjoy the wild mountain scenery as much as he have enjoy anything in his life . the road bridge the river ; it bring he into Spain once more , and on as far as to the spanish village of Vera , where he linger in the mellowing afternoon . all round he be green slope of the Pyrenees , green with pasture and with turf , with bracken , with wood of oak . there come by a yoke of white oxen , their head cover with the wonte sheepskin , and on their forehead the fringe of red wool tassel ; he touch a warm flank with his palm , and look into the mild , lustrous eye of the beast that pass near he . 

 " Vera , Vera , " he repeat to himself , with pleasure in the name . he should remember Vera when he be back again behind the counter in Fulham Road . he have never think to see the Pyrenees , never dream of look at Spain . it be a good holiday . 

 " Vera , Vera , " he again murmur . how come the place to be so call ? the word seem to mean true . he muse upon it . 

 he din at the village inn , then drive at dusk back to Hendaye , down the great gorge ; crag and precipice , woode ravine and barren height gloome magnificently under a sky warm with afterglow ; beside he the torrent leapt and roar , and foam into whiteness . 

 and from Hendaye the train bring he back to St. Jean de Luz . before go to bed , he pen a note to Mr. Coppinger , say that he be unexpectedly oblige to leave for England , at an early hour next day , and regret that he could not come to say good - bye . he add a postscript . " Miss Elvan will , of course , know of her sister 's marriage to Norbert Franks . I hear it take place to - morrow . very good news . " 

 this write , he smoke a meditative pipe , and go upstairs hum a tune . 




 CHAPTER 38 

 touch the shore of England , will stamp like a man who return from exile . it be a blustering afternoon , more like November than August ; livid cloud pelt he with rain , and the wind chill his face ; but this suit very well with the mood which possess he . he have be away on a holiday a more expensive holiday than he ought to have allow himself , and be back full of vigour . instead of make he qualmish , the green roarer of the Channel have brace his nerve , and put he in good heart ; the boat could not roll and pitch half enough for his spirit . a holiday a run to the Pyrenees and back ; who durst say that it have be anything else ? the only person who could see the matter in another light be little likely to disclose her thought . 

 at Dover he telegraph to Godfrey Sherwood : " come and see I to - night . " true , he have be absent only a week , but the time seem to he so long that he feel it must have teem with event . in the railway carriage he glow with good fellowship toward the other passenger ; the rain - beat hop - land rejoice his eye , and the first house of London be so many friendly face greet his return . from the station he drive to his shop . Allchin , engage in serve a lady , forget himself at the sight of Mr. Jollyman , and give a shout of welcome . all be right , nothing troublesome have happen ; trade well than usual at this time of year . 

 " he will have to put up the shutter , " say Allchin confidentially , with a nod in the direction of the rival grocer . " his wife 's be make a row in the shop again disgraceful scene talk of the ' ole neighbourhood . she begin throw thing at customer , and somebody as be badly hit on the jaw with a tin of sardine complain to the police . we shall be rid of he very soon , you will see , sir . " 

 this give Warburton small satisfaction , but he keep his human thought to himself , and presently go home . here his landlady meet he with the announcement that only a few hour ago she have forward a letter deliver by the post this morning . this be vexatious ; several day must elapse before he could have the letter back again from St. Jean de Luz . sure that Mrs. Wick must have closely scrutinise the envelope , he question she as to handwriting and postmark , but the woman declare that she have give not a glance to these thing , which be not her business . could not   she even remember whether the writing look masculine or feminine ? no ; she have not the slight idea ; it be not her business to " pry " and Mrs. Wick close her bloodless lip with virtuous severity . 

 he have tea and walk back again to the shop , w ere as he girt himself with his apron , he chuckle contentedly . 

 " have Mrs. Cross look in ? " he inquire . 

 " yes , sir , " answer his henchman , ' she be here day before yes'day , and ask where you be . I say you be travel for your health in foreign part . " 

 " and what do she say to that ? " 

 " she say ' oh ' that be all , sir . it be a very small order she give . I can not   make out how she manage to use so little sugar in her ' ouse . it be certain the servant do not   have her tea too sweet what do you think , sir ? " 

 Warburton speak of something else . 

 at nine o'clock he sit at home await his visitor . the expected knock soon sound and Sherwood be show into the room . will grasp his hand , call out : " what news ? 

 " News ? " echo Godfrey , in a voice of no good oman . " have not   you hear ? " 

 " heard what ? " 

 " but your telegram ? be not   that what it mean ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " cry Will . " speak , man ! I have   be abroad for a week . I know nothing ; I telegraph because I want to see you , that be all . " 

 " confound it ! I hop you know the bad . strangwyn be dead . " 

 " he be dead ? well , be not   that what we have   be wait for ? " 

 " not the old man , " groan Sherwood , " not the old man . it be Ted Strangwyn that be dead . never be such an extraordinary case of bad luck . and his death the most astounding you ever hear of . he be down in Yorkshire for the grouse . the dogcart come round in the morning , and as he stand beside it , stow away a gun or something , the horse make a movement forward , and the wheel go over his toe . he think nothing of it . the next day he be ill ; it turn to tetanus ; and in a few hour he die . do you ever in your life hear anything like that ? " 

 Warburton have listen gravely . towards the end , his feature begin to twitch , and , a moment after Godfrey have cease , a spasm of laughter overcome he . 

 " I can not   help it , Sherwood , " he gasp . " it be brutal , I know , but I can not   help it . " 

 " my dear boy , " exclaim the other , with a countenance of relief , " I be delighted you can laugh . talk about the irony of fate eh ? I could not   believe my eye when I see the paragraph in the paper yesterday . but , you know , " he add earnestly , " I do not   absolutely give up hope . accord to the late news , it almost look as if old Strangwyn might recover ; and , if he do , I shall certainly try to get this money out of he . if he have any sense of honour " 

 will again laugh , but not so spontaneously . 

 " my boy , " he say , " it be all up , and you know it . you will never see a penny of your ten thousand pound . " 

 " oh , but I can not   help hop " 

 " hope as much as you like . how go the other affair ? " 

 " why , there , too , odd thing have be happen . Milligan have just get engage , and , to tell you the truth , to a girl I should not   have think he would ever have look twice at . it be a Miss Parker , the daughter of a City man . pretty enough if you like , but as far as I can see , no more brain than a teapot , and I can not   for the life of I understand how a man like Milligan . but of course , it make no difference ; our work go on . we have an enormous correspondence . " 

 " do Miss Parker interest herself in it ? " ask Will . 

 " oh , yes , in a way , you know ; as far as she can . she have turn vegetarian , of course . to tell you the truth , Warburton , it vex I a good deal . I do not   think Milligan could do such a silly thing . I hope he will get marry quickly . just at present , the fact be , he be not   quite himself . " 

 again Warburton be subdue by laughter . 

 " well , I think thing might have be happen whilst I be away , " he say , " and I be not   mistaken . luckily , I have come back with a renew gusto for the shop . by the bye , I be go to keep that secret no long . I be a grocer , and probably shall be a grocer all my life , and the soon people know it the well . I be sick of hide away . tell Milligan the story ; it will amuse Miss Parker , and , talk of Miss Parker , do you know that Norbert Franks be marry ? his old love Miss Elvan . of course it be the sensible thing to do . they be off to Tyrol . as soon as I have their address , I shall write and tell he all about Jollyman 's . " 

 " of course , if you really feel you must , " say Godfrey , with reluctance . " but remember that I still hope to recover the money . Old Strangwyn have the reputation of be an honourable man " 

 " like Brutus , " break in Warburton , cheerfully . " let we hope . of course we will hope . Hope spring eternal " 

 day go by , and at length the desire letter come back from St. Jean de Luz . see at a glance that it be from his sister , will reproach himself for have let more than a month elapse without write to St. Neots . of his recent " holiday " he have no intention of say a word . Jane write a long letter than usual , and its tenor be disquieting . their mother have not be at all well lately ; Jane notice that she be become very weak . " you know how she dread to give trouble , and can not bear to have any one worry about she . she have see Dr. Edge twice in the last few day , but not in my presence , and I feel sure that she have forbid he to tell I the truth about she . I dare not let she guess how anxious I be , and have to go on in my usual way , just do what I can for her comfort . if you would come over for a day , I should feel very glad . not have see mother for some time , you would be well able than I to judge how she look . " after read this Will 's self - reproach be double . at once he set off for St. Neots . 

 on arrive at the Haws , he find Jane gardening , and speak with she before he go in to see his mother . 

 he have be away from home , he say , and her letter have stray in pursuit of he . 

 " I wonder , " say Jane , her honest eye search his countenance . " and it be so long since you send a word ; I should have write again this afternoon . " 

 " I have   be abominably neglectful , " he reply , " and time go so quickly . " 

 " there be something strange in your look , " say the girl . " what be it , I wonder ? you have   alter in some way I do not   know how . " 

 " think so ? but never mind I ; tell I about mother . " 

 they stand among the garden scent , amid the flower , which tell of parting summer , and converse with voice soften by tender solicitude . Jane be above all anxious that her brother 's visit should seem spontaneous , and will promise not to hint at the news she have send he . they enter the house together . Mrs. Warburton , after her usual morning occupation , have lie down on the couch in the parlour , and fall asleep ; as soon as he behold her face , will understand his sister 's fear , white , motionless , beautiful in its absolute calm , the visage might have be that of the dead ; after gaze for a moment , both , on the same impulse , put forth a hand to touch the unconscious form . the eyelid rise a look of confused trouble darken the feature then the lip relax in a happy smile . 

 " will and you find I asleep ? I appeal to Jane ; she will tell you it be only an accident . do you ever before see I asleep like this , Jane ? " 

 at once she rise , and move about , and strove to be herself ; but the effort it cost she be too obvious ; presently she have to sit down , with tremulous limb , and will notice that her forehead be moist . 

 not till evening do he find it possible to lead the conversation to the subject of her health . Jane have purposely leave they alone . her son have say that he fear she be not so well as usual , Mrs. Warburton quietly admit that she have recently consult her doctor . 

 " I be not young , Will , you know . sixty - five next birthday . " 

 " but you do not   call that old ! " exclaim her son . 

 " yes , it be old for one of my family , dear , none of we , that I know of , live to be much more than sixty , and most die long before . do not   let we wear melancholy face , " she add , with that win smile which have ever be the blessing of all about she . " you and I , dear , be too sensible , I hope , to complain or be frightened because life must have an end . when my time come , I trust to my child not to make I unhappy by forget what I have always try to teach they . I should like to think and I know that you would be sorry to lose I ; but to see you miserable on my account , or to think you miserable after I have go I could not   bear that . " 

 will be silent , deeply impressed by the calm voice , the noble thought . he have always feel no less respect than love for his mother , especially during the latter year , when experience of life well enable he to understand her rare quality ; but a deep reverence take possession of he whilst she be speak . her word not only extend his knowledge of her character ; they help he to an understanding of himself , to a clear view of life , and its possibility . 

 " I want to speak to you of Jane , " continue Mrs. Warburton , with a look of pleasant reflection . " you know she go to see her friend , Miss Winter , a few week ago . have she tell you anything about it ? " 

 " nothing at all . " 

 " well , do you know that Miss Winter have take up flower - grow as a business , and it look as if she would be very successful . she be rent more land , to make garden of , and have two girl with she , as apprentice . I think that be what Jane will turn to some day . of course she will not   be really oblige to work for her living , but , when she be alone , I be certain she will not   be content to live just as she do now she be far too active ; but for I , I daresay she would go and join Miss Winter at once . " 

 " I do not   much care for that idea of girl go out to work when they could live quietly at home , " say will . 

 " I use to have the same feeling , " answer his mother , " but Jane and I have often talk about it , and I see there be something to be say for the other view . at all event , I want to prevent you from wonder what be to become of she when she be leave alone . to be sure , " she add , with a bright smile , " Jane may marry . I hope she will . but I know she will not   easily be persuade to give up her independence . Jane be a very independent little person . " 

 " if she have that in mind , " say will , " why should not   you both go and live over there , in Suffolk ? you could find a house , no doubt " 

 Mrs. Warburton gently shake her head . 

 " I do not   think I could leave the Haws . and for the short time " 

 " short time ? but you be not seriously ill , mother . " 

 " if I get strong , " say Mrs. Warburton , without raise her eye , " we must manage to send Jane into Suffolk . I could get along very well alone . but there we have talk enough for this evening , Will . can you stay over tomorrow ? do , if you could manage it . I be glad to have you near I . " 

 when they part for the night , will ask his sister to meet he in the garden before breakfast , and Jane nod assent . 




 CHAPTER 39 

 the garden be drench in dew , and when about seven o'clock , the first sunbeam pierce the grey mantle of the east , every leaf flash back the yellow light . will be walk there alone , his eye turn now and then to the white window of his mother 's room . 

 Jane come forth with her rosy morning face , her expression graver than of will not . 

 " you be uneasy about mother , " be her first word . " so be I , very . I feel convinced Dr. Edge have give she some serious warning ; I see the change in she after his last visit . " 

 " I shall go and see he , " say will . 

 they talk of their anxiety , then Warburton propose that they should walk a little way along the road , for the air be cool . 

 " I have   something I want to tell you , " he begin , when they have set forth . " it be a little startling rather ludicrous , too . what should you say if some one come and tell you he have see I serve behind a grocer 's counter in London ? " 

 " what do you mean , will ? " 

 " well , I want to know how it would strike you . should you be horrify ? " 

 " no ; but astonish . " 

 " very well . the fact of the matter be then , " say Warburton , with an uneasy smile , " that for a couple of year I have be do that . it come about in this way " 

 he relate Godfrey Sherwood 's reckless proceeding , and the circumstance which have decide he to take a shop . no exclamation escape the listener ; she walk with eye downcast , and , when her brother cease , look at he very gently , affectionately . 

 " it be brave of you , will , " she say . 

 " well , I see no other way of make good the loss ; but now I be sick of live a double life that have really be the bad part of it , all along . what I want to ask you , be would it be wise or not to tell mother ? would it worry and distress she ? as for the money , you see there be nothing to worry about ; the shop will yield a sufficient income , though not as much as we hop from Applegarth 's ; but of course I shall have to go on behind the counter . " 

 he break off , laugh , and Jane smile , though with a line of trouble on her brow . 

 " that will not   do , " she say , with quiet decision . 

 " oh , I be get use to it . " 

 " no , no , Will , it will not   do . we must find a well way . I see no harm in shopkeeping , if one have be bring up to it ; but you have not , and it be not   suitable for you . about mother yes , I think we would well tell she . she will not   worry on account of the money ; that be not   her nature , and it be very much well that there should be confidence between we all . " 

 " I have not   enjoy tell lie , " say will , " I assure you . " 

 " that I be sure you have not , poor boy ! but Mr. Sherwood ? have not   he make any effort to help you . surely he " 

 " poor old Godfrey ! " break in her brother , laugh . " it be a joke to remember that I use to think he a splendid man of business , far more practical than i. why , there be no dreamy muddlehead living . " 

 he tell the story of Strangwyn and of Milligan with such exuberance of humour that Jane could not but join in his merriment . 

 " no , no ; it be no good look in that direction . the money have go , there be no help for it . but you can depend on Jollyman 's . of course the affair would have be much more difficult without Allchin . oh , you must see Allchin some day ! " 

 " and absolutely no one have discover the secret ? " ask Jane . 

 will hesitate , then . 

 " yes , one person . you remember the name of Miss Elvan ? a fortnight ago imagine the scene she walk into the shop with a friend of her , a Miss Cross , who have be one of my customer from the first . as soon as she catch sight of I she turn and run ; yes , run out into the street in indignation and horror . of course she must have tell her friend , and whether Miss Cross will ever come to the shop again , I do not   know . I never mention that name to you , do I ? the Crosses be friend of Norbert Franks . and , by the bye , I hear that Franks be married to Miss Elvan a few day ago just after her awful discovery . no doubt she tell he , and perhaps he will drop my acquaintance . " 

 " you do not   mean that ? " 

 " well , not quite ; but it would not   surprise I if his wife tell he that really one must not   be too intimate with grocer . in future , I be go to tell everybody ; there shall be no more hiding and sneak . that be what debase a man ; not the selling of sugar and tea . a short time ago , I have get into a vile state of mind ; I feel like poison myself . and I be convinced it be merely the burden of lie weigh upon I . yes , yes , you be quite right ; of course , mother must be tell . shall I leave it to you , Jane ? I think you could break it well . " 

 after breakfast , will walk into St. Neots , to have a private conversation with Dr. Edge , and whilst he be away Jane tell her mother the story of the lose money . at the end of an hour 's talk , she go out into the garden , where presently she be find by her brother , who have walk back at his utmost pace , and wear a perturbed countenance . 

 " you have not   tell yet ? " be his first word , utter in a breathless undertone . 

 " why ? " ask Jane startle . 

 " I be afraid of the result . Edge say that every sort of agitation must be avoid . " 

 " I have tell she , " say Jane , with quiet voice , but anxious look . " she be grieve on your account , but it give she no shock . again and again she say how glad she be you have let we know the truth . " 

 " so far then , good . " 

 " but Dr. Edge what do he tell you ? " 

 " he say he have want to see I , and thought of writing . yes , he speak seriously . " 

 they talk for a little , then will go into the house alone , and find his mother as she sit in her wonte place , the usual needlework on her lap . as he cross the room , she keep her eye upon he in a gaze of the gentle reproach , mingle with a smile , which tell the origin of Will be wholesome humour . 

 " and you could not   trust I to take my share of the trouble ? " 

 " I know only too well , " reply her son , " that your own share would not   content you . " 

 " greedy mother ! perhaps you be right , Will . I suppose I should have interfere , and make everything bad for you ; but you need not   have wait quite so long before tell I . the one thing that I can not   understand be Mr. Sherwood 's behaviour . you have always give I such a different idea of he . really , I do not   think he ought to have be let off so easily . " 

 " oh , poor old Godfrey ! what could he do ? he be sorry as man could be , and he give I all the cash he could scrape together " 

 " I be glad he be not   a friend of mine , " say Mrs. Warburton . " in all my life , I have never quarrel with a friend , but I be afraid I must have fall out with Mr. Sherwood . think of the woman who entrust their all to man of that kind , and have no strong son to save they from the consequence . " 

 after the mid - day meal all sit together for an hour or two in the garden . by an evening train , will return to London . Jane have promise to let he have frequent news , and during the ensue week she write twice with very favourable account of their mother 's condition . a month go by without any disquieting report , then come a letter in Mrs. Warburton 's own hand . 

 " my dear will , " she write , " I can not   keep secret as long as you . this be to inform you that a week ago I let the Haws , on annual tenancy , to a friend of Mr. Turnbull 's , who be look for such a house . the day after to - morrow we begin our removal to a home which Jane have take near to Miss Winter 's in Suffolk . that she be able to find just what we want at a moment 's notice encourage I in think that Providence be on our side , or , as your dear father use to say , that the oracle have speak . in a week 's time I hope to send news that we be settle . you be forbid to come here before our departure , but will be invite to the new home as soon as possible . the address be " etc . 

 the same post bring a letter from Jane . 

 " do not   be alarm by the news , " she write . " Mother have be so firm in this resolve since the day of your leave we , that I could only obey she . wonderful and delightful to tell , she seem well in health . I dare not make too much of this , after what Dr. Edge say , but for the present she be certainly strong . as you suppose , I be go to work with Miss Winter . come and see we when we be settle , and you shall hear all our plan . everything have be do so quickly , that I live in a sort of a dream . do not   worry , and of course do not   on any account come . " 

 these letter arrive in the evening , and , after read they , Warburton be so moved that he have to go out and walk under the starry sky , in quiet street . of course the motive on which his mother have act be a desire to free he as soon as possible from the slavery of the shop ; but that slavery have now grow so supportable , that he grieve over the sacrifice make for his sake . after all , would he not have do well to live on with his secret ? and yet and yet 




 CHAPTER 40 

 with curiosity which have in it a touch of amusement , Will be wait to hear from Norbert Franks . he wait for nearly a month , and be begin to feel rather hurt at his friend 's neglect , perhaps a little uneasy on another score , when there arrive an italian postcard , stamp Venice . " we have be tempt as far as this , " run the hurried scrawl . " must be home in ten day . shall be delighted to see you again . " Warburton pucker his brow and wonder whether a previous letter or card have fail to reach he . but probably not . 

 at the end of September , Franks write from his London address , briefly but cordially , with an invitation to luncheon on the next day , which be Sunday . and Warburton go . 

 he be nervous as he knock at the door ; he be rather more nervous as he walk into the studio . Norbert advance to he with a shout of welcome , and from a chair in the background rise Mrs. Franks . perceptibly change , both of they . the artist 's look be not quite so ingenuous as formerly ; his speech , resolute in friendliness , have not quite the familiar note . Rosamund , already more mature of aspect , smile somewhat too persistently , seem rather too bent on show herself unembarrassed . they plunge into talk of Tyrol , of the Dolomites , of Venice , and , so talk , pass into the dining - room . 

 " Queer little house this , be not   it ? " say Mrs. Franks as she sit down to table . " everything be sacrifice to the studio ; there be no room to turn anywhere else . we must look at once for more comfortable quarter . " 

 " it be only mean for a man live alone , " say the artist , with a laugh . Franks laugh frequently , whether what he say be amusing or not . " yes , we must find something roomy . 

 " a score of sitter wait for you , I suppose ? " say Warburton . 

 " oh , several . one of they such an awful phiz that I be afraid of she . if I make her presentable , it will be my great feat yet . but the labourer be worthy of his hire , you know , and this bit of beauty - making will have its price . " 

 " you know how to interpret that , Mr. Warburton , " say Rosamund , with a discreetly confidential smile . " Norbert ask very much less than any other portrait painter of his reputation would . " 

 " he will grow out of that bad habit , " will reply . his note be one of joviality , almost of bluffness . 

 " I be not sure that I wish he to , " say the painter 's wife , her eye stray as if in a sudden dreaminess . " it be a distinction nowadays not to care for money . Norbert joke about make an ugly woman beautiful , " she go on earnestly , " but what he will really do be to discover the very good aspect of the face , and so make something much more than an ordinary likeness . " 

 Franks fidget , his head bend over his plate . 

 " that be the work of the great artist , " exclaim Warburton , boldly flattering . 

 " Humbug ! " growl Franks , but at once he laugh and glance nervously at his wife . 

 though this be Rosamund 's only direct utterance on the subject , Warburton discover from the course of the conversation , that she wish to be know as her husband 's fervent admirer , that she take he with the utmost seriousness , and be resolve that everybody else should do so . the " great artist " phrase give her genuine pleasure ; she reward Will with the kind look of her beautiful eye , and from that moment appear to experience a relief , so that her talk flow more naturally . Luncheon over , they return to the studio , where the man light their pipe , while Rosamund , at her husband 's entreaty , exhibit the sketch she have bring home . 

 " why do not   you let I hear from you ? " ask Warburton . " I get nothing but that flimsy postcard from Venice . " 

 " why , I be always mean to write , " answer the artist . " I know it be too bad . but time go so quickly " 

 " with you , no doubt . but if you stand behind a counter all day " 

 will see the listener exchange a startled glance , follow by an artificial smile . there be an instant 's dead silence . 

 " behind a counter ? " fall from Norbert , as if he fail to understand . 

 " the counter ; my counter ! " shout will blusterously . " you know very well what I mean . your wife have tell you all about it . " 

 Rosamund flush , and could not raise her eye . 

 " we do not   know , " say Franks , with his nervous little laugh , " whether you care to talk about it " 

 " I will talk about it with any one you like . so you do know ? that be all right . I still owe my apology to Mrs. Franks for have give she such a shock . the disclosure be really too sudden . " 

 " it be I who should beg you to forgive I , Mr. Warburton , " reply Rosamund , in her sweetest accent . " I behave in a very silly way . but my friend Bertha Cross treat I as I deserve . she declare that she be ashamed of I . but do not , pray do not , think I bad than I be . I run away really because I feel I have surprise a secret . I be embarrassed , I lose my head . I be sure you do not   think I capable of really mean feeling ? " 

 " but , old man , " put in the artist , in a half pain voice , " what the deuce do it all mean ? tell we the whole story , do . " 

 will tell it , jestingly , effectively . 

 " I be quite sure , " sound , at the close , in Rosamund 's voice of tender sympathy , " that you have some noble motive . I say so at once to Bertha . " 

 " I suppose , " say will , " Miss Cross will never dare to enter the shop again ? " 

 " she do not   come ! " 

 " never since , " he answer laughingly . " her mother have be once or twice , and seem to regard I with a very suspicious eye . Mrs. Cross be tell no doubt ? " 

 " that I really can not   say , " reply Rosamund , avert her eye . " but do not   it do one good to hear such a story , Norbert ? " she add impulsively . 

 " yes , that be pluck , " reply her husband , with the old spontaneity , in his eye the old honest look which hitherto have somehow be a little obscure . " I know very well that I could not   have do it . " Warburton have not look at Rosamund since her explanation and apology . he be afraid of meet her eye ; afraid as a generous man who shrink from inflict humiliation . for be it conceivable that Rosamund could support his gaze without feel humiliate ? remember what have precede that discovery at the shop ; bear in mind what have follow upon it ; he reflect with astonishment on the term of her self - reproach . it sound so genuine ; to the ear of her husband it must have be pure , womanliest sincerity . as though she could read his thought , Rosamund address he again in the most naturally playful tone . 

 " and you have be in the basque country since we see you . I be so glad you really take your holiday there at last ; you often use to speak of do so . and you meet my sister Winifred write to I all about it . the Coppingers be delighted to see you . do not   you think they nice people ? do poor Mrs. Coppinger seem any well ? " 

 in spite of himself , will encountered her look , meet the beautiful eye , feel their smile envelop he . never till now have he know the passive strength of woman , that characteristic which at time make she a force of Nature rather than an individual being . amazed , abash , he let his head fall and mumble something about Mrs. Coppinger 's state of health . 

 he do not stay much long . when he take his leave , it would have seem natural if Franks have come out to walk a little way with he , but his friend bear he company only to the door . 

 " let we see you as often as possible , old man . I hope you will often come and lunch on Sunday ; nothing could please we well . " 

 Franks ' handgrip be very cordial , the look and tone be affectionate , but will say to himself that the old intimacy be at an end ; it must now give place to mere acquaintanceship . he suspect that Franks be afraid to come out and walk with he , afraid that it might not please his wife . that Rosamund be to rule very sweetly of course , but unmistakably no one could doubt who see the two together for five minute . it would be , in all likelihood , a happy subjugation , for Norbert be of anything but a rebellious temper ; his bond would be of silk ; the reward of his docility would be such as many a self - assertive man might envy . but when Warburton try to imagine himself in such a position , a choke laugh of humourous disdain heave his chest . 

 he wander homeward in a dream . he relive those moment on the Embankment at Chelsea , when his common sense , his reason , his true emotion , be defeat by an impulse now scarcely intelligible ; he see himself shoot across Europe , like a parcel despatch by express ; and all that fury and rush meaningless as buffoonery at a pantomime ! yet this be how the vast majority of man " fall in love " if ever they do so at all . this be the prelude to marriage innumerable , marriage destine to be dull as ditchwater or sour as verjuice . in love , forsooth ! rosamund at all event know the value of that , and have save he from his own infatuation . he owe she a lifelong gratitude . 

 that evening he re - read a long letter from Jane which have reach he yesterday . his sister give he a full description of the new home in Suffolk , and tell of the arrangement she have make with Miss Winter , whereby , in a twelvemonth , she would be able to begin earn a little money , and , if all go well , before long would become self - support . could he not run down to see they ? their mother have bear the removal remarkably well , and seem , indeed , to have a new vigour ; possibly the air might suit she well than at the Haws . will muse over this , but have no mind to make the journey just yet . it would be a pain to he to see his mother in that new place ; it would shame he to see his sister at work , and to think that all this change be on his account . so he write to mother and sister , with more of express tenderness than usual , beg they to let he put off his visit yet a few week . presently they would be more settle . but of one thing let they be sure ; his daily work be no burden whatever to he , and he hardly know whether he would care to change it for what be call the great respectability of labour in an office . his health be good ; his spirit could only be disturb by ill news from those he love . he promise that at all event he would spend Christmas with they . 

 September go by . one of the Sundays be make memorable by a visit to Ashtead . will have request Franks to relate in that quarter the story of Mr. Jollyman , and immediately after hear it , Ralph Pomfret write a warm - hearted letter which make the recipient in Fulham chuckle with contentment . at Ashtead he enjoy himself in the old way , gladden by the pleasure with which his friend talk of Rosamund 's marriage . Mrs. Pomfret take an opportunity of speak to he apart , a bright smile on her good face . 

 " of course we know who do much , if not everything , to bring it about . Rosamund come and tell I how beautifully you have plead Norbert 's cause , and Norbert confide to my husband that , but for you , he would most likely have marry a girl he really do not   care about at all . I doubt whether a mere man ever do such a thing so discreetly and successfully before ! " 

 in October , will begin to waver in his resolve not to go down into Suffolk before Christmas . there come a letter from his mother which deeply move he ; she speak of old thing as well as new , and declare that in her husband and in her child no woman have ever know truer happiness . this be at the middle of the week ; will all but make up his mind to take an early train on the following Sunday . on Friday he write to Jane , tell she to expect he , and , as he walk home from the shop that evening he feel glad that he have overcome the feeling which threaten to make this first visit something of a trial to his self - respect . 

 " there be a telegram a - wait for you , sir , " say Mrs. Wick , as he enter . 

 the telegram contain four word : 

 " Mother ill . please come . " 




 CHAPTER 41 

 happen what might in the world beyond her door , Mrs. Cross lead the wonted life of domestic discomfort and querulousness . an interval there have be this summer , a brief , uncertain interval , when something like good - temper seem to struggle with her familiar mood ; it be the month or two during which Norbert Franks resume his friendly visiting . fall out of Mrs. Cross 's good grace since his failure to become her tenant a couple of year ago , the artist have but to present himself again to be forgive , and when it grow evident that he come to the house on Bertha 's account , he rise into high favour than ever . but this promising state of thing abruptly end . one morning , Bertha , with a twinkle in her eye , announce the fact of Franks ' marriage . her mother be stricken with indignant amaze . 

 " and you laugh about it ? " 

 " it be so amusing , " answer Bertha . 

 Mrs. Cross examine her daughter . 

 " I do not   understand you , " she exclaim , in a tone of irritation . " I do not understand you , Bertha ! all I can say be , behaviour more disgraceful I never " 

 the poor lady 's feeling be too much for she . she retreat to her bedroom , and there pass the great part of the day . but in the evening curiosity overcome her sullenness . have obtain as much information about the artist 's marriage as Bertha could give she , she relieve herself in an acrimonious criticism of he and Miss Elvan . 

 " I never like to say what I really think of that girl , " be her concluding word . " now your eye be open . of course you will never see she again ? " 

 " why , mother ? " ask Bertha . " I be very glad she have marry Mr. Franks . I always hop she would , and feel pretty sure of it . " 

 " and you mean to be friend with they both ? " 

 " why not ? but do not   let we talk about that , " Bertha add good - humouredly . " I should only vex you . there be something else I want to tell you , something you will really be amuse to hear . " 

 " your idea of amusement , Bertha " 

 " yes , yes , but listen . it be about Mr. Jollyman . who do you think Mr. Jollyman really be ? " 

 Mrs. Cross hear the story with bent brow and lip severely set . 

 " and why do not   you tell I this before , pray ? " 

 " I hardly know , " answer the girl , thoughtfully , smile . " perhaps because I wait to hear more to make the revelation more complete . but " 

 " and this , " exclaim Mrs. Cross , " be why you would not   go to the shop yesterday ? " 

 " yes , " be the frank reply . " I do not   think I shall go again . " 

 " and , pray , why not ? " 

 Bertha be silent . 

 " there be one very disagreeable thing in your character , Bertha , " remark her mother severely , " and that be your habit of hiding and conceal . to think that you find this out more than a week ago ! you be very , very unlike your father . he never keep a thing from I , never for an hour . but you be always full of secret . it be not   nice it be not   at all nice . " 

 since her husband 's death Mrs. Cross have never cease discover his virtue . when he live , one of the reproach with which she constantly sour his existence be that of secretiveness . and Bertha , who know something and suspect more of the truth in this matter , never feel it so hard to bear with her mother as when Mrs. Cross bestow such retrospective praise . 

 " I have think it over , " she say quietly , disregard the reproof , " and on the whole I have rather not go again to the shop . " 

 Thereupon Mrs. Cross grow angry , and for half an hour clamour as to the disadvantage of leave Jollyman 's for another grocer 's . in the end she do not leave he , but either go to the shop herself or send the servant . great be her curiosity regard the disguised Mr. Warburton , with whom , after a significant coldness , she gradually resume her old chatty relation . at length , one day in autumn , Bertha announce to she that she could throw more light on the Jollyman mystery ; she have learn the full explanation of Mr. Warburton 's singular proceeding . 

 " from those people , I suppose ? " say Mrs. Cross , who by this phrase signify Mr. and Mrs. Franks . " then I do not   wish to hear one word of it . " 

 but as though she have not hear this remark , Bertha begin her narrative . she seem to repeat what have be tell she with a quiet pleasure . 

 " well , then , " be her mother 's comment , " after all , there be nothing disgraceful . " 

 " I never think there be . " 

 " then why have you refuse to enter his shop ? " 

 " it be awkward , " reply Bertha . 

 " no more awkward for you than for I , " say Mrs. Cross . " but I have   notice , Bertha , that you be get rather selfish in some thing I do not   of course say in everything and I think it be not   difficult to guess where that come from . " 

 soon after Christmas they be leave , by a familiar accident , without a servant ; the girl who have be with they for the last six month somehow contrive to get her box secretly out of the house and disappear   have just be pay her wage   without warn . long and loudly do Mrs. Cross rail against this infamous behaviour . 

 the next morning , a young woman come to the house and inquire for Mrs. Cross ; Bertha , who have open the door , lead she into the dining room , and retire . half an hour later , Mrs. Cross come into the parlour , beam . 

 " there now ! if that be not   a good idea ! who do you think send that girl , Bertha ? Mr. Jollyman . " 

 Bertha keep silence . 

 " I have to go into the shop yesterday , and I happen to speak to Mr. Jollyman of the trouble I have in find a good servant . it occur to I that he might just possibly know of some one . he promise to make inquiry , and here at once come the nice girl I have   see for a long time . she have to leave she last place because it be too hard ; just fancy , a shop where she have to cook for sixteen people , and see to five bedroom ; no wonder she break down , poor thing . she be be rest for a month or two : and she live in the same house as a person name Mrs. Hopper , who be the sister of the wife of Mr. Jollyman 's assistant . and she be quite content with fifteen pound quite . " 

 as she listen , Bertha wrinkle her forehead , and grow rather absent . she make no remark , until , after a long account of the virtue she have already descry in Martha this be the girl 's name Mrs. Cross add that of course she must go at once and thank Mr. Jollyman . 

 " I suppose you still address he by that name ? " fall from Bertha . 

 " that name ? why , I would really almost forget that it be not   his real name . in any case , I could not   use the other in the shop , could I ? " 

 " of course not ; no . " 

 " now you speak of it , Bertha , " pursue Mrs. Cross , " I wonder whether he know that I know who he be ? " 

 " certainly he do . " 

 " when one think of it , would not   it be well , Bertha , for you to go to the shop again now and then ? I be afraid the poor man may feel hurt . he must have notice that you never go again after that discovery , and one really would not   like he to think that you be offend . " 

 " offended ? " echo the girl with a laugh . " offend at what ? " 

 " oh , some people , you know , might think his behaviour strange use a name that be not his own , and and so on . " 

 " some people might , no doubt . but the poor man , as you call he , be probably quite indifferent as to what we think of he . " 

 " do not   you think it would be well if you go in and just thank he for send the servant ? " 

 " perhaps , " reply Bertha , carelessly . 

 but she do not go to Mr. Jollyman 's , and Mrs. Cross soon forget the suggestion . 

 Martha enter upon her duty , and discharge they with such zeal , such docility , that her mistress never tired of laud she . she be a young woman of rather odd appearance ; slim and meagre and red - headed , with a never fail simper on her loose lip , and blue eye that frequently water ; she have somehow an air of lurk gentility in faded youth . undeniable as be the good quality she put forth on this scene of innumerable domestic failure , Bertha could not altogether like she . submissive to the point of slavishness , she have at time a look which do not harmonize at all with this demeanour , a something in her eye disagreeably suggestive of mock insolence . Bertha particularly notice this on the day after Martha have receive her first wage . leave have be give she to go out in the afternoon to make some purchase , she be rather late in return , and Bertha , meet she as she enter , ask she to be as quick as possible in get tea ; whereupon the domestic throw up her head and regard the speaker from under her eyelid with an extraordinary smile ; then with a " yes , miss , this minute , miss " scamper upstairs to take her thing off . all that evening her behaviour be strange . as she wait at the supper table she seem to be subduing laughter , and in clear away she for the first time break a plate ; whereupon she burst into tear , and beg forgiveness so long and so wearisomely that she have at last to be order out of the room . 

 on the morrow all be well again ; but Bertha could not help watch that singular countenance , and the more she observe , the less she like it . 

 the more " willing " a servant the more toil do Mrs. Cross exact from she . when occasion of rebuke or of dispute be lack , the day would have be long and wearisome for she have she not ceaselessly ply the domestic drudge with task , and narrowly watch their execution . the spectacle of this slave - driving be a constant trial to Bertha 's nerve ; now and then she venture a mild protest , but only with the result of excite her mother 's indignation . in her mood of grow moral discontent , Bertha begin to ask herself whether acquiescence in this sordid tyranny be not a culpable weakness , and one day early in the year a wretched day of east - wind when she see Martha perch on an outer window - sill cleaning pane , she find the courage to utter resolute disapproval . 

 " I do not   understand you , Bertha , " reply Mrs. Cross , the muscle of her face quiver as they do when she feel her dignity outraged . " what do we engage a servant for ? be the window to get so dirty we can not   see through they ? " 

 " they be clean not many day ago , " say her daughter , " and I think we could manage to see till the weather 's less terrible . " 

 " my dear , if we manage so as to give the servant no trouble at all , the house would soon be in a pretty state . be so good as not to interfere . it be really an extraordinary thing that as soon as I find a girl who almost suit I , you begin to try to spoil she . one would think you take a pleasure in make my life miserable " 

 overwhelmed with flood of reproach , Bertha have either to combat or to retreat . again her nerve fail she , and she leave the room . 

 at dinner that day there be a roast leg of mutton , and , as her habit be , Mrs. Cross carve the portion which Martha be to take away for herself . one very small and very thin slice , together with one unwholesome little potato , represent the servant 's meal . as soon as the door have close , Bertha speak in an ominously quiet voice . 

 " Mother , this will not   do . I be very sorry to annoy you , but if you call that a dinner for a girl who work hard ten or twelve hour a day , I do not . how she support life , I can not   understand . you have only to look into her face to see she be starve . I can bear the sight of it no long . " 

 this time she hold firm . the conflict last for half an hour , during which Mrs. Cross twice threaten to faint . neither of they eat anything , and in the end Bertha see herself , if not defeat , at all event no well off than at the beginning , for her mother clung fiercely to authority , and would obviously live in perpetual strife rather than yield an inch . for the next two day domestic life be very unpleasant indeed ; mother and daughter exchange few word ; meanwhile Martha be task , if possible , more vigorously than ever , and feed mysteriously , meal no long dole out to she under Bertha 's eye . the third morning bring another crisis . 

 " I have a letter from Emily , " say Bertha at breakfast , name a friend of hers who live in the far north of London . " I be go to see she to - day . " 

 " very well , " answer Mrs. Cross , between rigid lip . 

 " she say that in the house where she live , there be a bed - sit - room to let . I think , mother , it might be well for I to take it . " 

 " you will do just as you please , Bertha . " 

 " I shall have dinner to - day with Emily , and be back about tea - time . " 

 " I have no doubt , " reply Mrs. Cross , " that Martha will be so obliging as to have tea ready for you . if she do not   feel strong enough , of course I will see to it myself . " 




 CHAPTER 42 

 on the evening before , Martha have receive her month 's wage , and have be promise the usual afternoon of liberty to - day ; but , as soon as Bertha have leave the house , Mrs. Cross summon the domestic , and inform she bluntly that the holiday must be postpone . 

 " I be very sorry , mum , " reply Martha , with an odd , half - frightened look in her watery eye . " I would promise to go and see my brother as have just lose his wife ; but of course , if it be not   convenient , mum " 

 " it really be not , Martha . Miss Bertha will be out all day , and I do not   like be leave alone you shall go to - morrow instead . " 

 half an hour later , Mrs. Cross go out shopping , and be away till noon . on return , she find the house full of the odour of something burn . 

 " what be this smell , Martha ? " she ask at the kitchen door , " what be burn ? " 

 " oh , it be only a dishcloth as be dry and catch fire , mum , " answer the servant . 

 " only ! what do you mean ? " cry the mistress , angrily . " do you wish to burn the house down ? " 

 Martha stand with her arm akimbo , on her thin , dough - pale face the most insolent of grin , her tooth gleam , and her eye wide . 

 " what do you mean ? " cry Mrs. Cross . " show I the burn cloth at once . " 

 " there you be , mum ! " 

 and Martha , with a kick , point to something on the floor . amazed and wrathful , Mrs. Cross see a long roller - towel , half a yard of it burn to tinder ; nor could any satisfactory explanation of the accident be draw from Martha , who laugh , sob , and snigger by turn as if she be demente . 

 " of course you will pay for it , " exclaim Mrs. Cross for the twentieth time . " go on with your work at once , and do not   let I have any more of this extraordinary behaviour . I can not   think what have come to you . " 

 but Martha seem incapable of resume her ordinary calm . whilst serve the one o'clock dinner which be very badly cook she weep and sigh , and when her mistress have rise from the table , she stand for a long time star vacantly before she could bestir herself to clear away . about three o'clock , have several time vainly ring the sit - room bell , Mrs. Cross go to the kitchen . the door be shut , and , on try to open it , she find it lock . she call " Martha , " again and again , and have no reply , until , all of a sudden , a shrill voice cry from within " go away ! go away ! " beside herself with wrath and amazement , the mistress demand admission answer , there come a violent thumping on the door at the other side , and again the voice scream " go away ! go away ! " 

 " what be the matter with you , Martha ? " ask Mrs. Cross , begin to feel alarmed . 

 " go away ! " reply the voice fiercely . 

 " either you open the door this moment , or I call a policeman . " 

 this threat have an immediate effect , though not quite of the kind that Mrs. Cross hop . the key turn with a snap , the door be fling open , and there stand Martha , in a Corybantic attitude , brandish a dinner - plate in one hand , a poker in the other ; her hair be dishevel , her face red , and fury blaze in her eye . 

 " you will not   go away ? " she scream " there , then there go one of your plate ! " 

 she dash it to the floor . 

 " you will not   go away ? there go one of you dish ! and there go a basin ! and there go a tea - cup ! " 

 one after another , the thing she name perish upon the floor . Mrs. Cross stand paralyse , horror - stricken . 

 " you think you will make I pay for they ? " cry Martha frantically . " not I not I ! it be you as owe I money money for all the work I have   do as be not   in my wage , and for the food as I have not   have , when I would ought to . what do you call that ? " she point to a plate of something on the kitchen table . " be that a dinner for a human being , or be it a dinner for a beetle ? d'you think I would eat it , and I with money in my pocket to buy well ? you want to make a walkin ' skeleton of I , do you ? but I will have it out of you , I will there go another dish ! and here go a sugar - basin ! and here go your teapot ! " 

 with a shriek of dismay , Mrs. Cross spring forward . she be too late to save the cherished object , and her aggressive movement excite Martha to yet more alarming behaviour . 

 " you would hit I , would you ? two can play at that game you old skinflint , you ! come another step nearer , and I will bring this poker on your head ! you think you would get somebody you could do as you like with , do not   you ? you think because I be willing , and try to do my good , as I could be put upon to any extent , do you ? it be about time you learn your mistake , you old cheese - parer ! you and I have an account to settle . let I get at you let I get at you " 

 she brandish the poker so menacingly that Mrs. Cross turn and flee . Martha pursue , yell abuse and threat . the mistress vainly try to shut the sitting - room door against she ; in break the furious maid , and for a moment so handle her weapon that Mrs. Cross with difficulty escape a dangerous blow . round and round the table they go , until , the cloth have be drag off , Martha 's foot catch in it , and she fall heavily to the floor . to escape from the room , the terrify lady must have step over she . for a moment there be silence . then Martha make an attempt to rise , fall again , again struggle to her knee , and finally collapse , lie quite still and mute . 

 trembling , panting , Mrs. Cross move cautiously nearer , until she could see the girl 's face . Martha be asleep , unmistakably asleep ; she have even begin to snore . avoid her contact with as much disgust as fear , Mrs. Cross get out of the room , and open the front door of the house . this way and that she look along the street , search for a policeman , but none be in sight . at this moment , approach a familiar figure , Mr. Jollyman 's errand boy , basket on arm ; he have parcel to deliver here . 

 " be you go back to the shop at once ? " ask Mrs. Cross , after hurriedly set down her grocery in the passage . 

 " straight back , mum . " 

 " then run as quickly as ever you can , and tell Mr. Jollyman that I wish to see he immediately immediately . run ! do not   lose a moment ! " 

 Afraid to shut herself in with the sleep fury , Mrs. Cross remain stand near the front door , which every now and then she open to look for a policeman . the day be cold ; she shiver , she feel weak , wretched , ready to sob in her squalid distress . some twenty minute pass , then , just as she open the door to look about again , a rapid step sound on the pavement , and there appear her grocer . 

 " oh , Mr. Jollyman ! " she exclaim . " what I have just go through ! that girl have go rave mad she have break almost everything in the house , and try to kill I with the poker . oh , I be so glad you have   come ! of course there be never a policeman when they be want . do please come in . " 

 Warburton do not at once understand who be mean by " that girl , " but when Mrs. Cross throw open the sit - room door , and exhibit her domestic prostrate in disgraceful slumber , the fact of the situation break upon he . this be the girl so strongly recommend by Mrs. Hopper . 

 " but I think she have be do very well " 

 " so she have , so she have , Mr. Jollyman except for a few little thing though there be always something rather strange about she . it be only today that she break out . she be mad , I assure you , rave mad ! " 

 another explanation suggest itself to Warburton . 

 " do not   you notice a suspicious odour ? " he ask significantly . 

 " you think it be that ! " say Mrs. Cross , in a horrified whisper . " oh , I daresay you be right . I be too agitated to notice anything . oh , Mr. Jollyman ! do , do help I to get the creature out of the house . how shameful that people give she a good character . but everybody deceive I everybody treat I cruelly , heartlessly . do not   leave I alone with that creature , Mr. Jollyman . oh , if you know what I have be through with servant ! but never anything so bad as this never ! oh , I feel quite ill I must sit down " 

 fearful that his situation might become more embarrassing than it be , Warburton support Mrs. Cross into the dining - room , and by dint of loudly cheerful talk in part compose she . she consent to sit with the door lock , whilst her rescuer hurry in search of a policeman . before long , a constable 's tread sound in the hall ; Mrs. Cross tell her story , exhibit the ruin of her crockery on the kitchen floor , and demand instant expulsion of the dangerous rebel . between they , Warburton and the man in authority shake Martha into consciousness , make her pack her box , put she into a cab , and send she off to the house where she have live when out of service ; she all the time weep copiously , and protest that there be no one in the world so dear to she as her outraged mistress . about an hour be thus consume . when at length the policeman have withdraw , and sudden quiet reign in the house , Mrs. Cross seem again on the point of fainting . 

 " how can I ever thank you , Mr. Jollyman ! " she exclaim , half hysterically , as she let herself sink into the armchair . " without you , what would have become of I ! oh , I feel so weak , if I have strength to get myself a cup of tea " 

 " let I get it for you , " cry Warburton . " nothing easy . I notice the kettle by the kitchen fire . " 

 " oh , I can not allow , you , Mr. Jollyman you be too kind I feel so ashamed " 

 but will be already in the kitchen , where he bestir himself so effectually that in a few minute the kettle have begin to sing . just as he go back to the parlour , to ask where tea could be find , the front door open , and in walk Bertha . 

 " your daughter be here , Mrs. Cross , " say will , in an undertone , step toward the limp and pallid lady . 

 " Bertha , " she cry . " Bertha , be you there ? oh , come and thank Mr. Jollyman ! if you know what have happen whilst you be away ! " 

 at the room door appear the girl 's astonished face . Warburton 's eye fall upon she . 

 " it be a wonder you find I alive , dear , " pursue the mother . " if one of those blow have fall on my head ! " 

 " let I explain , " interpose Warburton quietly . and in a few word he relate the event of the afternoon . 

 " and Mr. Jollyman be just get I a clip of tea , Bertha , " add Mrs. Cross . " I do feel ashamed that he should have have such trouble . " 

 " Mr. Jollyman have be very kind indeed , " say Bertha , with look and tone of grave sincerity . " I be sure we can not thank he enough . " 

 Warburton smile as he meet her glance . 

 " I feel rather guilty in the matter , " he say , " for it be I who suggest the servant . if you will let I , I will do my good to atone by try to find another and a well . " 

 " run and make the tea , my dear , " say Mrs. Cross . " perhaps Mr. Jollyman will have a cup with we " 

 this invitation be decline . Warburton seek for his hat , and take leave of the lady , Mrs. Cross overwhelm he with gratitude , and Bertha murmur a few embarrassed word . as soon as he be go , mother and daughter take hand affectionately , then embrace with more tenderness than for a long , long time . 

 " I shall never dare to live alone with a servant , " sob Mrs. Cross . " if you leave I , I must go into lodging , dear . " 

 " hush , hush , mother , " reply the girl , in her gentle voice . " of course I shall not leave you . 

 " oh , the dreadful thing I have be through ! it be drink , Bertha ; that creature be a drunkard of the most dangerous kind . she do she good to murder I . I wonder I be not at this moment lie dead . oh , but the kindness of Mr. Jollyman ! what a good thing I send for he ! and he speak of find we another servant ; but , Bertha , I shall never try to manage a servant again never . I shall always be afraid of they ; I shall dread to give the simple order . you , my dear , must be the mistress of the house ; indeed you must . I give over everything into your hand . I will never interfere ; I will not   say a word , whatever fault I may have to find ; not a word . oh , that creature ; that horrible woman will haunt my dream . Bertha , you do not   think she will hang about the house , and lie in wait for I , to be revenge ? we must tell the policeman to look out for she . I be sure I shall never venture to go out alone , and if you leave I in the house with a new servant , even for an hour , I must be in a room with the door lock . my nerve will never recover from this shock . oh , if you know how ill I feel ! I will have a cup of tea , and then go straight to bed . " 

 whilst she be refresh herself , she speak again of Mr. Jollyman . 

 " do you think I ought to have press he to stay , dear ? I do not   feel sure . " 

 " no , no , you be quite right not to do so , " reply Bertha . " he of course understand that it be well for we to be alone . " 

 " I think he would . really , for a grocer , he be so very gentlemanly . " 

 " that be not surprising , mother . " 

 " no , no ; I be always forget that he be not   a grocer by birth . I think , Bertha , it will only be right to ask he to come to tea some day before long . " 

 Bertha reflect , a half - smile about her lip . 

 " certainly , " she say , " if you would like to . " 

 " I really should . he be so very kind to I . and perhaps what do you think ? ought we to invite he in his proper name ? " 

 " no , I think not , " answer Bertha , after a moment 's reflection . " we be not suppose to know anything about that . " 

 " to be sure not . oh , that dreadful creature . I see her eye , glare at I , like a tiger 's . fifty time at least do she chase I round this table . I think I should have drop with exhaustion ; and if I have , one blow of that poker would have finish I . never speak to I of servant , Bertha . engage any one you like , but do , do be careful to make inquiry about she . I shall never wish even to know her name ; I shall never look at her face ; I shall never speak a word to she . I leave all the responsibility to you , dear . and now , help I upstairs . I be sure ' I could never get up alone . I tremble in every limb " 




 CHAPTER 43 

 Warburton 's mother be dead . the first effect upon he of the certainty that she could not recover from the unconsciousness in which he find she when summon by Jane 's telegram , be that of an acute remorse ; it pierce he to the heart that she should have abandon the home of her life - time , for the strangeness and discomfort of the new abode , and here have fall , stricken by death the cause of it , he himself , he so unworthy of the least sacrifice . he have love she ; but what assurance have he be will not to give she of his love ? through many and many a year it be much if he write at long interval a hurried letter . how seldom have he care to go down to St. Neots , and , when there , how soon have he feel impatient of the little restraint impose upon he by his mother 's way and prejudice . yet not a moment have she hesitate , ill and aged , when , at so great a cost to herself , it seem possible to make life a little easy for he . this reproach be the keen pain with which nature have yet visit he . 

 something of the same be feel by his sister , partly on her own , partly on his account , but as soon as Jane become aware of his self torment , her affection and her good sense soon bring succour to they both . she speak of the life their mother have lead since come into Suffolk , relate a hundred instance to prove how full of interest and contentment it have be , bear witness to the seem improvement of health , and the even cheerfulness of spirit which have accompany it . moreover , there be the medical assurance that life could not in any case have be prolong ; that change of place and habit count for nothing in the sudden end which some month ago have be foretell . Jane confess herself surprised at the ease with which so great and sudden a change be bear ; the good proof that could have be give of their mother 's nobleness of mind . once only have Mrs. Warburton seem to think regretfully of the old home ; it be on come out of church one morning , when , have stand for a moment to look at the graveyard , she murmur to her daughter that she would wish to be bury at St. Neots . this , of course , be do ; it would have be do even have she not speak . and when , on the day after the funeral , brother and sister part to go their several way , the sadness they bear with they have no embitterment of brood regret . a little graver than usual , will take his place behind the counter , with no word to Allchin concern the cause of his absence . he write frequently to Jane , and from she receive long letter , which do he good , so redolent be they of the garden life , even in mid - winter , and so expressive of a frank , sweet , strong womanhood , like that of she who be no more . 

 meanwhile his business flourish . not that he much exert himself , or greatly rejoice to see his till more heavily laden night after night , by natural accretion custom flow to the shop in full stream ; Jollyman 's have establish a reputation for quality and cheapness , and begin seriously to affect the trade of small rival in the district . as Allchin have foretell , the hapless grocer with the drunken wife sink defeat before the end of the year ; one morning his shop do not open , and in a few day the furniture of the house be carry off by some brisk creditor . it make Warburton miserable to think of the man 's doom ; when Allchin , frank barbarian as he be , loudly exult . will turn away in shame and anger . have the thing be practicable he would have give money out of his own pocket to the ruin struggler . he see himself as a merciless victor ; he seem to have his heel on the other man 's head , and to crush , crush 

 at Christmas he be oblige to engage a second assistant . Allchin do not conceal his dislike of this step , but he end by admit it to be necessary . at first , the new state of thing do not work quite smoothly ; Allchin be incline to an imperious manner , which the newcomer , by name Goff , now and then plainly resent . but in a day or two they be on fair term , and ere long they become cordial . 

 then befell the incident of Mrs. Cross ' Martha . 

 not without uneasiness have Warburton suggest a servant on the recommendation of Mrs. Hopper , but credential seem to be fairly good , and when , after a week or two , Mrs. Cross declare herself more than satisfied , he bless his good luck . long ago he have cease to look for the reappearance at the shop of Bertha Cross ; he think of the girl now and then , generally revert in memory to that day when he have follow she and her mother into Kew Gardens a recollection which have lose all painfulness , and shine idyllically in summer sunlight , but it matter nothing to he that Bertha show herself no more . of course she know his story from Rosamund , and in all likelihood she feel her self - respect concerned in hold aloof from an acquaintance of his ambiguous standing . it matter not a jot . 

 yet when the tragi - comedy of Martha 's outbreak unexpectedly introduce he to the house at Walham Green , he experience a sudden revival of the emotion of a year ago . after his brief meeting with Bertha , he do not go straight back to the shop , but wander a little in quiet by - way , think hard and smile . nothing more grotesque than the picture of Mrs. Cross amid her shattered crockery , Mrs. Cross point to the prostrate Martha , Mrs. Cross pant forth the chronicle of her woe ; but Mrs. Cross ' daughter be not involve in this scene of pantomime ; she walk across the stage , but independently , with a simple dignity , proof against paltry or ludicrous circumstance . if any one could see the laughable side of such domestic squalor , assuredly it be Bertha herself of that will feel assured . do he not remember her smile when she have to discuss price and quality in the shop ? not many girl smile with so much implication of humorous comment . 

 he have promise to look out for another servant , but hardly know how to go to work . first of all , Mrs. Hopper be summon to an interview in the parlour behind the shop , and Martha 's case be fully discuss . with much protest and circumlocution , Mrs. Hopper bring herself at length to own that Martha have be know to " take too much , " but that be so long ago , and the girl have solemnly declare , etc . , etc . however , as luck would have it , she do know of another girl , a really good general servant , who have only just be throw out of a place by the death of her mistress , and who be live at home in Kentish Town . Thither speed Warburton ; he see the girl and her mother , and , on return , send a note to Mrs. Cross , in which he detail all he have learn concern the new applicant . at the close he write : " you be aware , I think , that the name under which I do business be not my own . permit I , in write to you on a private matter , to use my own signature " which accordingly follow . moreover , he date the letter from his lodging , not from the shop . 

 the next day bring he a reply ; he find it on his breakfast table , and break the envelope with amused curiosity . Mrs. Cross write that " Sarah Walker " have be to see she , and if inquiry prove satisfactory , would be engage . " we be very greatly oblige for the trouble you have take . many thank for your kind inquiry as to my health . I be glad to say that the bad of the shock have pass away , though I fear that I shall long continue to feel its effect . " a few remark follow on the terrible difficulty of the servant question ; then " should you be disengage on Sunday next , we shall be glad if you will take a cup of tea with we . " 

 over his coffee and egg , will ponder this invitation . it please he , undeniably , but cause he no undue excitement . he would have like to know in what degree Mrs. Cross ' daughter be a consent party to the step . perhaps she feel that , after the service he have render , the least one could do be to invite he to tea . why should he refuse ? before go to business , he write a brief acceptance . during the day , a doubt now and then trouble he as to whether he have behave discreetly , but on the whole he look forward to Sunday with pleasant expectation . 

 how should he equip himself ? should he go dressed as he would have go to the pomfret ' , in his easy walking attire , jacket and soft - feel ? or do the circumstance dictate chimney - pot and frock - coat ? he scoff at himself for fidget over the point ; yet perhaps it have a certain importance . after decide for the informal costume , at the last moment he alter his mind , and go array as society demand ; with the result that , on enter the little parlour that name suit it much well than drawing - room he feel overdress , pompous , generally absurd . his cylinder seem to be about three foot high ; his glove star their newness ; the tail of his coat feel as though they wrap several time round his leg , and still leave enough to trail upon the floor as he sit on a chair too low for he . never since the most awkward stage of boyhood have he feel so little at ease " in company . " and he have a conviction that Bertha Cross be laugh at he . her smile be too persistent ; it could only be explain as a compromise with threaten merriment . 

 a gap in the conversation prompt Warburton to speak of a little matter which be just now interesting he . it relate to Mr. Potts , the shopkeeper in Kennington Lane , whom he use to meet , but of whom for a couple of year and more , he have quite lose sight . stir by reproach of conscience , he have at length go to make inquiry ; but the name of Potts be no long over the shop . 

 " I go in and ask whether the old man be dead ; no , he have retire from business and be lodge not far away . I find the house a rather grimy place , and the door be open by a decidedly grimy woman . I see at once that she do not   care to let I in . what be my business ? and so on ; but I hold firm , and get at last into a room on the second floor , an uncomfortable sitting - room , where poor old Potts welcome I . if only he have know my address , he say , he should have write to tell I the news . his son in America , the one I know , be do well , and send money every month , enough for he to live upon . ' but be he comfortable in those lodging ? I ask . of course I see that he be not , and I see too that my question make he nervous . he look at the door , and speak in a whisper . the upshot of it be that he have fall into the hand of a landlady who victimise he ; just because she be an old acquaintance , he do not   feel able to leave she . ' shall I help you to get away ? ' I ask he , and his face shine with hope . of course the woman be listen at the keyhole ; we both know that . when I go away she have run half down the stair , and I catch her angry look before she hide it with a grin . I must find decent lodging for the old fellow , as soon as possible . he be be bleed mercilessly . " 

 " how very disgraceful ! " exclaim Mrs. Cross . " really , the meanness of some woman of that class ! " 

 her daughter have her eye cast down , on her lip the faint suggestion of a smile . 

 " I wonder whether we could hear of anything suitable , " pursue her mother , " by inquire of people we know out at Holloway . I be think of the Boltons , Bertha . " 

 Mr. Potts ' requirement be discuss , Bertha interesting herself in the matter , and make various suggestion . the talk grow more animate . Warburton be lead to tell of his own experience in lodging . catch Bertha 's eye , he give his humour full scope on the subject of Mrs. Wick , and there be merriment in which even Mrs. Cross make a show of join . 

 " why , " she exclaim , " do you stay in such very uncomfortable room ? " 

 " it do not   matter , " will reply , " it be only for a time . " 

 " ah , you have other view ? " 

 " yes , " he answer , smile cheerfully , " I have other view . " 




 CHAPTER 44 

 toward the end of the follow week , Mrs. Cross come to the shop . she have a busy air , and speak to Warburton in a confidential undertone . 

 " we have be make inquiry , and at last I think we have hear of something that might suit your poor friend . this be the address . my daughter go there this morning , and have a long talk with the woman , and she think it really might do ; but perhaps you have already find something ? " 

 " nothing at all , " answer Will . " I be much oblige to you . I will go as soon as possible . " 

 " we shall be so glad to hear if it suit , " say Mrs. Cross . " do look in on Sunday , will you ? we be always at home at five o'clock . oh , I have write out a little list of thing , " she add , lay her grocery order on the counter . " please tell I what they come to . " 

 Warburton gravely take the cash , and Mrs. Cross , with she thinly gracious smile , bid he good - day . 

 he do not fail to " look in " on Sunday , and this time he wear his ordinary comfortable clothing . the room recommend for Mr. Potts have seem to he just what be need , and on his own responsibility he have take they . moreover , he have be to Kennington , and have make known to the nervous old man the arrangement that be propose for he . 

 " but will he be allow to leave ? " ask Bertha in her eye the twinkle for which will watch . 

 " he will not   dare , he tell I , to give notice but he will only have to pay a week 's rent in lieu of it . I have promise to be with he at ten to morrow morning , to help he to get away . I shall take my heavy walking - stick ; one must be prepare for every emergency . glance over the police news on Tuesday , Mrs. Cross , just to see whether I have come to harm . " 

 " we shall be very anxious indeed , " reply the literal lady , with pained brow . " could not   you let we hear to - morrow evening ? I know only too well what dreadful creature the woman of that class can be . I very strongly advise you , Mr. Warburton , to be accompany by a policeman . I beg you will . " 

 late on the Monday afternoon , Jollyman 's errand boy leave a note for Mrs. Cross . it inform she that all have go well , though " not without uproar . the woman shriek insult from her doorstep after our depart cab . poor Mr. Potts be all but paralytic with alarm , but come round famously at sight of the new lodging . he want to thank you both . " 

 it be on this same evening that Warburton have a visit from Godfrey Sherwood . a fortnight ago , just after Easter , have take place the marriage of Mr. Milligan and Miss Parker ; and Sherwood , whilst his chief be absent on the honeymoon , have run down to the seaside for a change of air . tonight , he present himself unexpectedly , and his face be the prologue to a move tale . 

 " read that , Warburton " he hold out a letter . " read that , and tell I what you think of human nature . " 

 it be a letter from Milligan , who , with many explanation and apology , write to inform his secretary that the Great Work could not be pursue , that the vegetarian colony in Ireland , which be to civilise the world , must so far as he be concern remain a glorious dream . the fact of the matter be , Mrs. Milligan do not like it . she have try vegetarianism ; it do not suit her health ; moreover , she object to live in Ireland , on account of the dampness of the climate . sadly , reluctantly , Mrs. Milligan 's husband have to forgo his noble project . in consequence , he would have no need henceforth of a secretary , and Sherwood must consider their business relation at an end . 

 " he enclose a very liberal cheque , " say Godfrey . " but what a downfall ! I foresaw it . I hint my fear to you as soon as Miss Parker appear on the scene . poor old Milligan ! a lost man sink in the commonplace hopelessly whelm in vulgar matrimony . poor old fellow ! " 

 Warburton chuckle . 

 " but that be not   all , " go on the other , " Old Strangwyn be dead , really dead at last . I write several time to he ; no acknowledgment of my letter . now it be all over . the ten thousand pound " 

 he make a despairing gesture . then : 

 " take that cheque , Warburton . it be all I have ; take it , old fellow , and try to forgive I . you will not ? well , well , if I live , I will pay you yet ; but I be a good deal run down , and these disappointment have almost floor I . to tell you the truth , the vegetarian diet will not   do . I feel as weak as a cat . if you know the heroism it have cost I , down at the seaside , to refrain from chop and steak . now I give it up . another month of cabbage and lentil and I should be sink beyond recovery . I give it up . this very night I shall go and have a supper , a real supper , in town . will you come with I , old man ? what be before I , I do not   know . I have half a mind to go to Canada as farm labourer ; it would be just the thing for my health ; but let we go and have one more supper together , as in the old day . where shall it be ? " 

 so they go into town , and sup royally , with the result that Warburton have to see his friend home . over the second bottle , Godfrey decide for an agricultural life in the Far West , and will promise to speak for he to a friend of his , a lady who have brother farm in British Columbia ; but , before he go , he must be assure that Warburton really forgive he the loss of that money . will protest that he have forget all about it ; if any pardon be need , he grant it with all his heart . and so with affectionate cordiality they bid each other good - night . 

 to his surprise , he receive a letter from Sherwood , a day or two after , seriously return to the British Columbia project , and remind he of his promise . so , on Sunday , will call for the first time without invitation at Mrs. Cross ' , and , be receive with no less friendliness than hitherto , begin ask news of Bertha 's brother ; whereupon follow talk upon canadian farming life , and the mention of Godfrey Sherwood . Bertha undertake to write on the subject by the next mail ; she think it likely enough that her brother might be able to put Mr. Sherwood into the way of earn a living . 

 " what do you think we do yesterday ? " say Mrs. Cross . " we take the liberty of call upon Mr. Potts . we have to go and see Mrs. Bolton , at Holloway , and , as it be so near , we think we might venture use your name as our introduction . and the poor old gentleman be delighted to see we be not   he , Bertha ? oh , and he be so grateful for our suggestion of the lodging . " 

 Bertha 's smile betray a little disquiet . perceive this , Warburton speak with emphasis . 

 " it be kind of you . the old man feel a little lonely in that foreign region ; he be hardly be out of Kennington for forty year . a very kind thought , indeed . " 

 " I be relieve , " say Bertha ; " it seem to I just possible that we have be guilty of a serious indiscretion . good intention be very dangerous thing . " 

 when next Warburton find time to go to Holloway , he hear all about the lady ' visit . he learn , moreover , that Mr. Potts have tell they the story of his kindness to the sick lad at St. Kitts , and of his first visit to Kennington Lane . 




 CHAPTER 45 

 when Bertha , at her mother 's request , undertake the control of the house , she know very well what be before she . 

 during a whole fortnight , Mrs. Cross faithfully adhere to the compact . for the first time in her life , she declare , she be enjoy peace . feel much shake in her nervous system , she rise late , retire early , and , when downstairs , recline a good deal on the sofa . she profess herself unable to remember the new servant 's name , and assume an air of profound abstraction whenever " what do you call she " come into the room . not a question do she permit herself as to the detail of household management . Bertha happen   incautiously   to complain of a certain joint supply by the butcher , Mrs. Cross turn a dreamy eye upon it , and say , in the tone of one who speak of long ago , " in my time he could always be depend upon for a small shoulder " ; then dismiss the matter as in no way concern she . 

 but repose have a restorative effect , and , in the third week , Mrs. Cross feel the revival of her energy . she be but fifty - three year old , and in spite of languish habit , in reality have very fair health . care little for book , and not much for society , how be she to pass her time if deny the resource of household affair ? Bertha observe the sign of come trouble . one morning , her mother come downstairs early than usual , and after fidget about the room , where her daughter be busy at her drawing - board , suddenly exclaim : 

 " I wish you would tell that girl to make my bed properly . I have not   close my eye for three night , and I ache from head to foot . the way she neglect my room be really shameful " 

 there follow intimate detail , to which Bertha listen gravely . 

 " that shall be see to at once , mother , " she reply , and leave the room . 

 the complaint , as she suspect , have very little foundation . it be only the beginning ; day after day do Mrs. Cross grumble about this , that and the other thing , until Bertha see that the anticipated moment be at hand . the great struggle arise out of that old point of debate , the servant 's meal . Mrs. Cross , steal into the kitchen , have catch a glimpse of Sarah 's dinner , and so amazed be she , so stir with indignation to the depth of her soul , that she cast off all show of respect for the new order , and overwhelm Bertha with rebuke . her daughter listen quietly until the torrent have spend its force , then say with a smile : 

 " be this how you keep your promise , mother ? " 

 " promise ? do I promise to look on at wicked waste ? do you want to bring we to the workhouse , child ? " 

 " do not   let we waste time in talk about what we settle a month ago , " reply Bertha decisively . " Sarah be do very well , and there must be no change . I be quite content to pay her wage myself . keep your promise , mother , and let we live quietly and decently . " 

 " if you call it live decently to pamper a servant until she burst with insolence " 

 " when be Sarah insolent to you ? she have never be disrespectful to I . quite the contrary , I think she a very good servant indeed . you know that I have a good deal of work to do just now , and to speak quite plainly I can not   let you upset the orderly life of the house . be quiet , there be a dear . I insist upon it . " 

 speak thus , Bertha lay her hand on her mother 's shoulder , and look into the foolish , angry face so steadily , so imperturbably , with such a light of true kindness in her gentle eye , yet at the same time such resolution about the well - draw lip that Mrs. Cross have no choice but to submit . grumble she turn ; sullenly she hold her tongue for the rest of the day ; but Bertha , at all event for a time , have conquer . 

 the Crosses know little and see less of their kith and kin . with her husband 's family , Mrs. Cross have naturally be on cold term from an early period of her married life ; she hold no communication with any of the name , and always give Bertha to understand that , in one way or another , the paternal uncle and aunt have " behave very badly . " of her own blood , she have only a brother ten year young than herself , who be an estate agent at Worcester . some seven year have elapse since their last meeting , on which occasion Mrs. Cross have a little difference of opinion with her sister - in - law . James Rawlings be now a widower , with three child , and during the past year or two not unfriendly letter have be exchange between Worcester and Walham Green . utterly at a loss for a means of pass her time , Mrs. Cross , in these day of domestic suppression , renew the correspondence , and be surprise by an invitation to pass a few day at her brother 's house . this she make known to Bertha about a week after the decisive struggle . 

 " of course , you be invite , too , but I be afraid you be too busy ? " 

 amuse by her mother 's obvious wish to go to Worcester unaccompanie , Bertha answer that she really do not   see how she be to spare the time just now . 

 " but I do not   like to leave you alone here " 

 her daughter laugh at this scruple . she be just as glad of the prospect of a week 's solitude as her mother in the thought of temporary escape from the proximity of pampered Sarah . the matter be soon arrange , and Mrs. Cross leave home . 

 this be a Friday . the next day , sunshine and freedom put she in holiday mood , Bertha escape into the country , and have a long ramble like that , a year ago , on which she have encounter Norbert Franks . Sunday morning she spend quietly at home . for the afternoon she have invite a girl friend . about five o'clock , as they be have tea , Bertha hear a knock at the front door . she hear the servant go to open , and , a moment after , Sarah announce , " Mr. Warburton . " 

 it be the first time that Warburton have find a stranger in the room , and Bertha have no difficulty in read the unwonted look with which he advance to shake hand . 

 " no bad news , I hope ? " she ask gravely , after present he to the other visitor . 

 " bad news ? " 

 " I think you look rather troubled " 

 her carefully compose feature resist Will 's scrutiny . 

 " do I ? I do not   know it but , yes , " he add , abruptly , " you be right . something have vex I a trifle . " 

 " look at these drawing of Miss Medwin 's . they will make you forget all vexatious trifle . " 

 Miss Medwin be , like Bertha , a book illustrator , and have bring work to show her friend . Warburton glance at the drawing with a decent show of interest . presently he inquire after Mrs. Cross , and learn that she be out of town for a week or so ; at once his countenance brighten , and so shamelessly that Bertha have to look aside , lest her disposition to laugh should be observe . conversation of a rather artificial kind go on for half an hour , then Miss Medwin jump up and say she must go . Bertha protest , but her friend allege the necessity of make another call , and take leave . 

 Warburton stand with a hand upon his chair . Bertha , turn back from the door , pass by he , and resume her seat . 

 " a very clever girl , " she say , with a glance at the window . 

 " very , no doubt , " say Will , glance the same way . 

 " will not   you sit down ? " 

 " Gladly , if you do not   think I be stay too long . I have something I want to talk about . that be why I feel glum when I come in and find a stranger here . it be such a long time since I have any part in ordinary society , that I be forget how to behave myself . " 

 " I must apologise for you to Miss Medwin , when I see she next , " say Bertha , with drollery in her eye . 

 " she will understand if you tell she I be only a grocer , " remark Will , look at a point above her head . 

 " that might complicate thing . " 

 " do you know , " resume Warburton . " I feel sure that the Franks will never again invite I to lunch or dine there . Franks be very careful when he ask I to go and see they ; he always add that they will be alone quite alone . " 

 " but that be a privilege . " 

 " so it may be take ; but would it surprise you if they really prefer to see as little of I as possible ? " 

 Bertha hesitate , smile , and say at length with a certain good - humour irony : 

 " I think I should understand . " 

 " so do I , quite , " exclaim Will , laugh . " I want to tell you that I have   be look about I , try to find some way of get out of the shop . it be not   so easy . I might get a clerkship at a couple of pound a week , but that do not   strike I as preferable to my present position . I have   be correspond with Applegarth , the jam manufacturer , and he very strongly advise I to stick to trade . I be not sure that he be not   right . " 

 there be silence . each sit with droop eye . 

 " do you know , " Warburton then ask , " why I turn grocer ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " it be a fortunate idea . I do not   see how else I should have make enough money , these three year , to pay the income I owe to my mother and sister , and to support myself . since my mother 's death " 

 her look arrest he . 

 " I be forget that you could not have know of that . she die last autumn ; by my father 's will , our old house , at St. Neots then become mine ; it be let ; the rent go to my sister , and out of the shop profit I easily make up what her own part of the lose capital use to yield . Jane be go in for horticulture , make a business of what be always her chief pleasure , and before long she may be independent ; but it would be shabby to get rid of my responsibility at her expense do not   you think so ? " 

 " bad than shabby . " 

 " good . I like to hear you speak so decidedly . now , if you please " his own voice be not quite steady " tell I in the same tone whether you agree with Applegarth whether you think I should do well to stick to the shop and not worry with look for a more respectable employment . " 

 Bertha seem to reflect for a moment , smile soberly . 

 " it depend entirely on how you feel about it . " 

 " not entirely , " say Warburton , his feature nervously rigid ; " but first let I tell you how I do feel about it . you know I begin shopkeepe as if I be ashamed of myself . I keep it a dead secret ; hide away from everybody ; tell elaborate lie to my people ; and the result be what might have be expect before long I sink into a vile hypochrondria , see everything black or dirty grey , think life intolerable . when common sense find out what be the matter with I , I resolve to have do with snobbery and lying ; but a sanguine friend of mine , the only one in my confidence , make I believe that something be go to happen in fact , the recovery of the lost thousand ; and I foolishly hold on for a time . since the awful truth have be divulge , I have feel a different man . I can not   say that I glory in grocerdom ? but the plain fact be that I see nothing degrade in it , and I do my day 's work as a matter of course . be it any bad to stand behind a counter than to sit in a counting - house ? why should retail trade be vulgar , and wholesale quite repeatable ? this be what I have   come to , as far as my own thought and feel go . " 

 " then , " say Bertha , after a moment 's pause , " why trouble yourself any more ? " 

 " because " 

 his throat turn so dry that he have to stop with a gasp . his finger be do their good to destroy the tassel on the arm of his easy chair . with , an effort , he jerk out the next word . 

 " one may be content to be a grocer ; but what about one 's wife ? " 

 with head bent , so that her smile be half conceal , Bertha answer softly 

 " ah , that be a question . " 




 CHAPTER 46 

 after he have put the question , the reply to which mean so much to he , Will 's eye , avoid Bertha , turn to the window . though there want still a couple of hour to sunset , a sky overcast be already dusk the little parlour . distant bell make summon to evening service , and footfall sound in the otherwise silent street . 

 " it be a question , " he resume , " which have trouble I for a long time . do you remember when be it ? a year ago ? go one Sunday with Mrs. Cross to kew ? " 

 " I remember it very well . " 

 " I happen to be at Kew that day , " will continue , still nervously . " you pass I as I stand on the bridge . I see you go into the Gardens , and I say to myself how pleasant it would be if I could have venture to join you in your walk . you know I as your grocer . for I to have approach and speak , would have be an outrage . that day I have villainous thought . " 

 Bertha raise her eye ; just raise they till they meet his , then bent her head again . 

 " we think your name be really jolly man , " she say , in a half - apologetic tone . 

 " of course you do . a good invention , by the bye , that name , be not   it ? " 

 " very good indeed , " she answer , smile . " and you use to come to the shop . " pursue Will . 

 " and I look forward to it . there be something human in your way of talk to I . " 

 " I hope so . " 

 " yes , but it make I ask myself that question . I comfort myself by say that of course the shop be only a temporary expedient ; I should get out of it ; I should find another way of make money ; but , you see , I be as far from that as ever ; and if I decide to go on shopkeeping do not   I condemn myself to solitude ? " 

 " it be a difficulty , " say Bertha , in the tone of one who lightly ponder an abstract question . 

 " now and then , some time ago , I half persuade myself that , even though a difficulty , it need not   be a fatal one . " he be speak now with his eye steadily fix upon she ; " but that be when you still come to the shop . suddenly you cease " 

 his voice drop . in the silence , Bertha utter a little " yes . " 

 " I have be wonder what that mean " 

 his speech be a mere parch gasp . Bertha look at he , and her eyebrow contract , as if in sympathetic trouble . gently she ask : 

 " no explanation occur to you ? " 

 with a convulsive movement , will change his position , and by so do seem to have release his tongue . 

 " several , " he say , with a strange smile . " the one which most plague I , I should very likely do well to keep to myself ; but I will not ; you shall know it . perhaps you be prepare for it . do you know that I go abroad last summer ? " 

 " I hear of it . " 

 " from Miss Elvan ? " 

 " from Mrs. Franks . " 

 " Mrs. Franks yes . she tell you , then , that I have be to St. Jean de Luz ? she tell you that I have see her sister ? " 

 " yes , " reply Bertha , and add quickly . " you have long wish to see that part of France . " 

 " that be not   my reason for go . I go in a fit of lunacy . I go because I think Miss Elvan be there . they tell I at her Chelsea lodging that she have go to St. Jean de Luz . this be on the day after she come into the shop with you . I have be see she . we meet here and there , when she be sketch . I go crazy . do not   for a moment think the fault be her do not   dream of anything of the kind . I , I alone , ass , idiot , be to blame . she must have see what have happen , and , in leave her lodging , she purposely give a false address , never imagine that I be capable of pursue she across Europe . at St. Jean de Luz I hear of her marriage " 

 he stop , breathless . the short sentence have be fling out explosively . he be hot and red . 

 " do you suspect anything of all that ? " follow in a more restrained tone . " if so , of course I understand " 

 Bertha seem to be deep iii meditation . a faint smile be on her lip . she make no answer . 

 " be you say to yourself , " will go on vehemently , " that , instead of be merely a foolish man , I have show myself to be shameless ? it be foolish , no doubt , to dream that an educate girl might marry a grocer ; but when he begin his suit by tell such a story as this ! perhaps I need not   have tell it at all . perhaps you have never have a suspicion of such thing ? all the same , it be well so . I have   have enough of lie to last I for all my life ; but now that I have   tell you , try to believe something else ; and that be that I never love Rosamund Elvan never never ! " 

 Bertha seem on the point of laughing ; but she draw in her breath , compose her feature , let her eye wander to a picture on the wall . 

 " can you believe that ? " will ask , his voice quiver with earnestness , as he bend forward to she . 

 " I should have to think about it , " be the answer , calm , friendly . 

 " the fit of madness from which I suffer be very common in man . often it have serious result . no end of marriage come about in that way . happily I be in no danger of that . I simply make a most colossal fool of myself . and all the time all the time , I tell you , believe it or not , as you will or can I be in love with you . " 

 again Bertha draw in her breath , more softly than before . 

 " I go one day from St. Jean de Luz over the border into Spain , and come to a village among the mountain , call Vera . and there my madness leave I . and I think of you think of you all the way back to St. Jean de Luz , think of you as I have be accustom to do in England , as if nothing have happen . do you think it pain I then that Rosamund be Mrs. Franks ? no more than if I have never see she ; by that time , fresh air and exercise be do their work , and at Vera I stand a sane man once more . I find it hard to believe now that I really behave in that frantic way . do you remember come once to the shop to ask for a box to send to America ? as you talk to I that morning , I know what I know well still now , that there be no girl that I like as I like you , no girl whose face have so much meaning for I , whose voice and way of speak so satisfied I . but you do not   understand I can not   express it it sound stupid " 

 " I understand very well , " say Bertha , once more on the impartial note . 

 " but the other thing , my insanity ? " 

 " I should have to think about that , " she answer , with a twinkle in her eye . 

 will pause a moment , then ask in a shameface way : 

 " do you suspect anything of the sort ? " 

 Bertha move her head as if to reply , but after all , keep silence . thereupon Warburton stand up and clutch his hat . 

 " will you let I see you again soon ? may I come some afternoon in this week , and take my chance of find you at home ? do not   answer . I shall come , and you have only to refuse I at the door . it be only an importunate tradesman . " 

 without shake hand , he turn and leave the room . 

 Dreamily he walk homeward ; dreamily , often with a smile upon his face , he sit through the evening , now and then he pretend to read , but always in a few minute forget the page before he . he sleep well ; he arise in a cheerful but still dreamy , mood ; and without a thought of reluctance he go to his day 's work . 

 Allchin meet he with a long - draw face , say : " she be dead , sir . " he speak of his consumptive sister - in - law , whom Warburton have befriend , but whom nothing have avail to save . 

 " poor girl , " say will kindly . " it be the end of much suffering . " 

 " that be what I say , sir , " assent Allchin . " and poor Mrs. Hopper , she be fair wear out with nursing she . nobody can feel sorry . " 

 Warburton turn to his correspondence . 

 the next day , at about four o'clock , he again call at the Crosses . without hesitation the servant admit he , and he find Bertha seat at her drawing . a little gravely perhaps , but not at all inhospitably , she rise and offer her hand . 

 " forgive I , " he begin , " for come again so soon . " 

 " tell I what you think of this idea of a book - cover , " say Bertha , before he have cease speak . 

 he inspect the drawing , find it pretty , yet venture one or two objection ; and Bertha , after smile to herself for a little , declare that he have find the weak point . 

 " you be really fond of this work ? " ask Will . " you would be sorry to give it up ? " 

 " think of the world 's loss , " Bertha answer with raise eyebrow . 

 he sit down and keep a short silence , whilst the girl resume her pencil . 

 " there be thing I ought to have tell you on Sunday . " will 's voice threaten huskiness . " thing I forget . that be why I have come again so soon . I ought to have tell you much more about myself . how can you know my character my peculiarity fault ? I have   be go over all that . I do not   think I be ill - temper , or unjust or violent , but there be thing that irritate I . unpunctuality for instance . dinner ten minute late make I fume ; failure to keep an appointment make I hate a person , I be rather a grumbler about food ; can not   stand a potato ill - boil or an under - do chop . then ah yes ! restraint be intolerable to I . I must come and go at my own will . I must do and refrain just as I think fit . one enormous advantage of my shopkeeping be that I be my own master . I can not   subordinate myself , will not   be rule . fault - finding would exasperate I ; dictation would madden I . then yes , the money matter . I be not extravagant , but I hate parsimony . if it please I to give away a sovereign I must be free to do it . then yes , I be not very tidy in my habit ; I have no respect for furniture ; I like , when it be comfortable , to sit with my boot on the fender ; and I loathe antimacassar . " 

 in the room be two or three of these article , dear to Mrs. Cross . Bertha glance at they , then bent her head and bite the end of her pencil . 

 " you can not   think of anything else ? " she ask , when will have be silent for a few second . 

 " those be my most serious point . " he rise . " I only come to tell you of they , that you might add they to the objection of the shop . " 

 Bertha also rise . he move toward she to take leave . 

 " you will think ? " 

 turn half way , Bertha cover her face with her hand , like a child who be bid " not to look . " so she stand for a moment ; then , face will again , say : 

 " I have think . " 

 " and ? " 

 " there be only one thing I be sorry for that you be nothing bad than a grocer . a grocer 's be such a clean , dainty , aromatic trade . now if you keep an oil shop there would be some credit in overlook it . and you be so little even of a grocer , that I should constantly forget it . I should think of you simply as a very honest man the most honest man I ever know . " 

 Warburton 's face glow . 

 " should should ? " he murmur . " can not   it be shall ? " 

 and Bertha , smile now without a touch of roguishness , smile in the mere joy of her heart , lay a hand in his . 




 CHAPTER 47 

 when Mrs. Cross come home she bring with she a change countenance . the line grave by habitual fretfulness and sourness of temper , by long - indulge vice of the feminine will , could not of course be obliterate , but her complexion have a healthy tone , her eye be bright , and the smile with which she answer Bertha 's welcome express a more spontaneous kindliness than have appear on her face for many a year . she have recover , indeed , during her visit to the home of her childhood , something of the grace and virtue in which she be not lack before her marriage to a man who spoil she by excess of good nature . subject to a husband firm of will and occasionally rough of tongue , she might have lead a fairly happy and useful life . it be the perception of this truth which have strengthen Bertha in her ultimate revolt . perhaps , too , it have not be without influence on her own feeling and behaviour during the past week . 

 Mrs. Cross have much to relate . at the tea - table she tell all about her brother 's household , describe the child , laud the cook and housemaid " ah , Bertha , if one could get such servant here ! but London ruin they . " 

 James Rawlings be well - to - do ; he live in a nice , comfortable way , in a pretty house just outside the town . " oh , and the air , Bertha . I have not   be there a day before I feel a different creature . " James have be kindness itself . not a word about old difference . he regret that his niece have not come , but she must come very soon . and the child Alice , Tom , and little Hilda , so well - behave , so intelligent . she have bring photograph of they all . she have bring present all sort of thing . 

 after tea , gossip continue . speak of the age of the child , the eld eight , the young four , Mrs. Cross regret their motherless state . a lady - nurse have care of they , but with this person their father be not quite satisfied . he speak of make a change . and here Mrs. Cross pause , with a little laugh . 

 " perhaps uncle think of marry again ? " say Bertha . 

 " not a bit of it , my dear , " reply her mother eagerly . " he expressly tell I that he should never do that . I should not   wonder if but let bygone be bygone . no , he speak of something quite different . last night we be talk , when the child have go to bed , and all at once he startle I by say ' if only you could come and keep house for I . ' the idea ! " 

 " a wonderfully good idea it seem to I , " say Bertha , reflectively . 

 " but how be it possible , Bertha ? be you serious ? " 

 " quite . I think it might be the very good thing for you . you need something to do , mother . if Uncle James really wish it , you ought certainly to accept . " 

 Fluttered , not know whether to look pleased or offended , surprised at her daughter 's decisiveness , Mrs. Cross begin urge objection . she doubt whether James be quite in earnest ; he have admit that Bertha could not be leave alone , yet she could hardly go and live in his house as well . 

 " oh , do not   trouble about I , mother , " say the listener . " nothing be simple . " 

 " but what would you do ? " 

 " oh , there be all sort of possibility . at the bad " Bertha pause a moment , face avert , and lip roguish " I could get marry . " 

 and so the disclosure come about . Mrs. Cross seem so startled as to be almost pain ; one would have think that no remotest possibility of such a thing have ever occur to she . 

 " then Mr. Warburton have find a position ? " she ask at length . 

 " no , he keep to the shop . " 

 " but my dear you do not   mean to tell I ? " 

 the question end in a mere gasp . Mrs. Cross ' eye be darken with incredulous horror . 

 " yes , " say Bertha , calmly , pleasantly , " we have decide that there be no choice . the business be a very good one ; it improve from day to day ; now that there be two assistant , Mr. Warburton need not work so hard as he use to . " 

 " but , my dear Bertha , you mean to say that you be go to be the wife of a grocer ? " 

 " yes , mother , I really have make up my mind to it . after all , be it so very disgraceful ? " 

 " what will your friend say ? what will " 

 " Mrs. Grundy ? " interpose Bertha . 

 " I be go to say Mrs. Franks " 

 Bertha nod , and answer laughingly : 

 " that be very much the same thing , I be afraid . " 




 CHAPTER 48 

 Norbert Franks be put the last touch to a portrait of his wife ; a serious portrait , full length , likely to be regard as one of his most important work . now and then he glance at the original , who sit reading ; his eye be dull , his hand move mechanically , he hum a monotonous air . 

 Rosamund have come to the end of her book , close it , and look up . 

 " will that do ? " she ask , after suppress a little yawn . 

 the painter merely nod . she come to his side , and contemplate the picture , incline her head this way and that with an air of satisfaction . 

 " well than the old canvas I put my foot through , do not   you think ? " ask Franks . 

 " of course there be no comparison . you have   develop wonderfully . in those day " 

 Franks wait for the rest of the remark , but his wife lose herself in contemplation of the portrait . assuredly he have do nothing more remarkable in the way of bold flattery . any one who have see Mrs. Franks only once or twice , and at her good , might accept the painting as a fair " interpretation " of her undeniable beauty ; those who know she well would stand bewildered before such a counterfeit presentment . 

 " Old Warburton must come and see it , " say the artist presently . 

 Rosamund utter a careless assent . long since she have cease to wonder whether Norbert harbour any suspicion concern his friend 's brief holiday in the south of France . obviously he know nothing of the dramatic moment which have precede , and bring about , his marriage , nor would he ever know . 

 " I really ought to go and look he up . " Franks add . " I keep on say I will go to - morrow and to - morrow . any one else would think I an ungrateful snob ; but old Warburton be too good a fellow . to tell the truth , I feel a little ashamed when I think of how he be live . he ought to have a percentage on my income . what would have become of I if he have not   put his hand into his pocket when he be well off and I be a beggar ? " 

 " but do not   you think his business must be profitable ? " ask Rosamund , her thought only half attentive to the subject . 

 " the old chap be not   much of a business man , I fancy , " Franks answer with a smile . " and he have his mother and sister to support . and no doubt he be always give away money . his lodging be miserable . it make I uncomfortable to go there . suppose we ask he to lunch on Sunday ? " 

 Rosamund reflect for a moment . 

 " if you like I have think of ask the Fitzjames girl . " 

 " you do not   think we might have he at the same time ? " 

 Rosamund purse her lip a little , avert her eye as she answer : 

 " would he care for it ? and he say do not   he ? that he mean to tell everybody , everywhere , how he earn his living . would not   it be just a little ? " 

 Franks laugh uneasily . 

 " yes , it might be just a little . well , he must come and see the picture quietly . and I will go and look up the poor old fellow to - night , I really will . " 

 this time , the purpose be carry out . Franks return a little after midnight , and be surprised to find Rosamund sit in the studio . a friend have look in late in the evening , she say , and have stay talk . 

 " all about her husband 's picture , so tiresome ? she think they monument of genius ! " 

 " his last thing be not   half bad , " say Franks , good - naturedly . 

 " perhaps not . of course I pretend to think he the great painter of modern time . nothing else will satisfy the silly little woman . you find Mr. Warburton ? " 

 Franks nod , smile mysteriously . 

 " I have news for you . " 

 knit she brow a little his wife look interrogation . 

 " he be go to be marry . guess to whom . " 

 " not to ? " 

 " well ? " 

 " Bertha Cross ? " 

 again Franks nod and laugh . an odd smile rise to his wife 's lip ; she muse for a moment , then ask : 

 " and what position have he get ? " 

 " position ? his position behind the counter , that be all . Say 's he shall not   budge . by the bye , his mother die last autumn ; he be in easy circumstance ; the shop do well , it seem . he think of try for something else , but talk it over with Bertha Cross , and they decide to stick to grocery . they will live in the house at Walham Green . Mrs. Cross be go away to keep house for a brother of her . " 

 Rosamund heave a sigh , murmur : 

 " Poor Bertha ! " 

 " a grocer 's wife , " say Franks , his eye wander . " oh , confound it ! really you know " he take an impatient turn across the floor . again his wife sigh and murmur : 

 " Poor Bertha ! " 

 " of course , " say Franks , come to a pause , " there be a good deal to be say for stick to a business which yield a decent income , and promise much more . " 

 " money ! " exclaim Rosamund scornfully . " what be money ? " 

 " we find it useful , " quietly remark the other . 

 " certainly we do ; but you be an artist , Norbert , and money be only an accident of your career . do we ever talk about it , or think about it ? poor Bertha ! with her talent ! " 

 the artist pace about , his hand in his jacket pocket . he be smile uneasily . 

 " do you know anything of this kind be go on ? " he ask , without look at his wife . 

 " I have hear nothing whatever . it be age since Bertha be here . " 

 " yet you do not   seem very much surprised . " 

 " and you ? " ask Rosamund , meet his eye . " be you profoundly astonish ? " 

 " why , yes . it come very unexpectedly . I have no idea they see each other except in the shop . " 

 " and it vex you ? " say Rosamund , her eye upon his face . 

 " Vexes ? oh , I can not   say that . " he fidget , turn about , laugh . " why should it vex I ? after all , Warburton be such a thoroughly good fellow , and if he make money " 

 " money ! " 

 " we do find it useful , you know , " insist Franks , with a certain obstinacy . 

 Rosamund be stand before the picture , and gaze at it . 

 " that she should have no high ambition ! poor Bertha ! " 

 " we can not   all achieve ambition , " cry Franks from the other end of the room . " not every girl can marry a popular portrait - painter . " 

 " a great artist ! " exclaim his wife , with emphasis . 

 as she move slowly away , she keep she look still turn upon the face which smile from the easel . watch her tremulous eyebrow , her uncertain lip , one might have fancy that Rosamund seek the solution of some troublesome doubt , and hop , only hop , to find it in that image of herself so daringly glorify . 
