the unclasse 


 by 

 George Gissing 
 CHAPTER I 

 school 

 there be strange disorder in Miss Rutherford 's schoolroom , will not to be the abode of decorum . true , it be the gathering - time after the dinner - hour , and Miss Rutherford herself be as yet out of sight ; but thing seem to be go forward of a somewhat more serious kind than a game of romp among the child . there be scream and sobbing , hysterical cry for help ; some of the little girl be crowd round an object in one corner of the room , other appear to be get as far away from it as possible , hide their pale face in their hand , or look at one another with terrified eye . at length one more thoughtful than the rest speed away out of the room , and stand at the bottom of the stair , call out her teacher 's name as loud as she could . a moment , and Miss Rutherford come hasten down , with alarmed aspect , beg to be tell what be the matter . but the summoner have turn and flee at the first sight of the lady 's garment . Miss Rutherford dart into the schoolroom , and at once there be quietness , save for half - choke sob here and there , and a more ominous kind of moaning from the crowded corner . 

 " gracious goodness , child , what be it ? who be that lie on the floor ? harriet smale ! what ever have happen ? " 

 the cluster of child have fall aside , expose a strange picture . on the ground lie a girl of twelve , her face deadly pale , save in the place where it be dabble with fresh blood , which still stream from a gash on the right side of her forehead . her eye be half open ; she be just recover consciousness ; a moan come from she at interval . she have for support the lap and arm of a little girl , perhaps two year young than herself . heedless of the flow blood , this child be press her pale cheek against that of the wound one , whose name she keep murmur in pitiful accent , mix with endear epithet . so unconscious be she of all around , that the fall back of the other child do not cause she to raise her eye ; neither be she aware of Miss Rutherford 's first exclamation , nor yet of the question which be next address to she by the horrified schoolmistress . 

 " how do it happen ? some of you run at once for a doctor Dr. Williams in Grove Road oh , quick ! Ida Starr , how do it happen ? " 

 Ida do not move , but seem to tighten her embrace . the other pupil all look fearfully hither and thither , but none venture to speak . 

 " Ida ! " repeat Miss Rutherford , drop on her knee by the two , and begin to wipe away some of the blood with her handkerchief . " speak , child ! have some one go for the doctor ? how be it do ? " 

 the face at length turn upon the questioner be almost as ghastly and red - stained as that it have be press against . but it have become self - control ; the dark eye look straight forward with an expression marvellously full of meaning in one so young ; the lip do not tremble as they speak . 

 " I do it , Miss Rutherford . I have kill Harriet . I , and nobody else . " 

 " you ? how , child ? " 

 " I kill she with the slate , Miss Rutherford ; this slate , look . " 

 she point to a slate without a frame which lie on the floor . there be sum work on the uppermost side , and the pencil - mark be half obliterate . for a moment the schoolmistress 's amazement hold her motionless , but fresh and loud moan recall she to the immediate necessity of the case . she push Ida Starr aside , and , with the help of a servant - girl who have by this time appear in the room , raise the sufferer into a chair , and begin to apply what remedy suggest themselves . the surgeon , whom several of the child have hasten to seek , only live a few yard away , and his assistant be speedily present . Harriet Smales have quite recover consciousness , and be very soon able to give her own account of the incident . after listen to she , Miss Rutherford turn to the schoolchildren , who be now seat in the usual order on bench , and speak to they with some degree of calm . 

 " I be go to take Harriet home . Lucy Wood , you will please to see that order be preserve in my absence ; I shall only be away twenty minute , at the most . Ida Starr , you will go up into my sitting - room , and remain there till I come to you . all take out your copy - book ; I shall examine the line write whilst I be away . " 

 the servant , who have be despatch for a cab , appear at the door . Harriet Smales be lead out . before leave the house , Miss Rutherford whisper to the servant an order to occupy herself in the sitting - room , so as to keep Ida Starr in sight . 

 Miss Rutherford , strict disciplinarian when her nerve be not unstrung , be as good as her promise with regard to the copy - book . she have return within the twenty minute , and the first thing she do be to walk along all the bench , make a comment here , a correction there , in another place give a word of praise . then she take her place at the raise desk whence she be will not to survey the little room . 

 there be present thirteen pupil , the old of they turn fifteen , the youngest scarcely six . they appear to be the daughter of respectable people , probably of tradesman in the neighbourhood . this school be in Lisson Grove , in the north - west of London ; a spot not to be picture from its name by those ignorant of the locality ; in point of fact a dingy street , with a mixture of shop and private house . on the front door be a plate display Miss Rutherford 's name , nothing more . that lady herself be middle - aged , grave at all time , kindly , and , be it add , fairly competent as thing go in the world of school . the room be rather bare , but the good fire necessitate by the winter season be not want , and the plain boarding of the floor show itself no stranger to scrubbing . a clock hang on the wall tick very loudly in the perfect stillness as the schoolmistress take her seat . 

 she appear to examine a book for a few moment , then raise her head , look at the face before she with a troubled expression , and begin to speak . 

 " I wish to know who can give I any account of the way in which Harriet Smales receive her hurt . stop ! hand only , please . and only those raise their hand who actually see the blow strike , and overheard all that lead to it . you understand , now ? one , two , three seven altogether , that be quite enough . those seven will wait in the room at four o'clock till the other have all go . now I will give the first class their sum . " 

 the afternoon pass very slowly to teacher and pupil alike . when the clock strike four , work be put away with more than the usual noise and hurry . Miss Rutherford seem for a time to be on the point of make some new address to the school before the child depart , but eventually she decide to keep silence , and the dismissal be get over as quickly as possible . the seven witness remain , solemnly seat at their desk , all anxious - look . 

 " Lucy Wood , " Miss Rutherford begin , when the door be closed and quiet , " you be the eld . please tell I all you can of this sad affair . " 

 there be one of the seven face far more discomposed than the rest , a sweet and spiritual little countenance ; it be tear - stain , red - eyed ; the eager look , the trembling lip speak some intimate cause of sympathy . before the girl address have time to begin her answer , this other , one would have say in spite of herself , intervene with an almost agonise question . 

 " oh , Miss Rutherford , be Harriet really dead ? " 

 " hush , hush ! " say the lady , with a shocked look . " no , my dear , she be only badly hurt . " 

 " and she really will not   die ? " plead the child , with an instant brightening of look . 

 " certainly not , certainly not . now be quiet , Maud , and let Lucy begin . " 

 Lucy , a sensible and matter - of - fact girl , make a straightforward narration , the fact of which be concur in by her companion . Harriet Smales , it seem , have be exercise upon Ida for some day her utmost power of irritation , tease she , as Lucy put it , " beyond all bearing . " the cause of this be not unknown in the school , and Miss Rutherford remember the incident from which the malice date . Harriet have copy a sum in class from Ida 's slate she be always copy from somebody and the teacher , who have somehow detect she , ask Ida plainly whether such be not the case . Ida make no reply , would not speak , which of course be take as confirmatory evidence , and the culprit have accordingly receive an imposition . her spleen , thus arouse , Harriet vent upon the other girl , who , she maintain , ought to have stoutly deny the possibility of the alleged deceit , and so have save she . she give poor Ida no rest , and her persecution have culminate this afternoon ; she begin to " call Ida 's mother name , " the result of which be that the assailed one suddenly snatch up her slate , and , in an uncontrollable fit of passion , strike her tormentor a blow with it upon the forehead . 

 " what do she call Ida 's mother ? " inquire Miss Rutherford , all at once change her look curiously . 

 " she call she a bad woman . " 

 " be that all ? " 

 " no , please , Miss Rutherford , " put in Maud eagerly . " she say she get she live in the street . and it be not   true . Ida 's mother 's a lady , and do not   sell thing in the street ! " 

 the teacher look down and be silent . 

 " I do not   think I need ask any more question , " she say presently . " run away home all of you . what be it , my dear ? " 

 Maud , she be about eleven , and small for her age , have remain behind , and be look anxiously up into Miss Rutherford 's face . 

 " may I wait for Ida , please , " she ask , " and and walk home with she ? we go the same way . " 

 " not to - night , dear ; no , not to - night . Ida Starr be in disgrace . she will not go home just yet . run away , now , there be a good girl . " 

 sadly , sadly be the command obey , and very slowly do Maud Enderby walk along the street homeward , ever turn back to see whether perchance Ida might not be behind she . 

 Miss Rutherford ascend to her sitting - room . the culprit be stand in a corner with her face to the wall . 

 " why do you stand so ? " ask the teacher gravely , but not very severely . 

 " I think you would want I to , Miss Rutherford . " 

 " come here to I , child . " 

 Ida have clearly be cry for a long time , and there be still blood on her face . she seem to have make up her mind that the punishment await she must be dreadful , and she resolve to bear it humbly . she come up , still hold her hand behind she , and stand with downcast eye . the hair which hang down over her shoulder be dark brown , her eye - brow strongly mark , the eye themselves rather deep - set . she wear a pretty plum - colour dress , with a dainty little apron in front ; her whole appearance bespeak a certain taste and love of elegance in the person who have the care of she . 

 " you will be glad to hear , " say Miss Rutherford , " that Harriet 's hurt be not as serious as we fear at first . but she will have to stay at home for some day . " 

 there be no motion , or reply . 

 " do you know that I be quite afraid of you , Ida ? I have no idea that you be so passionate . have you no thought what harm you might do when you strike that terrible blow ? " 

 but Ida could not converse ; no word be to be get from she . 

 " you must go home now , " go on the schoolmistress after a pause , " and not come back till I send for you . tell your mother just what you have do , and say that I will write to she about you . you understand what I say , my child ? " 

 the punishment have come upon she . nothing bad than this have Ida imagine ; nay , nothing so bad . she draw in her breath , her finger wreathe themselves violently together behind her back . she half raise her face , but could not resolve to meet her teacher 's eye . on the permission to go be repeat , she leave the room in silence , descend the stair with the slow step of an old person , dress herself mechanically , and go out into the street . Miss Rutherford stand for some time in profound and troubled thought , then sigh as she return to her usual engagement . 

 the follow day be Saturday , and therefore a half - holiday . after dinner , Miss Rutherford prepare herself for walking , and leave home . a quarter of an hour bring she to a little out - of - the - way thoroughfare call Boston Street , close to the west side of Regent 's Park , and here she enter a chemist 's shop , over which stand the name smale . a middle - aged man of very haggard and feeble appearance stand behind the counter , and his manner to the lady as she address he be painfully subservient . he speak very little above a whisper , and as though suffer from a severe sore throat , but it be his natural voice . 

 " she be well , I thank you , madam ; much well , I hope and believe ; yes , much well . " 

 he repeat his word nervously , rub his hand together feverishly the while , and make his eye - brow go up and down in a curious way . 

 " might I see she for a few moment ? " 

 " she would be happy , madam , very happy : oh yes , I be sure , very happy if if you would have the kindness to come round , yes , round here , madam , and and to excuse our poor sitting - room . thank you , thank you . Harriet , my dear , Miss Rutherford have have the great , the very great , goodness to visit you to visit you personally yes . I will leave you , if if you please h'm , yes . " 

 he shuffle away in the same distressingly nervous manner , and close the door behind he . the schoolmistress find herself in a dark little parlour , which smell even more of drug than the shop itself . the window look out into a dirty back - yard , and be almost conceal with heavy red curtain . as the eye get accustom to the dimness , one observe that the floor be cover with very old oil - cloth , and that the article of furniture be few , only the most indispensable , and all very shabby . everything seem to be dusty and musty . the only approach to an ornament be a framed diploma hang over the mantelpiece , certify that John Alfred Smales be a duly qualified pharmaceutical chemist . a low fire burn in the grate , and before it , in a chair which would probably have claim the title of easy , sit the girl Harriet Smales , her head in bandage . 

 she receive Miss Rutherford rather sulkily , and as she move , groan in a way which do not seem the genuine utterance of pain . after a few sympathetic remark , the teacher begin to touch upon the real object of her visit . 

 " I have no intention of blame you , Harriet ; I should not speak of this at all , if it be not necessary . but I must ask you plainly what reason you have for speaking of Ida Starr 's mother as they say you do . why do you say she be a bad woman ? " 

 " it be only what she be , " return Harriet sullenly , and with much inward venom . 

 " what do you mean by that ? who have tell you anything about she ? " 

 only after some little question the fact be elicit that Harriet owe her idea on the subject to a servant girl in the house , whose name be Sarah . 

 " what do Sarah say , then ? " ask Miss Rutherford . 

 " she say she be not   respectable , and that she go about with man , and she be only a common street - woman , " answer the girl , speak evidently with a very clear understanding of what these accusation mean . the schoolmistress look away with a rather shocked expression , and think a little before speak again . 

 " well , that be all I want to ask you , Harriet , " she say . " I will not   blame you , but I trust you will do as I wish , and never say such thing about any one again , whoever may tell you . it be our duty never to speak ill of other , you know ; least of all when we know that to do so will be the cause of much pain and trouble . I hope you will very soon be able to come back again to we . and now I will say good - bye . " 

 in the shop Miss Rutherford renew to the chemist her sincere regret for what have take place . 

 " of course I can not risk the recurrence of such a thing , " she say . " the child who do it will not return to I , Mr. Smales . " 

 Mr. Smales utter incoherent excuse , apology , and thank , and shufflingly escort the lady to his shop - door . 

 Miss Rutherford go home in trouble . she do not doubt the truth of what Harriet Smales have tell she , for she herself have already entertain uneasy suspicion , date indeed from the one interview she have have with Mrs. Starr , when Ida be first bring to the school , and derive confirmation from a chance meeting in the street only a few day ago . it be only too plain what she must do , and the necessity grieve she . Ida have not show any especial brilliancy at her book , but the child 's character be a remarkable one , and display a strength which might eventually operate either for good or for evil . with careful training , it seem at present very probable that the good would predominate . but the task be not such as the schoolmistress feel able to undertake , bear in mind the necessity of an irreproachable character for her school if it be to be keep together at all . the disagreeable secret have begin to spread ; all the child would relate the event of yesterday in their own home ; to pass the thing over be impossible . she sincerely regret the step she must take , and to which she would not have feel herself drive by any ill - place prudery of her own . on Monday morning it must be state to the girl that Ida Starr have leave . 

 in the meantime , it only remain to write to Mrs. Starr , and make known this determination . Miss Rutherford think for a little while of go to see Ida 's mother , but feel that this would be both painful and useless . it be difficult even to write , desirous as she be of somehow mitigate the harshness of this sentence of expulsion . after half - an - hour spend in effort to pen a suitable note , she give up the attempt to write as she would have wish , and announce the necessity she be under in the few possible word . 




 CHAPTER II 

 MOTHER and child 

 Ida Starr , dismiss by the schoolmistress , run quickly homeward . she be unusually late , and her mother would be anxious . still , when she come within sight of the door , she stop and stand pant . how should she tell of her disgrace ? it be not fear that make her shrink from repeat Miss Rutherford 's message ; nor yet shame , though she would gladly have hide herself away somewhere in the dark from every eye ; her overwhelming concern be for the pain she know she be go to cause one who have always cherish she with faultless tenderness , tenderness which it have become her nature to repay with a child 's unreflecte devotion . 

 her home be in Milton Street . on the front - door be a brass - plate which bear the inscription : " Mrs. Ledward , Dressmaker ; " in the window of the ground - floor be a large card announce that " Apartments " be vacant . the only light be one which appear in the top storey , and there Ida know that her mother be wait for she , with tea ready on the table as usual . Mrs. Starr be seldom at home during the child 's dinner - hour , and Ida have not see she at all to - day . for it be only occasionally that she share her mother 's bedroom ; it be the rule for she to sleep with Mrs. Ledward , the landlady , who be a widow and without child . the arrangement have hold ever since Ida could remember ; when she have become old enough to ask for an explanation of this , among other singularity in their mode of life , she be tell that her mother sleep badly , and must have the bed to herself . 

 but the night have come on , and every moment of delay doubtless increase the anxiety she be cause . Ida go up to the door , stand on tiptoe to reach the knocker , and give her usual two distinct rap . Mrs. Ledward open the door to she in person ; a large woman , with pressed lip and eye that squint very badly ; attire , however , neatly , and look as good - natured as a woman who be at once landlady and dressmaker could be expect to look . 

 " how be ' t you be so late ? " she ask , without look at the child ; her eye , as far as one could guess , fix upon the house opposite , her hand in the little pocket on each side of her apron . " your mother 's poorly . " 

 " oh , then I shall sleep with she to - night ? " exclaim Ida , forget her trouble for the moment in this happy foresight . 

 " Dessay , " return Mrs. Ledward laconically . 

 Ida leave she still stand in the doorway , and run stair . the chamber she go into after knock and receive permission to enter , accord to the rule which have be impress upon she be a tolerably - furnish bedroom , which , with its bright fire , tasteful little lamp , white coverlet and general air of fresh orderliness , make a comfortable appearance . the air be scented , too , with some pleasant odour of a not too pungent kind . but the table lack one customary feature ; no tea be lay as it be will not to be at this hour . the child gaze round in surprise . her mother be in bed , lie back on raise pillow , and with a restless , half - pettish look on her face . 

 " where have you be ? " she ask querulously , her voice husky and feeble , as if from a severe cold . " why be you so late ? " 

 Ida do not answer at once , but go straight to the bed and offer the accustomed kiss . her mother wave she off . 

 " no , no ; do not   kiss I . can not   you see what a sore throat I have   get ? you might catch it . and I have not   get you any tea , " she go on , her face grow to a calm expression as she gaze at the child " be not   I a naughty mother ? but it serve you half right for be late . come and kiss I ; I do not   think it be catch . no , perhaps you would well not . " 

 but Ida start forward at the granted leave , and kiss she warmly . 

 " there now , " go on the hoarse voice complainingly , " I should not   wonder if you catch it , and we shall both be lay up at once . oh , Ida , I do feel that poorly , I do ! it be the draught under the door ; what else can it be ? I do , I do feel that poorly ! " 

 she begin to cry miserably . Ida forget all about the tale she have to tell ; her own eye overflow in sympathy . she put her arm under her mother 's neck , and press cheek to cheek tenderly . 

 " oh , how hot you be , mother ! shall I get you a cup of tea , dear ? would not   it make your throat well ? " 

 " perhaps it would ; I do not   know . do not   go away , not just yet . you will have to be a mother to I to - night , Ida . I almost feel I could go to sleep , if you hold I like that . " 

 she close her eye , but only for a moment , then start up anxiously . 

 " what be I think about ! of course you want your tea . " 

 " no , no ; indeed I do not , mother . " 

 " nonsense ; of course you do . see , the kettle be on the bob , and I think it be full . go away ; you make I hotter . let I see you get your tea , and then perhaps it will make I feel I could drink a cup . there , you have   put your hair all out of order ; let I smooth it . do not   trouble to lay the cloth ; just use the tray ; it be in the cupboard . " 

 Ida obey , and set about the preparation . compare her face with that which rest sideways upon the pillow , and the resemblance be as strong as could exist between two people of such different age : the same rich - brown hair , the same strongly - pencil eye - brow ; the deep - set and very dark eye , the fine lip , the somewhat prominent jaw - bone , alike in both . the mother be twenty - eight , the daughter ten , yet the face on the pillow be the more childish at present . in the mother 's eye be a helpless look , a gaze of unintelligent misery , such as one could not conceive on Ida 's countenance ; her lip , too , be weakly part , and seem tremble to a sob , whilst sorrow only make the child close hers the firm . in the one case a pallor not merely of present illness , but that waste whiteness which be only see on face accustom to borrow artificial hue ; in the other , a healthy pearl - tint , the gleaming and gradation of a perfect complexion . the one a child long lose on weary , woful way , know , yet untaught by , the misery of desolation ; the other a child still stand upon the misty threshold of unknown land , look around for guidance , yet already half feel that the sole guide and comforter be within . 

 it be strange that talk which follow between mother and daughter . Lotty Starr   that be the name of the eld child , and it become she much well than any more matronly appellation , would not remain silent , in spite of the effort it cost she to speak , and her conversation run on the most trivial topic . except at occasional moment , she speak to Ida as to one of her own age , with curious neglect of the relationship between they ; at time she give herself up to the luxury of feeling like an infant dependent on another 's care ; and cry just for the pleasure of be pet and console . Ida have make up her mind to leave her disclosure till the next morning ; impossible to grieve her mother with such shocking news when she be so poorly . yet the little girl with difficulty keep a cheerful countenance ; as often as a moment 's silence leave she to her own reflection she be remind of the heaviness of heart which make speak an effort . to bear up under the secret thought of her crime and its consequence require in Ida Starr a courage different alike in quality and degree from that of which child be ordinarily capable . one compensation alone help she ; it be still early in the evening , and she know there be before her long hour to be spend by her mother 's side . 

 " do you like I to be with you , mother ? " she ask , when a timid question have at length elicited assurance of this joy . " do it make you feel well ? " 

 " yes , yes . but it be my throat , and you can not   make that well ; I only wish you could . but you be a comfort to I , for all that ; I do not   know what I should do without you . oh , I sha'n't   be able to speak a word soon , I sha'n't ! " 

 " do not , do not   talk , dear . I will talk instead , and you listen . do not   you think , mother dear , I could could always sleep with you ? I would not   disturb you ; indeed , indeed I would not ! you do not   know how quiet I lie . if I be wakeful ever I seem to have such a lot to think about , and I lie so still and quiet , you can not   think . I never wake Mrs. Led ward , indeed . do let I , mother ; just try I ! " 

 Lotty break out into passionate weeping , wring her hand , and hide her face in the pillow . Ida be terrify , and exert every effort to console this strange grief . the outburst only endure a minute or two , however ; then a mood of vex impatience grow out of the anguish and despair , and Lotty push away the child fretfully . 

 " I have   often tell you , you can not , you must not   bother I . there , there ; you do not   mean any harm , but you put I out , bother I , Ida . tell I , what do you think about when you lay awake ? do not   you think you would give anything to get off to sleep again ? I know I do ; I can not   bear to think ; it make my head ache so . " 

 " oh , I like it . sometimes I think over what I have   be read , in the animal book , and the geography - book ; and and then I begin my wishing - thought . and oh , I have   such lot of wish - thought , you could not   believe ! " 

 " and what be the wish - thought about ? " inquire the mother , in a matter - of - fact way . 

 " I often wish I be grow up . I feel tired of be a child ; I want to be a woman . then I should know so much more , and I should be able to understand all the thing you tell I I can not   now . I do not   care for play at game and go to school . " 

 " you will be a woman soon enough , Ida , " say Lotty , with a quiet sadness unusual in she . " but go on ; what else ? " 

 " and then I often wish I be a boy . it must be so much nice to be a boy . they be strong than girl , and they know more . do not   you wish I be a boy , mother ? " 

 " yes , I do , I often do ! " exclaim Lotty . " boy be not   such a trouble , and they can go out and shift for themselves . " 

 " oh , but I will not   be a trouble to you , " exclaim Ida . " when I be old enough to leave school " 

 she interrupt herself , for the moment she have actually forget the misfortune which have come upon she . but her mother do not observe the fall of her countenance , nor yet the incomplete sentence . 

 " Ida , have I be a bad mother to you ? " lotty sob out presently . " if I be to die , would you be sorry ? " 

 " Mother ! " 

 " I have   do my good , indeed I have   do my good for yon ! how many mother like I would have bring you up as I have   do ? how many , I would like to know ? and some day you will hate I ; oh yes , you will ! some day you will wish to forget all about I , and you will never come to see where I be bury , and you will get rid of everything that could remind you of I . how I wish I would never be bear ! " 

 Ida have often to comfort her mother in the latter 's fit of low spirit , but have never hear such sad word as these before . the poor child could say nothing in reply ; the terrible think that she herself be bring new woe to be endure almost break her heart she clung about her mother 's neck and weep passionately . 

 lotty shortly after take a draught from a bottle which the child reach out of a drawer for she , and lie pretty still till drowsiness come on . Ida undressed and creep to her side . they have a troubled night , and , when the daylight come again , Lotty be no well . Ida rise in anguish of spirit , torture herself to find a way of tell what must be tell . yet she have another respite ; her mother say that , as it be Saturday , she might as well stay away from school and be a little nurse . and the dull day wear through ; the confession be still postpone . 

 but by the last post at night come Miss Rutherford 's letter . Ida be still sit up , and Lotty have fall into a doze , when the landlady bring the letter upstairs . the child take it in , answer an inquiry about her mother in a whisper , and return to the bedside . she know the handwriting on the envelope . the dreaded moment have come . 

 she must have stand more than a quarter of an hour , motionless , gaze on her mother 's face , conscious of nothing but an agonised expectation of see the sleeper 's eye open . they do open at length , and quickly see the letter . 

 " it be from Miss Rutherford , mother , " say Ida , her own voice sound very strange to herself . 

 " oh , be it ? " say Lotty , in the hoarse whisper which be all she could command " I suppose she want to know why you do not   go . read it to I . " 

 Ida read , and , in reading , suffer as she never do again throughout her life . 


 " DEAR MRS . STARR , I be very sorry to have to say that Ida must not return to school . I have well leave the explanation to herself ; she be truthful , and will tell you what have compel I to take this step . I grieve to lose she , but have really no choice . I be , yours truly , 

 H. RUTHERFORD . " 


 no tear rise ; her voice be as firm as though she have be read in class ; but she be pale and cold as death . 

 Lotty rise in bed and star wildly . 

 " what have you do , child ? what ever have you do ? be be it anything about I . " 

 " I hit Harriet Smales with a slate , and cover she all over with blood , and I think I would kill she . " 

 she could not meet her mother 's eye ; stand with head hang down , and her hand clasp behind she . 

 " what make you do it ? " ask Lotty in amazement . 

 " I could not   help it , mother ; she she say you be a bad woman . " 

 Ida have raise her eye with a look of love and proud confidence . Lotty shrink before she , clutch convulsively at the bed - clothe , then half raise herself and dash her head with fearful violence against the wall by which the bed stand . she fall back , half stun , and lie on the pillow , whilst the child , with outstretched hand , gaze horror - strike . but in a moment Ida have her arm around the distraught woman , press the daze head against her breast . Lotty begin to utter incoherent self - reproach , unintelligible to her little comforter ; her voice have become the mere whisper ; she seem to have quite exhausted herself . just now there come a knock at the door , and Ida be relieve to see Mrs. Ledward , whose help she beg . in a few minute Lotty have come to herself again , and whisper that she wish to speak to the landlady alone . the latter persuade Ida to go downstairs for a while , and the child , whose tear have begin to flow , leave the room , sob in anguish . 

 " be not   you well then ? " ask the woman , with an apparent effort to speak in a sympathetic tone which do not come easily to she . 

 " I be very bad , " whisper the other , draw her breath as if in pain . 

 " ay , you have   get a bad cold , that be what it be . I will make you some gruel presently , and put some rum in it . you do not   take care of yourself : I tell you how it ' ud be when you come in with those wringin ' thing on , on Thursday night . " 

 " they have   find out about I at the school , " gasp Lotty , with a despairing look , " and Ida 's get send away . " 

 " she have ? well , never mind , you can find another , I suppose . I can not   see myself what she want with so much schoolin ' , but I suppose you know well about your own affair . " 

 " oh , I feel that bad ! if I get over this , I will give it up God help I , I will ! I will get my living honest , if there be any way . I never feel so bad as I do now . " 

 " Pooh ! " exclaim the woman . " wait a bit till you get rid of your sore throat , and you will think different . poorly people get all sort o ' fancy . keep a bit quiet now , and do not   put yourself out so . " 

 " what be we to do ? I have   only get a few shilling " 

 " well , you will have money again some time , I suppose . you do not   suppose I will turn you out in the street ? write to Fred on Monday , and he will send you something . " 

 they talk till Lotty exhaust herself again , then Ida be allow to re - enter the room . Mrs. Ledward keep come and go till her own bed - time , give what help and comfort she could in her hard , half - indifferent way . another night pass , and in the morning Lotty seem a little well . her throat be not so painful , but she breathe with difficulty , and have a cough . Ida sit hold her mother 's hand . it be a sunny morning , and the bell of neighbouring church begin to ring out clearly on the frosty air . 

 " Ida , " say the sick woman , raise herself suddenly , " get I some note - paper and an envelope out of the box ; and go and borrow pen and ink , there be a good child . " 

 the material be procure , and , with a great effort , Lotty manage to arrange herself so as to be able to write . she cover four page with a sad scrawl , close the envelope , and be about to direct it , but pause . 

 " the bell have stop , " she say , listen . " it be half - past eleven . put on your thing , Ida . " 

 the child obey , wonder . 

 " give I my purse out of the drawer . see , there be a shilling . now , say this after I : Mr. Abra'm Woodstock , number , St. John Street Road . " 

 Ida repeat the address . 

 " now , listen , Ida . you put this letter in your pocket ; you go down into the Mary'bone road ; you ask for a ' bus to the Angel . when you get to the Angel , you ask your way to Number , St. John Street Road ; it be not   far off . knock at the door , and ask if Mr. Abra'm Woodstock be in . if he be , say you want to see he , and then give he this letter , into his own hand , and nobody else 's . if he be not   in , ask when he will be , and , if it will not   be long , wait . " 

 Ida promise , and then , after a long gaze , her mother drop back again on the pillow , and turn she face away . a cough shake she for a few moment . Ida wait . 

 " well , be not   you go ? " ask Lotty faintly . 

 " kiss I , mother . " 

 they hold each other in a passionate embrace , and then the child go away . 

 she reach Islington without difficulty , and among the bustling and loitering crowd which obstruct the corner at the Angel , find some one to direct she to the street she seek . she have to walk some distance down St. John Street Road , in the direction of the City , before discover the house she desire to find . when she reach it , it prove to be a very dingy tenement , the ground - floor apparently use as office ; a much - wear plate on the door exhibit the name of the gentleman to whom her visit be , with his professional description add . Mr. Woodstock be an accountant . 

 she ring the bell , and a girl appear . yes , Mr. Woodstock be at home . Ida be tell to enter the passage , and wait . 

 a door at her right hand as she enter be slightly ajar , and voice could be hear from the other side of it . one of these voice very shortly raise itself in a harsh and angry tone , and Ida could catch what be say . 

 " well , Mr. What's - your - name , I suppose I know my own business rather well than you can teach I . it be pretty clear you have   be do your good for some time to set the people against I , and I be damned if I will have it ! you go to the place on religious pretence , and what your real object may be I do not   know ; but I do know one thing , and that be , I will not   have you hang about any long . I will meet you there myself , and if it be a third - floor window you get pitch out of , well , it will not   be my fault . now I do not   want any more talk with you . this be most folk ' pray - time ; I wonder you be not at it . it be my time for write letter , and I would rather have your room than your company . I be a plain - speak man , you see , a man of business , and I do not   mince matter . to come and dictate to I about the state of my house and of my tenant be not   a business - like proceeding , and you will excuse I if I do not   take it kindly . there be the door , and good morning to you ! " 

 the door open , and a young man , look pale and dismayed , come out quickly , and at once leave the house . behind he come the last speaker . at the sight of the wait child he stand still , and the expression of his face change from sour annoyance to annoyed surprise . 

 " eh ? well ? " he exclaim , look closely at Ida , his eye - brow contracting . 

 " I have a letter for Mr. Abra'm Woodstock , sir . " 

 " well , give it here . who be it from ? " 

 " Mrs. Starr , sir . " 

 " who be Mrs. Starr ? come in here , will you ? " 

 his short and somewhat angry tone be evidently in some degree the result of the interview that have just close , but also pretty clearly an indication of his general manner to stranger . he let the child pass he , and follow she into the room with the letter in his hand . he do not seem able to remove his eye from her face . Ida , on her side , do not dare to look up at he . he be a massively build , grey - head man of something more than sixty . everything about he express strength and determination , power alike of body and mind . his feature be large and heavy , but the forehead would have become a man of strong intellect ; the eye be full of astonishing vital force , and the chin be a physiognomical study , so strikingly do its moulding express energy of character . he be clean - shaven , and scarcely a seam or wrinkle anywhere break the hard , smooth surface of his visage , its complexion clear and rosy as that of a child . 

 still regard Ida , he tear open the envelope . at the sight of the writing he , not exactly start , but move his head rather suddenly , and again turn his eye upon the messenger . 

 " sit down , " he say , point to a chair . the room be an uncomfortable office , with no fire . he himself take a seat deliberately at a desk , whence he could watch Ida , and begin to read . as he do so , his face remain unmoved , but he look away occasionally , as if to reflect . 

 " what be your name ? " he ask , when he have finish , begin , at the same time , to tear the letter into very small piece , which he throw into a waste - paper basket . 

 " Ida , sir , Ida Starr . " 

 " Starr , eh ? " he look at her very keenly , and , still look , and still tear up the letter , go on in a hard , unmodulated voice . " well , Ida Starr , it seem your mother want to put you in the way of earn your living . " the child look up in fear and astonishment . " you can carry a message ? you will say to your mother that I will undertake to do what I can for you , on one condition , and that be that she put you in my hand and never see you again . " 

 " oh , I can not   leave mother ! " burst from the child 's lip involuntarily , her horror overcome her fear of the speaker . 

 " I do not   ask you if you could , " remark Mr. Woodstock , with something like a sneer , tap the desk with the finger of his right hand . " I ask whether you could carry a message . can you , or not ? " 

 " yes , I can , " stammer Ida . 

 " then take that message , and tell your mother it be all I have   get to say . run away . " 

 he rise and stand with his hand behind he , watch she . Ida make what haste she could to the door , and speed out into the street . 




 CHAPTER III 

 antecedent 

 it would not have be easy to find another instance of a union of keen intellect and cold heart so singular as that display in the character of Abraham Woodstock . the man s life have be strongly consistent from the beginning ; from boyhood a powerful will have bear he triumphantly over every difficulty , and in each decisive instance his will have be direct by a shrewd intelligence which know at once the strength of its own resource and the multiply weakness of the vast majority of man . in the pursuit of his end he would tolerate no obstacle which his strength would suffice to remove . in boyhood and early manhood the exuberance of his physical power be will not to manifest itself in brutal self - assertion . at school he be the bad kind of bully , his ferociousness temper by no cowardice . later on , he learn that a too demonstrative bearing would on many occasion interfere with his success in life ; he tone down his love of muscular victory , and only allow himself an outbreak every now and then , when he feel he could afford the indulgence . Put early into an accountant 's office , and lose his father about the same time   the parent , who have a diseased heart , be kill by an outburst of fury to which Abraham give way on some trivial occasion , he have henceforth to fight his own battle , and show himself very capable of win it . in many strange way he accumulate a little capital , and the development of commercial genius put he at a comparatively early age on the road to fortune . he keep to the business of an accountant , and by degree add several other distinct calling . he become a lender of money in several shape , keep both a loan - office and a pawnbroker 's shop . in middle age he frequent the race - course , but , for sufficient reason , drop that pursuit entirely before he have turn his fiftieth year . as a youth he have make a good thing of game of skill , but do not pursue they as a means of profit when he no long need the resource . 

 he marry at the age of thirty . this , like every other step he take , be well plan ; his wife bring he several thousand pound , be the daughter of a retire publican with whom Woodstock have have business relation . 

 two year after his marriage be bear his first and only child , a girl whom they call Lotty . Lotty , as she grow up , gradually develop an unfortunate combination of her parent ' quality ; she have her mother 's weakness of mind , without her mother 's moral sense , and from her father she derive an ingrained stubbornness , which have nothing in common with strength of character . doubly unhappy be it that she lose her mother so early ; the loss deprive she of gentle guidance during her youth , and leave she without resource against her father 's coldness or harshness . the result be that the soft element of her character unavoidably degenerate and find expression in quality not at all admirable , whilst her obstinacy grow the ally of the weakness from which she have most to fear . 

 Lotty be send to a day - school till the age of thirteen , then have to become her father 's housekeeper . her friend be very few , none of they likely to be of use to she . leave very much to her own control , she make an acquaintance which lead to secret intimacy and open disaster . rather than face her father with such a disclosure , she leave home , and throw herself upon the mercy of the man who have assist she to go astray . he be generous enough to support she for about a year , during which time her child be bear . then his help cease . 

 the familiar choice lie before her home again , the street , or starvation . hardship she could not bear ; the second alternative she shrink from on account of her child ; she determine to face her father . for he she have no affection , and know that he do not love she ; only desperation could drive she back . she come one Sunday evening , find Mr. Woodstock at home , and , without let the servant say who be come , go up and enter his presence , the child in her arm . Abraham rise and look at her calmly . her disappearance have not trouble he , though he have exert himself to discover why and whither she be go , and her return do not visibly affect he . she be a rebel against his authority so he view the matter and consequently quite beyond the range of his sympathy . he listen to all she have to say , beheld unmove her miserable tear , and , when she become silent , coolly deliver his ultimatum . for she he would procure a situation , whereby she could earn her living , and therewith his relation to she would end ; the child he would put into other hand and have it care for , but Lotty would lose sight of it for ever . the girl hesitate , but the maternal instinct be very strong in she ; the little one begin to cry , as if fear separation from its mother ; she decide to refuse . 

 " then I shall go on the street ! " she exclaim passionately . " there be nothing else leave for I . " 

 " you can go where you please , " return Abraham . 

 she try to obtain work , of course fruitlessly . she get into debt with her landlady , and only take the fatal step when at length absolutely turn adrift . 

 that be not quite ten year go by ; she be then but eighteen . let she have lose her child , and she would speedily have fall into the last stage of degradation . but the little one live . she have call it Ida , a name choose from some tale in the penny weekly , which be the solace of her misery . she herself take the name of Starr , also from a page of fiction . 

 balance the good and evil of this life in her dark little mind , Lotty determine that one thing there be for which it be worth while to make sacrifice , one end which she feel strong enough to keep persistently in view . Ida should be bring up " respectably " it be her own word ; she should be keep absolutely free from the contamination of her mother 's way of living ; nay , should , when the time come , go to school , and have good chance . and at the end of all this be a far - off hope , a dim vision of possibility , a vague trust that her daughter might perchance prove for she a means of return to that world of " respectability " from which she be at present so hopelessly shut out . she would keep make effort to get into an honest livelihood as often as an occasion present itself ; and Ida should always live with " respectable " people , cost what it might . 

 the last resolution be only adhere to for a few month . Lotty could not do without her little one , and eventually bring it back to her own home . it be not an infrequent thing to find little child live in disorderly house . in the profession Lotty have choose there be , as in all profession , grade and difference . she be by no mean a vicious girl , she have no love of riot for its own sake ; she would greatly have prefer a decent mode of life , have it seem practicable . hence she do not associate herself with the rank and file of abandon woman ; her resort be not the crowded centre ; her abode be not in the quarter consecrate to her business . in all part of London there be quiet by - street of house give up to lodge - letting , wherein be to be find many landlady , who , good easy soul , trouble little about the private moral of their lodger , so long as no positive disorder come about and no public scandal be occasion . a girl who say that she be occupy in a workroom be never presume to be able to afford the luxury of strict virtue , and if such a one , on take a room , say that ' she suppose she may have friend come to see she ? " the landlady will understand quite well what be mean , and will either accept or refuse she for a lodger as she see good . to such house as these Lotty confine herself . after some three or four year of various experience , she hit upon the abode in Milton Street , and there have dwelt ever since . she get on well with Mrs. Ledward , and have be able to make comfortable arrangement for Ida . the other lodger in the house be generally very quiet and orderly people , and she herself be quite successful in arrange her affair so as to create no disturbance . she have her regular clientele ; she frequent the road about Regent 's Park and Primrose Hill ; and she support herself and her child . 

 Ida Starr 's bringing up be in no respect inferior to that she would have receive in the home of the average London artisan or small tradesman . at five year old she have begin to go to school ; Mrs. Ledward 's daughter , a girl of seventeen , take she backwards and forwards every day . at this school she remain three year and a half ; then her mother take she away , and put she under the care of Miss Rutherford , a well teacher . when at home , she either amuse herself in Lotty 's room , or , when that be engage , make herself comfortable with Mrs. Ledward 's family , with one or other of whom she generally pass the night . she hear no bad language , see nothing improper , listen to no bad conversation than any of the other child at Miss Rutherford 's . even at her present age of ten it never occur to she to inquire how her mother support herself . the charge bring by Harriet Smales convey to her mind no conception of their true meaning ; they be to her mere general calumny of vague application . her mother " bad , " indeed ! if so , then what be the meaning of goodness ? for poor Lotty 's devotion to the child have receive its due reward herein , that she be love as purely and intensely as any most virtuous parent could hope to be ; so little regard have nature for social code , so utterly be she often oppose to all the precept of respectability . this phrase of Harriet 's be the very first breathe against her mother 's character that Ida have ever hear . Lotty have invent fable , for the child 's amusement , about her own early day . the legend be , that her husband have die about a year after marriage . of course Ida implicitly believe all this . her mind contain picture of a beautiful little house just outside London in which her mother have once live , and her imagination busy itself with the time when they would both live in just that same way . she be go to be a teacher , so it have be decide in confidential chat , and would one day have a school of her own . in such a future Lotty herself really believe . the child seem to her extraordinarily clover , and in four more year she would be as old as a girl who have assist with the little one in the first school she go to . Lotty be ambitious . offer of Mrs. Ledward to teach Ida dressmaking , she have put aside ; it be not good enough . 

 yet Ida be not in reality remarkable either for industry or quickness in learn . at both school she have frequently to be deal with somewhat severely . ability she show from time to time , but in application she be sadly lack . book be distasteful to she , more even than to most child ; she learn sometimes by listen to the teacher , but seldom the lesson give she to prepare . at home there be no book to tempt she to read for herself ; her mother never read , and would not have know how to set about give her child a love for such occupation , even have she deem it needful . and yet Ida always seem to have abundance to think about ; she would sit by herself for hour , without any childlike employment , and still not seem weary . when ask what her thought run upon , she could not give very satisfactory answer ; she be always rather slow in express herself , and never chatter , even to her mother . one queer and most unchildlike habit she have , which , as if think it wrong , she only indulge when quite alone ; she love to sit before a look - glass and gaze into her own face . at such time her little countenance become very sad without any understand reason . 

 the past summer have be to she a time of happiness , for there have come comparatively little bad weather , and sunshine be like wine to Ida . the proximity of the park be a great advantage . during the week of summer holiday , she spend whole day wander about the large , grassy tract by herself , rejoice in the sensation of freedom from task - work . if she be especially in luck , a dog would come and play about she , desert for a minute its lawful master or mistress , and the child would roll upon the grass in delighted sport . or she would find out a warm , shady nook quite near to the border of the Zoological Gardens , and would lie there with ear eager to catch the occasional sound from the animal within . the roar of the lion thrill she with an exquisite trembling ; the call of the bird make her laugh with joy . once , three year ago , her mother have take she to Hastings for a week , and when she now catch the cry of the captive sea - gull , it bring back marvellous memory of the ocean flash in the sun , of the music of breaker , of the fresh smell of the brine . 

 now there have come upon she the first great grief . she have cause her mother bitter suffering , and her own heart be fill with a commensurate pain . have she be a little old she would already have be trouble by another anxiety ; for the last two year her mother 's health have be fall away ; every now and then have come a fit of illness , and at other time Lotty suffer from a depression of spirit which leave she no energy to move about . Ida know that her mother be often unhappy , but naturally could not dwell long on this as soon as each successive occasion have pass away . indeed , in her heart , she almost welcome such time , since she be then allow to sleep upstairs , one of her great joy . Lotty be only too well aware of the physical weakness which be gain upon she . she be mentally troubled , moreover . Ida be grow up ; there would come a time , and that very shortly , when it would be necessary either for they to part , or else for herself to change her mode of life . indeed , she have never from the first quite lost sight of her intention to seek for an honest mean of support ; and of late year the consciousness of her hopeless position have grow to an ever - recur trouble . she know the propose step be in reality impossible to she , yet she persistently think and talk of it . to Mrs. Ledward she confide at least once a week , generally when she pay her rent , her settle intention to go and find work of some kind in the course of the next two or three day ; till at length this have become a stand joke with the landlady , who laugh merrily as often as the subject be mention . Lotty have of late let her thought turn to her father , whom she have never see since their parting . not with any affection do she think of he , but , in her despairing moment , it seem to her impossible that he should still refuse aid if she appeal to he for it . several time of late she have be on the point of put her conviction to the test . she have pass his house from time to time , and know that he still live there . perhaps the real reason of her hesitation be , not fear of he , but a dread , which she would not confess to herself , lest he should indeed prove obdurate , and so put an end to her last hope . for what would become of she and of Ida if her health absolutely fail ? the poor creature shrink from the thought in horror . the hope connect with her father grow more and more strong . but it need some very decide crisis to bring she to the point of overcome all the apprehension which lie in the way of an appeal to the stern old man this crisis have arrive . the illness which be now upon she she feel to be more serious than any she have yet suffer . suppose she be to die , and Ida to be leave alone in the world even before she hear of the child 's dismissal from school she have all but make up her mind to write to her father , and the shock of that event give she the last impulse . she write a letter of pitiful entreaty . would he help she to some mean of earn a living for herself and her child ? she could not part from Ida . perhaps she have not long to live , and to ask she to give up her child would be too cruel . she would do anything , would go into service , perform the hard and coarse toil . she tell he how Ida have be bring up , and implore his pity for the child , who at all event be innocent . 

 when Ida reach home from her visit to the City , she see her mother risen and sit by the fire . Lotty have find the suspense insupportable as she lie still , and , though the pain in her chest grow bad and the feeling of lassitude be gain upon she , she have half - dress , and even try to move about . just before the child 's appearance , she seem to have sink into something of a doze on her chair , for , as the door open , she start and look about she in doubt . 

 " where have you be so long ? " she ask impatiently . 

 " I get back as quickly as I could , mother , " say Ida , in some surprise . 

 " got back ? be school over ? " 

 " from the the place you send I to , mother . " 

 " what be I think of ! " exclaim Lotty , start to consciousness . " come here , and tell I . do you see see he , Ida ? Mr. Woodstock , you know . " 

 " yes , mother , " begin the child , with pale face , " and he he say I be to tell you " 

 she burst into tear , and fly to her mother 's neck . 

 " oh , you will not   send I away from you , mother dear ? I can not   go away from you ! " 

 Lotty feel she know what this mean . fear and trouble work with her physical weakness to drive she almost distracted . she spring up , catch the child by the shoulder , and shake she as if in anger . 

 " tell I , can not   you ? " she cry , strain her weak voice . " what do he say ? do not   be a little fool ! can not   the child speak ? " 

 she fall back again , seize with a cough which choke she . Ida stay her sobbing , and look on in terror . her mother motion constantly to she to proceed . 

 " the gentleman say , " Ida continue , with calm which be the result of extreme self - control , " that he would take I ; but that you be never to see I again . " 

 " do he say anything else about I ? " whisper Lotty . 

 " no , nothing else . " 

 " go go and tell he you will come , you will leave I . " 

 Ida stand in anguish , speechless and motionless . all at once her mother seem to forget what she be say , and sit still , star into the fire . several time she shiver . her hand lie listlessly on her lap ; she breathe with difficulty . 

 shortly afterwards , the landlady come into the room . she be alarm at Lotty 's condition . her attempt to arouse the sick woman to consciousness be only partly successful . she go downstairs again , and return with another woman , a lodger in the house . these two talk together in low tone . the result of their colloquy be that Mrs. Ledward dress Lotty as well as she could , whilst the other leave the house and return with a cab . 

 " we be go to take your mother to the hospital , " say Mrs. Ledward to the child . " you wait here till we come back , there be a good girl . now , hold up a bit , Lotty ; try and walk downstairs . that be well , my girl . " 

 Ida be leave alone . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 CHRISTMAS in two home 

 when Ida Starr be dismiss from school it want but a few day to the vacation . the day which follow her mother 's removal to the hospital be Christmas Eve . for two hour on the afternoon of Christmas Day , Ida sit in silence by the bedside in the ward , hold her mother 's hand . the patient be not allow to speak , seem indeed unable to do so . the child might not even kiss she . the Sister and the nurse look pityingly at Ida when they pass by , and , when the visitor ' time be at an end , and she have to rise and go , the Sister put an orange into her hand , and speak a few hopeful word . 

 Night be set in as she walk homeward ; it be cold , and the sky threaten snow . she have only go a few yard , when there come by a little girl of her own age , walk with some one who look like a nurse - maid . they be pass ; but all at once the child spring to Ida 's side with a cry of recognition . it be little Maud Enderby . 

 " where have you be , Ida ? where be you go ? oh , I be so glad ; I want so to see you . Miss Rutherford tell we you would leave school , and you be not   come back again . be not   you really ? and sha'n't   I see you ? " 

 " I do not   know , I think not , " say Ida . in her premature trouble she seem so much old than her friend . 

 " I tell Miss Rutherford you be not   to blame , " go on Maud eagerly . " I tell she it be Harriet 's own fault , and how shockingly she would behave to you . I expect you will come back again after the holiday , do not   you ? " 

 Ida shake her head , and say nothing . 

 " but I shall see you again ? " plead the little maid . " you know we be always go to be friend , be not   we ? who shall I tell all my dream to , if I lose you ? " 

 dream , in the literal sense of the word . seldom a week go by , but Maud have some weird vision of the night to recount to her friend , the meaning of which they would together try to puzzle out ; for it be an article of faith with both that there be meaning to be discover , and deep one . 

 Ida promise that she would not allow herself to be lose to her friend , and they kiss , and go their several way . 

 throughout the day the door of Mr. Smales 's shop have be open , though the shutter be up . but at nightfall it be closed , and the family draw around the tea - table in the parlour which smell so of drug . it be their only sit - room , for as much of the house as could be be let to another family . besides Mr. Smales and his daughter Harriet , there sit at the table a lad of about thirteen , with a dark , handsome face , which have something of a foreign cast his eye gleam at all time with the light of a frank joyousness ; he laugh with the unrestraint of a perfectly happy nature . his countenance be capable , too , of a thoughtfulness beyond his year , a gravity which seem to come of high thought or rich imagination . he bear no trace of resemblance to either the chemist or his daughter , yet be their relative . Mr. Smales have have a sister , who at an early age become a public singer , and so far prosper as to gain some little distinction in two or three opera season . Whilst thus engage , she make the acquaintance of an italian , Casti by name , fall in love with he , and subsequently follow he to Italy . her courage be reward , for there she become the singer 's wife . they travel for two year , during which time a son be bear to they . the mother 's health fail ; she be unable henceforth to travel with her husband , and , after live in Rome for nearly four year , she die there . the boy be shortly bring back to England by his father , and place in the care of Mr. Smales , on the understanding that a sum of money should be pay yearly for his support and education . from that day to the present nothing more have be hear of Signor Casti , and all the care of his sister 's child have fall upon poor smale , who be not too well provide with mean to support his own small household . however , he have not fail in the duty , and Julian   his name have be englishe   be still go to school at his uncle 's expense . it be by this time understand that , on leave school , he should come into the shop , and there qualify himself for the business of a chemist . 

 have it not be for Julian , the back parlour would have see but little cheerfulness to - night . Mr. Smales himself be always depressed in mind and ail in body . life have prove too much for he ; the burden of the recur daylight be beyond his strength . there be plainly no lack of kindliness in his disposition , and this never fail to come strongly into his countenance as often as he look at Harriet . she be his only child . her mother have die of consumption early in their married life , and it be his perpetual dread lest he should discover in Harriet a disposition to the same malady . 

 his fear have but too much stimulus to keep they alive . Harriet have pass through a sickly childhood , and be grow up with a feeble constitution . body and mind be alike unhealthy . of all the people who come in contact with she , her father alone be blind to her distorted sense of right , her baseless resentment , her malicious pleasure , her depraved intellect . his affection she repay with indifference . at present , the only person she appear to really like be the servant Sarah , a girl of vicious character . 

 Harriet have suffer more from Ida 's blow than have at first appear likely . the wound would not heal well , and she have have several feverish night . for her convenience , the couch have be draw up between the fire and the table ; and , recline here , she every now and then throw out a petulant word in reply to her father 's or Julian 's well - mean cheerfulness . but for the boy , the gloomy silence would seldom have be break . he , however , be full to - night of a favourite subject , and keep up a steady flow of bright narrative . at school he be much engage just now with the history of Rome , and it be his great delight to tell the listener at home the glorious story which be his late acquisition . all to - day he have be read Plutarch . the enthusiasm with which he speak of these old hero and their deed go beyond mere boyish admiration of valour and delight in bloodshed ; he seem to be strongly sensible of the real feature of greatness in these man 's life , and invest his story with a glow of poetical colour which find little appreciation in either of his hearer . 

 " and I be bear in Rome , be not   I , uncle ? " he exclaim at last . " I be a Roman ; Romanus sum ! " 

 then he laugh with his wonte bright gleefulness . it be half in jest , but for all that there be a genuine warmth on his cheek , and lustre in his fine eye . 

 " some day I will go to Rome again , " he say , " and both of you shall go with I . we shall see the Forum and the Capitol ! sha'n't   you shout when you see the Capitol , uncle ? " 

 poor smale only smile sadly and shake his head . it be a long way from Marylebone to Rome ; great still the distance between the boy 's mind and that of his uncle . 

 Sarah take Harriet to bed early . Julian have get hold of his Plutarch again , and read snatch of it aloud every now and then . his uncle pay no heed , be sink in dull reverie . when they have sit thus for more than an hour , Mr. Smales begin to exhibit a wish to talk . 

 " put the book away , and draw up to the fire , my boy , " he say , with as near an approach to heartiness as he be capable of . " it be Christmas time , and Christmas only come once a year . " 

 he rub his palm together , then begin to twist the corner of his handkerchief . 

 " well , Julian , " he go on , lean feebly forward to the fire , " a year more school , I suppose , and then business ; what ? " 

 " yes , uncle . " 

 the boy speak cheerfully , but yet not in the same natural way as before . 

 " I wish I could afford to make you something well , my lad ; you ought to be something well by right . and I do not   well know what you will find to do in this little shop . the business might be well ; yes , might be well . you will not   have much practice in dispense , I be afraid , unless thing improve . it be mostly hair - oil , and the patent medicine . it be a poor look - out for you , Julian . " 

 there be a silence . 

 " Harriet be not   quite well yet , be she ? " smale go on , half to himself . 

 " no , she look poorly to - night . " 

 " Julian , " begin the other , but pause , rub his hand more nervously than ever . 

 " yes , uncle ? " 

 " I wonder what ' ud become of she if I if I die now ? you be grow up , and you be a clever lad ; you will soon be able to shift for yourself . but what will Harriet do ? if only she have her health . and I shall have nothing to leave either she or you , Julian , nothing , nothing ! she will have to get she living somehow . I must think of some easy business for she , I must . she might be a teacher , but her head be not   strong enough , I fear . julian " 

 " yes , uncle ? " 

 " you you be old enough to understand thing , my boy , " go on his uncle , with quaver voice . " suppose , after I be dead and gone , Harriet should want help . she will not   make many friend , I fear , and she will have bad health . suppose she be in want of any kind , you would stand by she , Julian , would not   you ? you would be a friend to she , always ? " 

 " indeed I would , uncle ! " exclaim the boy stoutly . 

 " you promise I that , Julian , this Christmas night ? you promise it ? " 

 " yes , I promise , uncle . you have   always be kind and good to I , and see if I be not the same to Harriet . " 

 his voice tremble with generous emotion . 

 " no , I sha'n't   see it , my boy , " say smale , shake his head drearily ; " but the promise will be a comfort to I at the end , a comfort to I . you be a good lad , Julian ! " 

 Silence come upon they again . 

 in the same district , in one of a row of semi - detached house stand in garden , live Ida 's little friend , Maud Enderby , with her aunt , Miss Bygrave , a lady of forty - two or forty - three . the room be small and dark ; the furniture sparse , old - fashioned , and much worn ; there be no ornament in any of the room , with the exception of a few picture represent the sad incident in the life of Christ . on enter the front door you be oppress by the chill , damp atmosphere , and by a certain unnatural stillness . the stair be not carpet , but stain a dark colour ; a footfall upon they , however light , echo strangely as if from empty chamber above . there be no sign of lack of repair ; perfect order and cleanliness wherever the eye penetrate ; yet the general effect be an unspeakable desolation . 

 Maud Enderby , on reach home after her meeting with Ida , enter the front parlour , and sit down in silence near the window , where faint daylight yet glimmer . the room be without fire . over the mantelpiece hang an engraving of the Crucifixion ; on the opposite wall be the Agony in the Garden , and an entombment ; all after old master . the centre table , a few chair , and a small sideboard be the sole article of furniture . the table be spread with a white cloth ; upon it be a loaf of bread , a pitcher contain milk , two plate , and two glass . 

 Maud sit in the cold room for a quarter of an hour ; it become quite dark . then be hear a soft footstep descend the stair ; the door open , and a lady come in , bear a lighted lamp , which she stand upon the table . she be tall , very slender , and with a face which a painter might have use to personify the spiritual life . its outline be of severe perfection ; its expression a confirmed grief , subdue by , and make subordinate to , the consciousness of an inward strength which could convert suffering into triumph . her garment be black , of the simple possible design . in look at Maud , as the child rise from the chair , it be scarcely affection that her eye express , rather a grave compassion . Maud take a seat at the table without speak ; her aunt sit down over against she . in perfect silence they partook of the milk and the bread . Miss Bygrave then clear the table with her own hand , and take the thing out of the room . Maud still keep her place . the child 's manner be not at all constrain ; she be evidently behave in her wonte way . her eye wander about the room with rather a dreamy gaze , and , as often as they fall upon her aunt 's face , become very serious , though in no degree expressive of fear or even awe . 

 Miss Bygrave return , and seat herself near the little girl ; then remain thoughtful for some minute . the breath from their lip be plainly visible on the air . Maud almost shiver now and then , but force herself to suppress the impulse . her aunt presently break the silence , speak in a low voice , which have nothing of tenderness , but be most impressive in its earnest calm . 

 " I wish to speak to you before you go upstairs , Maud ; to speak of thing which you can not understand fully as yet , but which you be old enough to begin to think about . " 

 Maud be surprised . it be the first time that her aunt have ever address she in this serious way . she be use to be all but ignore , though never in a manner which make she feel that she be treat unkindly . there be nothing like confidence between they ; only in care for her bodily want do Miss Bygrave fill the place of the mother whose affection the child have never know . Maud cross her hand on her lap , and look up with respectful attention upon her pale sweet little face . 

 " do you wonder at all , " Miss Bygrave go on , " why we never spend Christmas like your friend do in their home , with eat and drinking and all sort of merriment ? " 

 " yes , aunt , I do . " 

 it be evidently the truth , and give with the simple directness which characterise the child . 

 " you know what Christmas Day mean , Maud ? " 

 " it be the day on which Christ be bear . " 

 " and for what purpose do Christ come as a child on earth ? " 

 Maud think for a moment . she have never have any direct religious teaching ; all she know of these matter be gather from her regular attendance at church . she reply in a phrase which have rest in her mind , though probably convey little if any meaning to she . 

 " he come to make we free from sin . " 

 " and so we should rejoice at his coming . but would it please he , do you think , to see we show our joy by indulge in those very sin from which he come to free we ? " 

 Maud look with puzzled countenance . 

 " be it a sin to like cake and sweet thing , aunt ? " 

 the gravity of the question bring a smile to Miss Bygrave 's close , strong lip . 

 " listen , Maud , " she say , " and I will tell you what I mean . for you to like such thing be no sin , as long as you be still too young to have it explain to you why you should overcome that liking . as I say , you be now old enough to begin to think of more than a child 's foolishness , to ask yourself what be the meaning of the life which have be give you , what duty you must set before yourself as you grow up to be a woman . when once these duty have become clear to you , when you understand what the end of life be , and how you should seek to gain it , then many thing become sinful which be not so before , and many duty must be perform which previously you be not ready for . " 

 Miss Bygrave speak with effort , as if she find it difficult to express herself in sufficiently simple phraseology . speak , she do not look at the child ; and , when the pause come , her eye be still fix absently on the picture above the mantelpiece . 

 " keep in mind what I shall tell you , " she proceed with grow solemnity , " and some day you will well understand its meaning than you can now . the sin which Christ come to free we from be fondness for the world , enjoyment of what we call pleasure , desire for happiness on earth . he himself come to set we the example of one to whom the world be nothing , who could put aside every joy , and make his life a life of sorrow . even that be not enough . when the time have come , and he have finish his teaching of the disciple whom he choose , he willingly undergo the most cruel of all death , to prove that his teaching have be the truth , and to show we that we must face any most dreadful suffering rather than desert what we believe to be right . " 

 she point to the crucified figure , and Maud follow the direction of her hand with awed gaze . 

 " and this , " say Miss Bygrave , " be why I think it wrong to make Christmas a time of merriment . in the true Christian , every enjoyment which come from the body be a sin . if you feel you like this or that , it be a sign that you must renounce it , give it up . if you feel fond of life , you must force yourself to hate it ; for life be sin . life be give to we that we may conquer ourselves . we be place in the midst of sin that we may struggle against its temptation . there be temptation in the very breath you draw , since you feel a dread if it be check . you must live so as to be ready at any moment to give up your life with gladness , as a burden which it have be appoint you to bear for a time . there be temptation in the love you feel for those around you ; it make you cle to life ; you be tempt to grieve if you lose they , whereas death be the great blessing in the gift of God . and just because it be so , we must not snatch at it before our time ; it would be a sin to kill ourselves , since that would be to escape from the task set we . many pleasure would seem to be innocent , but even these it be well to renounce , since for that purpose do every pleasure exist . I speak of the pleasure of the world . one joy there be which we may and must pursue , the joy of sacrifice . the more the body suffer , the great should be the delight of the soul ; and the only moment of perfect happiness should be that when the world grow dark around we , and we feel the hand of death upon our heart . " 

 she be silent , and both sit in the cold room without word or motion . 




 CHAPTER V 

 POSSIBILITIES 

 Christmas pass , and the beginning of the New Year draw nigh . and , one morning , as Mr. Woodstock be glance up and down the page of a ledger , a telegram be deliver to he . it be from a hospital in the north - west of London . " your daughter be die , and wish to see you . please come at once . " 

 Lotty 's ailment have declare itself as pneumonia . she be frequently delirious , and the substance of her talk at such time lead the attendant Sister to ask she , when reason return , whether she do not wish any relative to be send for . Lotty be frightened , but , as long as she be tell that there be still hope of recovery , decline to mention any name . the stubborn independence which have support she through these long year assert itself again , as a reaction after her fruitless appeal ; at moment she feel that she could die with her lip close , and let what might happen to her child . but when she at length read upon the face of those about she that her fate hang in the balance , and when she see the face of little Ida , come there she know not how , look upon she from the bedside , then her purpose yield , and in a whisper she tell her father 's address , and beg that he might be apprise of her state . 

 Abraham Woodstock arrive at the hospital , but to no purpose . Lotty have lose her consciousness . he wait for some hour ; there be no return of sensibility . when it have be long dark , and he have withdraw from the ward for a little , he be all at once hastily summon back . he stand by the bedside , his hand behind his back , his face set in a hard gaze upon the pale feature on the pillow . opposite to he stand the medical man , and a screen place around the bed shut they off from the rest of the ward . all at once Lotty 's eye open . it seem as though she recognise her father , for a look of surprise come to her countenance . then there be a gasping for breath , a struggle , and the eye see no more , for all their staring . 

 Mr. Woodstock leave the hospital . at the first public - house he reach he enter and drank a glass of whisky . the barman have forget the piece of lemon , and be reward with an oath considerably strong than the occasion seem to warrant . arrive at certain cros - way , Mr. Woodstock pause . his eye be turn downwards ; he do not seem dubious of his way , so much as in hesitation as to a choice of direction . he take a few step hither , then back ; begin to wend thither , and again turn . when he at length decide , his road bring he to Milton Street , and up to the door on which stand the name of Mrs. Ledward . 

 he knock loudly , and the landlady herself open . 

 " a Mrs. Starr live here , I believe ? " he ask . 

 " she do live here , sir , but she be in the orspital at present , I be sorry to say . " 

 " be her child at home ? " 

 " she be , sir . " 

 " let I see she , will you ? in some room , if you please . " 

 Mrs. Ledward 's squint eye take shrewd stock of this gentleman , and , with much politeness , she show he into her own parlour . then she summon Ida from upstairs , and , the door be close upon the two , she hold she ear as closely as possible to the keyhole . 

 Ida recognise her visitor with a start , and draw back a little . there be both fear and dislike in her face , fear perhaps predominate . 

 " you remember come to see I , " say Mr. Woodstock , look down upon the child , and a trifle askance . 

 " yes , sir , " be Ida 's reply . 

 " I have just be at the hospital . your mother be dead . " 

 his voice give way a little between the first and the last letter of the last word . perhaps the sound be more to his ear than the thought have be to his mind . perhaps , also , he feel when it be too late that he ought to have make this announcement with something more of preparation . Ida 's eye be fix upon his face , and seem expand as they gaze ; her lip have part ; she be the image of sudden dread . he try to look away from she , but somehow could not . then two great tear drop upon her cheek , and her mouth begin to quiver . she put her hand up to her face , and sob as a grown woman might have do . 

 Mr. Woodstock turn away for a minute , and finger a china ornament on the mantelpiece . he hear the sob forcibly check , and , when there be silence , again face his grandchild . 

 " you will be leave all alone now , you see , " he say , his voice less hard . " I be a friend of your mother 's , and I will do what I can for you . you would well come with I to my house . " 

 Ida look at he in surprise , temper with indignation . 

 " if you be a friend of mother 's , " she say , " why do you want to take I away from she and never let she see I again ? " 

 " well , you have   nothing to do with that , " say Abraham roughly . " go and put your thing on , and come with I . " 

 " no , " reply Ida firmly . " I do not   want to go with you . " 

 " what you want have nothing to do with it . you will do as I tell you . " 

 Abraham feel strangely in this interview . it be as though time be repeat itself , and he be once more at issue with his daughter 's childish wilfulness . 

 Ida do not move . 

 " why will not   you come ? " ask Mr. Woodstock sharply . 

 " I do not   want to , " be Ida 's answer . 

 " look here , then , " say the other , after a brief consideration . " you have the choice , and you be old enough to see what it mean . you can either come with I and be well care for , or stay here and shift as well you can ; now , be sharp and make up your mind . " 

 " I do not   wish to go with you , I will stay here and do my good . " 

 " very well . " 

 Mr. Woodstock whistle a bar of an air , step from the room , and thence out into the street . 

 it be not his intention really to go at once . Irritation have make it impossible for he to speak long with the child ; he would walk the length of the street and return to give she one more chance . distract in purpose as he have never be in his life before , he reach Marylebone Road ; rain be just begin to fall , and he have no umbrella with he . he stand and look back . Ida once out of his sight , that impatient tenderness which her face inspire fail before the recollection of her stubbornness . she have match her will with his , as bad an omen as well could be . what be the child to he , or he to she ? he do not feel capable of try to make she like he ; what good in renew the old conflict and upset the position of freedom he have attain ? Doubtless she inherit a fatal disposition . in his mind lurk the foreknowledge that he might come to be fond of this little outcast , but Woodstock be incapable as yet of understanding that love must and will be its own reward . the rain fall heavier , and at this moment an omnibus come up . he hail it , say to himself that he would think the matter over and come back on the morrow . the first part of his purpose he fulfil ; but to Milton Street he never return . 

 as soon as he have leave the house , Mrs. Ledward bounce into the room where Ida stand . 

 " you little idjot ! " she exclaim . " what do you mean by refuse a offer like that ! why , the gentleman 's your own father . " 

 " my father ! " repeat Ida , in scornful astonishment . " my father die when I be a baby . Mother 's tell I so often . " 

 " if you believe all your mother tell you , well , well , you have be a little wooden - head . what make you behave like that to he ? where do he live , eh ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " you do know . why , I hear he say you would be to see he . and what be you go to do , I would like to know ? you do not   expect I to keep you , I s'pose . tell I at once where the gentleman live , and let I take you there . the idea of your turn against your own father ! " 

 " he be not my father ! " cry Ida passionately . " my father be dead ; and now mother 's dead , and I be alone . " she turn and go from the room , weep bitterly . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 AN advertisement 

 in a morning newspaper of March 187 , that be to chapter , appear a singular advertisement . 

 " WANTED , human companionship . a young man of four - and - twenty wish to find a congenial associate of about his own age . he be a student of ancient and modern literature , a free - thinker in religion , a lover of art in all its form , a hater of conventionalism . would like to correspond in the first instance . Address O. W. , City News Rooms , W.C. " 

 an advertisement which , naturally , might mean much or little , might be the outcome of an idle whim , or the despairing cry of a hungry heart . it could not be expect to elicit many reply ; and bring indeed but one . 

 behind the counter of a chemist 's shop in Oxford Street there serve , day after day , a young assistant much observe of female customer . the young man be handsome , and not with that vulgar handsomeness which be fairly common among the well kind of shop - walker and counter - keeper . he have rather long black hair , which arrange itself in silky ripple about a face of perfectly clear , though rather dark , complexion . when he smile , as he frequently do , the effect be very pleasant . he speak , too , with that musical intonation which be always more or less suggestive of musical thought . he do not seem by any mean ideally adapt to the place he occupy here , yet fill it without suspicion of constraint or uneasiness : there be nothing in he to make one suppose that he have ever be accustom to a well sphere of life . 

 he live in the house above the shop , and have do so for about two year ; previously he have hold a like position in a more modest establishment . his bed - room , which have to serve he as sit - room also during his free hour , give indication of a taste not ordinarily find in chemist ' assistant . on the wall be several engraving of view in Rome , ancient and modern ; and there be two bookcase fill with literature which have evidently know the second - hand stall , most of the latin poet , a few italian book , and some english classic . not a trace anywhere of the habit and predilection not unfairly associate with the youth of the shop , not even a pipe or a cigar - holder . it be while sit alone here one evening , half musing , half engage in glance over the advertisement in a paper two day old , that the assistant have be attract by the insertion just quote . he read and re - read it , become more thoughtful , sigh slightly . then he move to the table and take some note - paper out of a writing - case . still he seem to be in doubt , hesitate in press a pen against his thumb - nail , be on the point of put the note - paper away again . ultimately , however , he sit down to write . he cover four page with a letter , which he then proceed deliberately to correct and alter , till he have cut it down by about half . then come another period of doubt before he decide to make a fair copy . but it be finally make , and the signature at the foot be : Julian Casti . 

 he go out at once to the post . 

 two day later he receive a reply , somewhat long than his own epistle . the writer be clearly keep himself in a tentative attitude . still , he write something about his own position and his need . he be a teacher in a school in South London , live in lodging , with his evening mostly unoccupied . his habit , he declare , be Bohemian . suppose , by way of test each other 's disposition , they be to interchange view on some book with which both be likely to be acquaint : say , Keats 's poem ? in conclusion , the " O. W. " of the advertisement sign himself Osmond Waymark . 

 the result be that , a week after , Casti receive an invitation to call on Waymark , at the latter 's lodging in Walcot Square , Kennington . he arrive on a Saturday evening , just after eight o'clock . the house he seek prove to be one of very modest appearance ; small , apparently not too clean , generally uninviting . but a decent - look woman open the door , and say that Mr. Waymark would be find in response to a knock at the first - floor front . the visitor make his way up the dark , narrow stair - case , and knock as bid . a firm voice summon he to enter . 

 from a seat by a table which be place as near as possible to a very large fire rise a young man whose age might have be either twenty - three or twenty - six . Most people would have incline to give he the latter figure . he be rather above the average stature , and show well - hang limb , with a habit of hold himself which suggest considerable toughness of sinew ; he move gracefully , and with head well hold up . his attire speak sedentary habit ; would have be decidedly shabby , but for its evident adaptation to easy - chair and fireside . the pure linen and general tone of cleanliness be reassure ; the hand , too , which he extend , be soft , delicate , and finely form . the head be strike , strongly individual , set solidly on a rather long and shapely neck ; a fine forehead , irregular nose , rather prominent jaw - bone , lip just a little sensual , but speak good - humour and intellectual character . a heavy moustache ; no beard . eye dark , keen , very capable of tenderness , but perhaps more often shrewdly discern or cynically speculative . one feel that the present expression of genial friendliness be unfamiliar to the face , though it by no mean fail in pleasantness . the lip have the look of be frequently gnaw in intense thought or strong feeling . in the cheek no healthy colour , but an extreme sallowness on all the feature . smile , he show imperfect tooth . altogether , a young man upon whom one feel it difficult to pronounce in the early stage of acquaintance ; whose intimacy but few man would exert themselves to seek ; who in all likelihood be chary of exhibit his true self save when secure of be understand . 

 Julian Casti be timid with stranger ; his eye fall before the other 's look , and he shake hand without speak . the contrast in mere appearance between the two be very pronounce ; both seem in some degree to be aware of it . Waymark seem more rugged than in ordinary companionship ; the slightly effeminate beauty of Casti , and his diffident , shyly graceful manner , be more noticeable than usual . Waymark inspect his visitor closely and directly ; the latter only venture upon one or two quick side glance . yet the result be , on the whole , mutually satisfactory . 

 Julian 's eye glisten at the sight of two goodly bookcase , reach from floor to ceiling . there be , too , picture of other than the lodge - house type ; engrave head of the great in art and science , and a few reproduction in pencil or chalk of know subject , perchance their possessor 's own work . on the table lie trace of literary occupation , sheet of manuscript , open book , and the like . on another table stand a tray , with cup and saucer . a kettle be boil on the fire . 

 Waymark help the conversation by offer a cup of coffee , which he himself make . 

 " you smoke , I hope ? " he ask , reach some cigar from the mantelpiece . 

 Julian shake his head , with a smile . 

 " no ? how on earth do you support existence ? at all event , you do not , as the railway - carriage phrase have it , object to smoking ? " 

 " not at all . I like the scent , but be never tempt to go far . " 

 Waymark fill his pipe , and make himself conformable in a low cane - bottom chair , which have stand fold - up against the wall . talk begin to range over very various topic , Waymark lead the way , his visitor only gradually venture to take the initiative . theatre be mention , but Julian know little of they ; recent book , but with these he have small acquaintance ; politic , but in these he have clearly no interest . 

 " that be a point of contact , at all event , " exclaim Waymark . " I det the very name of Parliament , and could as soon read Todhunter on conic Sections as the report of a debate . perhaps you be a mathematician ? " this with a smile . 

 " by no mean , " be the reply . " in fact , " Casti go on , " I be afraid you begin to think my interest be very narrow indeed . my opportunity have be small . I leave a very ordinary school at fourteen , and what knowledge I have since get have come from my own effort . I be sure the profit from our intercourse would be entirely on my side . I have the wish to go in for many thing , however , " 

 " oh , " break in the other , " do not   suppose that I be a scholar in any sense of the word , or a man of more than average culture . my own regular education come to an end pretty much at the same age , and only a certain stubbornness have force I into an intellectual life , if you can call it so . not much intellect require in my every - day business , at all event . the school in which I teach be a fair type of the middle - class commercial ' academy ; ' the headmaster a nincompoop and charlatan , my fellow - assistant poor creature , who must live , I suppose , though one do not   well understand why . I have always a liking for Greek and Latin and can make shift to read both in a way satisfactory to myself , though I dare say it would not   go for much with college examiner . then , as for my scribbling , well , it have scarcely yet pass the amateur stage . it will some day ; simply because I have   make up my mind that it shall ; but as yet I have not   get beyond a couple of weak article in weak magazine , and I do not   exactly feel sure of my way . I rather think we shall approach most nearly in our taste for poetry . I like much what you have to say about Keats . it decide I that we ought to go on . " 

 Julian look up with a bright smile . 

 " what do you think at first of my advertisement , eh ? " cry Waymark , with a sudden burst of loud laughter . " queer idea , be not   it ? " 

 " it come upon I curiously . it be so like a frequent thought of my own actually carry out . " 

 " it be ? you have feel that same desperate need of congenial society ? " 

 " I have feel it very strongly indeed . I live so very much alone , and have always do so . fortunately I be of a very cheerful disposition , or I might have suffer much . the young fellow I see every day have not   much intellect , it must be confess . I use to try to get they under the influence of my own enthusiasm , but they do not   seem to understand I . they care only for thing which either repel I , or be utterly without interest . " 

 " ha ! you understand what that mean ! " Waymark have rise from his low chair , and stand with his back to the fire . his eye have a new life , and he speak in a strong , emphatic way which suit well with his countenance . " you know what it be to have to do exclusively with fool and brute , to rave under the vile restraint of philistine surrounding ? then you can form some notion of the state I be in when I take the step of write that advertisement ; I be , I firmly believe , on the verge of lunacy ! for two or three day I have come back home from the school only to pace up and down the room in an indescribable condition . I get often like that , but this time thing seem reach a head . why , I positively cry with misery , absurd as it may sound . my blood seem too hot , seem to be swell out the vein beyond endurance . as a rule I get over these mood by furious walking about the street half through the night , but I could not   even do that . I have no money to go in for dissipation : that often help I . every book be loathsome to I . my landlady must have overhear something , for she come in and begin a conversation about God know what ; I fear I mortally offend she ; I could have pitch the poor old woman out of the window ! Heavens , how do I get through those night ? " 

 " and the fit have pass ? " inquire Julian when the other cease . 

 " the Lord be praise ; yes ! " Waymark laugh half - scornfully . " there come an editor 's note , accept a thing that have be go from magazine to magazine for three month . this snatch I up into furious spirit . I rush out to a theatre , drink more than be good for I , make a fool of myself in general , and then receive your letter . good luck never come singly . " 

 Julian have watch the strange working of Waymark 's face with close interest . when the latter suddenly turn his eye , as if to see the effect of all his frankness , Casti colour slightly and look away , but with a look of friendly sympathy . 

 " do I shock you ? " ask the other . " do you think I rather too much of an animal , for all my spiritual longing ? " 

 " certainly not , I can well understand you , I believe . " 

 the conversation pass to quieter thing . Julian seem afraid of say too much about his own experience , but find opportunity of show his acquaintance with english poetry , which be quite as extensive as that of his new friend , except in the case of a few writer of the day , whom he have not be able to procure . he have teach himself italian , too , and have read considerably in that language . he explain that his father be an italian , but have die when he himself be still an infant . 

 " you have be in Italy ? " ask Waymark , with interest . 

 a strange look come over Julian 's feature , a look at once bright and melancholy ; his fine eye gleam as be their will not eight year ago , in the back - parlour in Boston Street , when he be tell tale from Plutarch . 

 " not , " he say , in a low voice charge with feeling , ' since I be three year old . you will think it strange , but I do not   so much long for the modern Italy , for the beautiful scenery and climate , not even for the Italy of Raphael , or of Dante . I think most of classical Italy . I be no scholar , but I love the Latin writer , and can forget myself for hour , work through Livy or Tacitus . I want to see the ruin of Rome ; I want to see the Tiber , the Clitumnus , the Aufidus , the Alban Hills , Lake Trasimenus , a thousand place ! it be strange how those old time have take hold upon I . the mere name in roman history make my blood warm . and there be so little chance that I shall ever be able to go there ; so little chance . " 

 Waymark have watch the glow face with some surprise . 

 " why , this be famous ! " he exclaim . " we shall suit each other splendidly . who know ? we may see Italy together , and look back upon these time of miserable struggle . by the by , have you ever write verse ? " 

 Julian redden , like a girl . 

 " I have try to , " he say . 

 " and do still ? " 

 " sometimes . " 

 " I think as much . some day you shall let I hear they ; will not   you ? and I will read you some of my own . but mine be in the savage vein , a mere railing against the universe , altogether too furious to be anything like poetry ; I know that well enough . I have long since make up my mind to stick to prose ; it be the true medium for a polemical egotist . I want to find some new form of satire ; I feel capability that way which shall by no means rust unused . it have please Heaven to give I a splenetic disposition , and some day or other I shall find the tongue . " 

 it be midnight before Julian rise to leave , and he be surprised when he discover how time have fly . Waymark insist on his guest 's have some supper before set out on his walk home ; he bring out of a cupboard a tin of australian mutton , which , with bread and pickle , afford a very tolerable meal after four hour ' talk . they then leave the house together , and Waymark accompany his friend as far as Westminster Bridge . 

 " it be too bad to have bring you so far at this hour , " say Julian , as they part . 

 " oh , it be my hour for walk , " be the reply . " London street at night be my element . depend upon it , Rome be poor in comparison ! " 

 he go off laugh and wave his hand . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 between OLD and new 

 Julian Casti 's uncle have be three year dead . it be well for he that he live no long ; his business have continue to dwindle , and the last month of the poor man 's life be embitter by the prospect of inevitable bankruptcy . he die of an overdose of some opiate , which the anguish of sleeplessness bring he into the habit of taking . suicide it might have be , yet that be scarcely probable ; he be too anxious on his daughter 's account to abandon she in this way , for certainly his death could be nothing to her profit . Julian be then already eighteen , and quickly succeed in get a situation . Harriet Smales leave London , and go to live with her sole relative , except Julian , an aunt who keep a stationer 's shop in Colchester . she be teach the business , and assist her aunt for more than two year , when , grow tired of the life of a country town , she return to London , and succeed in get a place at a stationer 's in Gray 's Inn Road . this be six month ago . have thus establish herself , she write to Julian , and tell he where she be . 

 Julian never forget the promise he have make to his uncle that Christmas night , eight year ago , when he be a lad of thirteen . Harriet he have always regard as his sister , and never yet have he fail in brotherly duty to she . when the girl leave Colchester , she be on rather bad term with her aunt , and the latter write to Julian , say that she know nothing of Harriet 's object in go to London , but that it be certainly advisable that some friend should be at hand , if possible , to give her advice ; though advice   she go on to say   be seldom acceptable to Harriet . this letter alarm Julian , as it be the first he have hear of his cousin 's new step ; the letter from herself at the end of a week 's time greatly relieve he , and he go off as soon as possible to see she . he find she live in the house where she be engage , apparently with decent people , and moderately content ; more than this could never be say of the girl . since then , he have see she at least once every week . sometimes he visit she at the shop ; when the weather be fine , they spend the Sunday afternoon in walk together . Harriet 's health seem to have improve since her return to town . previously , as in her childhood , she have always be more or less ailing . from both father and mother she have inherit an unhealthy body ; there be a scrofulous tendency in her constitution , and the slight casual ill - health , a cold or any trifling accident , always threaten she with serious result . she be of mind correspond to her body ; restless , self - will , discontent , sour - temper , querulous . she certainly use no special pain to hide these fault from Julian , perhaps be not herself sufficiently conscious of they , but the young man do not seem to be repel by her imperfection ; he invariably treat she with gentle forbearance , pity her suffering , do many a graceful little kindness in hope of please she . 

 the first interview between Julian and Waymark be follow by a second a few day after , when it be agree that they should spend each Sunday evening together in Kennington ; Julian have no room in which he could well receive visitor . the next Sunday prove fine ; Julian plan to take Harriet for a walk in the afternoon , then , after accompany her home , to proceed to Walcot Square . as be usual on these occasion , he be to meet his cousin at the Holborn end of Gray 's Inn Road , and , as also be the rule , Harriet come some twenty minute late . Julian be scrupulously punctual , and wait irritated he not a little , but he never allow himself to show his annoyance . there be always the same kind smile on his handsome face , and the pressure of his hand be warm . 

 Harriet Smales be about a year young than her cousin . her dress show moderately good taste , with the usual fault of a desire to imitate an elegance which she could not in reality afford . she wear a black jacket , fur - trim , over a light grey dress ; her black straw hat have a few flower in front . her figure be good and her movement graceful ; she be nearly as tall as Julian . her face , however , could not be call attractive ; it be hollow and of a sickly hue , even the lip scarcely red . grey eye , beneath which be dark circle , look about with a quick , suspicious glance ; the eye - brow make almost a straight line . the nose be of a coarse type , the lip heavy and indicative of ill - temper . the disagreeable effect of these lineament be heighten by a long scar over her right temple ; she evidently do she good to conceal it by let her hair come forward very much on each side , an arrangement in itself unsuited to her countenance . 

 " I think I be go to leave my place , " be her first remark to - day , as they turn to walk westward . she speak in a dogged way with which Julian be familiar enough , hold her eye down , and , as she walk , swing her arm impatiently . 

 " I hope not , " say her cousin , look at her anxiously . " what have happen ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know ; it be always the same ; people treat you as if you be so much dirt . I have not   be accustom to it , and I do not   see why I should begin now . I can soon enough get a new shop . " 

 " have Mrs. Ogle be unkind to you ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know , and I do not   much care . you be expect to slave just the same , day after day , whether you be feel well or not . " 

 this indirect and querulous mode of make know her grievance be characteristic of the girl . julian bore with it very patiently . 

 " have not   you be feel well ? " he ask , with the same kindness . 

 " well , no , I have not . my head fairly split now , and this sun be not   likely to make it any well . " 

 " let we cross to the shady side . " 

 " ' twon't   make any difference ; I can not   run to get out of the way of horse . " 

 Julian be silent for a little . 

 " why do not   you write to I in the week ? " she ask presently . " I be sure it would be a relief to hear from somebody sometimes . it be like a year from one Sunday to another . " 

 " do I promise to write ? I really do not   remember have do so ; I be very sorry . I might have tell you about a new friend I have   get . " 

 Harriet look sharply into his face . Julian have make no mention of Waymark on the precede Sunday ; it have be a rainy day , and they have only spend a few minute together in the parlour which Mrs. Ogle , the keeper of the shop , allow they to use on these occasion . 

 " what sort of a friend ? " the girl inquire rather sourly . 

 " a very pleasant fellow , rather old than myself ; I make his acquaintance by chance . " 

 Julian avoid reference to the real circumstance . he know well the difficulty of make Harriet understand they . 

 " we be go to see each other every Sunday , " he go on . 

 " then I suppose you will give up come for I ? " 

 " oh no , not at all . I shall see he at night always , after I have leave you . " 

 " where do he live ? " 

 " rather far off ; in Kennington . " 

 " what be he ? " 

 " a teacher in a school . I hope to get good from be with he ; we be go to read together , and so on . I wish you could find some pleasant companion of the same kind , Harriet ; you would not   feel so lonely . " 

 " I dare say I be well off without anybody . I should not   suit they . it be very few people I do suit , or else people do not   suit I , one or the other . what be his name , your new friend 's ? " 

 " Waymark . " 

 " and he live in Kennington ? whereabout ? " 

 " in Walcot Square . I do not   think you know that part , do you ? " 

 " what number ? " 

 Julian look at she with some surprise . he find her eye fix with penetrate observation upon his face . he mention the number , and she evidently make a mental note of it . she be silent for some minute . 

 " I suppose you will go out at night with he ? " be her next remark . 

 " it be scarcely likely . where should we go to ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know , and I do not   suppose it matter much , to I . " 

 " you seem vex at this , Harriet . I be very sorry . really , it be the first friend I have   ever have . I have   often feel the need of some such companionship . " 

 " I be nobody ? " she say , with a laugh , the first today . 

 Julian 's face register very perfectly the many subtle phase of thought and emotion which succeed each other in his mind . this last remark distress he for a moment ; he could not bear to hurt another 's feeling . 

 " of course I mean male friend , " he say quickly . " you be my sister . " 

 " no , I be not , " be the reply ; and , as she speak , Harriet glance sideway at he in a particularly unpleasant manner . she herself mean it to be pleasant . 

 " oh yes , you be , Harriet , " he insist good - humouredly . " we have   be brother and sister ever since we can remember , have not   we ? " 

 " but we be not   really , for all that , " say the girl , look away . " well , now you have   get somebody else to take you up , I know very well I shall see less of you . you will be make excuse to get out of the ride when the summer come again . " 

 " pray do not   say or think anything of the kind , Harriet , " urge Julian with feeling . " I should not think of let anything put a stop to our picnic . it will soon be get warm enough to think of the river , will not   it ? and then , if you would like it , there be no reason why my friend should not   come with we , sometimes . " 

 " oh , nonsense ! why , you would be ashamed to let he know I . " 

 " Ashamed ! how can you possibly think so ? but you do not   mean it ; you be joke . " 

 " I be sure I be not . I should make mistake in talk , and all sort of thing . you do not   think much of I , as it be , and that would make you like I bad still . " 

 she toss her head nervously , and swing her arm with the awkward restlessness which always denote some strong feeling in she . 

 " come , Harriet , this be too bad , " Julian exclaim , smile . " why , I shall have to quarrel with you , to prove that we be good friend . " 

 " I wish you would quarrel with I sometimes , " say the girl , laugh in a force way . " you take all my bad - temper always just in the same quiet way . I would far rather you fall out with I . it be treat I too like a child , as if it do not   matter how I go on , and I be not   anything to you . " 

 of late , Harriet have be get much into the habit of this ambiguous kind of remark when in her cousin 's company . Julian notice it , and it make he a trifle uneasy . he attribute it , however , to the girl 's strangely irritable disposition , and never fail to meet such outbreak with increase warmth and kindness of tone . to - day , Harriet 's vagary seem to affect he somewhat unusually . he become silent at time , and then try to laugh away the unpleasantness , but the laughter be not exactly spontaneous . at length he bring back the conversation to the point from which it have start , and ask if she have any serious intention of leave Mrs. Ogle . 

 " I be tired of be order about by people ! " Harriet exclaim . " I know I sha'n't   put up with it much long . I only wish I have a few pound to start a shop for myself . " 

 " I heartily wish I have the money to give you , " be Julian 's reply . 

 " do not   you save anything at all ? " ask his cousin , with affected indifference . 

 " a little ; very little . at all event , I think we shall be able to have our week at the seaside when the time come . have you think where you would like to go to ? " 

 " no ; I have not   think anything about it . what time shall you get back home to - night ? " 

 " rather late , I dare say . we sit talk and forget the time . it may be after twelve o'clock . " 

 Harriet become silent again . they reach Hyde Park , and join the crowd of people go in all direction about the walk . Harriet have always a number of ill - natured comment to make on the dress and general appearance of people they pass . Julian smile , but with no genuine pleasure . as always , he do his good to lead the girl 's thought away from their incessant object , her , elf . 

 they be back again at the end of Gray 's Inn Road by half - past four . 

 " well , I will not   keep you , " say Harriet , with the sour smile . " I know you be in a hurry to be off . be you go to walk ? " 

 " yes ; I can do it in about an hour . " 

 the girl turn away without further leave - taking , and Julian walk southward with a troubled face . 

 Waymark expect he to tea . at this , their third meeting , the two be already on very easy term . Waymark do the great share of the talking , for Julian be naturally of few word ; from the beginning it be clear that the elder of the friend would have the initiative in most thing . Waymark unconsciously display something of that egoism which be inseparable from force of character , and to the other this be far from disagreeable ; Julian like the novel sensation of have a strong nature to rely upon . already he be be lead by his natural tendency to hero - worship into a fervid admiration for his friend . 

 " what have you ' be do with yourself this fine day ? " Waymark ask , as they sit down to table . 

 " I always spend Sunday afternoon with a cousin of mine , " reply Julian , with the unhesitate frankness which be natural to he . 

 " male or female ? " 

 " Female . " there be a touch of colour on his face as he meet the other 's eye , and he continue rather quickly . " we live together always as child , and be only separate at my uncle 's death , three year ago . she be engage at a stationer 's shop . " 

 " what be a fellow to do to get money ? " Waymark exclaim , when his pipe be well alight . " I be grow sick of this hand - to - mouth existence . now if one have a bare competency , what glorious possibility would open out . the vulgar saying have it that ' time be money ; ' like most vulgar saying put the thing just the wrong way about . ' money be time , ' I prefer to say ; it mean leisure , and all that follow . why do not   you write a poem on Money , Casti ? I almost feel capable of it myself . what can claim precedence , in all this world , over hard cash ? it be the fruitful soil wherein be nourish the root of the tree of life ; it be the vivifying principle of human activity . upon it luxuriate art , letter , science ; rob they of its sustenance , and they droop like wither leaf . money mean virtue ; the lack of it be vice . the devil love no lurking - place like an empty purse . give I a thousand pound to - morrow , and I become the most virtuous man in England . I satisfy all my instinct freely , openly , with no petty makeshift and vile hypocrisy . to scorn and revile wealth be the mere resource of splenetic poverty . what can not be purchase with coin of the realm ? first and foremost , freedom . the moneyed man be the sole king ; the herd of the penniless be but as slave before his footstool . he breathe with a sense of proprietorship in the whole globe - envelop atmosphere ; for be it not in his power to inhale it wheresoever he please ? he put his hand in his pocket , and bid with security for every joy of body and mind ; even death he face with the comfort consciousness that his defeat will only coincide with that of human science . he buy culture , he buy peace of mind , he buy love . you think not ! I do not   use the word cynically , but in very virtuous earnest . make I a millionaire , and I will purchase the passionate devotion of any free - hearted woman the world contain ! " 

 Waymark 's pipe have go out ; he re - light it , with the half - mocking smile which always follow upon any more vehement utterance . 

 " that I be poor , " he go on presently , " be the result of my own pigheadedness . my father be a stock - broker , in anything but flourish circumstance . he go in for some cursed foreign loan or other , I know nothing of such thing , and ruin himself completely . he have to take a subordinate position , and die in it . I be about seventeen then , and find myself alone in the world . a friend of my father 's , also a city man , Woodstock by name , be leave my guardian . he want I to begin a business career , and , like a fool , I would not   hear of it . Mr. Woodstock and I quarrel ; he show himself worthy of his name , and tell I plainly that , if I do not   choose to take his advice , I must shift for myself . that I profess myself perfectly ready to do ; I be bent on an intellectual life , forsooth ; could not   see that the natural order of thing be to make money first and be intellectual afterwards . so , lad as I be , I get a place as a teacher , and that be be my business ever since . " 

 Waymark throw himself back and laugh carelessly . he strum a little with his finger on the arm of the chair , and resume : 

 " I interest myself in religion and philosophy ; I become an aggressive disciple of free - thought , as it be call . radicalism of every kind break out in I , like an ailment . I buy cheap free - thought literature ; to one or two paper of the kind I even contribute . I keep these effusion carefully lock up , for salutary self - humiliation at some future day , when I shall have grow conceited . Nay , I go far . I deliver lecture at working - man 's club , lecture with violent title . one , I remember , be call ' the Gospel of Rationalism . ' and I be enthusiastic in the cause , with an enthusiasm such as I shall never experience again . can I imagine myself write and speak such thing now - a - day ? scarcely : yet the spirit remain , it be only the manifestation which have change . I be by nature combative ; I feel the need of attack the cherished prejudice of society ; I have a joy in outrage what be call the propriety . and I wait for my opportunity , which have yet to come . " 

 " how commonplace my life have be , in comparison , " say Julian , after an interval of thoughtfulness . 

 " your nature , I believe , be very pure , and therefore very happy . I be what brown somewhere call a ' beast with a speckled hide , ' and happiness , I take it , I shall never know . " 

 Julian could begin to see that his friend take something of a pleasure in showing and dwell upon the bad side of his own character . 

 " you will be happy , " he say , " when you once find your true work , and feel that you be do it well . " 

 " but the motif , the motif ! never mind , I have   talk enough of myself for one sitting . do not   think I have   tell you everything . plenty more confession to come , when time and place shall serve . little by little you will get to know I , and by then will most likely have have enough of I . " 

 " that be not at all likely ; rather the opposite . " 

 when they leave the house together , shortly after eleven , Julian 's eye fall upon the dark figure of a girl , stand by a gas - lamp on the opposite side of the way . the figure hold his gaze . Waymark move on , and he have to follow , but still look back . the girl have a veil half down upon her face ; she be gaze after the two . she move , and the resemblance to Harriet be so striking that Julian again stop . as he do so , the figure turn away , and walk in the opposite direction , till it be lose in the darkness . 

 Julian go on , and for a time be very silent . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 ACADEMICAL 

 the school in which Osmond Waymark teach be situate in " a pleasant suburb of southern London "   Brixton , to wit ; have its ' spacious playground and gymnasium "   the former a tolerable back - yard , the latter a disuse coach - house ; and , as to educational feature , offer , at the choice of parent and guardian , either the solid foundation desirable for those youth predestine to a commercial career , or the more liberal training adapt to mind of a professional bias . anything far in the way of information be to be obtain by apply to the headmaster , Dr. Tootle . 

 at present the number of resident pupil be something under forty . the marvel be how so many could be accommodate in so small a house . two fair - sized bedroom , and a garret in which the servant could not be persuade to sleep , serve as dormitory for the whole school ; the young child sleep two together . 

 Waymark do not reside on the premise . for a stipulated sum of thirteen pound per quarter he teach daily from nine till five , with an interval of an hour and a half at dinner - time , when he walk home to Walcot Square for such meal as the state of his exchequer would allow . Waymark occupy a prominent place in Dr. Tootle 's prospectus . as Osmond Waymark , B.A. , the degree be a bona fide one , of London University , he fill the position of Senior Classical Master ; anonymously he figure as a teacher of drawing and lecturer on experimental chemistry . the other two master , resident , be Mr. O'Gree and Herr Egger ; the former , teacher of mathematic , assistant classical master , and professor of gymnastic ; the latter , teacher of foreign language , of music , and of dancing . Dr. Tootle take upon himself the english branch , and , of course , the arduous duty of general superintendence . he be a very tall , thin , cadaverous , bald - headed man . somehow or other he have the reputation of have , at an early stage in his career , grievously over - exert his brain in literary labour ; parent be find , on the whole , ready to accept this fact as an incontestable proof of the doctor 's fitness to fill his present office , though it result in entire week of retreat from the school - room under the excuse of fearful headache . the only know product of the literary toil which have have such sad result be a very small English Grammar , of course use in the school , and always refer to by the doctor as " my little compendium . " 

 now and then , Waymark seek refuge from the loneliness of his room in a visit to his colleague at the Academy . the master ' sit - room be not remarkable for cosiness , even when a fire burn in the grate and the world of school be for the time shut out . the floor be uncarpeted , the wall illustrate only with a few map and diagram . there be a piano , whereon Herr Egger give his music lesson . few room in existence could have excel this for draught ; at all time there come beneath the door a current of wind which pierce the leg like a knife ; impossible to leave loose paper anywhere with a chance of find they in the same place two minute after . 

 when Waymark enter this evening , he find his colleague seat together in silence . Mr. Philip O'Gree " fill - up " be his own pronunciation of the name would have be bad than insignificant in appearance , but for the expression of good - humour and geniality which possess his irregular feature . he be red - headed , and have large red whisker . 

 Herr Egger be a gentleman of very different exterior . tall , thick , ungainly , with a very heavy , stupid face , coarse hand , outrageous low extremity . a mass of coal - black hair seem to weigh down his head . his attire be un - english , and , one might suspect , have be manufacture in some lonely cottage away in the remote swiss valley which have till lately be the poor fellow 's home . Dr. Tootle never keep his foreign master long . his plan be to get hold of some foreigner without mean , and ignorant of English , who would come and teach French or german in return for mere board and lodging ; when the man have learn a little English , and be in a position to demand a salary , he be dismiss , and a new professor obtain . Egger have lately , under the influence of some desperate delusion , come to our hospitable clime in search of his fortune . of language he could not be say to know any ; his French and his german be of barbarism all compact ; English as yet he could use only in a most primitive manner . he must have be the most unhappy man in all London . find himself face to face with large class of youngster accustom to no kind of discipline , in whom every word he utter merely excited outrageous mirth , he be hourly bring to the very verge of despair . constitutionally he be lachrymose ; tear come from he freely when distress have reach a climax , and the contrast between his unwieldy form and this weakness of demeanour supply inexhaustible occasion for mirth throughout the school . his hour of freedom be spend in abysmal brooding . 

 Waymark enter in good spirit . at the sight of he , Mr. O'Gree start from the fireside , snatch up the poker , brandish it wildly about his head , and burst into vehement exclamation . 

 " ha ! ha ! you have   come in time , sir ; you have   come in time to hear my resolution . I can not   stand ut any long ; I will not   stand ut a day long ! Mr. Waymark , you be a witness of the outrageous way in which I be treat in this academy the way in which I be treat both by Dr. Tootle and by Mrs. Tootle . you be witness of his insult behaviour this very afternoon . he openly take the side of the boy against I ; he ridicule my accent ; he treat I as no gentleman can treat another , unless one of they be no gentleman at all ! and , Mr. Waymark , I will not   stand ut ! " 

 Mr. O'Gree 's accent be very strong indeed , especially in his present mood . Waymark listen with what gravity he could command . 

 " you be quite right , " he say in reply . " Tootle 's behaviour be especially scandalous to - day . I should certainly take some kind of notice of it . " 

 " Notuss , sir , notuss ! I will take that amount of notuss of it that all the metropoluss shall hear of my wrong . I will assault ' um , sir ; I will assault ' um in the face of the school , the very next time he dare to provoke I ! I will rise in my might , and smite his bald crown with his own ruler ! I be not a tall man , Mr. Waymark , but I can reach his crown , and that he shall be aware of before he know ut . he set I at naught in my own class , sir ; he pooh - poohs my mathematical demonstration , sir ; he encourage my pupil in insubordination ! and Mrs. Tootle ! Bedad , if I do not   invent some device for revenge myself on that supercilious woman . the very next time she presume to address I disrespectfully at the dinner - table , sir , I will rise in my might , sir , see if I do not ! and I will say to she , ' Mrs. Tootle , ma'am , you seem to forget that I be a gentleman , and have a gentleman 's susceptibility . when I treat you with disrespect , ma'am , pray tell I of ut , and I will inform you you speak an untruth ! ' " 

 Waymark smile , with the result that the expression of furious wrath immediately pass from his colleague 's countenance , give place to a broad grin . 

 " Waymark , look here ! " exclaim the Irishman , snatch up a piece of chalk , and proceed to draw certain outline upon a black - board . " here be Tootle , a veritable Goliath ; here be I , as it be David . Observe ; Tootle hold in his hand his ' little compendium , ' raise in haughty superciliousness . observe I with the ruler ! I be on tiptoe ; I be take aim ; there be wrath in every sinew of my arrum ! my arrum descend on the very centre of Tootle 's bald pate " 

 " Mr. O'Gree ! " 

 the tableau be most effective . unnoticed by either the Irishman or Waymark , the door have open behind they , and there have appear a little red - faced woman , in slatternly dress . it be Mrs. Tootle . she have overhear almost the whole of O'Gree 's vivid comment upon his graphic illustration , in silence , until at length she could hold her peace no long , and give utterance to the teacher 's name in a voice which tremble with rage and mortification . 

 " Mr. O'Gree ! be you aware of my presence , sir ? " 

 the chalk drop from O'Gree 's finger , but otherwise his attitude remain unaltered ; strike motionless with horror , he stand point to the drawing on the board , his face pale , his eye fascinate by those of Mrs. Tootle . the latter go on in a high note . 

 " well , sir , as soon as you have have enough of your insulting buffoonery , perhaps you will have the goodness to attend to I , and to your duty ! what do you mean by allow the dormitory to get into this state of uproar ? there be be a pillow - fight go on for the last half - hour , and you pay no sort of attention ; the very house be shake ? " 

 " I protest I have not hear a sound , ma'am , or I should have " 

 " perhaps you hear nothing now , sir , and the doctor suffer from one of his very bad headache , utterly unable to rest even if the house be perfectly quiet ! " 

 O'Gree dart to the door , past Mrs. Tootle , and be lose to sight . there be indeed a desperate uproar in the high region of the house . in a moment the noise increase considerably . O'Gree have rush up without a light , and be battle desperately in the darkness with a score of pillow - fighter , roar out threat the while at the top of his voice . Mrs. Tootle retire from the master ' room with much affectation of dignity , leave the door open behind she . 

 Waymark slam it to , and turn with a laugh to the poor Swiss . 

 " in low spirit to - night , I be afraid , Mr. Egger ? " 

 Egger let his chair tilt forward , rise slowly , draw a yellow handkerchief from his mouth and wipe his eye with it , then exclaim , in the most pitiful voice 

 " Mr. Waymark , I have make my possible ! I can no more ! " 

 it be his regular phrase on these occasion ; Waymark have always much ado to refrain from laughter when he hear it repeat , but he do his good to be seriously sympathetic , and to attempt consolation in such german as be at his command . Egger 's despondency only increase , and he weep afresh to hear accent which be intelligible to he . Mr. O'Gree re - enter the room , and the Swiss retire to his comer . 

 Philip be hot with excitement and bodily exertion ; he come in mop his forehead , and , without turn to Waymark , stand with eye fix on the chalk caricature . very gradually he turn round . Waymark be watch he , on his face an expression of subdue mirth . their look meet , and both explode in laughter . 

 " Bedad , my boy , " exclaim O'Gree , " I be devilish sorry ! I would not   have have it happen for a quarter 's salary , though I sadly need a new pair of breech . she be a supercilious cat - o - mountain , and she lose no opportunity of insult I , but after all she be a woman . " 

 " by - the - by , Waymark , " he add in a moment , " what a stunn the new governess be ! you be a lucky dog , to sit in the same room with she . what be her name , I say ? " 

 " Miss Enderby . you have   see she , have you ? " 

 " I catch a glimpse of she as she come downstairs ; it be quite enough ; she floor I . she be never be out of my thought for a minute since I see she . ' I love she , I love she , and who shall dare , to chide I for love that teacher fair ! ' " 

 " well , yes , " say Waymark , ' she have a tolerable face ; seem to I a long way too good to be teach those unlicked cub . the dragon be not   too civil to she , though it be the first day . " 

 " not civil to she ? if I be present , and hear that woman breathe the slight eat incivility , I would " 

 he break off in the midst of his vehemence with a startled look towards the door . 

 " Mr. Egger , " he exclaim , " a song ; I beg , a song . come , I will lead off . 

 ' Miss Enderby hath a beam eye ' 
 Bah ! I be not in voice to - night . " 

 Egger be persuade to sit down to the piano . it be a mournful instrument , reduce to discordant wheeziness by five - finger exercise , but the touch of the Swiss could still evoke from it some kind of harmony . he sing a Volkslied , and in a way which show that there be poetry in the man 's nature , though his outward appearance give so little promise of it . his voice be very fair , and well suit to express the tender pathos of these inimitable melody . Waymark always enjoy this singing ; his eye brighten , and a fine emotion play about his lip . and as he walk along the dark way to his lodging , Egger 's voice be still in his ear 

 " Der Mensch wenn er fortgeht , der kommt nimmermefr . " 

 " Heaven be thank , no ! " the young man say to himself . 

 Poverty be his familiar companion , and have be so for year . his rent pay each week , there often remain a sum quite insufficient for the absolute necessity of existence ; for anything more , he have to look to chance pupil in the evening , and what little he could earn with his pen . he write constantly , but as yet have only succeed in get two article print . then , it be a necessity of his existence to mix from time to time in the life of the town , and a stroll into the Strand after nightfall inevitably lead to the expenditure of whatever cash his pocket contain . he be passionately find of the theatre ; the light about the open entrance draw he on irresistibly , and if , as so often , he have to choose between a meal and a seat in the gallery , the meal be sacrifice . hunger , indeed , be his normal state ; semi - starvation , alternate with surfeit of cheap and unwholesome food , bring about an unhealthy condition of body . often he return to Walcot Square from his day - long drudgery , and throw himself upon the bed , too exhausted to light a fire and make his tea , for he be his own servant in all thing except the weekly cleaning - out of the room . those be dark hour , and they have to be struggle through in solitude . 

 Weary as he be he seldom go to bed before midnight , sometimes long after , for he cling to those few hour of freedom with something like savage obstinacy ; during this small portion of each day at least , he would possess his own soul , be free to think and read . then come the penalty of anguish unutterable when the morning have to be face . these dark , foggy February morning crush he with a recur misery which often drive he to the verge of mania . his head throb with the torture of insufficient sleep , he lie in dull half - conscious misery till there be no long time to prepare breakfast , and he have to hasten off to school after a mouthful of dry bread which choke he . there have be moment when his strength fail , and he find his eye fill with tear of wretchedness . to face the hideous drudgery of the day 's teaching often cost he more than it have cost many man to face the scaffold . the hour between nine and one , the hour between half - past two and five , Waymark curse they minute by minute , as their awful length be measure by the crawl hand of the school - clock . he try sometimes , in mere self - defence , to force himself into an interest in his work , that the time might go the quick ; but the effort be miserably vain . his sens reel amid the din and rattle of class where discipline be unknown and intelligence almost indiscoverable . not seldom his temper get the well even of sick lassitude ; his face at such time pal with passion , and in ungoverned fury he rave at his tormentor . he awe they , too , but only for the moment , and the waste of misery swallow he up once more . 

 be this to be his life ? he ask himself . would this last for ever ? 

 for some reason , the morning after the visit to the master ' room just speak of find he in rather well spirit than usual . perhaps it be that he have sleep fairly well ; a gleam of unwonted sunshine have doubtless something to do with it . yet there be another reason , though he would scarcely admit it to himself . it be the day on which he give a drawing - lesson to Dr. Tootle 's two eld child . these drawing - lesson be always give in a room upstairs , which be also appropriate to the governess who come every morning to teach three other young Tootles , two girl and a boy , the latter consider not yet old enough to go into the school . on the previous day , Waymark have be engage in the room for half an hour touch up some drawing of boy in the school , which be about to be send home . he know that he should find a fresh governess busy with the child , the lady hitherto employ have go at a moment 's notice after a violent quarrel with Mrs. Tootle , an incident which have happen not infrequently before . when he enter the room , he see a young woman seat with she back to he , pen a copy , whilst the child jump and riot about she in their usual fashion . the late governess have be a mature person of feature rather serviceable than handsome ; that her successor be of a different type appear sufficiently from the fair round head , the gracefully hand neck , the perfect shoulder , the slight , beautiful form . Waymark take his place and wait with some curiosity till she move . when she do so , and , rise , suddenly become aware of his presence , there be a little start on both side ; Miss Enderby so Waymark soon hear she call by the pupil have not be aware , owe to the noise , of a stranger 's entrance , and Waymark on his side be so strike with the face present to he . he have expect , at the most , a pretty girl of the commonplace kind : he see a countenance in which refinement be as conspicuous as beauty . she be probably not more than eighteen or nineteen . in speak with the child she rarely if ever smile , but exhibit a gentle forbearance which have something touch in it ; it be almost as though she appeal for gentleness in return , and fear a harsh word or look . 

 " that be Mr. Waymark , " cry out Master Percy Tootle , when his overquick eye perceive that the two have see each other . " he be our drawing - master . do you like the look of he ? " 

 Miss Enderby redden , and lay her hand on the boy 's arm , try to direct his attention to a book . but the youngster shake off her gentle touch , and look at his brother and sister with a much too know grin . Waymark have content himself with a slight bow , and at once bent again over his work . 

 very shortly the two eld child , both girl , come in , and with they their mother . the latter pay no attention to Waymark , but proceed to cross - examine the new governess as to her method of teaching , her experience , and so on , in the coarse and loud manner which characterise Mrs. Tootle . 

 " you will find my child clever , " say Mrs. Tootle , " at least , that have be the opinion of all their teacher hitherto . if they do not   make progress , it certainly will not be their own fault . at the same time , they be high - spirited , and require to be discreetly manage . this , as I previously inform you , must be do without the help of punishment in any shape ; I disapprove of those method altogether . now let I hear you give they a lesson in geography . " 

 Waymark retire at this juncture ; he feel that it would be nothing less than cruelty to remain . the episode , however , have lighten his day with an interest of a very unusual kind . and so it be that , on the follow morning , not only the gleam of watery sunshine , but also the thought of an hour to be spend in the presence of that timid face , bring he on his way to the school with an unwonted resignation . unfortunately his drawing lesson be only give on two morning in the week . still , there would be something in future to look forward to , a novel sensation at the Academy . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 the cousin 

 Harriet Smales have leave home in a bad temper that Sunday afternoon , and when she come back to tea , after her walk with Julian , her state of mind do not appear to have undergo any improvement . she take her place at the tea - table in silence . she and Mrs. Ogle be alone this evening ; the latter 's husband he be a journeyman printer , and leave entirely in his wife 's hand the management of the shop in Gray 's Inn Road happen to be away . Mrs. Ogle be a decent , cheerful woman , of motherly appearance . she make one or two attempt to engage Harriet in conversation , but , failing , subside into silence , only look askance at the girl from time to time . when she have finish her tea and bread - and - butter , Harriet cough , and , without face her companion , speak in rather a cold way . 

 " I may be late back to - night , Mrs. Ogle . you will not   lock the door ? " 

 " I sha'n't   go to bed till eleven myself , " be the reply . 

 " but it may be after twelve when I get back . " 

 " where be you go to , Harriet ? " 

 " if you must know always , Mrs. Ogle , I be go to see my friend in Westminster . " 

 " well , it be not   no business of mine , my girl , " return the woman , not unkindly , " but I think it be only right I should have some idea where you spend your night . as long as you live in my house , I be responsible for you , in a way . " 

 " I do not   want any one to be responsible for I , Mrs. Ogle . " 

 " maybe not , my girl . but young people be not   always the good judge of what be good for they , and what be not . I do not   think your cousin ' ud approve of your be out so late . I shall sit up for you , and you must not   be after twelve . " 

 it be say very decidedly . Harriet make no reply , but speedily dressed and go out . she take an omnibus eastward , and seek a neighbourhood which most decently dress people would have be chary of enter after nightfall , or indeed at any other time , unless compel to do so . the girl find the object of her walk in a dirty little public - house at the corner of two foul and narrow by - way . she enter by a private door , and pass into a parlour , which be behind the bar . 

 a woman be sit in the room , beguile her leisure with a Sunday paper . she be dress with vulgar showiness , and make a lavish display of jewellery , more or less valuable . eight year ago she be a servant in Mr. Smales 's house , and her name be Sarah . she have marry in the meanwhile , and become Mrs. Sprowl . 

 she welcome her visitor with a friendly nod , but do not rise . 

 " I think it likely you would look in , as you miss larst week . how 's thing go in your part o ' the world ? " 

 " very badly , " return Harriet , throw off her hat and cloak , and go to warm her hand and foot at the fire . " it will not   last much long , that be the truth of it . " 

 " eh well , it be all in a life ; we all have our little trial an ' trouble , as the sayin ' be . " 

 " how be the baby ? " ask Harriet look towards a bundle of wrapper which lie on a sofa . 

 " I doubt it be too good for this world , " return the mother , grin in a way which make her ugly face peculiarly revolting . " Dessay it will join its little brother an ' sister before long . Mike put it in the club yes'day . " 

 the burial - club , Mrs. Sprowl mean , and Harriet evidently understand the allusion . 

 " have you walk ? " go on the woman , double up her paper , and then throw it aside . " dessay you could do with something to take the cold orff yer chest . Liz , " she call out to some one behind the bar , with which the parlour communicate by an open door ; " two irish ! " 

 the liquor be bring . presently some one call to Mrs. Sprowl , who go out . lean on the counter , in one of the compartment , be something which a philanthropist might perhaps have have the courage to claim as a human being ; a very tall creature , with bent shoulder , and head seem to grow straight out of its chest ; thick , grizzle hair hide almost every vestige of feature , with the exception of one dreadful red eye , its fellow be dead and sightless . he have lay on the counter , with palm downward as if conceal something , two huge hairy paw . Mrs. Sprowl seem familiar with the appearance of this monster ; she address he rather bad - temperedly , but otherwise much as she would have speak to any other customer . 

 " no , you do not , Slimy ! no , you do not ! what you have in this house you pay for in copper , so you know . next time I catch you tryin ' to ring the change , I will have you run in , and then you will get a warm bath , which you would not   partic'lar care for . " 

 the creature speak , in hoarse , jumbled word , not easy to catch unless you listen closely . 

 " if you have   any accusion to make agin I , Mrs. Sprowl , p'r'aps you will wait till you can prove it . I want change for arf a suvrin : be not   that straight , now ? " 

 " straight or not , you will not   get no change over this counter , so there you have   the straight tip . now sle yer ' ook , Slimy , an ' get it somewhere else . " 

 " if you have   any accusion to make " 

 " hold yer noise ! what be he order , Liz ? " 

 " pot o ' old six , " answer the girl . 

 " got sixpence , Slimy ? " 

 " no , I be not , Mrs. Sprowl , " mutter the creature . " I have   get arf a suvrin . " 

 " then go an ' get change for it . now , once more , sle yer ' ook . " 

 the man move away , send back a horrible glare from his one fiery eyeball . 

 Mrs. Sprowl re - enter the parlour . 

 " I wish you would take I on as barmaid , Sarah , " Harriet say , when she have drink her glass of spirit . 

 " take you on ? " exclaim the other , with surprise . " why , have you fall out with your cousin ? I think you be go to be marry soon . " 

 " I do not   say for sure that I be ; I only say I might be . any way it will not   be just yet , and I be tired of my place in the shop . " 

 " do not   you be a fool , Harriet , " say the other , with genial frankness . " you be well enough off . you stick where you be till you get marry . you would not   make nothing at our business ; ' tain't   all sugar an ' lemon , an ' sittin ' drinkin ' two o ' whisky till further order . you want a quiet , easy business , you do , an ' you have   get it . if you keep worritin ' yerself this way , you will not   never make old bone , an ' that be the truth . you wait a bit , an ' give yer cousin a chance to arst you , if that be what you be troublin ' about . " 

 " I have   give he lot o ' chance , " say Harriet peevishly . 

 " eh well , give he lot more , an ' it will all come right . we be all bear , but we be not bury . hev ' another irish ? " 

 Harriet allow herself to be persuade to take another glass . 

 when the clock point to half - past nine , she rise and prepare to depart . she have tell Mrs. Sprowl that she would take the ' bus and go straight home ; but something seem to have lead she to alter her purpose , for she make her way to Westminster Bridge , and cross the river . then she make some inquiry of a policeman , and , in consequence , get into a Kennington omnibus . very shortly she be set down close by Walcot Square . she walk about till , with some difficulty in the darkness , she have discover the number at which Julian have tell she his friend live . the house find , she begin to pace up and down on the opposite pavement , always keep her eye fix on the same door . she be soon shiver in the cold night air , and quicken her walk . it be rather more than an hour before the door she be watch at length open , and two friend come out together . Harriet follow they as closely as she could , until she see that she herself be observe . thereupon she walk away , and , by a circuit , ultimately come back into the main road , where she take a ' bus go northward . 

 Harriet 's cousin , when alone of an evening , sit in his bedroom , the world shut out , his thought in long past time , rebuild the ruin of a fallen empire . 

 when he be eighteen , the lad have the good luck to light upon a cheap copy of Gibbon in a second - hand book - shop . it be the first edition ; six noble quarto volume , clean and firm in the old binding . often he have turn long eye upon new copy of the great book , but the price have always put they beyond his reach . that very night he solemnly lay open the first volume at the first page , prop it on a couple of mean book , and , after glance through the short Preface , begin to read with a mind as devoutly disposed as that of any pious believer pore upon his Bible . " in the second century of the christian AEra , the empire of Rome comprehend the fairest part of the earth , and the most civilised portion of mankind . the frontier of that extensive monarchy be guard by ancient renown and disciplined valour . " with what a grand epic roll , with what anticipation of solemn music , do the noble history begin ! far , far into the night Julian turn over page after page , thoughtless of sleep and the commonplace duty of the morrow . 

 since then he have master his Gibbon , know he from end to end , and joy in he more than ever . whenever he have a chance of obtain any of the writer , ancient or modern , to whom Gibbon refer , he read they and add to his knowledge . about a year ago , he have pick up an old Claudian , and the reading of the poet have settle he to a task which he have before that doubtfully seek . he want to write either a poem or a drama on some subject take from the " Decline and Fall , " and now , with Claudian 's help , he fix upon Stilicho for his hero . the form , he then decide , should be dramatic . upon " Stilicho " he have now be engage for a year , and to - night he be write the last word of the last scene . shortly after twelve he have finish it , and , throw down his pen , he pace about the room with enviable feeling . 

 he have not as yet mention to Waymark the work he be engage upon , though he have confess that he write verse at time . he wish to complete it , and then read it to his friend . it be now only the middle of the week , and though he have decide previously to wait till his visit to Walcot Square next Sunday before say a word about " Stilicho , " he could not refrain now from hastily pen a note to Waymark , and go out to post it at once . 

 when the day come , the weather would not allow the usual walk with Harriet , and Julian could not help feel glad that it be so . he be too pre - occupy to talk in the usual way with the girl , and he know how vain it would be to try and make she understand his state of mind . still , he go to see she as usual , and sit for an hour in Mrs. Ogle 's parlour . at time , throughout the week , he have think of the curious resemblance between Harriet and the girl he have notice on leave Waymark 's house last Sunday , and now he ask she , in a half - jesting way , whether it have really be she . 

 " how could it be ? " say Harriet carelessly . " I can not   be in two place at once . " 

 " do you stay at home that evening ? " 

 " no , not all the evening . " 

 " what friend be they you go to , when you be out at night , Harriet ? " 

 " oh , some relation of the Colchester people . I suppose you have   be spend most of your time in Kennington since Sunday ? " 

 " I have not   leave home . in fact , I have   be very busy . I have   just finish some work that have occupy I for nearly a year . " 

 after all , he could not refrain from speak of it , though he have make up his mind not to do so . 

 " work ? what work ? " ask Harriet , with the suspicious look which come into her grey eye whenever she hear something she could not understand . 

 " some writing . I have   write a play . " 

 " a play ? will it be act ? " 

 " oh no , it be not   mean for act . " 

 " what be the good of it then ? " 

 " it be write in verse . I shall perhaps try to get it publish . " 

 " shall you get money for it ? " 

 " that be scarcely likely . in all probability I shall not be able to get it print at all . " 

 " then what be the good of it ? " repeat Harriet , still suspicious , and a little contemptuous . 

 " it have give I pleasure , that be all . " 

 Julian be glad when at length he could take his leave . Waymark receive he with a pleased smile , and much questioning . 

 " why do you keep it such a secret ? I shall try my hand at a play some day or other , but , as you can guess , the material will scarcely be seek in Gibbon . it will be desperately modern , and possibly not altogether in accordance with the view of the Lord Chamberlain . what be the time ? four o'clock . we will have a cup of coffee and then fall to . I be eager to hear your ' deep - cheste music , ' your ' hollow oe and aes . ' " 

 the reading take some three hour ; Waymark smoke a vast number of pipe the while , and be silent till the close . then he get up from his easy - chair , take a step forward , and hold out his hand . his face shine with the frank enthusiasm . he could not express himself with sufficient vehemence . Julian sit with the manuscript roll up in his hand , on his face a glow of delight . 

 " it be very kind of you to speak in this way , " he falter at length . 

 " kind ! how the deuce should I speak ? but come , we will have this off to a publisher 's forth with . have you any idea for the next work ? " 

 " yes ; but so dare that they hardly bear put into word . " 

 " try the effect on I . " 

 " I have think , " say Julian , with embarrassment , " of a long poem an Epic . Virgil write of the founding of Rome ; her dissolution be as grand a subject . it would mean year of preparation , and again year in the writing . the siege and capture of Rome by Alaric what do you think ? " 

 " a work not to be raise from the heat of youth , or the vapour of wine . but who know ? " 

 there be high talk in Walcot Square that evening . all unknown to its other inhabitant , the poor lodging - house be convert into a temple of the Muses , and harmony as from Apollo 's lyre throb in the heart of the two friend . the future be their inexhaustible subject , the seed - plot of strange hope and desire . they talk the night into morning , hardly daunt when perforce they remember the day 's work . 




 CHAPTER X 

 the way OUT 

 the rule spirit of the Academy be Mrs. Tootle . her husband 's constitutional headache , and yet more constitutional laziness , leave to she almost exclusively the congenial task of guide the household , and even of discipline the school . in lesson - time she would even flit about the classroom , and not scruple to administer sharp rebuke to a teacher whose pupil be disorderly , the effect of this naturally be to make confusion bad confound . the boy of course hat she with the hatred of which schoolboy alone be capable , and many a practical joke be play at her expense , not , however , with impunity . still more pronounced , if possible , be the animus entertain against Mrs. Tootle 's offspring , and it be upon the head of Master Felix that the full energy of detestation concentrate itself . he be , in truth , as offensive a young imp as the soil of a middle - class boarding - school could well produce . if Mrs. Tootle rule the Academy , he in turn rule Mrs. Tootle , and on all occasion show himself a most exemplary autocrat . his position , however , as in the case of certain other autocratic ruler , have its disadvantage ; he could never venture to wander out of earshot of his father or mother , who form his body - guard , and the utmost prudence do not suffice to protect he from an occasional punch on the head , or a nip in a tender part , mean probably as earnest of more substantial kindness to be confer upon he at the very early opportunity . 

 to poor Egger fall the unpleasant duty of instruct these young Tootles in the element of the french language . for that purpose he go up every morning to the class - room on the first floor , and for a while relieve Miss Enderby of her charge . with anguish of spirit he feel the approach of the moment which summon he to this dread duty , for , in addition to the lively spite of Master Felix and the other child , he have to face the awful superintendence of Mrs. Tootle herself ; who be invariably present at these lesson . Mrs. Tootle have somehow conceive the idea that French be a second mother - tongue to she , and her intercourse with Mr. Egger be invariably carry on in that language . now this be a refinement of torture , see that it be often impossible to gather a meaning from her remark , whilst to show any such difficulty be to incur her most furious wrath . Egger tremble when he hear the rustle of her dress outside , the perspiration stand on his forehead as he rise and bow before she . 

 " Bon jour , Monsieur , " she would come in exclaim . " Quel un beau matin ! vous trouverez les jeunes dames et messieurs en bons esprit ce matin . " 

 the spirit of Master Felix have manifest themselves already in his skilfully stand a book upright on the teacher 's chair , so that when Egger subside from his obeisance he sit down on a sharp edge and be throw into confusion . 

 " Monsieur Felix , " cry his mother , " que faite - vous la ? Les jeune messieur anglais sont plus spirituel que les jeune messieur suisse , n'est ce pas , Monsieur Egger ? " 

 " En effet , madame , " mutter the teacher , nervously arrange his book . 

 " Monsieur Egger , " exclaim Mrs. Tootle , with a burst of good humour , " est - ce vrai ce qu'on dit que les Suisses sont si excessivement sujet a etre chez - malades ? " 

 the awful moment have come . what on earth do chez - malade mean ? be he to answer yes or no ? in his ignorance of her meaning , either reply might prove offensive . he redden , fidget on his chair , look about he with an anguished mute appeal for help . Mrs. Tootle repeat her question with emphasis and a change of countenance which he know too well . the poor fellow have not the tact to appear to understand , and , as he might easily have do , mystify she by some idiomatic remark . he stammer out his apology and excuse , with the effect of make Mrs. Tootle furious . 

 then follow a terrible hour , at the end of which poor Egger rush down to the Masters ' room , cover his head with his hand and wept , regardless of the boy strum his exercise on the piano . Waymark shortly come in to summon he to some other class , whereupon he rise , and , with gesture of despair , groan out 

 " let I , let I ! I have make my possible ; I can no more ! " 

 Waymark alone fear neither Mrs. Tootle nor her hopeful son , and , in turn , be hold in some little awe by both of they . the lady have at first try the effect of interfere in his class , as she do in those of the other master , but the result be not encouraging . 

 " do not   you think , Mr. Waymark , " she have say one day , as she walk through the school - room and pause to listen to our friend 's explanation of some rule in English grammar ; " do not   you think it would be well to confine yourself to the term of the doctor 's little compendium ? the boy be use to it . " 

 " in this case , " reply Waymark calmly , " I think the term of the compendium be rather too technical for the fourth class . " 

 " still , it be customary in this school to use the compendium , and it have never yet be find unsatisfactory . whilst you be discourse at such length , I observe your class get very disorderly . " 

 Waymark look at she , but keep silence . Mrs. Tootle stand still . 

 " what be you wait for , Mr. Waymark ? " she ask sharply . 

 " till your presence have cease to distract the boy ' attention , Mrs. Tootle , " be the straightforward reply . 

 the woman be disconcert , and , as Waymark preserve his calm silence , she have no alternative but to withdraw , after give he a look not easily forget . 

 but there be another person whose suffering under the tyranny of mother and child be perhaps keenest of all . Waymark have frequent opportunity of observe Miss Enderby under persecution , and learn to recognise in she the sign of acute misery . many time he leave the room , rather than add to her pain by his presence ; very often it be as much as he could do to refrain from take her part , and defend she against Mrs. Tootle . he have never be formally introduce to Miss Enderby , and during several week hold no kind of communication with she beyond a " good morning " when he enter the room and find she there . the first quarter of a year be draw to a close when there occur the first conversation between they . Waymark have be give some of the child their drawing - lesson , whilst the governess teach the two young . the class - time be over , the youngster all scamper off . for a wonder , Mrs. Tootle be not present , anti Waymark seize the opportunity to exchange a word with the young lady . 

 " I fear your pupil give you dreadful trouble , " he say , as he stand by the window point a pencil . 

 she start at be speak to . 

 " they be full of life , " she reply , in the low sad voice which be natural to she . 

 " which would all seem to be direct towards shorten that of other , " say Waymark , with a smile . 

 " they be intelligent , " the governess venture to suggest , after a silence . " it would be a pleasure to teach they if they if they be a little more orderly . " 

 " certainly . if their parent have only common sense " 

 he stop . a flush have rise to the girl 's face , and a slight involuntary motion of her hand seem to warn he . the reason be that Mrs. Tootle stand in the doorway , to which he have his back turn . Miss Enderby say a quick " good morning " and leave he . 

 he be take up some paper , preparatory to leave the room , when he notice that the governess have leave behind she a little book in which she be accustom to jot down lesson for the child . he take it up and examine it . on the first page be write " Maud Enderby , South Bank , Regent 's Park . " he repeat the name to himself several time . then he smile , recall the way in which the governess have warn he that Mrs. Tootle could overhear what he say . somehow , this slight gesture of the girl 's have seem to bring they close to each other ; there be an unpremeditated touch of intimacy in the movement , which it please he to think of . this be by no mean the first time that he have stand with thought busy about she , but the brief exchange of word and what have follow give something of a new complexion to his feeling . previously he have be interested in she ; her striking feature have make he wonder what be the history which their expression conceal ; but her extreme reticence and the timid coldness of her look have leave his sens unmove . now he all at once experience the awakening of quite a new interest ; there have be something in her eye as they meet his which seem to desire sympathy ; he be strike with the possibility of emotion in the face which this one look have reveal to he . her situation seem , when he think of it , to affect he more strongly than hitherto ; he feel that it would be more difficult henceforth to maintain his calmness when he see she insult by Mrs. Tootle or disrespectfully use by the child . 

 nor do the new feeling subside as rapidly as they have arise . at home that night he be unable to settle to his usual occupation , and , as a visit to his friend in the Masters ' Room would have be equally distasteful , he ramble about the street and so tired himself . his duty do not take he up to the child 's classroom on the follow morning , but he invent an excuse for go there , and feel reward by the very faint smile and the inclination of the head with which Miss Enderby return his " good morning . " day after day , he scheme to obtain an opportunity of speak with she again , and he fancy that she herself help to remove any chance that might have occur . throughout his lesson , his attention remain fix upon she ; he study her face intently , and be constantly discover in it new meaning . when she catch his eye thus busy with she , she evince , for a moment , trouble and uneasiness ; he feel sure that she arrange her seat so as to have she back to he more frequently than she have be accustom to do . her work appear to he to be do with less self - forgetfulness than formerly ; the rioting and impertinence of the child seem to trouble her more ; she bear Mrs. Tootle 's interference with something like fear . once , when Master Felix have go beyond his wonte licence , in his mother 's absence , Waymark go so far as to call he to order . as soon as he have speak , the girl look up at he in a startled way , and seem silently to beg he to refrain . all this only strengthen the influence she exercise upon Waymark . 

 since the climax of wretchedness which have result in his advertisement and the forming of Julian Casti 's acquaintance , a moderate cheerfulness have possess he . now he once more feel the cloud sink about he , be aware of many a threatening portent , the meaning whereof he too well understand . there have be a week or two of prevail bad weather , a state of thing which always work harmfully upon he ; his thought darken under the dark sky , and the daily downpour of rain sap his energy . it be within a few day of Easter , but the prospect of a holiday have no effect upon he . night after night he lie in fever and unrest . he feel as though some voice be call upon he to undertake a vaguely hazardous enterprise which yet he know not the nature of . 

 on one of these evening , Mr. O'Gree announce to he that Miss Enderby be go to give up her position at the end of the quarter . Philip have gather this from a conversation hear during the day between Dr. Tootle and his wife . 

 " the light of my life will be go out , " exclaim O'Gree , " when I be no long able to catch a glimpse of she as she go past the schoolroom door . and I have   never even have a chance of speak to she . you know the tale of Raleigh and Queen Elizabeth . suppose I be to rush out and throw my top - coat on the muddy door - step , just as she be go out ; d'ye think she would say thank you ? " 

 " probably , " mutter Waymark , without know what he say . it be Mr. O'Gree 's habit to affect this violent devotion to each new governess in turn , but Waymark do not seem to find the joke amusing at present . 

 " Bedad , I will do it then ! or , rather , I would , if I have two top - coat . hang it ! there be no behaving like a gentleman on twenty - five pound a year . " 

 Waymark walk about the street the great part of the night , and the next morning come to school rather late . Dr. Tootle have to consult with he about some matter as soon as he arrive . 

 " you seem indisposed , Mr. Waymark , " the doctor remark , when he have in vain try to elicit intelligible reply to his question . 

 " I be a little out of sort , " the other return carelessly . " perhaps we could talk about these thing to - morrow . " 

 " as you please , " say Dr. Tootle , a little surprised at his assistant 's indifference . 

 it be a drawing - lesson morning . as he go upstairs , his ear apprise he of the state of thing he would find in Miss Enderby 's room . the approach of the Easter holiday be make the youngster even more than usually uproarious , and their insubordination have pass beyond all pretence of attend to task . when Waymark enter , his first glance , as always , be towards the governess . she look harassed and ill ; be in vain endeavouring to exert some authority with her gentle voice . her eye show unmistakable gratitude as the teacher appear , for his approach mean that she would be relieve from the three elder child . Waymark call sharply to his pupil to come and take their place , but without any attention on their part . Master Felix openly urge the rest to assume a defiant attitude , and begin to improvise melody on a trumpet form by roll up a copy - book . 

 " Felix , " say Miss Enderby , " give I your copy - book and go to the drawing - lesson . " 

 the boy remove the trumpet from his mouth , and , wave it once round his head , send it fly across the room at the speaker ; it hit she on the cheek . in the same minute , Waymark have bend across his knee a large pointer which stand in a corner of the room , and have snap it into two piece . hold the light of these in one hand , with the other hand he suddenly catch Master Felix by the coat - collar , and in a second have he out of the room and on to the landing . then do the echo of the Academy wake to such a bellowing as they have probably never hear before . with a grip impossible even to struggle against , Waymark hold the young imp under his arm , and ply the broken pointer with great vigour ; the stripe be almost as loud as the roaring . there be a rush from the room below in the direction of the disturbance ; all the boy be in a trice leap about delightedly on the stair , and behind they come O'Gree , Egger , and Dr. Tootle himself . from the room above rush out all the young Tootles , yell for help . last of all , from still high region of the house there sweep down a vision of disorder female attire , dishevel hair , and glare eye ; it be Mrs. Tootle , disturb at her toilet , forget all consideration of personal appearance at the alarming outcry . just as she reach the spot , Waymark 's arm drop in weariness ; he fling the howl young monkey into one corner , the stick into another , and deliberately pull his coat - sleeve into position once more . he feel vastly well for the exercise , and there be even a smile on his heated face . 

 " you brutal ruffian ! " shriek Mrs. Tootle . " how dare you touch my child ? you shall answer for this in the police court , sir . " 

 " Waymark , " cry her husband , who have struggle to the scene through the crowd of cheer boy , " what be the meaning of this ? you forget yourself , sir . who give you authority to use corporal chastisement ? " 

 " the boy have long deserve a good thrashing , " he say , " and I be glad I lose my temper sufficiently to give he a portion of his desert . if you wish to know the immediate cause , it simply be that he throw a book at his governess 's head and hit she . " 

 " Mr. O'Gree , " call out the doctor , " take your boy back to their duty , sir ! I be quite unable to understand this disgraceful lack of discipline . every boy who be not at his seat in one minute will have five hundred verse of the Psalms to write out ! Mr. Waymark , I shall be oblige to you if you will step into my study . " 

 five minute after , Waymark be closet with Dr. Tootle . the latter have all at once put off his appearance of indignation . 

 " really , " he begin , " it be a great pity you let yourself be carry away like that . I think it very probable indeed that Felix deserve castigation of some kind , but you would have do much well to report he to I , you know , and let I see to it . you have put I in an awkward position . I fear you must make an apology to Mrs. Tootle , and then perhaps the matter can be allow to blow over . " 

 " I think not , " reply Waymark , whose mind be evidently make up . there be a look of recklessness on his face which one could at any time have detect lurk beneath the hard self - control which usually mark he . " I do not   feel disposed to apologise , and I be tired of my position here . I must give it up . " 

 Dr. Tootle be annoy . it would not be easy to get another teacher of the kind at so cheap a rate . 

 " come , you do not   mean this , " he say . " you be out of temper for the moment . perhaps the apology could be dispense with ; I think I may promise that it can be . the lad will be no bad for his little correction . possibly we can come to some more satisfactory arrangement for the future " 

 " no , " interpose Waymark ; " I have quite make up my mind . I mean to give up teaching altogether ; it do not   suit I . of course I be willing to come as usual the next two day . " 

 " you be aware that this notice should have be give I at the beginning of the quarter ? " hint the principal . 

 " oh yes . of course you will legally owe I nothing . I be prepare for that . " 

 " well , I shall have to consider it . but I still think that you " 

 " as far as I be concern , the matter be decide . I go at Easter . " 

 " very well . I think you be blind to your own interest , but of course you do as you please . if Mrs. Tootle should press I to take out a summon against you for assault , of course I " 

 " good morning , Dr. Tootle . " 

 the summon be not take out , but Waymark 's resolution suffer no change . there be another interview between he and the principal , from which he issue with the sum of six pound ten in his pocket , be half the quarter 's salary . he have not apply for this , but do not refuse it when it be offer . see that the total amount of cash previously in his possession be something less than five shilling , he do wisely , perhaps , to compromise with his dignity , and let Dr. Tootle come out of the situation with a certain show of generosity . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 by the WAYSIDE 

 " so there end another chapter . how many more to the end of the story ? how many more scene till the farce be play out ? there be something flattering to one 's vanity in this careless playing with fate ; it be edify , moreover , to sot circumstance at defiance in this way , now and then , to assert one 's freedom . freedom ! what a joke the word must be to whoever be pull the wire and make we poor puppet dance at his pleasure . pity that we have to pay the piper so heavily for our involuntary jigging ! " 

 a passage from the letter Waymark write to his friend Casti , on the evening when his school - work come to an end . that night he seek rest early , and sleep well . the sensation with which he wake next morning be such as he have not experience for a long time . he be at liberty , with six pound ten in his pocket . he could do what he like and go whither he like , till lack of a dinner should remind he that a man 's hard master be his own body . he dress leisurely , and , have dress , treat himself to an egg for breakfast . absolutely no need for hurry ; the thought of school - hour dismiss for ever ; a horizon quite free from the vision of hateful toil ; in the real sky overhead a gleam of real sunshine , as if to make credible this sudden change . his mood be still complete recklessness , a revolt against the idea of responsibility , indifference to all beyond the moment . 

 it be Thursday ; the morrow would be good Friday ; after that the intervention of two clear day before the commencement of a new week in the meantime the sun be really shin , and the fresh spring air invite to the open way . Waymark close the door of his room behind he , and go downstairs , whistle to himself . but , before reach the bottom , he turn and go back again . it seem warm enough to sit in one of the park and read . he lay his hand on a book , almost at haphazard , to put in his pocket . then he walk very leisurely along Kennington Road , and on , and on , till he have cross the river . 

 wonder in which direction he should next turn , he suddenly find himself repeat , with unaccountable transition of thought , the word " South Bank , Regent 's Park . " in all likelihood , he say to himself presently , they be suggest by some inscription on a pass omnibus , note unconsciously . the address be that he have read in Miss Enderby 's note - book . why not ramble in that direction as well as another , and amuse himself by guess which house it be that the governess live in ? he have not see she since the uproar which have terminate his connection with the young Tootles . be it true that she have then already decide to give up her position ? if not , his outbreak of temper have doubtless result unpleasantly for she , see that Mrs. Tootle would almost certainly dismiss she out of mere spite . several time during the last two day he have think of conveying to she a note by some mean , to express in some way or other this fear , and the regret it cause he ; the real motive , he know well enough , would be a hope of receive a reply from she . but now she have perhaps leave the school , and he do not know her exact address . he make his way across the Park in the direction of St. John 's Wood , and have soon reach South Bank . 

 he have walk once the length of the road , and be look at the near house before he turn , when a lady come round the corner and pause to avoid he , as he stand in the middle of the pavement . it be Miss Enderby herself . her embarrassment be apparently not as great as his own . she smile with friendliness ; seem indeed in a happy frame of mind than any in which Waymark have as yet see she . but she do not offer her hand , and the other , have raise his hat , be almost on the point of pass on , when he overcome his diffidence and speak . 

 " I come here to try and discover where you live , Miss Enderby . " 

 there be something grotesque in this abruptness ; his tone only save it from impertinence . the girl look at he with frank surprise . 

 " pray do not   misunderstand I , " he go on hurriedly . " I wish , if possible , to well , to tell you that I fear I act thoughtlessly the other day ; without regard , I mean , to any consequence it might have for yourself . " 

 " rather I ought to thank you for defend I . it make no difference in the way you mean . it have already be decide that I should leave . I do not suit Mrs. Tootle . " 

 it be very pleasant to look down into her earnest face , and watch it as she speak in this unrestrained way . she seem so slight and frail , evidently think so depreciatingly of herself , look as though her life have in it so little joy , that Waymark have speedily assume a confident attitude , and gaze at she as a man do at one whom he would gladly guard and cherish . 

 " you be certainly unsuited for the work , in every way , " he say , with a smile . " your effort be quite waste there . still , I be sorry you have leave . " 

 " I be go into a family , " be she next word , speak almost cheerfully . " it be in the country , in Essex . there be only two child , quite young . I think I shall succeed well with they ; I hope so . " 

 " then I suppose , " Waymark say , move a little and keep his eye fix on she with an uneasy look , " I shall I must say good - bye to you , for the last time ? " 

 a scarcely hear " yes " fall from her lip . her eye be cast down . 

 " I be go to make a bold request , " Waymark exclaim , with a sort of recklessness , though his voice express no less respect than hitherto . " will you tell I where you be go to ? " 

 she tell he , without look up , and with a recurrence to the timid manner which have mark she in the schoolroom . this give Waymark encouragement ; his confidence grow as hers diminish . 

 " will you let I write to you occasionally ? would you let I keep up our acquaintance in this way , so that , if you return to London , I might look forward to meet you again some time ? " 

 the girl answer timidly 

 " I shall be glad to keep up our acquaintance . I shall be glad to hear from you . " 

 then , at once feeling that she have go too far , her confusion make her pale . Waymark hold out his hand , as if to take leave . 

 " thank you very much , " he say warmly . " I be very grateful . " 

 she give he a quick " good - bye , " and then pass on . Waymark move at once in the opposite direction , turn the corner . then he wish to go back and notice which house she enter , but would not do so lest she should observe he . he walk straight forwards . 

 how the aspect of the world have change for he in these few minute ; what an incredible revolution have come to pass in his own desire and purpose t the intellectual atmosphere he breathe be of his own creation ; the society of cultured people he have never have an opportunity of enjoy . a refined and virtuous woman have hitherto exist for he merely in the sanctuary of his imagination ; he have know not one such . if he pass one in the street , the effect of the momentary proximity be only to embitter his thought , by remind he of the hopeless gulf fix between his world and that in which such creature have their being . in revenge , he try to soil the purity of his ideal ; would have persuade himself that the difference between the two sphere be merely in external , that he be impose upon by wealth , education , and superficial refinement of manner . happily he have never really succeed in thus deceive himself , and the effort have only serve to aggravate his misery . the habit of mind , however , have show itself in the early stage of his acquaintance with Miss Enderby . the first sight of she have move he somewhat , but scarcely with any foreshadowing of serious emotion . he feel that she be different from any woman with whom he have ever stand on an equal footing ; but , at the same time , the very possibility of establish more or less intimate relation with she make he distrustful of his judgment . in spite of himself , he try to disparage her quality . she be pretty , he admit , but then of such a feeble , characterless type ; doubtless her understanding correspond with the weakness of her outward appearance . none the less , he have continue to observe she keenly , and have note with pleasure every circumstance which contradict his wilful depreciation of she . his state of mind after the thrashing he give to young Tootle have be characteristic . what have be the cause of his violence ? certainly not uncontrollable anger , for he have in reality be perfectly cool throughout the affair ; simply , then , the pleasure of avenge Miss Enderby . and for this he have sacrifice his place , and leave himself without resource . he have act absurdly ; certainly would not have repeat the absurdity have the scene be to act over again . this be not the attitude of one in love , and he know it . moreover , though he have think of write to she , it would in reality have cost he nothing if she have forthwith pass out of his sight and knowledge . now how all this have be alter , by a mere chance meeting . the doubt have leave he ; she be indeed the being from a high world that he would have like to believe she from the first ; the mysterious note of true sympathy have be strike in that short exchange of word and look , and , though they have take leave of each other for who could say how long , mutual knowledge be just begin , real intercourse about to be establish between they . he might write to she , and of course she would reply . 

 he walk without much perception of time or distance , and find himself at home just before nightfall . he feel disposed for a quiet evening , to be spend in the companionship of his thought . but when he have make his coffee and eat with appetite after the day 's ramble , restlessness again possess he . after all , it be not retirement that he need ; these strange new Imaginings would consort well with motion and the liveliness of the street . so he put out his lamp , and once more set forth . the night air freshen his spirit ; he sing to himself as he go along . it be long since he have be to a theatre , and just now he ' vas so hopelessly poor that he could really afford a little extravagance . so he be soon sit before the well - know drop of a favourite play - house , as full of light - hearted expectancy as a boy who be enjoy a holiday . the evening be delightful , and pass all too quickly . 

 the play over , he be in no mood to go straight home . he light a cigar and drift with the current westward , out of the Strand and into Pall Mall . a dispute between a cabdriver and his fare induce he to pause for a moment under the colonnade , and , when the little cluster of people have move on , he still stand lean against one of the pillar , enjoy the mild air and the scent of his cigar . he feel his elbow touch , and , look round with indifference , meet the kind of greeting for which he be prepare . he shake his head and do not reply ; then the sham gaiety of the voice all at once turn to a very real misery , and the girl begin to beg instead of try to entice he in the ordinary way . he look at she again , and be shock at the ghastly wretchedness of her daub face . she be ill , she say , and could scarcely walk about , but must get money somehow ; if she do not , her landlady would not   let she sleep in the house again , and she have nowhere else to go to . there could be no mistake about the genuineness of her story , at all event as far as bodily suffer go . Waymark contrast her state with his own , and take out what money he have in his pocket ; it be the change out of a sovereign which he have receive at the theatre , and he give she it all . she star , and do not understand . 

 " be you come with I ? " she ask , feel oblige to make a hideous attempt at professional coaxing in return for such generosity . 

 " Good God , no ! " Waymark exclaim . " go home and take care of yourself . " 

 she thank he warmly , and turn away at once . as his eye follow she , he be aware that somebody else have draw near to he from behind . this also be a girl , but of a different kind . she be well dressed , and of graceful , rounded form ; a veil almost hide her face , but enough could be see to prove that she have good look . 

 " that a friend of your ? " she ask abruptly , and her voice be remarkably full , clear , and sweet . 

 Waymark answer with a negative , look closely at she . 

 " then why do you give she all that money ? " 

 " how do you know what I give she ? " 

 " I be stand just behind here , and could see . " 

 " well ? " 

 " nothing ; only I should think you be one out of a thousand . you save I a sovereign , too ; I have   watch her beg of nearly a dozen people , and I could not   have stand it much long . " 

 " you would have give she a sovereign ? " 

 " I mean to , if she have fail with you . " 

 " be she a friend of your ? " 

 " never see she before to - night . " 

 " then you must be one out of a thousand . " 

 the girl laugh merrily . 

 " in that case , " she say , " we ought to know each other , should not   we ? " 

 " if we begin by think so well of each other , " return Waymark , smile , " we should not improbably suffer a grievous disappointment before long . " 

 " well , you might . you have to take my generosity on trust , but I have proof of your . " 

 " you be an original sort of girl , " say Waymark , throw away the end of his cigar . " do you talk to everybody in this way ? " 

 " Pooh , of course not . I should not   be worth much if I could not   suit my conversation to the man I want to make a fool of . would you rather have I talk in the usual way ? shall I say " 

 " I have rather not . " 

 " well , I know that . " 

 " and how ? " 

 " well , you do not   wear a veil , if I do . " 

 " you can read face ? " 

 " a little , I flatter myself . can you ? " 

 " give I a chance of try . " 

 she raise her veil , and he inspect she for some moment , then look away . 

 " excellently well , if God do all , " he observe , with a smile . 

 " that be out of a play , " she reply quickly . " I hear it a little time ago , but I forget the answer . I would have give anything to be able to cap you ! then you would have put I down for a clever woman , and I should have live on the reputation henceforth and for ever . but it be all my own , indeed ; I be not afraid of cry . " 

 " do you ever cry ? I can not   easily imagine it . " 

 " oh yes , sometimes , " she answer , sigh , and at the same time lower her veil again . " but you have not   read my face for I . " 

 " it be a face I be sorry to have see . " 

 " why ? " she ask , hold her hand clasp before she , the palm turn outward . 

 " I shall think of it often after tonight , and imagine it with all its freshness go , and mark of suffering and degradation upon it . " 

 " suffering , perhaps ; degradation , no . why should I be degrade ? " 

 " you can not   help yourself . the life you have choose bring its inevitable consequence . " 

 " choose ! " she repeat , with an indignant face . " how do you know I have any choice in the matter ? you have no right to speak contemptuously , like that . " 

 " perhaps not . certainly not . I should have say the life you be evidently lead . " 

 " well , I do not   know that it make so much difference . I suppose everybody have a choice at all event between life and death , and you mean that I ought to have kill myself rather than come to this . that be my own business , however , and " 

 a man have just pass behind they , and , catch the sound of the girl 's voice , have turn suddenly to look at she . she , at the same moment , look towards he , and stop all at once in her speech . 

 " be you walk up Regent Street ? " she ask Waymark , in quite a different voice . " give I your arm , will you ? " 

 Waymark comply , and they walk together in the direction she suggest . 

 " what be the matter with you ? " he ask . " why be you tremble ? " 

 " do not   look round . it be that fellow behind we ; I know he be follow . " 

 " somebody you know ? " 

 " yes , and hate . worse than that , I be afraid of he . will you keep with I till he be go ? " 

 " of course I will . what harm can he do you though ? " 

 " none that I know of . it be a strange stupid feeling I have . I can not   bear the sight of he . do not   look round ! " 

 " have he be a a friend of your ? " 

 " no , no ; not in that way . but he follow I about . he will drive I out of London , I know . " 

 they have reach Piccadilly Circus . 

 " look back now , " she say , " and see if he be follow still . " 

 Waymark turn his head ; the man be at a little distance behind . he stop when he see himself observe , and stand on the edge of the pavement , tap his boot with his cane . he be a tall and rather burly fellow , well dress , with a clean - shaven face . 

 " let us make haste round the corner , " the girl say , " and get into the restaurant . you must have some supper with I . " 

 " I should be very happy , have I a penny in my pocket . " 

 " see how easily good deed be forget , " return the other , laugh in the old way . " now come my turn to give proof of generosity . come and have some supper all the same . " 

 " no ; that be out of the question . " 

 " Fiddlestick surely you will not   desert I when I ask your protection ? come along , and pay I back another time , if you like . " 

 they walk round the corner , then the girl start and run at her full speed . Waymark follow in the same way , somewhat oppress by a sense of ridiculousness . they reach the shelter of the restaurant , and the girl lead the way upstairs , laugh immoderately . 

 Supper be serve to they , and honour with due attention by both . Waymark have leisure to observe his companion 's face in clear light . it be beautiful , and , well still , full of character . 

 he presently bent forward to she , and speak in a low voice . 

 " be not   this the man who follow we just come in now ? look , he have go to the table on the right . " 

 she look round hastily , and shudder , for she have meet the man 's eye . 

 " why do you tell I ? " she exclaim impatiently . " now I can not   finish my supper . wait till he have give his order , and then we will go . " 

 Waymark examine this mysterious persecutor . in truth , the countenance be no good one , and a woman might well dislike to have such eye turn upon she . it be a strong face ; coarse originally , and , in addition to the fault of nature , it now bear the plain trace of hard living . as soon as he perceive Waymark and his companion , he fix they with his eye , and scarcely look away as long as they remain in the room . the girl seem shrink under this gaze , though she sit almost with she back to he . she cease talk , and , as soon as she see that Waymark have finish , make a sign to he to pay quickly   with a sovereign she push across the table   and let they be go . they rise , accordingly , and leave . the man watch they , but remain seat . 

 " be you in a hurry to get home ? " the girl ask , when they be in the street again . 

 " no ; time be of no consequence to I . " 

 " do you live far off ? " 

 " in Kennington . and you ? " 

 " if you like , I will show you . let we walk quickly . I feel rather cold . " 

 she lead the way into the Strand . at no great distance from Temple Bar she turn off into a small court . 

 " this be a queer place to live in , " observe Waymark , as he look up at the dark house . 

 " do not   be afraid , " be the good - humour reply , as she open the door with a latch - key . they go up two flight of stair , then enter a room where a bright fire be burn . Waymark 's conductor hold a piece of paper to the flame , and light a lamp . it be a small , pleasantly furnish sit - room . 

 " do you play ? " Waymark ask , see an open piano , with music upon it . 

 " I only wish I could . my landlady 's daughter be give I lesson . but I think I be get on . listen to I do this exercise . " 

 she sit down , and , with much conscientious effort , go over some simple bar . then she look up at her companion and catch he smile . 

 " well , " she exclaim , in a pet , " you must begin at the beginning in everything , must not   you ? come and let I hear what you can do . " 

 " not even so much . " 

 " then do not   laugh at a poor girl do she good . you have such a queer smile too ; it seem both ill - natured and good - natured at the same time . now wait a minute till I come back . " 

 she go into an inner room , and close the door behind she . in five minute it open again . she appear in a dress gown and with her foot in slipper . her fine hair fall heavily about her shoulder ; in her arm she hold a beautiful black cat , with white throat and paw . 

 " this be my child . do not   you admire he ? shake hand , Grim . " 

 " why Grim ? " 

 " it be short for Grimalkin . the name of a cat in a hook of fairy tale I use to be fond of reading . do not   you think he be get a beautiful face , and a good deal more intelligent than some people we could mention ? I pick he up on our door - step , two month ago . oh , you never see such a wretched little object , drip with rain , and with such a poor starve little face , and bone almost come through the skin . he look up at I , and beg I as plain as plain could be to have pity on he and help he ; do not   you , Grimmy ? and so I bring he upstairs , and make he comfortable , and now we shall never part . do you like animal ? " 

 " yes . " 

 the door of the room suddenly open , and there spring in a fresh - coloured young girl in hat and jacket , short , plump , pretty , and look about seventeen . she start back on see that the room be occupy . 

 " what be it , Sally ? " ask Grim 's mistress , with a good - natured laugh . 

 " why , Mrs. Walter tell I you be not   in yet ; I be awful sorry , I beg your pardon . " 

 she speak with a strong south - west - country accent . 

 " do you want I ? " 

 " it be only for Grim , " return Sally , show something which she hold wrap up in paper . " I would bring un home a bit o ' fish , a nice bit without bone ; it will just suit he . " 

 " then come and give it he , " say the other , with a merry glance at Waymark . " but he must not   make a mess on the hearthrug . " 

 " oh , trust un for that , " cry Sally . " he will not   pull it off the paper . " 

 Grim be accordingly provide with his supper , and Sally run away with a " good - night . " 

 " who be that ? " Waymark ask . " where on earth do she come from ? " 

 " she be from Weymouth . they talk queerly there , do not   they ? she live in the house , and go to business . Sally and I be great friend . " 

 " do you come from the country ? " Waymark inquire , as she sit down in an easy - chair and watch the cat eat . 

 " no , I be a London girl . I have   never be out of the town since I be a little child . " 

 " and how old be you now ? " 

 " guess . " 

 " not twenty . " 

 " eighteen a month ago . all my life before I , be not   it ? " 

 Waymark keep silence for a moment . 

 " how do you like my room ? " she ask suddenly , look round . 

 " it be very comfortable . I always think there be nothing but business place all about here . I should rather like to live in the very middle of the town , like this . " 

 " should you ? that be just what I like . oh , how I enjoy the noise and the crowd ! I should be ill if I have to live in one of those long , dismal street , where the house be all the same shape , and costermonger go bawl about all day long . I suppose you live in a place like that ? " 

 " very much the same . " 

 in take his handkerchief out , Waymark just happen to feel a book in his overcoat - pocket . he draw it forth to see what it be , have forget entirely that he have be carry the volume about with he since morning . 

 " what be that ? " ask the girl . " will you let I look ? be it a tale ? lend it I ; will you ? " 

 " do you read book ? " 

 " oh yes ; why not ? let I keep this till you come again . be this your name write here Osmond Waymark ? " 

 " yes . and what be your name ? " 

 " Ida Starr . " 

 " Ida ? that be a beautiful name . I be almost afraid to ask you , for fear it should be something common . " 

 " and why should not   I have a common name ? " 

 " because you be by no mean a common girl . " 

 " you think not ? well , perhaps you be right . but may I keep the book till I see you again ? " 

 " I have well give it you , for it be not   very likely you will see I again . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " my acquaintance would be anything but profitable to you . I often have not   enough money to live on , and " 

 Ida stoop down and play for a few moment with Grim , who turn over lazily on to his back , and stroke his mistress 's hand delicately with his soft white paw . 

 " but you be a gentleman , " she say , rise again , and rustle over the page of the book she still hold . " be you in the city ? " 

 " the Lord deliver I ! " 

 " what then ? " 

 " I be nothing . " 

 " then you must be rich . " 

 " it by no means follow . yesterday I be a teacher in a school . to - day I be what be call out of work . " 

 " a teacher . but I suppose you will get another place . " 

 " no . I have   give it up because I could not   endure it any long . " 

 " and how be you go to live ? " 

 " I have no idea . " 

 " then you must have be very foolish to give away your money like that to - night . " 

 " I do not   pretend to much wisdom . if I have have another sovereign in my pocket , no doubt I should have give it you before this , and you would not   have refuse it . " 

 " how do you know ? " she ask sharply . " why should you think I selfish ? " 

 " certainly I have no reason to . and by the by , I already owe you money for the supper . I will send it you to - morrow . " 

 " why not bring it ? " 

 " well not . I have a good deal of an unpleasant quality which people call pride , and I do not   care to make myself uncomfortable unnecessarily . " 

 " you can not   have more pride than I have . look . " she hold out her hand . " will you be my friend , really my friend ? you understand I ? " 

 " I think I understand , but I doubt whether it be possible . " 

 " everything be possible . will you shake hand with I , and , when you come to see I again , let we meet as if I be a modest girl , and you have get to know I in a respectable house , and not in the street at midnight ? " 

 " you really wish it ? you be not joke ? " 

 " I be in sober earnest , and I wish it . you will not   refuse ? " 

 " if I do I should refuse a great happiness . " 

 he take her hand and again release it . 

 " and now look at the time , " say she , point to a clock on the mantelpiece . " half - past one . how will you get home ? " 

 " Walk . it will not   take I more than an hour . may I light my pipe before I start ? " 

 " of course you may . when shall I see you again ? " 

 " shall we say this night next week ? " 

 " very well . come here any time you like in the evening . I will be at home after six . and then I can give you your book back . " 

 Waymark light his pipe , stoop to give Grim a stroke , and button up his coat . Ida lead the way downstairs . they shake hand again , and part . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 RENT day 

 it be much after his usual hour when Waymark awake on Good Friday morning . he have be trouble throughout the night with a strangely vivid dream , which seem to have repeat itself several time ; when he at length start into consciousness the anguish of the vision be still upon he . 

 he rise at once , and dress quickly , do his good to shake off the clinging misery of sleep . in a little while it have pass , and he try to go over in his mind the event of the precede day . be they , too , only fragment of a long dream ? surely so many and strange event could not have crowd themselves into one period of twelve hour ; and for he , whose day pass with such dreary monotony . the interview with Maud Enderby seem so unnaturally long ago ; that with Ida Starr , so impossibly fresh and recent . yet both have undoubtedly take place . he , who but yesterday morning have feel so bitterly his loneliness in the world , and , above all , the impossibility of what he most long for woman 's companionship find himself all at once on term of at least friendly intimacy with two woman , both young , both beautiful , yet so wholly different . each answer to an ideal which he cherish , and the two ideal be so diverse , so mutually exclusive . the experience have leave he in a curious frame of mind . for the present , he feel cool , almost indifferent , to both his new acquaintance . he have ask and obtain leave to write to Maud Enderby ; what on earth could he write about ? how could he address she ? he have promise to go and see Ida Starr , on a most impracticable footing . be it not almost certain that , before the day come round , her caprice would have vanish , and his reception would prove anything but a flattering one ? the feeling which both girl have at the time excited in he seem artificial ; in his present mood he in vain try to resuscitate his interest either in the one or the other . it be as though he have over - exert his emotional power , and they lie exhausted . weariness be the only reality of which he be conscious . he must turn his mind to other thing . have breakfast , he remember what day it be , and presently take down a volume of his Goethe , opening at the Easter morning scene in Faust , favourite reading with he . this inspire he with a desire to go into the open air ; it be a bright day , and there would be life in the street . just as he begin to prepare himself for walk , there come a knock at his door , and Julian Casti enter . 

 " Halloa ! " Waymark cry . " I think you tell I you be engage with your cousin to - day . " 

 " I be , but I send she a note yesterday to say I be unable to meet she . " 

 " then why do not   you write at the same time and tell I you be come ? I might have go out for the day . " 

 " I have no intention of come then . " 

 " what be the matter ? you look out of sort . " 

 " I do not   feel in very good spirit . by the by , I hear from the publisher yesterday . here be the note . " 

 it simply state that Messrs. so - and - so have give their good attention to the play of " Stilicho , " which Mr. Casti have be so good as to submit to they , and regret their inability to make any proposal for its publication , see that its subject be hardly likely to excite popular interest . they thank the author for offer it to they , and beg to return the MS . 

 " well , it be a disappointment , " say Waymark , " but we must try again . I myself be so hardened to this kind of thing that I fear you will think I unsympathetic . it be like have a tooth out . you never quite get use to it , but you learn after two or three experiment to gauge the moment 's torture at its true value . re - direct your parcel , and fresh hope beat out the old discouragement . " 

 " it be not   altogether that which be make I feel restless and depressed , " Casti say , when they have leave the house and be walk along . " I suppose I be not quite right in health just at present . I seem to have lose my natural good spirit of late ; the bad of it be , I can not   settle to my day 's work as I use to . in fact , I have just be apply for a new place , that of dispenser at the All Saints ' Hospital . if I get it , it would make my life a good deal more independent . I should live in lodging of my own , and have much more time to myself . " 

 Waymark encourage the idea strongly . but his companion could not be rouse to the wonted cheerfulness . after a long silence , he all at once put a strange question , and in an abash way . 

 " Waymark , have you ever be in love ? " 

 Osmond laugh , and look at his friend curiously . 

 " many thousand time , " be his reply . 

 " no , but seriously , " urge Julian . 

 " with desperate seriousness for two or three day at a time . never long . " 

 " well now , answer I in all earnestness . do you believe it possible to love a woman whom in almost every respect you regard as your inferior , who you know can not   understand your thought and aspiration , who have no interest in anything above daily need ? " 

 " impossible to say . be she good - look ? " 

 " suppose she be not ; yet not altogether plain . " 

 " then do she love you ? " 

 Julian redden at the direct application . 

 " suppose she seem to . " 

 " seem to , eh ? on the whole , I should say that I could not   declare it possible or the contrary till I have see the girl . I myself should be very capable of fall desperately in love with a girl who have not   an idea in her head , and do not   know her letter . all I should ask would be passion in return , and well , yes , a pliant and docile character . " 

 " you be right ; the character would go for much . never mind , we will not   speak any more of the subject . it be an absurd question to ask you . " 

 " nevertheless , you have make I very curious . " 

 " I will tell you more some other time ; not now . tell I about your own plan . what decision have you come to ? " 

 Waymark profess to have form no plan whatever . this be not strictly true . for some month now , ever and again , as often indeed as he have feel the burden of his schoolwork more than usually intolerable , his thought have turn to the one person who could be of any assistance to he , and upon whom he have any kind of claim ; that be Abraham Woodstock , his father 's old friend . he have hold no communication with Mr. Woodstock for four year ; do not even know whether he be live . but of he he still think , now that absolute need be close at hand , and , as soon as Julian Casti have leave he to - day , he examine a directory to ascertain whether the accountant still occupy the house in St. John Street Road . apparently he do . and the same evening Waymark make up his mind to visit Mr. Woodstock on the following day . 

 the old gentleman be sit alone when the servant announce a visitor . in personal appearance he be scarcely change since the visit of his little grand - daughter . perhaps the eye be not quite so vivid , the skin on forehead and cheek a trifle less smooth , but his face have the same healthy colour ; there be the same repose of force in the huge limb , and his voice have lose nothing of its resonant firmness . 

 " ah ! " he exclaim , as Waymark enter . " you ! I have   be wonder where you be to be find . " 

 the visitor hold out his hand , and Abraham , though he do not rise , smile not unpleasantly as he give his own . 

 " you want to see I ? " Waymark ask . 

 " well , yes . I suppose you have   come about the mine . " 

 " mine ? what mine ? " 

 " oh , then you have not   come about they . you do not   know the Llwg Valley people have begin to pay a dividend ? " 

 Waymark remember that one of his father 's unfortunate speculation have be the purchase of certain share in some Welsh mine . the money thus invest have remain , for the last nine year , wholly unproductive . Mr. Woodstock explain that thing be look up with the company in question , who have just declare a dividend of 4 per cent . on all their pay - up share . 

 " in other word , " exclaim Waymark eagerly , " they owe I some money ? " 

 " which you can do with , eh ? " say Abraham , with a twinkle of good - humour commiseration in his eye . 

 " perfectly . what be the detail ? " 

 " there be fifty ten - pound share . dividend accordingly twenty pound . " 

 " by Jingo ! how be it to be get at ? " 

 " do you feel disposed to sell the share ? " ask the old man , look up sideways , and still smile . 

 " no ; on the whole I think not . " 

 " Ho , ho , Osmond , where have you learn prudence , eh ? why do not   you sit down ? if you do not   come about the mine , why do you come , eh ? " 

 " not to mince matter , " say Waymark , take a chair , and speak in an off - hand way which cost he much effort , " I come to ask you to help I to some way of get a living . " 

 " Hollo ! " exclaim the old man , chuckle . " why , I should have think you would make your fortune by this time . poetry do not   pay , it seem ? " 

 " it do not . one have to buy experience . it be no good say that I ought to have be guide by you five year ago . of course I wish I have be , but it be not   possible . the question be , do you care to help I now ? " 

 " what be your idea ? " ask Abraham , play with his watch - guard , a smile as of inward triumph flit about his lip . 

 " I have none . I only know that I have   be half - starve for year in the cursed business of teaching , and that I can not   stand it any long . I want some kind of occupation that will allow I to have three good meal every day , and leave I my evening free . that be not   ask much , I imagine ; most man manage to find it . I do not   care what the work be , not a bit . if it be of a kind which give a prospect of get on , all the well ; if that be out of the question , well , three good meal and a roof shall suffice . " 

 " you be turn out a devilish sensible lad , Osmond , " say Mr. Woodstock , still smile . " well late than never , as they say . but I do not   see what you can do . you literary chap get into the way of think that any fool can make a man of business , and that it be only a matter of condescend to turn your hand to desk work and the way clear before you . it be a mistake , and you be not the first that will find it out . " 

 " this much I know , " reply Waymark , with decision . " set I to anything that can be learn , and I will be perfect in it in a quarter the time it would take the average man . " 

 " you want your evening free ? " ask the other , after a short reflection . " what will you do with they ? " 

 " I shall give they to literary work . " 

 " I think as much . and you think you can be a man of business and a poet at the same time ? no go , my boy . if you take up business , you drop poetise . those two horse never yet pull at the same shaft , and never will . " 

 Mr. Woodstock ponder for a few moment . he thrust out his great leg with foot cross on the fender , and with his hand jingle coin in his trouser - pocket . 

 " I tell you what , " he suddenly begin . " there be only one thing I know of at present that you be likely to be able to do . suppose I give you the job of collect my rent down east . " 

 " weekly rent ? " 

 " Weekly . it be a rough quarter , and they be a shady lot of customer . you would not   find the job over - pleasant , but you might try , eh ? " 

 " what would it bring I in , to go at once to the point ? " 

 " the rent average twenty - five pound . your commission would be seven per cent . you might reckon , I dare say , on five - and - thirty shilling a week . " 

 " what be the day for collect ? " 

 " Mondays ; but there be lot of them you would have to look up several time in a week . if you like I will go round myself on Tuesday Easter Monday 's no good and you can come with I . " 

 " I will go , by all mean , " exclaim Waymark 

 Talk continue for some half - hour . when Waymark rise at length , he express his gratitude for the assistance promise . 

 " well , well , " say the other , " wait till we see how thing work . I should not   wonder if you throw it up after a week or two . however , be here on Tuesday at ten . and prompt , mind : I do not   wait for any man . " 

 Waymark be punctual enough on the following Tuesday , and the two drive in a hansom eastward . it be rather a foggy morning , and thing look their bad . after alight they have a short walk . Mr. Woodstock stop at the end of an alley . 

 " you see , " he say , " that be Litany Lane . there be sixteen house in it , and they be all mine . half way down , on the left , run off Elm Court , where there be fourteen house , and those be all mine , too . " 

 Waymark look . Litany Lane be a narrow passage , with house only on one side ; opposite to they run a long high wall , apparently the limit of some manufactory . two post set up at the entrance to the Lane show that it be no thoroughfare for vehicle . the house be of three storey . there be two or three dirty little shop , but the rest be ordinary lodging - house , the front - door stand wide open as a matter of course , exhibit a dusky passage , filthy stair , with generally a glimpse right through into the yard in the rear . in Elm Court the house be small , and have their front whitewash . under the archway which lead into the Court be fasten up several write notice of room to be let at this or that number . the paving be in evil repair , form here and there considerable pool of water , the stench and the colour whereof lead to the supposition that the inhabitant facilitate domestic operation by empty casual vessel out of the window . the dirty little casement on the ground floor exhibit without exception a rag of red or white curtain on the one side , prevail fashion evidently require no corresponding drapery on the other . the Court be a cul de sac , and at the far end stand a receptacle for ash , the odour from which be intolerable . strangely enough , almost all the window - sill display flower - pot , and , despite the wretched weather , several little bird - cage hang out from the upper storey . in one of they a lark be sing briskly . 

 they begin their progress through the tenement , commence at the top of Litany Lane . many of the room be lock , the occupier be away at their work , but in such case the rent have generally be leave with some other person in the house , and be forthcoming . but now and then neither rent nor tenant be to be get at , and dire be the threat which Abraham bid the neighbour convey to the defaulter on their return . his way with one and all be curt and vigorous ; to Waymark it seem needlessly brutal . a woman plead inability to make up her total sum would be cut short with a thunderous oath , and the assurance that , if she do not pay up in a day or two , every stick would be carry off . pitiful plead for time have absolutely no effect upon Abraham . here and there e tenant would complain of high rent , and point out a crack ceiling , a rotten piece of stair , or something else imperatively call for renovation . " if you do not   like the room , clear out , " be the landlord 's sole reply to all such speech . 

 in one place they come across an old irish woman engage in washing . the room be hang with reek clothe from wall to wall . for a time it be difficult to distinguish object through the steam , and Waymark , make his way in , stumble and almost fall over an open box . from the box at once proceed a miserable little wail , break by as terrible a cough as a child could be afflict with ; and Waymark then perceive that the box be be use as a cradle , in which lie a baby gasp in the agony of some throat disease , whilst drop from the wet clothing trickle on to its face . 

 on leave this house , they enter Elm Court . here , sit on the doorstep of the first house , be a child of apparently nine or ten , and seemingly a girl , though the nondescript attire might have conceal either sex , and the face be absolutely sexless in its savagery . her hair be cut short , and round her neck be a bit of steel chain , fasten with string . on see the two approach , she spring up , and disappear with a bound into the house . 

 " that be the most infernal little devil in all London , I do believe , " say Mr. Woodstock , as they begin to ascend the stair . " her mother owe two week , and if she do not   pay something to - day , I will have she out . she will be sham illness , you will see . the child run up to prepare she . " 

 the room in question be at the top of the house . it prove to be quite bare of furniture . on a bundle of straw in one corner be lie a woman , to all appearance in extremis . she lie look up to the ceiling , her face distort into the most ghastly anguish , her lip foam ; her whole frame shiver incessantly . 

 " ha , I think so , " exclaim Abraham as he enter . " be you go to pay anything this week ? " 

 the woman seem to be unconscious . 

 " have you get the rent ? " ask Mr. Woodstock , turn to the child , who have crouch down in another corner . 

 " no , we be not , " be the reply , with a terribly fierce glare from eye which rather seem to have look on ninety year than nine . 

 " then out you go ! come , you , get up now ; d ' you hear ? very well ; come along , Waymark ; you take hold of that foot , and I will take this . now , drag she out on to the landing . " 

 they drag she about half - way to the door , when suddenly Waymark feel the foot he have hold of withdraw from his grasp , and at once the woman spring upright . then she fall on he , tooth and nail , scream like some evil beast . have not Abraham forthwith come to the rescue , he would have be seriously tear about the face , but just in time the woman 's arm be seize in a giant grip , and she be fling bodily out of the room , fall with a crash upon the landing . then from she and the child arise a most terrific uproar of commination ; both together yell such foulness and blasphemy as can only be conceive by those who have make a special study of this vocabulary , and the vituperation of the child be , if anything , rich in quality than the mother 's . the former , moreover , do not confine herself to word , but all at once send she clench fist through every pain of glass in the window , heedless of the fearful cut she inflict upon herself , and utter a wild yell of triumph at each fracture . Mr. Woodstock be too late to save his property , but he catch up the creature like a doll , and fling she out also on to the landing , then coolly lock the door behind he , put the key in his pocket , and , let Waymark pass on first , descend the stair . the yelling and screech behind they continue as long as they be in the Court , but it draw no attention from the neighbour , who be far too accustomed to this kind of thing to heed it . 

 in the last house they have to enter they come upon a man asleep on a bare bedstead . it be difficult to wake he . when at length he be arouse , he glare at they for a moment with one blood - shot eye   the other be sightless , look much like a wild beast which doubt whether to spring or to shrink back . 

 " Rent , Slimy , " say Mr. Woodstock with more of good humour than usual . 

 the man point to the mantelpiece , where the piece of money be find to be lie . Waymark look round the room . besides the bedstead , a table be the only article of furniture , and on it stand a dirty jug and a glass . lie about be a strange collection of miscellaneous article , heap of rag and dirty paper , bottle , boot , bone . there be one or two chair in process of be new - caned ; there be a wooden frame for hold glass , such as be carry about by itinerant glazier , and , finally , there be a knife - grind instrument , adapt for wheel about the street . the wall be all scribble over with obscene word and drawing . on the inside of the door have be fit two enormous bolt , one above and one below . 

 " how be trade , Slimy ? " inquire Mr. Woodstock . 

 " which trade , Mr. Woodstock ? " ask the man in return , in a very husky voice . 

 " oh , trade in general . " 

 " there never be sich time since old Scratch die , " reply Slimy , shake his head . " no chance for a honest man . " 

 " then you be in luck . this be the new collector , d'you see . " 

 " I have   be a - look at he , " say Slimy , whose one eye , for all that , have seem busy all the time in quite a different direction . " I see he somewhere , but I can not   just make out where . " 

 " not many people you have not   see , I think , " say Abraham , nodding , as he go out of the room . Waymark follow , and be glad to get into the open street again . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 a man - TRAP 

 Julian Casti be successful in his application for the post of dispenser at the All Saints ' Hospital , and shortly after Easter he leave the shop in Oxford Street , take lodging in Beaufort Street , Chelsea . his first evening there be spend in Waymark 's company , and there be much talk of the progress his writing would make , now that his hour of liberty be so considerably extended . for the first time in his life he be enjoy the sense of independence . Waymark talk of move from Walcot Square , in order to be near to his friend . he , too , be possess of more freedom than have be the case for a long time , and his head be full of various fancy . they would encourage each other in their work , afford by mutual appreciation that stimulus which be so essential to the young artist . 

 but in this world , though man may propose , it be woman who dispose . and at this moment , Julian 's future be be dispose of in a manner he could not well have foresee . 

 Harriet Smales have hear with unconcealed pleasure of his leave the shop and take lodging of his own . she have be anxious to come and see the room , and , though the follow Sunday be appoint for her visit , she could not wait so long , but , to her cousin 's surprise , present herself at the house one evening , and be announce by the landlady , who look suspicious . Julian , with some nervousness , hasten to explain that the visitor be a relative , which do not in the least alter his landlady 's preconceive idea . Harriet sit down and look about she with a sigh of satisfaction . if she could but have such a home ! girl have no chance of get on as man do . if only her father could have live , thing would have be different . now she be throw on the world , and have to depend upon her own hard work . then she give way to an hysterical sob , and Julian who feel sure that the landlady be listen at the door could only beg she nervously not to be so down - hearted . 

 " whatever success I have , " he say to she , " you will share it . " 

 " if I think so ! " she sigh , look down at the floor , and move the point of her umbrella up and down . Harriet have saturate her mind with the fiction of penny weekly , and owe to this training all manner of awkward affectation which she take to be the most become manifestation of a susceptible heart . at time she would express herself in phrase of the most absurdly high - fly kind , and lately she have get into the habit of heave profound sigh between her sentence . Julian be not blind to the meaning of all this . his active employment during the past week have keep his thought from brood on the matter , and he have all but dismiss the trouble it have give he . but this visit , and Harriet 's demeanour throughout it , revive all his anxiety . he come back from accompany his cousin part of her way home in a very uneasy frame of mind . what could he do to disabuse the poor girl of the unhappy hop she entertain ? the thought of give pain to any most humble creature be itself a pain unendurable to Julian . his be one of those nature to which self - sacrifice be infinitely easy than the idea of sacrifice another to his own desire or even necessity , a vice of weakness often more deeply and widely destructive than the vice of strength . 

 the visit have be pay , it be arrange that on the follow Sunday Julian should meet his cousin at the end of Gray 's Inn Road as usual . on that day the weather be fine , but Harriet come out in no mood for a walk . she have be ail for a day or two , she say , and feel incapable of exertion ; Mrs. Ogle be away from home for the day , too , and it would be well they should spend the afternoon together in the house . Julian of course assent , as always , and they establish themselves in the parlour behind the shop . in the course of talk , the girl make mention of an engraving Julian have give she a week or two before , and say that she have have it frame and hang it in her bed - room . 

 " do come up and look at it , " she exclaim ; " there be no one in the house . I want to ask you if you can find a well place for it . it do not   show so well where it be . " 

 Julian hesitate for a moment , but she be already lead the way , and he could not refuse to follow . they go up to the top of the house , and enter a little chamber which might have be more tidy , but be decently furnish . the bed be make in a slovenly way , the mantelpiece be dusty , and the picture on the wall hang askew . Harriet close the door behind they , and proceed to point out the new picture , and discuss the various position which have occur to she . Julian would have decide the question as speedily as possible , and once or twice move to return downstairs , but each time the girl find something new to detain he . open a drawer , she take out several paltry little ornament , which she wish he to admire , and , in show they , stand very close by his side . all at once the door of the room be push open , and a woman run in . on see the stranger present , she dart back with an exclamation of surprise . 

 " oh , Miss Smales , I do not   know as you be not   alone ! I hear you move about , and come just to arst you to lend I but never mind , I be so sorry ; why do not   you lock the door ? " 

 and she bustle out again , apparently in much confusion . 

 Harriet have drop the thing she hold in her hand , and stand look at her cousin as if dismay . 

 " I never think any one be in , " she say nervously . " it be Miss Mould , the lodger . she go out before I do , and I never hear she come back . whatever will she think ! " 

 " but of course , " he stammer , " you will explain everything to she . she know who I be , do not   she ? " 

 " I do not   think so , and , even if she do " 

 she stop , and stand with eye on the ground , do she good to display maiden confusion . then she begin to cry . 

 " but surely , surely there be no need to trouble yourself , " exclaim Julian , almost distract , begin to be dimly conscious of all manner of threaten possibility . " I will speak to the woman myself , and clear you of every . oh , but this be all nonsense . let we go down at once , Harriet . what a pity you ask I to come up here ! " 

 it be the near to a reproach that he have ever yet address to she . his face show clearly how distressed he be , and that on his own account more than her , for he could not conceive any blame save on himself for be so regardless of appearance . 

 " go as quietly as ever you can , " Harriet whisper . " the stair creak so . step very softly . " 

 this be terrible to the poor fellow . to steal down in this guilty way be as bad as a confession of evil intention , and he so entirely innocent of a shadow of evil even in his thought . yet he could not but do as she bid he . even on the stair she urge he in a very loud whisper to be yet more cautious . he be out of himself with mortification ; and feel angry with she for bring he into such ignominy . in the back parlour once more , he take up his hat at once . 

 " you must not   go yet , " whisper Harriet . " I be sure that woman 's listen on the stair . you must talk a little . let us talk so she can hear we . suppose she should tell Mrs. Ogle . " 

 " I can not   see that it matter , " say Julian , with annoyance . " I will myself see Mrs. Ogle . " 

 " no , no ! the idea ! I should have to leave at once . whatever shall I do if she turn I away , and will not   give I a reference or anything ! " 

 even in a calm mood , Julian 's excessive delicacy would have present an affair of this kind in a grave light to he ; at present he be wholly incapable of distinguish between true and false , or of gauge these fear at their true value . the mere fact of the girl make so great a matter out of what should have be so easy to explain and have do with , cause an exaggeration of the difficulty in his own mind . he feel that he ought of course to justify himself before Mrs. Ogle , and would have be capable of do so have only Harriet take the same sensible view ; but her apparent distress seem even to he so much more like conscious guilt than troubled innocence , that such a task would cost he the acute suffering . for nearly an hour he argue with she , try to convince she how impossible it be that the woman who have surprise they should harbour any injurious suspicion . 

 " but she know " begin Harriet , and then stop , her eye fall . 

 " what do she know ? " demand her cousin in surprise ; but could get no reply to his question . however , his argument seem at length to have a calm effect , and , as he take leave , he even affect to laugh at the whole affair . for all that , he have never suffer such mental trouble in his life as during this visit and throughout the evening which follow . the mere thought of have be oblige to discuss such thing with his cousin fill he with inexpressible shame and misery . Waymark come to spend the evening with he , but find poor entertainment . several time Julian be on the point of relate what have happen , and ask for advice , but he find it impossible to broach the subject . there be an ever - recur anger against Harriet in his mind , too , for which at the same time he reproach himself . he dread the next meeting between they . 

 Harriet , though herself quite innocent of fine feeling and nice complexity of conscience , be well aware of the existence of such property in her cousin . she neither admire nor despise he for possess they ; they be of unknown value , indifferent to she , indeed , until she become aware of the practical use that might be make of they . like most narrow - minded girl , she become a shrewd reader of character , when her affection and interest be concern , and could calculate Julian 's motif , and the course wherein they would lead he , with much precision . she know too well that he do not care for she in the way she desire , but at the same time she know that he be capable of make almost any sacrifice to spare her humiliation and trouble , especially if he feel that her unhappiness be in any way cause by himself . 

 thus it come about that , on the Tuesday evening of the ensue week , Julian be startle by his landlady 's announce another visit from Miss Smales . Harriet come into the room with a veil over her face , and sink on a chair , sob . what she have fear have come to pass . the lodger have tell Mrs. Ogle of what have take place in her absence on the Sunday afternoon , and Harriet have receive notice that she must find another place at once . Mrs. Ogle be a woman of severe virtue , and would not endure the suspicion of wrong - doing under her roof . to whom could she come for advice and help , but to Julian ? 

 Julian be overwhelmed . his perfectly sincere nature be incapable of suspect a far more palpable fraud . he start up with the intention of go forthwith to Gray 's Inn Road , but Harriet clung to he and hold he back . the idea be vain . the lodger , Miss Mould , have long entertain a spite against she , Harriet say , and have so exaggerate this story in relate it to Mrs. Ogle , that the latter , and her husband , have declare that Casti should not as much as put foot in their shop again . 

 " if you only know what they have   be tell ! " sob the girl , still cling to Julian . " they would not   listen to a word you say . as if I could have think of such a thing happen , and that woman to say all the bad thing of we she can turn her tongue to ! I sha'n't   never get another place ; I be throw out on the wide world ! " 

 it be a phrase she have get out of her penny fiction ; and very remarkable indeed be the mixture of act and real sentiment which mark her utterance throughout . 

 Julian 's shame and anger begin to turn to compassion . a woman in tear be a sight which always cause he the keen distress . 

 " but , " he cry , with tear in his own eye , " it be impossible that you should suffer all this through I , and I not even make an attempt to clear you of such vile charge ! " 

 " it be my own fault . I be thoughtless . I ought to have know that people be always ready to think harm . but I think of nothing when I be with you , Julian ! " 

 he have disengage himself from her hand , and be hold one of they in his own . but , as she make this last confession , she throw her arm about his neck and droop her head against his bosom . 

 " oh , if you only feel to I like I do to you ! " she sob . 

 no man can hear without some return of emotion a confession from a woman 's lip that she love he . Harriet be the only girl whom Julian have ever approach in familiar intercourse ; she have no rival to fear amongst live woman ; the one rival to be dread be altogether out of the sphere of her conception , the ideal love of a poet 's heart and brain . but the ideal be often least present to we when most need . here be love ; offer but love to a poet , and do he pause to gauge its quality ? the sudden whirl of conflict emotion leave Julian at the mercy of the instant 's impulse . she be weak ; she be suffer through he ; she love he . 

 " be my wife , then , " he whisper , return her embrace , " and let I guard you from all who would do you harm . " 

 she utter a cry of delight , and the cry be a true one . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 NEAR and FAR 

 Osmond Waymark be light - hearted ; and with he such a state mean something not at all to be understand by those with whom lightness of heart be a chronic affection . the man who dwell for long period face to face with the bitter truth of life learn so to distrust a fleeting moment of joy , give habitually so cold a reception to the tardy messenger of delight , that , when the bright guest outdare his churlishness and perforce tarrie with he , there ensue a passionate revulsion unknown to heart which open readily to every flutter illusive bliss . illusion it of course remain ; be ever recognise as that ; but illusion so sweet and powerful that he thank the god that blind he , and count off with sigh of joy the hour thus brightly wing . 

 he await with extreme impatience the evening on which he would again see Ida . distrustful always , he could not entirely dismiss the fear that his first impression might prove mistaken in the second interview ; yet he try his good to do so , and amuse himself with imagine for Ida a romantic past , for she and himself together a yet more romantic future . in spite of the strange nature of their relation , he do not delude himself with the notion that the girl have fall in love with he at first sight , and that she stand before he to take or reject as he choose . he have a certain awe of she . he divine in she a strength of character which make she his equal ; it might well be , his superior . take , for instance , the question of the life she be at present leading . in the case of an ordinary pretty and good - natured girl fall in his way as Ida Starr have do , he would have exert whatever influence he might acquire over she to persuade she into well path . any such direct guidance be , he feel , out of the question here . the girl have independence of judgment ; she would resent anything say by he on the assumption of her moral inferiority , and , for aught he know , with justice . the chance be at least as great that he might prove unworthy of she , as that she should prove unworthy of he . 

 when he present himself at the house in the little court by Temple Bar , it be the girl Sally who open the door to he . she beckon he to follow , and run before he upstairs . the sitting - room present the same comfortable appearance , and Grim , rise lazily from the hearthrug , come forward purr a welcome , but Ida be not there . 

 " she be oblige to go out , " say Sally , in answer to his look of inquiry . " she will not   be long , and she say you be to make yourself comfortable till she come back . " 

 on a little side - table stand cup and saucer , and a box of cigar . the latter Sally bring forward . 

 " I be to ask you to smoke , and whether you would like a cup of coffee with it ? " she ask , with the curious naivete which mark her mode of speech . 

 " the kettle 's boiling on the side , " she add , see that Waymark hesitate . " I can make it in a minute . " 

 " in that case , I will . " 

 " you do not   mind I have one as well ? " 

 " of course not . " 

 " shall I talk , or shall I keep quiet ? I be not a servant here , you know , " she add , with an amusing desire to make her position clear . " Ida and I 's friend , and she would do just as much for i. " 

 " talk by all mean , " say Waymark , smile , as he light his cigar . the result be that , in a quarter of an hour Sally have relate her whole history . as Ida have say , she come from Weymouth , where her father be a fisherman , and owner of bum - boat . her mother keep a laundry , and the family have all live together in easy circumstance . she herself have come to London well , just for a change . and what be she do ? oh , get she live as good she could . in the day - time she work in a city workroom . 

 " and how much do you think I earn a week ? " she ask . 

 " fifteen shilling or so , I suppose ? " 

 " ah , that be all you know about it ! now , last week be the good I have   have yet , and I make seven shilling . " 

 " what do you do ? " 

 " machine work ; makin ' ulster . how much do you think we get , now , for makin ' a ulster one like this ? " point to one which hang behind the door . 

 " have no idea . " 

 " well , fourpence : there now ! " 

 " and how many can you make in a day ? " 

 " I can not   make no more than two . some make three , but it be bless hard work . but I get a little job now and then to do at home . " 

 " but you can not   live on seven shilling a week ? " 

 " I sh'd think not , indeed . we have to make up the rest as good we can , s'nough . " 

 " but your employer must know that ? " 

 " in course . what be the odd ? all us girl be the same ; we have to keep on the two job at the same time . but I will give up the day - work before long , s'nough . I come home at night that tire out I be not   fit for nothing . I feel all eye , as the sayin ' be . and it be hard to have to go out into the Strand , when you be like that . " 

 " but do they know about all this at home ? " 

 " no fear ! if our father know , he would be down here precious soon , and the house would not   hold he . but I shall go back some day , when I have   get a good fit - out . " 

 the door open quietly , and Ida come in . 

 " well , young people , so you be make yourself at home . " 

 the sweet face , the eye and lip with their contain mirth , the light , perfect form , the graceful carriage , Waymark feel his pulse throb at the sound of her voice and the touch of her hand . 

 " you do not   mind wait a little for I ? I really could not   help it . and then , after all , I think you might not   come . " 

 " but I promise to . " 

 " promise , promise , oh dear ! " laugh Ida . " Sally , here be an orange for you . " 

 " you be a duck ! " be the girl 's reply , as she catch it , and , with a nod to Waymark , leave the room . 

 " and so you have   really come , " Ida go on , sit down and begin to draw off her glove . 

 " you find it surprising ? to begin with , I have come to pay my debt . " 

 " be there another cup of coffee ? " she ask , seem not to have hear . " I be too tired to get up and see . " 

 Waymark feel a keen delight in wait upon she , in judge to a nicety the true amount of sugar and cream , in draw the little table just within her reach . 

 " Mr. Waymark , " she exclaim , all at once , " if you have have supper with a friend , and your friend have pay the bill , should you take out your purse and pay he back at your next meeting ? " 

 " it would depend entirely on circumstance . " 

 " just so . then the present circumstance do not   permit anything of the kind , and there be an end of that matter . light another cigar , will you ? " 

 " you do not   dislike the smoke ? " 

 " if I do , I should say so . " 

 have remove her outer garment one by one , she rise and take they into the inner room . on reappearing , she go to the sitting - room door and turn the key in the lock . 

 " could you let I have some more book to read ? " she ask . 

 " I have bring one , think you might be ready for it . " 

 it be " Jane Eyre . " she glance over the page eagerly . 

 " I do not   know how it be , " she say , " I have grow so hungry for read of late . till just now I never care for it . when I be a child and go to school , I do not   like my lesson . still I learn a good deal , for a little girl , and it have stay by I . and oh , it seem so long ago ! never mind , perhaps I will tell you all about that some day . " 

 they be together for an hour or so . Waymark , uneasily watch his companion 's every movement , rise as soon as she give sign of weariness , and Ida do not seek to detain he . 

 " I shall think much of you , " he say . 

 " the less the well , " be Ida 's reply . 

 for his comfort , yes , Waymark think , as he walk homeward . Ida have already a dangerous hold upon he ; she possess his sens , and set he on fire with passionate imagining . here , as on every hand , his cursed poverty close against he the possibility of happiness . that she should ever come to love he , seem very unlikely ; the alliance between they could only be a mere caprice on her part , such as girl of her kind be very subject to ; he might perhaps fill up her interval of tedium , but would have no share in her real life . and the thought of that life fevere he with jealousy . she might say what she like about never have know love , but it be of course impossible that she should not have a preference among her lover . and to think of the chance before such a girl , so blessed with rare beauty and endless charm . in the natural order of event she would become the mistress of some rich man ; might even , as at time happen , be rescue by marriage ; in either case , their acquaintance must cease . and , indeed , what right have he to endeavour to gain her love have nothing but mere beggarly devotion to offer she in return ? he have not even the excuse of one who could offer her married life in easy circumstance , suppose that to be an improvement on her present position . would it not be well at once to break off these impossible relation ? how often he have promise himself , in moment of clear thought , never again to enter on a course which would obviously involve he in futile suffering . why have he not now the strength to obey his reason , and continue to possess his soul in the calm of which he have enjoy a brief taste ? 

 the novel circumstance of the past week have almost drive from his mind all think of Maud Enderby . he regret have ask and obtain permission to write to she . she seem so remote from he , their meeting so long past . what could there be in common between himself and that dim , quiet little girl , who have excite his sympathy merely because her pretty face be make sad by the same torment which have afflict he ? he need some strong , vehement , original nature , such as Ida Starr 's ; how would Maud 's timid conventionality doubtless she be absolutely conventional suit with the heresy of which he be all compact ? still , he could not well ignore what have take place between they , and , after all , there would be a certain pleasant curiosity in await her reply . in any case , he would write just such a letter as come naturally from he . if she be horrified , well , there be an end of the matter . 

 accordingly , he sit down on the morning after his visit to Ida , and , after a little difficulty in beginning , write a long letter . it be mainly occupy with a description of his experience in Litany Lane and Elm Court . he make no apology for detail such unpleasant matter , and explain that he would henceforth be keep in pretty close connection with this unknown world . even this , he assert , be preferable to the world of Dr. Tootle 's Academy . then he dwell a little on the contrast between this life of his and that which Maud be doubtless lead in her home on the Essex coast ; and finally he hop she would write to he when she find leisure , and be able to let he know that she be no long so unhappy as formerly . 

 this he post on Friday . on the following Monday morning , the post bring two letter for he , both address in female hand , one bear a city , the other a country , post - mark . Waymark smile as he compare the two envelope , on one of which his name stand in firm , upright character , on the other in slender , sloping , delicate writing . the former he press to his lip , then tear open eagerly ; it be the promise intimation that Ida would be at home after eight o'clock on Wednesday and Friday evening , nothing more . the second letter he allow to lie by till he have breakfast . he could see that it contain more than one sheet . when at length he open it , he read this : 


 " DEAR MR . WAYMARK , I have an hour of freedom this Sunday afternoon , and I will spend it in reply as well as I can to your very interesting letter . my life be , as you say , very quiet and commonplace compare with that you find yourself suddenly enter upon . I have no such strange and move thing to write about , but I will tell you in the first place how I live and what I do , then put down some of the thought your letter have excite in I . 

 " the family I be with consist of very worthy but commonplace people . they treat I with more consideration than I imagine governess usually get , and I be grateful to they for this , but their conversation , especially that of Mrs. Epping , I find rather wearisome . it deal with very trivial concern of everyday life , in which I vainly endeavour to interest myself . 

 " then there be the religious formalism of the epping and their friend . they be High Church . they discuss with astonishing vigour and at dreadful length what seem to I the most immaterial point in the Church service , and just at present an impulse be give to their zeal by the fact of their favourite clergyman be threaten with a prosecution for ritualistic practice . of course I have to feign a become interest in all this , and to take part in all their religious form and ceremony . and indeed it be all so new to I that I have scarcely yet get over the first feeling of wonder and curiosity . 

 " have I not , then , you will ask , the courage of my opinion ? but indeed my religious opinion be so strangely different from those which prevail here , that I fear it would be impossible to make my thought clear to these good people . they would scarcely esteem I a Christian ; and yet I can not but think that it be they who be widely astray from christian belief and practice . the other evening the clergyman din with we , and throughout the meal discussion of the rubric alternate with talk about delicacy of the table ! that the rubric should be so interesting amaze I , but that an earnest Christian should think it compatible with his religion to show the slight concern in what he shall eat or drink be unspeakably strange to I . surely , if Christianity mean anything it mean asceticism . my experience of the world be so slight . I believe this be the first clergyman I ever meet in private life . surely they can not all be thus ? 

 " I know well how far the world at large have pass from true Christianity ; that have be impress upon I from my childhood . but how strange it seem to I to hear propose as a remedy the formalism to which my friend here pin their faith ! how often have I burn to speak up among they , and ask ' what think ye , then , of Christ ? be he , or be he not , our exemplar ? be not his life mean to exhibit to we the ideal of the complete severance from the world which be consistent with human existence ? to follow he , should we not , at least in the spirit , cast off everything which may tempt we to consider life , as life , precious ? ' we can not worship both God and the world , and yet nowadays Christians seem to make a merit of do so . when I conceive a religious revival , my thought do not in the least concern itself with form and ceremony . I imagine another John the baptist incite the people , with irresistible fervour , to turn from their sin that be , from the world and all its concern and to purify themselves by Renunciation . what they call ' progress , ' I take to be the veritable Kingdom of Antichrist . the world be evil , life be evil ; only by renunciation of the very desire for life can we fulfil the christian idea . what then of the civilisation which endeavour to make the world more and more pleasant as a dwelling - place , life more and more desirable for its own sake ? 

 " and so I come to the content of your own letter . you say you marvel that these wretched people you visit do not , in a wild burst of insurrection , overthrow all social order , and seize for themselves a fair share of the world 's good . I marvel also ; all the more that their very teacher in religion seem to lay such stress on the joy of life . and yet what profit would a real christian preacher draw for they from this very misery of their existence ! he would teach they that herein lie their supreme blessing , not their curse ; that in their poverty and nakedness lie mean of grace and salvation such as the rich can scarcely by any mean attain to ; that they should proudly , devoutly , accept their heritage of woe , and daily thank God for deprive they of all that can make life dear . only awaken the spirit in these poor creature , and how near might they be to the true Kingdom of Heaven ! and surely such a preacher will yet arise , and there will be a Reformation very different from the movement we now call by that name . but I weary you , perhaps . it may be you have no interest in all this . yet I think you would wish I to write from what I be . 

 " it would interest I to hear your further experience in the new work . believe I to be your sincere friend , 

 " MAUD ENDERBY . " 


 Waymark read , and think , and wonder . 

 then it be time to go and collect his rent . 




 CHAPTER XV 

 up the river 

 here be an extract from a letter write by Julian Casti to Waymark in the month of May . by this time they be live near to each other , but something be about to happen which Julian prefer to communicate in writing . 

 " this will be the beginning of a new life for I . already I have feel a growth in my power of poetical production . verse run together in my thought without effort ; I feel ready for some really great attempt . have you not notice something of this in I these last few day ? come and see I to - night , if you can , and rejoice with I . " 

 this mean that Julian be about to be marry . Honeymoon journey be out of the question for he . he and his wife establish themselves in the lodging which he be already occupy . and the new life begin . 

 Waymark have make Harriet 's acquaintance a couple of week before ; Julian have bring she with he one Sunday to his friend 's room . she be then live alone , have quit Mrs. Ogle the day after that decisive call upon Julian . there be really no need for she to have do so , Mrs. Ogle 's part in the comedy be an imaginary one of Harriet 's devising . but Julian be lead entirely by his cousin , and , as she know quite well , there be not the least danger of his go on his own account to the shop in Gray 's Inn Road ; he dread the thought of such an interview . 

 Waymark be not charm with Miss Smales ; the more he think of this marriage , the more it amaze he ; for , of course , he deem it wholly of his friend 's bring about . 

 the marriage affect their intercourse . Harriet do not like to be leave alone in the evening , so Julian could not go to Waymark 's , as he have be accustom to , and conversation in Mrs. Casti 's presence be , of course , under restraint . Waymark bear this with impatience , and even do his good to alter it . one Sunday afternoon , about three week after the marriage , he call and carry Julian off to his room across the street . Harriet 's face sufficiently indicate her opinion of this proceeding , and Julian have difficulty in appear at his case . Waymark understand what be go on , and try to discuss the matter freely , but the other shrink from it . 

 " I be grievously impatient of domestic arrangement , " Waymark say . " I fancy it would never do for I to marry , unless I have limitless cash , and my wife be as great a Bohemian as myself . by the by , I have another letter from Maud . her pessimism be magnificent . this intense religiousness be no doubt a mere phase ; it will pass , of course ; I wonder how thing would arrange themselves if she come back to London . why should not   she come here to sit and chat , like you do ? " 

 " that would naturally lead to something definite , " say Casti , smile . 

 " oh , I do not   know . why should it ? I be a believer in friendship between man and woman . of course there be in it the spice of the difference of sex , and why not accept that as a pleasant thing ? how much well if , when we meet a woman we like , we could say frankly , ' now let we amuse each other without any arriere pensee . if I marry you to - day , even though I feel quite ready to , I should ten to one see some one next week who would make I regret have bind myself . so would you , my dear . very well , let we tantalise each other agreeably , and be at ease in the sense that we be on the right side of the illusion . ' you laugh at the idea ? " 

 Julian laugh , but not heartily . they pass to other thing . 

 " I be make an article out of Elm Court , " say Waymark . " semi - descriptive , semi - reflective , wholly cynical maybe it will pay for my summer holiday . and , apropos of the same subject , I have   get great idea . this introduction to such phase of life will prove endlessly advantageous to I , artistically speak . let I get a little more experience , and I will write a novel such as no one have yet venture to write , at all event in England . I begin to see my way to magnificent effect ; ye god , such light and shade ! the fact be , the novel of every - day life be get wear out . we must dig deeply , get to untouched social strata . Dickens feel this , but he have not the courage to face his subject ; his monthly number have to lie on the family tea - table . not virginibus puerisque will be my book , I assure you , but for man and woman who like to look beneath the surface , and who understand that only as artistic material have human life any significance . yes , that be the conclusion I be work round to . the artist be the only sane man . life for its own sake ? no ; I would drink a pint of laudanum to - night . but life as the source of splendid picture , inexhaustible material for effect that can reconcile I to existence , and that only . it be a delight follow by no bitter after - taste , and the only such delight I know . " 

 Harriet be very quiet when Julian return . she go about get the tea with a sort of indifference ; she let a cup fall and break , but make no remark , and leave her husband to pick up the piece . 

 " Waymark think I be neglect he , " say Julian , with a laugh , as they sit down together . 

 " it be well to neglect he than to neglect I , I should think , " be Harriet 's reply , in a quiet ill - natured tone which she be mistress of . 

 " but could not   we find out some way of do neither , dear ? " go on Julian , play with his spoon . " now suppose I give he a couple of hour one evening every week ? you could spare that , could not   you ? say , from eight to ten on wednesday ? " 

 " I suppose you will go if you want to . " say Harriet , rise from the tea - table , and take a seat sulkily by the window . 

 " come , come , we will not   say any more about it , if it be so disagreeable to you , " say Julian , go up to she , and coax she back to her place . " you do not   feel well to - day , do you ? I ought not   to have leave you this afternoon , but it be difficult to refuse , be not   it ? " 

 " he have no business to ask you to go . he could see I do not   like it . " 

 Waymark grow so accustomed to receive Ida 's note each Monday morning , that when for the first time it fail to conic he be troubled seriously . it happen , too , that he be able to attach a particular significance to the omission . when they have last part , instead of just press her hand as usual , he have raise it to his lip . she frown and turn quickly away , say no word . he have offend she by this infringement of the condition of their friendship ; for once before , when he have utter a word which imply more than she be willing to allow , Ida have engage he in the distinct agreement that he should never do or say anything that approach love - making . as , moreover , it be distinctly understand that he should never visit her save at time previously appoint , he could not see she till she choose to write . after wait in the vain expectation of some later post bring news , he himself write , simply ask the cause of her silence . the reply come speedily . 


 " I have no spare time in the week . I think you would understand this . 

 I. S. " 


 it be her custom to write without any formal beginning or end ; yet Waymark feel that this note be brief than it would have be , have all be as usual between they . the jealousy which now often torture he awake with intolerable vehemence . he spend a week of misery . 

 but late on Saturday evening come a letter address in the well - know hand . it say 


 " Sally and I be go up the river to - morrow , if it be fine . do you care to meet we on the boat which reach Chelsea Pier at 10.30 ? 

 I. S. " 


 it seem he do care ; at all event he be half an hour too soon at the pier . as the boat approach his eye soon single out two very quietly - dress girl , who sit with their back to he , and neither turn nor make any sign of expect any addition to their party . with like undemonstrativeness he take a seat at Ida 's side , and return Sally 's nod and smile . Ida merely say " good morning ; " there be nothing of displeasure on her face , however , and when he begin to speak of indifferent thing she reply with the usual easy friendliness . 

 it be the first time he have see she by daylight . he have be uncertain whether she use any artificial colour on her cheek ; seemingly she do , for now she look much pale than usual . but the perfect clearness of her complexion , the lustre of her eye , appear to indicate complete health . she breathe the fresh sun - light air with frank enjoyment , and smile to herself at object on either side of the river . 

 " by the by , " Waymark say , when no word have be exchange for some minute , " you do not   tell I where you be go ; so I take no ticket , and leave matter to fate . " 

 " be you a good walker ? " Ida ask . 

 " fairly good , I flatter myself . " 

 " then this be what I propose . it be a plan I carry out two or three time by myself last summer , and enjoy . we get off at Putney , walk through Roehampton , then over the park into Richmond . by that time we shall be ready for dinner , and I know a place where we can have it in comfort . " 

 there be little thought of weariness throughout the delightful walk . all three give themselves up for the time to simple enjoyment ; their intercourse become that of child ; the trouble of passion , the misery of self - consciousness , the strain of mutual observation fall from they as the city drop behind ; they be once more creature for whom the external world alone have reality . there be a glorious June sky ; there be country road scented with flower and tree ; the wide - gleam common with its furze and bramble ; then the great park , with felled trunk to rest upon , and prospect of endlessly - varied green to soothe the eye . the girl exhibit their pleasure each in her own way . Sally throw off restraint , and spring about in free happiness , like one of the young roe , the sight of which make her utter cry like a delighted child . she remember scene of home , and chatter in her dialect of people and place strange enough to both her companion . she be in constant expectation of catch a glimpse of the sea ; in spite of all warning it be a great surprise and disappointment to she that Richmond Hill do not end in cliff and breaker . Ida talk less , but every now and then laugh in her deep enjoyment . she have no reminiscence of country life it be enough that all about she be new and fresh and pure ; nothing to remind she of Regent Street and the Strand . Waymark talk of he know not what , cheerful thing that come by chance to his tongue , trifle story , description of place , ideal plan for spending of ideal holiday ; but nothing of London , nothing of what at other time his thought most run upon . he come back to himself now and then , and smile as he look at the girl , but this happen seldom . 

 the appetite of all three be beyond deny when they have pass the " Star and Garter " and begin to walk down into the town . Waymark wonder whither their guide would lead they , but ask no question . to his surprise , Ida stop at a small inn half way down the hill . 

 " you be to go straight in , " she say , with a smile , to Waymark , " and be to tell the first person you meet that three people want dinner . there be no choice roast beef and vegetable , and some pudding or other afterwards . then you be to walk straight upstairs , as if you know your way , and we will follow . " 

 these direction be obey , with the result that all reach an upper chamber , wherein a table be cleanly and comfortably lay , as if expect they . french window lead out on to a quaint little verandah at the back of the house , and the view thence be perfect . the river below , wind between woode bank , and everywhere the same splendour of varied green which have delight their eye all the morning . just below the verandah be the tiled roof of an outhouse , whereon lie a fine black and white cat , bask in the hot sun . Ida clap her hand . 

 " he be like poor old Grim , " she cry . then , turn to Waymark : " if you be good , you may bring out a chair and smoke a cigar here after dinner . " 

 they have just begin to eat , when footstep be hear coin up the stair . 

 " oh bother ! " exclaim Sally . " there be some one else a - comin ' , s'nough . " 

 there be . the door open , and two gentleman walk in . Waymark look up , and to his astonishment recognise his old friend O'Gree and Egger . Mr. O'Gree be mop his face with a handkerchief , and look red and hungry ; Mr. Egger be resplendent in a very broad - brim straw hat , the glistening newness of which contrast with the rest of his attire , which have know no variation since his first arrival at Dr. Tootle 's . he , too , be perspire profusely , and , as he enter , be just in the act of take out the great yellow handkerchief which Waymark have see he chew so often in the bitterness of his spirit . 

 " Hollo , Waymark , be it you ? " cry Mr. O'Gree , forget the presence of the stranger in his astonishment . " sure , and they tell we we would find a gentleman here . " 

 " and I be the last person you would have think of as answer that description ? " 

 " well , no , I do not   mean that . I mean there be no mention of the lady . " 

 Waymark flash a question at Ida with his eye , and understand her assent in the smile and slight motion of the head . 

 " then let I introduce you to the lady . " 

 the new - comer accordingly make the acquaintance of Miss Starr and Miss Fisher   that be Sally 's name , and take seat at the table , to await the arrival of their dinner . both be on their good behaviour . Mr. O'Gree manage to place himself at Sally 's left hand , and lead the conversation with the natural ease of an Irishman , especially delighted if Sally herself seem to appreciate his effort to be entertaining . 

 " now , who would have think of the like of this . " he exclaim . " and we come in here by the mere chance ; sure , there be a fatality in these thing . we have   walk all the way from Hammersmith . " 

 " and we from Putney , " say Waymark . 

 " you do not   mean it ? it be be a warm undertaking . " 

 " how do you find the walk , Mr. Egger ? " 

 " Bedad , " reply that gentleman , who have get hold of his friend 's exclamation , and use it with kill effect ; " I make my possible , but , bedad , I could not much more . " 

 " you both look warm , " Waymark observe , smile . " I fear you hurry . you should have be leisurely , as we be . " 

 " now that be cruel , Waymark . you need not   have reflect upon our solitariness . if we have be bless with society such as you have , we would have come slow enough . as it be , we think a good deal of our dinner . " 

 no fresh guest appear to disturb the party . when all have appease their hunger , Waymark take a chair out on to the verandah for Ida . he be spar the trouble of provide in the same way for Sally by Mr. O'Gree 's ready office . poor Egger , find himself desert , open a piano there be in the room , and begin to run his finger over the key . 

 " let we have one of your german song , my boy , " cry O'Gree . 

 " but it be the Sunday , and we arc still in England , " say the Swiss , hesitate . 

 " Pooh , never mind , " say Waymark . " we will shut the door . sing my favourite , Mr. Egger , ' Wenn 's Mailufterl . ' " 

 when they leave the inn , Waymark walk first with Ida , and Mr. O'Gree follow with Sally . Egger bring up the rear ; he have relapse into a dreamy mood , and his mind seem occupy with unearthly thing . 

 with no little amusement Waymark have note Sally 's demeanour under Mr. O'Gree 's attention . the girl have evidently make up her mind to be absolutely proper . the Irishman 's respectful delicacy be something so new to she and so pleasant , and the question with she be how she could sufficiently show her appreciation without at the same time forfeit his good opinion for become modesty . all so new to she , accustom to make an art of forwardness , and to school herself in the endurance of brutality . she be constantly blush in the most unfeigned way at his neatly - turn little compliment , and , when she speak , do so with a pretty air of self - distrust which sit quite charmingly on she . fain , fain would O'Gree have propose to journey back to London by the same train , but good taste and good sense prevail with he . at the ticket - barrier there be a parting . 

 " how delightful it would be , Miss Fisher , " say Mr. O'Gree , in something like a whisper , " if this lucky chance happen again . if I only know when you be come again , there be no telling but it might . " 

 Sally give her hand , smile , evidently wish to say something , but end by turn away and run after her companion . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 example without precept 

 Waymark be grateful for the help Mr. Woodstock have give he . indeed , the two soon begin to get on very well together . in a great measure , of course , this be due to the change in Waymark 's philosophy ; whereas his early idealism have be revolt by what he then deem Mr. Woodstock 's crass materialism and vulgarity , the tolerance which have come with widen experience now make he regard these characteristic with far less certainty of condemnation . he be often merely amuse at what have formerly enrage and disgust he . at the same time , there be change in Abraham himself , no doubt at all event in his manner to the young man . he , on his side , be also far more tolerant than in the day when he have growl at Osmond for a conceited young puppy . 

 one Sunday morning in early July , Waymark be sit alone in his room , when he notice that a cab stop before the house . a minute after , there be a knock at his door , and , to his great surprise , Mr. Woodstock enter , bear a huge volume in his arm . Abraham deposit it on a chair , wipe his forehead , and look round the room . 

 " you smoke poor tobacco , " be his first remark , as he sniff the air . 

 " good tobacco happen to be expensive , " be the reply . " will you sit down ? " 

 " yes , I will . " the chair creak under he . " and so here you hang out , eh ? only one room ? " 

 " as you see . " 

 " devilish unhealthy , I should think . " 

 " but economical . " 

 " Ugh ! " 

 the grunt mean nothing in particular . Waymark be eye the mighty volume on the chair , and have recognise it some fortnight previously , he have come upon Abraham , in the latter 's study , turn over a collection of Hogarth 's plate , and greatly amuse himself with the realism which so distinctly appeal to his taste in art . the book have be pledge in the shop , and by lapse of time be become Abraham 's property . it be the first time that Waymark have have an opportunity of examine Hogarth ; the picture harmonise with his mood ; they give he a fresh impulse in the direction his literary project be take . he spend a couple of hour in turn the leaf , and Mr. Woodstock have observe his enjoyment . what mean the arrival of the volume here in Beaufort Street ? 

 Abraham light a cigar , still look about the room . 

 " you live alone ? " he ask , in a matter - of - fact way . 

 " at present . " 

 " ha ! do not   know but you might have find it lonely ; I use to , at your age . " 

 then , after a short silence 

 " by - the - by , it be your birthday . " 

 " how do you know ? " 

 " well , I should not   have do , but for an old letter I turn up by chance the other day . how old be you ? " 

 " five - and - twenty . " 

 " H'm . I be sixty - nine . you will be a wise man when you get to my age . well , if you can find room anywhere for that book there , perhaps you would like to keep it ! " 

 Waymark look up in astonishment . 

 " a birthday present ! " he exclaim . " it be ten year since I have one . upon my word , I do not   well know how to thank you ! " 

 " do you know what the thing be publish at ? " ask Abraham in an off - hand way . 

 " no . " 

 " fifty pound . " 

 " I do not   care about the value . it be the kindness . you could not   have give I anything , either , that would have delight I so much . " 

 " all right ; keep it , and there be an end of the matter . and what do you do with yourself all day , eh ? I do not   think it very likely I should find you in . " 

 " I be write a novel . " 

 " H'm . shall you get anything for it ? " 

 " can not   say . I hope so . " 

 " look here . why do not   you go in for politic ? " 

 " neither know nor care anything about they . " 

 " would you like to go into Parliament ? " 

 " would not   go if every borough in England call upon I to - morrow ? " 

 " why not ? " 

 " plainly , I think myself too good for such occupation . if you once succeed in get outside the world , you have little desire to go back and join in its most foolish prank . " 

 " that be all damned nonsense ! how can any one be too good to be in Parliament ? the well man you have there , the well the country will be govern , will not   it ? " 

 " certainly . but the good man , in this case , be the man who see the short distance before his nose . if you think the world worth all the trouble it take to govern it , go in for politic neck and crop , by all mean , and the world will no doubt thank you in its own way . " 

 Abraham look puzzle , and half dispose to be angry . 

 " then you think novel - writing well than govern the country ? " he ask . 

 " on its own merit , vastly so . " 

 " and suppose there be no government what about your novel then ? " 

 " I would make a magnificent one out of the spectacle of chaos . " 

 " but you know very well you be talk bosh , " exclaim Abraham , somewhat discomfited . " there must be government , and there must be order , say what you like . its nature that the strong should rule over the weak , and show they what be for their own good . what else be we here for ? if you be go to be a parson , well and good ; then cry down the world as much as you please , and think only about heaven and hell . but as far as I can make out , there be government there too . the devil rebel and be kick out . serve he right if he be not   strong enough to hold his own , he would ought to have keep quiet . " 

 " you be a Conservative , of course , " say Waymark , smile . " you believe only in keep the balance . you do not   are about reform . " 

 " do not   be so sure of that let I have the chance and he power , and I would reform hard enough , many a thing . " 

 " well , one might begin on a small scale . suppose one take in hand Litany Lane and Elm Court ? suppose we exert our right as the strong , and , to begin with , do a little whitewashing ? then sundry stair and ceiling might be look to . no doubt there would be resistance , but on the whole it would be for the people 's own good . a little fresh draining might not   be amiss , or " 

 " what the devil 's all this to do with politic ? " cry Abraham , whose face have grow dark . 

 " I should imagine , a good deal , " return Waymark , knock out his pipe . " if you be for government , yen must not   be above consider detail . " 

 " and so you think you have a hit at I , eh ? nothing of the kind . these be affair of private contract , and no concern of government at all . in private contract a man have only a right to what he be strong enough to exact if a tenant tell I my house be not   fit to live in , I tell he to go where he will be well off ' and I do not   hinder he ; I know well enough in a day or two there will come somebody else . ten to one he can not   go , and he do not . then why should I be at unnecessary expense in make the place well ? as Boon as I can get no tenant I will do so ; not till then . " 

 " you do not   believe in work of mere humanity ? " 

 " what the devil 's humanity get to do with business ? " cry Abraham . 

 " true , " be Waymark 's rejoinder . 

 " see , we will not   talk of these kind of thing , " say Mr. Woodstock . " that be just what we always use to quarrel about , and I be get too old for quarrel . get any engagement this afternoon ? " 

 " I think of look in to see a friend here in the street " 

 " male or female ? " 

 " both ; man and wife . " 

 " oh , then you have get some friend ? so have I when I be your age . they go somehow when you get old . your father be the last of they , I think . but you be not much like he , except a little in face . true , he be a Radical , but you , well , I do not   know what you be . if you have be a son of mine , I would have have you ill Parliament by now , somehow or other . " 

 " I think you never have a son ? " say Way mark , observe the note of melancholy which every now and then come up in the old man 's talk . 

 " no . " 

 " but you have some child , I think ? " 

 " yes , yes , they be dead . " 

 he have walk to the window , and suddenly turn round with a kind of impatience . 

 " never mind the friend to - day ; come and have some dinner with I . I seem to want a bit of company . " 

 this be the first invitation of the kind Waymark have receive . he accept it , and they go out together . 

 " it be a pleasant part this , " Mr. Woodstock say , as they walk by the river . " one might build himself a decent house somewhere about here , eh ? " 

 " do you think of do so ? " 

 " I think of do so ! what be the good of a house , and nobody to live in it ? " 

 Waymark study these various trait of the old man 's humour , and constantly feel more of kindness towards he . 

 on the follow day , just as he have collect his rent , and be on his way out of Litany Lane , Waymark be surprised at come face to face with Mrs. Casti ; yet more surprised when he perceive that she have come out from a public - house . she look embarrassed , and for a moment seem about to pass without recognise he ; but he have raise his hat , and she could not but move her head in reply . she so obviously wish to avoid speak , that he walk quickly on in another direction . he wonder what he could be do in such a place as this . it could hardly be that she have acquaintance or connection here . Julian have not give he any particular of Harriet 's former life , and his friend 's marriage be still a great puzzle to he . he know well that the girl have no liking for himself ; it be not improbable that this casual meeting would make their intercourse yet more strained . he think for a moment of question Julian , but decide that the matter be no business of his . 

 it be so rare for he to meet an acquaintance in the street , that a second chance of the same kind , only a few minute later , surprise he greatly . this time the meeting as a pleasant one ; somebody run across to he from over the way , and he see that it be Sally Fisher . she look pleased . the girl have preserve a good deal of her sea - side complexion through the year and a half of town life , and , when happy , glow all over her cheek with the healthy hue . she hold out her hand in the usual frank , impulsive way . 

 " oh , I think it be you ! you will not   see I no more at the old place . " 

 " no ? how be that ? " 

 " I be leavin ' un to - morrow . I have   get a place in a shop , just by here , a chandler 's shop , and I be go to live in . " 

 " indeed ? well , I be glad to hear it . I dare say you will be well off . " 

 " oh , I say , you know your friend ? " 

 " the Irishman ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " what about he ? " ask the other , smile as he look into the girl 's pretty face . 

 " well , " say Sally , " I do not   mind you tell un where I live now , if you like . look , there be the address on that paper ; you can take it . " 

 " oh , I see . in point of fact , you wish I to tell he ? " 

 " oh , I do not   care . I dessay he do not   want to know anything about i. but you can if you like . " 

 " I will be sure to , and no doubt he will be delighted . he be be grow thin since I tell he you decline to renew his acquaintance . " 

 " oh , do not   talk ! and now I must be off . good - bye . I dessay I shall see you sometimes ? " 

 " without doubt . we will have another Sunday at Richmond soon . good - bye . " 

 it be about four in the afternoon when Sally reach home , and she run up at once to Ida 's room , and burst in , cry out , " I have   get it ! I have   get it ! " with much dancing about and joyous singing . Ida rise with a faint smile of welcome . she have be sit at the window , read a book lend she by Waymark . 

 " they say they like my appearance , " Sally go on , " and ' ud give I a try . I go in to - morrow . it will not   be a over easy place , neither . I have   to do all the cleaning in the house , and there be a baby to look after when I be not in the shop . " 

 " and what will they give you ? " 

 " ten shilling a month for the first half - year ; then a rise . " 

 " and you be satisfied ? " 

 " oh , it will do till something well turn up . oh , I say , I meet your friend just after I would come away . " 

 " do you ? " say Ida quietly . 

 " yes ; and I tell he he could tell his friend where I be , if he like . " 

 " his friend ? " 

 " the Irishman , you know , " explain Sally , move about the room . " I tell you he have be ask after I . " 

 Ida seem all at once to awake from a dream . she utter a long " ah ! " under her breath , and for a moment look at the girl like one who be strike with an unexpected explanation . then she turn away to the window , and again gaze up at the blue sky , stand so for nearly a minute . 

 " be you engaged to - night ? " Sally ask presently . 

 " no ; will you sit with I ? " 

 " you be not feel very well to - day , be you ? " 

 " I think not , " reply Ida , pass her hand over her forehead . " I have   be think of go out of London for a few day , perhaps to the seaside . " 

 " go to Weymouth ! " cry Sally , delight at the thought . " go and see my people , and tell un how I be get on . they will make you hide with un all the time you be there , s'nough . it be not   a big house , but it be comfortable , and see if our mother would not   look after you ! it be three week since I write ; if I do not   mind there will be our father up here look after I. now , do go ! " 

 " no , it be too far . besides , if I go , I shall want to be quite alone . " 

 on the following evening Waymark be expect . at his last visit he have notice that Ida be not in her usual spirit . to - night he see that something be clearly wrong , and when Ida speak of go to the seaside , he strongly urge she to do so . 

 " where should you go to ? " he ask . 

 " I think to Hastings . I go there once , when I be a child , with my mother I believe I tell you . I have rather go there than anywhere else . " 

 " I feel the need of a change myself , " he say , a moment after , and without look at she . " suppose I be to go to Hastings , too at the same time that you be there would you dislike it ? " 

 she merely shake her head , almost indifferently . she do not care to talk much to - night , and frequently nod instead of reply with word . 

 " but you would rather I do not ? " he urge . 

 " no , indeed , " still in the same indifferent way . " I should have company , if I find it dull . " 

 " then let we go down by the same train will you , Ida ? " 

 as far as she remember , it be the first time that he have ever address she thus by her name . she look up and smile slightly . 

 " if you like , " be her answer . 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 the missing year 

 " why should not   life be always like this ? " say Waymark , lie on the upper beach and throw pebble into the breaker , which each moment draw a little further hack and need a little extra exertion of the arm to reach they . there be small disturbance by people pass , here some two mile up the shore eastward from Hastings . a large shawl spread between two walking - stick stick upright give , at this afternoon hour , all the shade needful for two person lie side by side , and , even in the blaze of unclouded summer , there be pleasant air flit about the edge of the laugh sea . " why should not   life be always like this ? it might be sunshine or fireside if man be wise . leisure be the one thing that all desire , but they strive for it so blindly that they frustrate one another 's hope . and so at length they have come to lose the end in the mean ; be mad enough to set the mean before they as in itself an end . " 

 " we must work to forget our trouble , " say his companion simply . 

 " why , yes , and those very trouble be the fit reward of our folly . we have not be content to live in the simple happiness of our sens . we must be learn and wise , forsooth . we be not content to enjoy the beauty of the great and the less light . we must understand whence they come and whither they go after that , what they be make of and how much they weigh . we think for such a long time that our toil would end in something ; that we might become as god , know good and evil . now we be at the end of our tether , we see clearly enough that it have all be bad than vain ; how good if we could unlearn it all , scatter the building of phantasmal knowledge in which we dwell so uncomfortably ! it be too late . the god never take back their gift ; we weary they with our prayer into grant we this one , and now they sit in the cloud and mock we . " 

 Ida look , and keep silent ; perhaps scarcely understand . 

 " People kill themselves in despair , " Waymark go on , " that be , when they have drunk to the very dreg the cup of life 's bitterness . if they be wise , they would die at that moment if it ever come when joy seem supreme and stable . life can give nothing far , and it have no more hellish misery than disillusion follow upon delight . " 

 " do you ever seriously think of kill yourself ? " Ida ask , gaze at he closely . 

 " yes . I have reach at time the point when I would not have move a muscle to escape death , and from that it be not far to suicide . but my joy have never come , and it be hard to go away without that one draught . and you ! " 

 " I go so far once as to buy poison . but neither have I taste any happiness , and I could not help hop . " 

 " and you still wait still hope ? " 

 Ida make no direct answer . she gaze far off at the indistinguishable border - land of sea and sky , and when she speak it be in a softened tone . 

 " when I be here last , I be seven year old . now I be not quite nineteen . how long I have live since then how long ! yet my life do not really begin till I be about eleven . till then I be a happy child , understand nothing . between then and now , if I have discover little good either in myself or in other , I have learn by heart everything that be bad in the world . nothing in meanness or vileness or wretchedness be a secret to I . compare I with other girl of nineteen perhaps still at school . what sort of a companion should I be for one of those , I wonder ! what strange thought I should have , if ever I talk with such a girl ; how old I should feel myself beside she ! " 

 " your knowledge be well in my eye than their ignorance . my ideal woman be the one who , know every dark secret of life , keep yet a pure mind as you do , Ida . " 

 she be silent so long that Waymark speak again . 

 " your mother die when you be eleven ! " 

 " yes , and that be when my life begin . my mother be very poor , but she manage to send I to a pretty good school . but for that , my life would have be very different ; I should not have understand myself as well as I always have do . poor mother , good , good mother ! oh , if I could but have she now , and thank she for all her love , and give she but one year of quiet happiness . to think that I can see she as if she be stand before I , and yet that she be go , be nowhere , never to be bring back to I if I break my heart with longing ! " 

 tear stand in her eye . they mean more than she could ever say to another , however close and dear to she . the secret of her mother 's life lie in the grave and in her own mind ; the one would render it up as soon as the other . for never would Ida tell in word of that moment when there have come to her mature intelligence clear insight into her mother 's history , when the fable of childhood have no long avail to blind she , and every recall circumstance point but to one miserable truth . 

 " she be happy than we be , " Waymark say solemnly . " think how long she have be rest . " 

 Ida become silent , and presently speak with a firm voice . 

 " they take she to a hospital in her last illness , and she die there . I do not   know where her grave be . " 

 " and what become of you ? have you friend to go to ? " 

 " no one ; I be quite alone . we have be live in lodging . the landlady tell I that of course I could not   stay on there ; she could not   afford to keep I ; I must go and find a home somewhere . try and think what that mean to I . I be so young and ignorant that such an idea as that I might one day have to earn my own living have never enter my mind . I be feed and clothe like every one else , a good deal well , indeed , than some of the child at school , and I do not   know why it should not   always be so . besides , I be a vain child ; I think myself clever ; I have even begin to look at myself in the glass and think I be handsome . it seem quite natural that every one should be kind and indulgent to I . I shall never forget the feeling I have when the landlady speak to I in that hard , sharp way . my whole idea of the world be overset all at once ; I seem to be in a miserable dream . I sit in my mother 's bedroom hour after hour , and , every step I hear on the stair , I think it must be my mother come back home to I ; it be impossible to believe that I be leave alone , and could look to no one for help and comfort . " 

 " next morning the landlady come up to I again , and say , if I like , she could tell I of a way of earn my living . it be by go as a servant to an eating - house in a street close by , where they want some one to wash up dish and do different kind of work not too hard for a child like I . I could only do as I be advise ; I go at once , and be engage . they take off the dress I be wear , which be far too good for I then , and give I a dirty , ragged one ; then I be set to work at once to clean some knife . nothing be say about wage or anything of that kind ; only I understand that I should live in the house , and have all give I that I need . of course I be very awkward . I try my very hard to do everything that be set I , but only get scold for my pain ; and it soon come to box on the ear , and even kick . the place be keep by a man and wife ; they have a daughter old than I , and they treat she just like a hire servant . I use to sleep with the girl in a wretched kitchen underground , and the poor thing keep I awake every night with cry and complain of her hard life . it be no hard than mine , and I can not   think she feel it more ; but I have even then a kind of stubborn pride which keep I from show what I suffer . I could not   have bear to let they see what a terrible change it be for I , all this drudgery and unkindness ; I feel it would have be like take they into my confidence , open my heart to they , and I despise they too much for that . I even try to talk in a rough rude way , as if I have never be use to anything well " 

 " that be fine , that be heroic ! " break in Waymark admiringly . 

 " I only know it be miserable enough . and thing get bad instead of well . the master be a coarse drunken brute , and he and his wife use to quarrel fearfully . I have see they throw knife at each other , and do bad thing than that , too . the woman seem somehow to have a spite against I from the first , and the way her husband behave to I make she hate I still more . child as I be , he do and say thing which make her jealous . often when she have go out of an evening , I have to defend myself against he , and call the daughter to protect I . and so it go on , till , what with fear of he , and fear of she , and misery and weariness , I resolve to go away , become of I what might . one night , instead of undress for bed as usual , I tell Jane that be the daughter that I could not   bear it any long , and be go away , as soon as I think the house be quiet . she look at I in astonishment , and ask I if I have anywhere to go to . will you believe that I say yes , I have ? I suppose I speak in a way which do not   encourage she to ask question ; she only lie down on the bed and cry as usual . " jane , " I say , in a little , " if I be you , I would run away as well . " " I will , " she cry out , start up , " I will this very night ! we will go out together . " it be my turn to ask she if she have anywhere to go to . she say she know a girl who live in a good home at Tottenham , and who would do something for she , she think . at any rate she would rather go to the workhouse than stay where she be . so , about one o'clock , we both creep out by a back way , and run into Edgware Road . there we say good - bye , and she go one way , and I another . 

 " all that night I walk about , for fear of be notice loitering by a policeman . when it be morning , I have come round to Hyde Park , and , though it be terribly cold just in March I go to sleep on a seat . I wake about ten o'clock , and walk off into the town , seek a poor part , where I think it more likely I might find something to do . of course I ask first of all at eating - house , but no one want I . it be nearly dark , and I have not   taste anything . then I beg of one or two people I forgot everything but my hunger and they give I a few copper . I buy some bread , and still wander about . there be some street into which I can never bear to go now ; the thought of walk about they eight year ago be too terrible to I . well , I walk till midnight , and then could stand up no long . I find myself in a dirty little street where the house door stand open all night ; I go into one , and walk up as far as the first landing , and there fall down in a corner and sleep all night . " 

 " poor child ! " say Waymark , look into her face , which have become very animated as the detail of the story succeed each other in her mind . 

 " I must have look a terrible little savage on that next morning , " Ida go on , smile sadly . " oh , how hungry I be ! I be awake by a woman who come out of one of the room , and I ask she if she would give I something to eat . she say she would , if I would light her fire for she , and clean up the grate . I do this , gladly enough . then she pretend I have do it badly , and give I one miserable little dry crust , and tell I to be off . well , that day I find another woman who say she would give I one meal and twopence a day for help she to chop wood and wash vegetable ; she have a son who be a costermonger , and the stuff he sell have to be clean each day . I take the work gladly . she never ask I where I spend the night ; the truth be I choose a different house each night , where I find the door open , and go up and sleep on the stair . I often find several people do the same thing , and no one disturb we . 

 " I live so for a fortnight , then I be lucky enough to get into another eating - house . I live there nearly two month , and have to leave for the very same reason as at the first place . I only half understand the meaning of what I have to resist , but my resistance lead to other unbearable cruelty , and again I run away . I go about eight o'clock in the evening . the thought of go back to my old sleeping place on the stair be horrible . besides , for some day a strange idea have be in my head . I have not forget my friend Jane , and I wonder whether , if I go to Tottenham , it would be possible to find she . perhaps she might be well off there , and could help I . I have make inquiry about the way to Tottenham , and the distance , and when I leave the eating - house I have make up my mind to walk straight there . I start from Hoxton , and go on and on , till I have leave the big street behind . I keep ask my way , but often go long distance in the wrong direction . I know that Tottenham be quite in the country , and my idea be to find a sleep - place in some field , then to begin my search on the next day . it be summer , but still I begin to feel cold , and this draw I away out of my straight road to a fire which I see burn a little way off . I think it would be nice to sit down by it and rest . I find that the road be be mend , and by the fire lie a watchman in a big tub . just as I come up he be eat his supper . he be a great , rough man , but I look in his face and think it seem good , so I ask he if he would let I rest a little . of course he be surprised at see I there , for it must have be midnight , and when he ask I about myself I tell he the truth , because he speak in a kind way . then he stop eat and give I what be leave ; it be a bit of fat bacon and some cold potato ; but how good it be , and how good he be ! to this moment I can see that man 's face . he get out of his tub and make I take his place , and he wrap I up in something he have there . then he sit by the fire , and keep look at I , I think , in a sad sort of way ; and he say , over and over again , ' ay , it be bad to be bear a little girl ; it be bad to be bear a little girl ; pity you be not   a boy . ' oh , how well I can hear his voice this moment ! and as he keep say this , I go off to sleep . " 

 she stop , and play with the pebble . 

 " and in the morning ? " ask Waymark . 

 " well , when I wake up , it be light , and there be a lot of other man about , begin their work on the road . I creep out of the tub , and when they see I , they laugh in a kind sort of way , and give I some breakfast . I suppose I thank they , I hope I do ; the watchman be go , but no doubt he have tell the other my story , for they show I the way to Tottenham , and wish I luck . " 

 " and you find your friend Jane ! " 

 " no , no ; how be it likely I should ? I wander about till I could stand no long , and then I go up to the door of a house which stand in a garden , and beg for something to eat . the servant who open be send I away , when her mistress hear , and come to the door . she stand look at I for some time , and then tell I to come in . I go into the kitchen , and she ask I all about myself . I tell she the truth ; I be too miserable now to do anything else . well , the result be she keep I there . " 

 " for good ? " 

 " indeed , for good . in that very house I live for six year . oh ; she be the queer and kind little body ! at first I help her servant in the kitchen , she live quite by herself , with one servant , but little by little she make I a sort of lady 's maid , and I do no more rough work . you would not   believe the ridiculous fancy of that dear old woman ! she think herself a great beauty , and often tell I so very plainly , and she use to talk to I about her chance of be married to this and the other person in the neighbourhood . and the result of all this be that she have to spend I do not   know how long every day in dress herself , and then look at herself in the glass . and I have to learn how to do her hair , and put paint and powder on her face , and all sort of wonderful thing . she be as good to I as she could be , and I never want for anything . and so six year pass , and one morning she be find dead in her bed . 

 " well , that be the end of the happy time of my life . in a day or two some relative come to look after thing , and I have to go . they be kind to I , however ; they give I money , and tell I I might refer to they if I need to . I come to London , and take a room , and wonder what I should do . 

 " I advertise , and answer advertisement , but nothing come . my money be go , and I should soon be as badly off as ever . I begin to do what I have always think of as the very last thing , look for needlework , either for home or in a workroom . I do not   know how it be that I have always hat sewing . for one thing , I really can not   sew . I be never teach as a child , and few girl be as clumsy with a needle as I be . I have   always look upon a work - girl 's life as the most horrible drudgery ; I would far rather scrub floor . I suppose I have   a rebellious disposition , and just because sewing be look upon as a woman 's natural slavery , I rebel against it . 

 " by this time I be actually starve . I have one day to tell my landlady I could not   pay my rent . she be a very decent woman , and she talk to I in a kind way . what be well , she give I help . she have a sister who keep a laundry , and she think I might perhaps get something to do there ; at all event she would go and see . the result be I get work . I be in the laundry nearly six month , and become quite clever in get up linen . now this be a kind of work I like . you can not   think what a pleasure it be to I to see shirt and collar turn out so spotless and sweet " 

 Waymark laugh . 

 " oh , but you do not   understand . I do so like cleanliness ! I have a sort of feeling when I be wash anything , that I be really do good in the world , and the dazzle white of linen after I have iron it seem to thank I for my work . " 

 " yes , yes , I understand well enough , " say Waymark earnestly . 

 " for all that I could not   stay . I be restless . I have a foolish notion that I should like to be with a well kind of people again I mean people in a high position . I still keep answer advertisement for a lady 's maid 's place , and at last I get what I want . oh yes , I get it . " 

 she break off ' laugh bitterly , and remain silent . Waymark would not urge she to continue . for a minute it seem as if she would tell no more ; she look at her watch , and half arise . 

 " oh , I may as well tell you all , now I have   begin , " she say , fall back again in a careless way . " you know what the end be go to be ; never mind , at all event I will try and make you understand how it come . 

 " the family I get into be a lady and her two grow - up daughter , and a son of about five - and - twenty . they live in a small house at Shepherd 's Bush . my wage be very small , and I soon find out that they be a kind of people who keep up a great deal of show on very little mean . of course I have to be let into all the secret of their miserable shift for dress well on next to nothing at all , and they expect I mother and daughter to do the most wonderful and impossible thing . I have to turn old rag into smart new costume , to trim wear - out hat into all manner of gaudy shape , even to patch up boot in a way you could not   imagine . and they use to send I with money to buy thing they be ashamed to go and buy themselves ; then , if I have not   lay out their few penny with marvellous result , they all but accuse I of have use some of the money for myself . I have fortunately learn a great deal with the old lady in Tottenham , or I could not   have satisfy they for a day . I be sure I do what few people could have do , and for all that they treat I from almost the first very badly . I have to be housemaid as well as lady 's maid ; the slavery leave I every night wear out with exhaustion . and I have not   even enough to eat . as time go on , they treat I bad and bad . they speak to I often in a way that make my heart boil , as if they be so many queen , and I be some poor mean wretch who be honour by be allow to toil for they . then they quarrel among themselves unceasingly , and of course I have to bear all the bad temper . I never see people hate one another like those three do ; the sister even scratch each other 's face in their fit of jealousy , and sometimes they both storm at their mother till she go into hysteric , just because she could not   give they more money . the only one in the house who ever speak decently to I be the son Alfred Bolter , his name be . I suppose I feel grateful to he . once or twice , when he meet I on the stair , he kiss I . I be too miserable even to resent it . 

 " I go about , day after day , in a daze state , try to make up my mind to leave the people , but I could not . I do not   know how it be , I have never feel so afraid of be throw out into the world again . I suppose it be bodily weakness , want of proper food , and overwork . I begin to feel that the whole world be wrong I . be there never to be anything for I but slaving ? be I never to have any enjoyment of life , like other people ? I feel a need of pleasure , I do not   care how or what . I be always in a fever ; everything be exaggerate to I . what be go to be my future ? I keep ask myself . be it only to be hard work , miserably pay , till I die ? and I should die at last without have know what it be to enjoy my life . when I be allow to go out it be very seldom I walk aimlessly about the street , watch all the girl I pass , and fancy they all look so happy , all enjoy their life so . I be grow thin and pale . I cough , and begin to think I be consumptive . a little more of it and I believe I should have become so really . 

 " it come to an end , suddenly and unexpectedly . all three , mother and daughter , have be worry I through a whole morning , and at last one of they call I a downright fool , and say I be not   worth the bread I eat . I turn on they . I can not   remember a word I say , but speak I do , and in a way that astonish they ; they shrink back from I , look pale and frightened . I feel in that moment that I be a thousand time their superior ; I believe I tell they so . then I rush up to my room , pack my box , and go out into the street . 

 " I have just turn a corner , when some one come up to I , and it be Mr. Bolter . he have follow I from the house . he laugh , say I have do quite right , and ask I if I have any money . I shake my head . he walk on by I , and talk . the end be , that he find I room , and provide for I . 

 " I have not the least affection for he , but he have pleasant , gentlemanly way , and it scarcely even occur to I to refuse his offer . I be reckless ; what happen to I matter little , as long as I have not to face hard work . I need rest . for one in my position there be , I see well enough , only one way of get it . I take that way . " 

 Ida have tell this in a straightforward , unhesitate manner , not meet her companion 's gaze , yet not turn away . one would have say that judgment upon her story be indifferent to she ; she simply relate past event . in a moment , she resume . 

 " do you remember , on the night when you first meet I , a man follow we in the street ? " 

 Waymark nod . 

 " he be a friend of Alfred Bolter 's , and sometimes we meet he when we go to the theatre , and such place . that be the only person I ever hat from the first sight , hat and dread in a way I could not possibly explain . " 

 " but why do you mention he ? " ask Waymark . " what be his name ? " 

 " his name be Edwards , " return Ida , pronounce it as if the sound excited loathing in she . " I have be live in this way for nearly half - a - year , when one day this man call and come up to my sitting - room . he say he have an appointment with Mr. Bolter , who would come presently . I sit scarcely speak , but he talk on . presently , Mr. Bolter come . he seem surprised to find the other man with I , and almost at once turn round and go out again . Edwards follow he , say to I that he wonder what it all mean . the meaning be make clear to I a few hour after . there come a short note from Mr. Bolter , say that he have suspect that something be wrong , and that under the circumstance he could of course only say good - bye . 

 I can not   say that I be sorry ; I can not   say that I be glad . I despise he for his meanness , not even trouble myself to try and make sure of what have happen . the same night Edwards come to see I again , make excuse , blame his friend , shuffle here and there , and give I clearly to understand what he want . I scarcely speak , only tell he to go away , and that he need never speak to I anywhere or at any time ; it would be useless . well , I change my lodging for those I now have , and simply begin the life I now the life I have be lead . work be more impossible for I than ever , and I have to feed and clothe myself . " 

 " how long ago be that ? " ask Waymark , without look up . 

 " four month . " 

 Ida rise from the beach . the tide have go down some distance ; there be stretch of smooth sand , already dry in the sunshine . 

 " let we walk back on the sand , " she say , point . 

 " you be go home ? " 

 " yes , I want to rest a little . I will meet you again about eight o'clock , if you like . " 

 Waymark accompany she as far as the door , then stroll on to his own lodging , which be near at hand . it be only the second day that they have be in Hastings , yet it seem to he as if he have be walk about on the seashore with Ida for week . for all that , he feel that he be not as near to she now as he have be on certain evening in London , when his arrival be to she a manifest pleasure , and their talk unflagge from hour to hour . she do not show the spirit of holiday , seem weary from time to time , be too often preoccupy and indispose to talk . true , she have at length fulfil her promise of tell he the whole of her story , but even this increase of confidence Waymark 's uneasy mind strangely convert into fresh source of discomfort to himself . she have make this revelation he half believe on purpose to keep up the distance between they , to warn he how slight occasion have lead she from what be call the path of virtue , that he might not delude himself into exaggerated estimate of her character . such a thought could of course only be due to the fact that Ida 's story have indeed produce something of this impression upon her hearer . Waymark have often busy himself with invent all manner of excuse for she , have exert his imagination to the utmost to hit upon some most irresistible climax of dolorous circumstance to account for her downfall . he have yet to realise that circumstance be as relative in their importance as everything else in this world , and that ofttime the great tragedy revolve on apparently the most insignificant outward event personality be all . 

 he spend the hour of her absence in move from place to place , fret in mind . at one moment , he half determine to bring thing to some issue , by disregard all consideration and urge his love upon she . yet this he feel he could not do . surely he ask himself angrily he be not still so much in the thraldom of conventionality as to be affect by his fresh reminder of her position and antecedent ? perhaps not quite so much prejudice as experience which disturb he . he be well acquainted with the characteristic of girl of this class ; he know how all but impossible it be for they to tell the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth . and there be one thing particularly in Ida 's story that he find hard to credit ; be it indeed likely that she have not feel more than she would confess for this man whose mistress she become so easily ? if she have not , if what she say be true , be not this something like a proof of her lack of that refined sentiment which be , the capacity for love , in its real sense ? torture doubt and reasoning of this kind once set go in a brain already confuse with passion , there be no limit to the range of speculation open ; Waymark find himself in spite of everything entertain all his old scepticism . in any case , have he the slight ground for the hope that she might ever feel to he as warmly as he do to she ? he could not recall one instance of Ida 's have betray a trace of fondness in her intercourse with he . the mere fact of their intercourse he altogether lose sight of . whereas an outsider would , under the circumstance , have be justify in lay the utmost stress on this , Waymark have grow to accept it as a matter of course , and only occupy himself with Ida 's absolute self - control , her perfect calmness in all situation , the ease with which she meet his glance , the looseness of her hand in his , the indifference with which she hear he when he have speak of his loneliness and frequent misery . where be the key of her character ? she do not care for admiration ; it be quite certain that she be not lead he about just to gratify her own vanity . be it not purely an intellectual matter ? she be a girl of superior intellect , and , have find in he some one with whom she could satisfy her desire for rational converse , do she not on this account keep up their relation ? for the rest well , she like ease and luxury ; above all , ease . of that she would certainly make no sacrifice . how well he could imagine the half - annoy , half - contemptuous smile which would rise to her beautiful face , if he be so foolish as to become sentimental with she ! that , he feel , would be a look not easy to bear . humiliation he dread . 

 when eight o'clock come , he be lean over the end of the pier , at the appoint spot , still busy in thought . there come a touch on his arm . 

 " well , be you think how you can make a book out of my story ? " 

 the touch , the voice , the smile , how all his sophistry be sweep away in a rush of tenderness and delight ! 

 " I must wait for the end of it , " he return , hold out his hand , which she do not take . 

 " the end ? oh , you must invent one . end in real life be so commonplace and uninteresting . " 

 " commonplace or not , " say Waymark , with some lack of firmness in his voice , " the end of your story should not be an unhappy one , if I have the disposing of it . and I might have but for one thing . " 

 " what be that ? " she ask , with sudden interest . 

 " my miserable poverty . if I only have money money " 

 " money ! " she exclaim , turn away almost angrily . then she add , with the coldness which she do not often use , but which , when she do , chill and check he " I do not   understand you . " 

 he point with a bitter smile down to the sand . 

 " look at that gold of the sunset in the pool the tide have leave . it be the most glorious colour in nature , but it make I miserable by remind I of the metal it take its name from . " 

 she look at he with eye which have in they a strange wonder , sad at first , then full of scorn , of indignation . and then she laugh , draw herself away from he . the laugh irritate he . he experience a terrible revulsion of feeling , from the warmth and passion which have possess he , to that humiliation , which he could not bear . 

 and just now a number of people come and take their stand close by , in a gossiping group . Ida have half turn away , and be look at the golden pool . he try to say something , but his tongue be dry , and the word would not come . presently , she face he again , and say , in very much her ordinary tone 

 " I be go to tell you that I have just have news from London , which make it necessary for I to go back to - morrow . I shall have to take an early train . " 

 " this be because I have offend you , " Waymark say , move near to she . " you have no thought of go before that . " 

 " I be not surprised that you refuse to believe I , " return Ida , smile very faintly . " still , it be the truth . and now I must go in again ; I be very tired . " 

 " no , " he exclaim as she move away , " you must not go in till till you have forget I . at least come away to a quiet place , where I can speak freely to you ; these people " 

 " to - morrow morning , " she say , wave her hand wearily . " I can not   talk now and indeed there be no need to speak of this at all . I have forget it . " 

 " no , you have not ; how could you ? and you will not go to - morrow ; you shall not . " 

 " yes , I must , " she return firmly . 

 " then I shall go with you . " 

 " as you like . I shall leave by the express at five minute past nine . " 

 " then I shall be at the station . but at least I may walk home with you ? " 

 " no , please . if you wish I to think you be sincere , if you wish we still to be friend stay till I have leave the pier . good night . " 

 he mutter a return , and stand watch she as she walk quietly away . 

 when it be nearly midnight , Ida lie on her bed , dress , as she have lain since her return home . for more than an hour she have cry and sob in blank misery , cry as never since the bitter day long ago , just after her mother 's death . then , the fit over , something like a reaction of calm follow , and as she lie perfectly still in the darkness , her regular breathing would have lead one to believe her asleep . but she be only think , and in deed very far from sleep the long day in the open air have so affect her eye that , as she look up at the ceiling , it seem to she to be a blue space , with light cloud constantly flit across it . presently this impression become painful , and a grow restlessness make her rise . the heat of the room be stifle , for just above be the roof , upon which all day the sun have pour its ray . she throw open the window , and drink in the air . the night be magnificent , flood with warm moonlight , and fragrant with sea breathing . Ida feel an irresistible desire to leave the house and go down to the shore , which she could not see from her window ; the tide , she remember , would just now be full , and to walk by it in the solitude of midnight would bring she that peace and strength of soul she so much need . she put on her hat and cloak , and go downstairs . the front door be only latch , and , as she have her key , no doubt she would be able to let herself in at any hour . 

 the street be all but deserted , and , when she come to the beach , no soul be anywhere visible . she walk towards the place where she have spend the afternoon with Waymark , then onwards still far to the east , till there be but a narrow space between the water and the cliff . breaker there be none , not more ripple at the clear tide - edge than on the border of a little lake . so intense be the silence that every now and then could be distinctly hear a call on one of the fishing - boat lie some distance from shore . the town be no long in sight . 

 it be close even here ; what little breeze there be brush the face like the warm wing of a pass bird . Ida dip her hand in the water and sprinkle it upon her forehead . then she take off her boot and stocking , and walk with her foot in the ripple . a moment after she stop , and look all around , as if hesitate at some thought , and wish to see that her solitude be secure . just then the sound of a clock come very faintly across the still air , strike the hour of one . she step from the water a few pace , and begin hastily to put off her clothing ; in a moment her foot be again in the ripple , and she be walk out from the beach , till her gleam body be hide . then she bath , breast the full flow with delight , make the sunder and broken water flash myriad reflection of the moon and star . 

 Waymark be at the station next morning half an hour before train - time . he wait for Ida 's arrival before take his ticket . she do not come . he walk about in feverish impatience , plague himself with all manner of doubt and apprehension . the train come into the station , and yet she have not arrive . it start , and no sign of she . 

 he wait yet five minute , then walk hastily into the town , and to Ida 's lodging . Miss Starr , he be tell , have leave very early that morning ; if he be Mr. Waymark , there be a note to be deliver to he . 

 " I think it well that I should go to London by an early train , for we should not have be quite at our ease with each other . I beg you will not think my leave you be due to anything but necessity indeed it be not . I shall not be live at the old place , but any letter you send there I shall get . I can not promise to reply at once , but hope you will let I do so when I feel able to . 

 I. S. " 


 Waymark take the next train to town . 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 the enderby 

 some twenty year before the date we have reach , the Rev. Paul Enderby , a handsome young man , endow with moral and intellectual quality considerably above the average , live and work in a certain small town of Yorkshire . 

 he have be here for two year , an unmarried man ; now it be make known that this state of thing be to come to an end ; moreover , to the disappointment of not a few household , it be understand that the future Mrs. Enderby have be choose from among his own people , in London . the lady come , and there be a field - day of criticism . Mrs. Enderby look very young , and be undeniably pretty ; she have accomplishment , and evidently like to exhibit they before her homely visitor . she exaggerate the refinement of her utterance that it might all the more strike off against the local accent . it soon become clear that she would be anything but an assistance to her husband in his parochial work ; one or two attempt be make , apparently with good will , at intercourse with the poor parishioner , but the enterprise be distinctly a failure ; it have to be definitively give up . presently a child be bear in the parsonage , and for a little while the young mother 's attention be satisfactorily engage at home . the child be a girl and receive the name of Maud . 

 Paul Enderby struggle to bate no jot of his former activity , but a change be obvious to all . no less obvious the reason of it . Mrs. Enderby 's reckless extravagance have soon involve her husband in great difficulty . he be grow haggard ; his health be fail ; his activity shrink within the narrow possible limit ; he shun man 's gaze . 

 yet all at once there happen something which revive much of his old zeal , and , in spite of everything , bring he once more prominently forward . a calamity have visit the town . by a great explosion in a neighbouring colliery , number of home have be render destitute , and aid of every kind be imperatively call for on all side . in former time , Paul Enderby would have be just the man for this occasion , and even now he be not want . extensive subscription be raise , and he , as chief man in the committee which have be form , have chief control of the fund . People say afterwards that they have often remark something singular in his manner as he go about in these duty . whether that be true or not , something more than singular happen when , some two month later , account be be investigate and clear up . late one evening , Mr. Enderby leave home , and never return to it . it be very soon know that he must have appropriate to his own use considerable sum which have reach his hand for charitable purpose , and the scandal be terrific . Mrs. Enderby and her child disappear in a day or two . it be say that lady from London have come and fetch she away , and she be no more hear of in that little town . 

 Miss Bygrave , an eld sister of Mrs. Enderby , have receive a letter from Paul summon she to the wife 's aid : and this letter , date from Liverpool , after disclose in a few word the whole situation , go on to say that the writer , though he would never more be see by those who know he , would not fail to send his wife what money he could as often as he could . and , after half a year , sum have begin to be remit , in envelope bear a californian postmark . they be not much use , however , to Mrs. Enderby . a few day after her arrival at her home in London , she have be discover hang , with a rope round her neck , from a nail behind her bedroom door . cut down in time , her life be save , but reason have forsake she . she be take away to an asylum , and remain there for five year . 

 by that time , she seem to have quite recover . her home be now to be with her sister , Theresa Bygrave . her child , Maud Enderby , be nearly seven year old . Mrs. Enderby return to the world not quite the same woman as when she leave it . she have never lack character , and this now show itself in one immutable resolution . have find that the child have learn nothing of its parent , she determine that this ignorance should continue ; or rather that it should be exchange for the belief that those parent be both long dead . she dwelt apart , support by her sister . finally , after ten year ' absence , Paul Enderby return to England , and live again with his wife . but Maud , their daughter , still believe herself alone in the world , save for her aunt , Miss Bygrave . 

 at the time when Waymark and Ida be together at Hastings , Mrs. Enderby call one evening at Miss Bygrave 's house the house of Maud 's childhood , still distinguish by the same coldness , bareness and gloom , the same silence echo to a strange footfall . Theresa Bygrave have not greatly alter ; tall , upright , clothe in the plain black garment , she walk into the room with silent dignity , and listen to a suggestion make by her brother - in - law . 

 " we have talk it over again , " say Paul , " and we have decide to take this step . " 

 he pause and watch the listener 's face eagerly , glance quickly away as soon as she look up . 

 " and you still wish I to break it to Maud , and in the way you say ? " 

 " if you will . but I do so wish you would let I know your own thought about this . you have so much claim to be consider . Maud be in reality yours far more than she be ours . will it do you think now it will really be for our own happiness ? will the explanation you be able to give be satisfactory to she ? what will be her attitude towards we ? you know her character you understand she . " 

 " if the future could be all as calm as the past year have be , " say Miss Bygrave , " I should have nothing to urge against your wish . " 

 " and this will contribute to it , " exclaim Enderby . " this would give Emily the very support she need . " 

 Miss Bygrave look into his face , which have a plead earnestness , and a deep pity lie in her eye . 

 " let it be so , " she say with decision . " I myself have much hope from Maud 's influence . I will write and tell she not to renew her engagement , and she will be with we at the end of September . " 

 " but you will not tell she anything till she come ? " 

 " no . " 

 Miss Bygrave live in all but complete severance from the world . when Maud Enderby be at school , she feel strongly and painfully the contrast between her own home life and that of her companion . the girl withdraw into solitary reading and thinking ; grow ever more afraid of the world ; and by degree seek more of her aunt 's confidence , feel that here be a soul that have long since attain to the peace which she be vainly seek . 

 but it be with effort that Miss Bygrave bring herself to speak to another of her form of faith . after that Christmas night when she address Maud for the first time on matter of religion , she have say no second word ; she wait the effect of her teaching , and the girl 's spontaneous recurrence to the subject . there be something in the very air of the still , chill house favourable to ascetic gravity . a young girl , live under such circumstance , must either pine away , eat her own heart , or become a mystic , and find her daily food in religious meditation . 

 only when her niece be seventeen year old do Miss Bygrave speak to she of worldly affair . her own income , she explain , be but just sufficient for their need , and would terminate upon her death ; have Maud thought at all of what course she would choose when the time for decision come ? naturally , only one thing could suggest itself to the girl 's mind , and that be to become a teacher . to begin with , she take subordinate work in the school where she have be a pupil ; later , she obtain the engagement at Dr. Tootle 's . 

 an education of this kind , work upon Maud Enderby 's natural temperament , result in an abnormal character , the chief trait of which be remarkable as be in contradiction to the spirit of her time . she be oppress with the consciousness of sin . every most natural impulse of her own heart she regard as a temptation to be resist with all her strength . her ideal be the same as Miss Bygrave 's , but she could not pursue it with the latter 's assure calm ; at every moment the voice of her youth speak within she , and become to she the voice of the enemy . her faith be scarcely capable of formulation in creed ; her sin be not of omission or commission in the literal sense ; it be an attitude of soul which she seek to attain , though ever fall away . what little she see of the world in London , and afterwards at her home by the sea - side , only serve to increase the trouble of her conscience , by make she more aware of her own weakness . for instance , the matter of her correspondence with Waymark . in very truth , the chief reason why she have give he the permission he ask of she be , that before so sudden and unexpected a demand she find herself confused and helpless ; have she be able to reflect , the temptation would probably have be resist , for the pleasantness of the thought make she regard it as a grave temptation . casuistry and sophistical reasoning with her own heart ensue , to the increase of her morbid sensitiveness ; she persuade herself that great insight into the world 's evil would be of aid in her struggle , and so the content of Waymark 's first letter lead she to a continuance of the correspondence . a power of strong and gloomy description which she show in her letter , and which impress Waymark , afford the key to her suffering ; her soul in reality be that of an artist , and , whereas the artist should be free from everything like moral prepossession , Maud 's aesthetic sensibility be in perpetual conflict with her moral conviction . she could not understand herself , see that her opportunity have never allow she to obtain an idea of the artistic character . this irrepressible delight and interest in the active life of the world , what could it be but the tendency to evil , most strongly develop ? these heart - burning whenever she witness man and woman rejoice in the exercise of their natural affection , what could that be but the proneness to evil in its gross form ? 

 it be naturally a great surprise to Maud when she receive the letter from her aunt , which ask she not to continue her engagement into the new quarter , give as a reason merely that the writer wish for she at home . it be even with something of dread and shrink that she look forward to a renewal of the old life . still , it be enough that her aunt have need of she . on her return to London , she be meet with strange revelation . Miss Bygrave 's story have be agree upon between herself and Paul . it have be deem well to make Mrs. Enderby 's insanity the explanation of Maud 's removal from her parent , and the girl , stricken as she be with painful emotion , seem to accept this undoubtingly . 

 the five year or so since Paul Enderby 's reappearance in England seem to have be not unprosperous . the house to which Maud be welcome by her father and mother be not a large one , and not in a very fashionable locality , but it be furnish with elegance . Mrs. Enderby frequently have her hire brougham , and make use of it to move about a good deal where people see and be see . Mr. Enderby 's business be " in the City . " how he have surmount his difficulty be not very clear ; his wife learn that he have bring with he from America a scheme for the utilisation of waste product in some obscure branch of manufacture , which have be so far successful as to supply he with a small capital . he seem to work hard , leave home at nine each morning , get back to dinner at half - past six , and , as often as not , spend the evening away from home , and not return till the small hour . he have the feverish eye of a man whose subsistence depend upon speculative acuteness and restless calculation . no doubt he be still so far the old Paul , that , whatever he undertake , he throw himself into it with surpass vigour . 

 Mrs. Enderby be in her thirty - eighth year , and still handsome . Most man , at all event , would have call she so , for most man be attract by a face which be long , delicate , characterless , and preserve late the self - conscious expression of a rather frivolous girl of seventeen . she have ideal of her own , which she pursue regardless of the course in which they lead she ; and these ideal be far from ignoble . to beauty of all kind she be passionately sensitive . as a girl she have play the piano well , and , though the power have go from long disuse , music be still her chief passion . graceful ease , delicacy in her surrounding , freedom from domestic care , the bloom of flower , sweet scent such thing make up her existence . she love her husband , and have once worship he ; she love her recovered daughter ; but both affection be in she , so to speak , of aesthetic rather than of moral quality . 

 intercourse between Maud and her parent , now that they live together , be , as might have be expect , not altogether natural or easy . she come to they with boundless longing , ready to expend in a moment the love of a lifetime ; they , on their side , be scarcely less full of warm anticipation ; yet something prevent the complete expression of this mutual yearning . the fault be not in the father and mother if they hang back somewhat ; in very truth , Maud 's pure , noble countenance abash they . this , their child , be so much the superior of they both ; they feel it from the first moment , and could never master the consciousness . Maud mistook this for coldness ; it check and sadden she . yet time bring about well thing , though the ideal would never be attain . in her father , the girl find much to love ; her mother she could not love as she have hop , but she regard she with a vast tenderness , often with deep compassion . much of sympathy , moreover , there be between these two . Maud 's artistic temperament be inherit from her mother , but she possess it in a strong degree , of purer quality , and under great restraint . this restraint , however , do not long continue to be exercise as hitherto . life for the first time be open before she , and the music which begin to fill her ear , the splendour which shine into her eye , gradually avail to still that inner voice which have so long speak to she in dark admonishing . she could not resign herself absolutely to the new delight ; it be still a conflict ; but from the conflict itself she derive a kind of joy , bear of the strength of her imagination . 

 yes , there be one portion of the past which dwelt with she , and by degree busy her thought more and more . the correspondence with Waymark have cease , and by her own negligence . in those day of mental disturbance which precede her return to London , his last letter have reach she , and this she have not reply to . it have be her turn to write , but she have not feel able to do so ; it have seem to she , indeed , that , with her return home , the correspondence would naturally come to an end ; with a strange ignorance of herself , such as now and then darken we , she have suddenly come to attach little value to the connection . not improbably , Waymark 's last two letter have be force and lack in interest . he have never say anything which could be construe into more than an expression of friendly interest , or intellectual sympathy . it may be that Maud 's condition , dimly prophetic of the come change , require more than this , and she conceive a certain dissatisfaction . then come the great event , and for some week she scarcely think of her correspondent . one day , however , she chance upon the little packet of his letter , and read they through again . it be with new eye . thought speak to she which have not be there on the first reading . Waymark have touch at time on art and kindre subject , and only now could she understand his meaning . she feel that , in break off her connection with he , she have lose the one person who could give her entire sympathy ; to whom she might have speak with certainty of be understand , of all the novel idea which possess she ; who , indeed , would have be invaluable as a guide in the unknown land she be treading . it be now almost the end of the year ; more than three month have go by since she receive that last letter from he . could she write now , and let he know that she be in London ? she could not but give expression to her altered self ; and would he be able to understand she ? yet , she need he ; and there be something of her mother in the fretting to which she be now and then drive by the balked desire . at length she be on the point of write a letter , with whatever result , when chance spar she the trouble . 

 one morning in December , she go with her mother to an exhibition of picture in Bond Street . such visit have be common of late ; Mrs. Enderby could rarely occupy herself at home , and picture , as everything beautiful , always attract she . they have be in the gallery a few minute only , when Maud recognise Waymark close at hand . he be look closely at a canvas , and seem quite unaware of her proximity . she lay her hand on her mother 's arm , and speak in a nervous whisper . 

 " Mother , I know that gentleman . " 

 " this one ? " ask Mrs. Enderby , indicate Waymark , with a smile . she show no surprise , any more than she would have do have Maud be only her friend . 

 " yes . if he should notice I , may I introduce he to you ? he be at the school where I teach a year ago . " 

 " why , certainly , my love , " reply her mother , with cheerful assent . " it be quite natural that you should have acquaintance I should like to know . shall I ask he to come and see we ? " 

 there be no opportunity of answer . Waymark , in move on , have glance round at the group of people , and his eye have fall on Maud . he seem uncertain ; look quickly away ; glance again , and , meet her eye , raise his hat , though still without conviction in his face . Maud come naturally forward a step or two , and they shake hand ; then at once she introduce he to her mother . no one ever experience awkward pause in Mrs. Enderby 's presence ; conversation link itself with perfect ease , and in a minute they be examine the picture together . Mrs. Enderby have make up her mind with regard to her new acquaintance in one or two gleam of her quick eye , and then talk on in an eager , intelligent way , full of contagious enthusiasm , which soon bring out Waymark 's good power . Maud say very little . whenever it be possible unobserved , she gaze at Waymark 's face . she find herself think that , in external appearance , he have improve since she last see he . he have no long that hungry , discontent look to which she have grow accustomed in the upper schoolroom at Dr. Tootle 's ; his eye seem at once quieter and keener ; his complexion be bright ; the habitual frown have somewhat smooth away . then , he be more careful in the matter of dress . on the whole , it seem probable that his circumstance have change for the well . 

 Waymark , on his side , whilst he talk , be not less full of speculation about Maud . for the change in her appearance be certainly much more noticeable than it could be in his own . not only that she have put aside her sad - coloured and poor raiment for a costume of tasteful and attractive simplicity this , of course , her mother 's doing but the look of shrinking , almost of fear , which he have be will not to see on her face , be entirely go . her eye seem for ever intelligent of new meaning ; she be pale , but with the pallor of eager , joy - bringing thought . there be something pathetic in this new - bear face ; the lip seem still to speak of past sorrow , or , it might be , to hold unspoken a sad fate half - foresee . 

 if this renewal of acquaintanceship come just at the right time for Maud , it be no less welcome to Waymark . when he write his last letter to she , it have proceed more from a sense of obligation than any natural impulse . for he be then only just recover from a period of something like despair . his pursuit of Ida Starr to London have be fruitless . it be true that she have leave her former abode , and the landlady profess to be ignorant of her new one , though she admit that she have see Ida scarcely two hour before Waymark 's arrival . he write , but have no reply . his only comfort be an ever - rise suspicion of the truth   as he would learn it later , but fear be , on the whole , strong within he . confidence in she he have not . all the reflection of that last evening on Hastings pier live and re - live in his mind ; outcome of the cynicism which be a marked feature in his development , and at the same time tend to confirm it . she have be summon back suddenly by a letter ; who but a simpleton could doubt what that mean ? he think of Sally , of course , and the step she have take ; but could he draw conclusion about Ida from Sally , and do ever two such instance come within a man 's experience ? to Sally herself he have naturally have recourse , but in vain . she say that she know nothing of the lose girl . so Waymark fight it out , to the result of weariness ; then plunge into his work again , and have regain very much his ordinary state of mind when Maud Enderby unexpectedly come before he . 

 he call upon the Enderbys , and be soon invite to dine , which necessitate the purchase of a dress suit . on the appoint evening , he find Maud and her mother in a little drawing - room , which have a pleasant air of ease and refinement . it be a new sensation for Waymark as he sink into a soft chair , and , in speak , lower his voice , to suit the quietness of the room . the soft lamp - light spread through the coloured shade , the just perceptible odour of scent when Mrs. Enderby stir , the crackling of the welcome fire , fill he with a sense of luxury to which he be not accustom . he look at Maud . she be beautiful in her evening dress ; and , mark the grave , sweet thoughtfulness of her face , the grace of her movement , the air of purity which clung about she , his mind turn to Ida Starr , and experience a shock at the comparison . where be Ida at this moment ? the mere possibility which such a question bring before his mind make he uneasy , almost as if he have forget himself and utter aloud some word all unfit for lady ' ear . the feeling be a novel one , and , in afterwards recall it , he could smile rather contemptuously , if we be enrapture with one particular flower , shall we necessarily despise another , whose beauty and perfume happen to be of quite a different kind ? 

 Mr. Enderby appear , follow by another gentleman . Waymark notice an unpleasant heat in the hand hold out to he ; there be a flush in Paul 's cheek , too , and his eye be very bright . he greet the visitor with somewhat excessive warmth , then turn and introduce his companion , by the name of Mr. Rudge . 

 Waymark observe that this gentleman and his hostess be on term of lively intimacy . they talk much throughout the evening . 

 during the three month that follow , Waymark 's intercourse with the Enderbys be pretty frequent . Mrs. Enderby ask few question about he , and Maud be silent after she have explain Waymark 's position , so far as she be acquaint with it , and how she have come to know he . to both parent , the fact of Maud 's friendship be a quite sufficient guarantee , so possessed be they with a conviction of the trustworthiness of her judgment , and the moral value of her impulse . in Waymark 's character there be something which woman find very attractive ; strength and individuality be perhaps the word that well express what it be , though these quality would not in themselves have suffice to give he his influence , without a certain gracefulness of inward homage which manifest itself when he talk with woman , a suggestion , too , of underlie passion which work subtly on a woman 's imagination . there be nothing commonplace in his appearance and manner ; one divine in he a past out of the ordinary range of experience , and feel the promise of a future which would , in one way or another , be remarkable . 

 the more Waymark saw of Maud Enderby the more completely do he yield to the fascination of her character . in her presence he enjoy a strange calm of spirit . for the first time he know a woman who by no word or look or motion could stir in he a cynical thought . here be something high than himself , a nature which he have to confess transcend the limit of his judgment , a soul with insight possibly for ever deny to himself . he be often pain by the deference with which she seek his opinion or counsel ; the word in which he reply to she sound so hollow ; he become so often and so keenly sensible of his insincerity , a quality which , with other , he could consciously rely upon as a resource , but which , before Maud , sting he . he be drive to balance judgment , to hesitate in reply , to search his own heart , as perhaps never before . 

 artificial good humour , affected interest , mock sympathy , be as far from she as be the least taint of indelicacy ; every word she utter rang true , and her very phrase have that musical fall which only associate itself with beautiful and honest thought . she never exhibit gaiety , or a spirit of fun , but could raise a smile by an exquisite shade of humour humour which , as the good be , be more than half sadness . nor be she fond of mix with people whom she do not know well ; when there be company at dinner , she generally beg to be allow to dine alone . though always anxious to give pleasure to her parent , she be most happy when nothing draw she from her own room ; there she would read and dream through hour there be time when the old dread feeling take revenge ; night - waking , when she lie in cold anguish , yearn for the dawn . she be not yet strong enough to face past and future , secure in attain conviction . as yet , she could not stir beyond the present , and in the enjoyment of the present be her strength . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 in the MEANTIME 

 it be one Wednesday evening in early April , that Waymark find a letter await he , address in a hand he at once recognise . 


 " will you come and see I ? I be at home after eight o'clock till the end of the week , and all day on Sunday . 

 I. S. " 


 no distinct pleasure be arouse in Waymark as he read this . as be always the case for hour after he have leave Maud 's presence , her face and voice live with he to the exclusion of every other thought . there be even something of repulsion in the feeling excited by his thus have the memory of Ida bring suddenly before he ; her face come as an unwelcome intruder upon the calm , grave mood which always possess he on these evening . in return home each Wednesday night , Waymark always seek the speedy and quiet route , unwilling to be bring in contact with that life of the street which at other time delight he . Ida 's note seem a summon from that world which , for the moment , he hold at a distance . but the call be not to be silence at his will . he begin to wonder about her life during the past half - year . why have she write just now , after so long a silence ? where , and under what circumstance , should he meet she ? do she think to find he the same as when they last talk together ? 

 through the night he wake constantly , and always with thought busy about Ida . in the morning his first impulse be to re - read her message ; receive so carelessly , it have in the meantime become of more account , and Waymark laugh in his wonte way as he see himself thus sway between force he could not control . the ordinary day 's task be neglect , and he impatiently wait for the hour when he could be sure of find Ida at home . the address be at Fulham , and , on reach it , he find a large new block of the kind know as model lodging - house . Ida 's number be up at the very top . when he knock , the door open immediately , and she stand there , hold out her hand to he . 

 she wear the same dress that she have wear at Hastings , but the gold brooch and watch - chain be miss , and her hair be arrange in a simple way . she be a trifle pale , perhaps , but that might be due to the excitement of the moment ; her voice shake a little as she speak . 

 Waymark look about he as he go in . there appear to be two room , one of they a very small bedroom , the other fit with a cooking - grate and oven ; the kind of tenement suitable to very poor working - people . the floor be bare , and there be nothing in the way of furniture beyond the most indispensable article : a table , two chair , and a few cup , saucer , and plate on a shelf ; through the half - open door , he see that the bed - room be equally plain . a fire be burn , and a kettle on it ; and in front , on a little square piece of carpet , lie Ida 's inseparable friend , Grim . Grim have lift his head at Waymark 's entrance , and , with gather curiosity in his eye , slowly stand up ; then stretch himself , and , look first at one , then at the other , wait in doubt . 

 Ida stoop and take he up in her arm . 

 " and who be this ? " she ask , talk to he as one talk to a child , whilst she press his warm black cheek against her own . " do Grim remember who this be ? we still keep together , " she add , look at Waymark . " all day long , whilst I be away , he keep house ; I be often afraid he suffer dreadfully from loneliness , but , you see , I be oblige to lock he in . and he know exactly the time when I come home . I always find he sit on that chair by the door , wait , wait , oh so patiently ! and I often bring he back something nice , do not   I , Grimmy ? you should see how delighted he be as soon as I enter the door . " 

 Ida be change , and in many way . she seem to have grow young ; in her voice and manner there be a girlishness which be quite new to Waymark . her motion be light and nimbler ; there be no long that slow grace of step and carriage which have express absolute leisure , and with it have go , perhaps , something of dignity , which use to sit so well upon she . she laugh from time to time in a free , careless way ; formerly she seldom do more than smile . in the old day , there be nothing about her suggestive of what be call the domestic virtue ; now she seem perfectly at home amid these simple surrounding , and , almost as soon as her visitor have sit down , she busy herself in lay the table in a quick , ready way , which come of the habit of wait upon herself . 

 " you will have a cup of tea with I ? " she say , look at Waymark with the curiosity which seem to show that she also find something change in he . " I only get home about eight o'clock , and this be the quiet and pleasantest meal in the day for I . " 

 " what do you do all day , then ? " Waymark ask , soften the bluntness of his question with a smile . 

 she step near to he , and hold out her hand for he to look at ; then , as he meet her eye again , laugh merrily . 

 " do you guess ? " she ask . 

 " I believe I can . you have go back to the laundry again ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and how long be it since you do so ? " 

 " how long be it since we last see each other ? " 

 " do you begin at once when you return to London ? " 

 " yes . " 

 Waymark keep silence , whilst Ida pour out a cup of tea for he , and then take her seat at the table . 

 " do not   you think I be comfortable here ? " Ida say . " it be like have a house of my own . I see nothing of the other people in the building , and feel independent . " 

 " do you buy the furniture yourself ? " 

 " yes ; just the thing I could not   do without . I pay only three - and - sixpence a week , and so long as I can earn that , I be sure at all event of a home , where I can be happy or miserable , as I please . " 

 Waymark wonder . there be no mistaking the genuineness of her tone . what , then , have be the reason for this astonishing change , a change extend , it would seem , almost to temperament ? what intermediate phase have lead up to this result ? he wish to ask she for an explanation , but to do so would be to refer to the condition she have leave , and that he do not wish to do . all would no doubt explain itself as they talk ; in the meantime she tell he how her day be order , and the detail of her life . 

 " have you bring your pipe ? " she ask , when they have drink their tea . 

 " may I smoke ? " 

 " of course , just as you use to . " 

 " but it be not the same , " Waymark say , half to himself . 

 " be you sorry for the change ? " Ida ask , as she hand he a box of match . 

 " what induce you to make it ? " 

 " oh , I have strange fancy . the idea come , just like other do . be you sorry ? " 

 " the opposite . do the idea come whilst we be at Hastings ? " 

 " before that . do you remember my tell you that I have a letter call I back to London ? " 

 Waymark nod . 

 " it be from the laundry , to say I could go to work as soon as I like . " 

 " and why do not   you tell I that ? " 

 Ida seem about to reply , but alter her intention , and , after be silent for a moment , ask another question . 

 " do you think you would ever hear from I ? " 

 " I have give up hope . " 

 " and do you wonder what have become of I ? " 

 " often . why do not   you write before ? " 

 " I be not   ready . " 

 " what do that mean ? " Waymark ask , look closely at she . 

 " perhaps I shall be able to explain some day . if not , well , it will not   matter . " 

 " and will you let I see you often ? " say Waymark , after think a little . " be we to be friend again , as we use to be ? " 

 " if you would care for it . " 

 Waymark turn away as their eye meet . 

 " certainly I should care for it , " he say , feel all at once a difficulty in speak naturally . then he look at Ida again ; she be bend down and stroke Grim 's ear . there be rather a long silence , which Waymark at length force himself to break . 

 " shall I bring you book again ? " he say . 

 " I have very little time for reading , " be Ida 's reply . " it be well , perhaps , that it be so . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " perhaps it would make I discontent with my work , and want all sort of thing I could not   have . " 

 " you have your Sundays free ? " Waymark say , after another rather long silence . 

 " yes . " 

 " then we must have some expedition again , now that the fine day have come . by the by , do you ever see Sally ? " 

 Ida look up with a smile and say , " yes ; do you ? " 

 " no ; but I hear of she . " 

 " from your friend ? " 

 " yes , from O'Gree . " 

 " do your other friend still live near you ? " Ida ask , speak quickly , as if to interrupt what Waymark be about to say . 

 " the Castis ? oh yes . " 

 " what be Mrs. Casti like ? " she say , in a tone which attract Waymark 's attention . 

 " well , " he reply , " it be difficult to describe she . there be nothing very good about she , and I suppose nothing very bad . I see little of she now ; she be almost always ill . " 

 " what be the matter with she ? " 

 " can not   say ; general weakness and ill health , I think ? " 

 " but she be so young , be not   she ? have she friend to go and see she ? " 

 " very few , I think . " 

 " it must be dreadful to be like that , " say Ida . " I be thankful that I have my health , at all event . loneliness be not   so hard to bear , as it must be in illness . " 

 " do you feel lonely ? " 

 " a little , sometimes , " say Ida . " but it be ungrateful to poor old Grim to say so . " 

 " have you no acquaintance except the people you work with ? " 

 she shake her head . 

 " and you do not   read ? would not   you like to go on reading as you use to ? you have a well head than most woman , and it be a pity not to make use of it . that be all nonsense about in make you discontent . you will not   always be live like this , I suppose . " 

 " why not ? " Ida ask simply . 

 " well , " say Waymark , without meet her look , " even if you do , it will be gain to you to cultivate your mind ? " 

 " do you wish I to cultivate my mind ? " 

 " you know I do . " 

 Waymark seem uneasy . he rise and lean against the mantelpiece . 

 " I will do whatever you bid I , " Ida say . " I can get an hour or so each night , and I have all Sunday . " 

 Waymark feel only too well the effect of the tone he be adopt . the situation be by this time clear enough to he , and his own difficulty no less clear . he avoid look at Ida as much as he could . a change have again come over her manner ; the girlishness be modify , the old sad tone be audible at moment . 

 " if it be fine on Sunday , " he say , " will you go with I to Richmond , and let we have dinner at the old place ? " 

 " no , " be Ida 's reply , with a smile , " I can not   afford it . " 

 " but I invite you . of course I do not   mean that it should be any expense . " 

 she still shake her head . 

 " no , I must take my own share , wherever we go . " 

 " then I shall certainly refuse your cup of tea next time I come , " say Waymark jestingly . 

 " that be quite different , " say Ida . " but if you like , we can go in the afternoon , and walk about Roehampton ; that I can afford . " 

 " as you please . when shall I call for you ? " 

 " half - past one . " 

 she open the door for he , and hold out her hand . their eye do not meet as they say good - bye . the door close , and Waymark go so slowly down the stone step that he seem at every moment on the point of stop and turn back . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 a suggestion 

 Waymark and Julian Casti be sit together in the former 's room . it be Saturday evening two day after Waymark 's visit to Ida . Julian have fall into a sad reverie . 

 " how be your wife ? " ask his friend , after watch the melancholy face for a while . 

 " she say her headache be bad to - night . " 

 " curiously , " observe Waymark , with a little acidity , " it always be when you have to leave home . " 

 Julian look up , and seem to reach a crisis in his thought . 

 " Waymark , " he begin , redden as he still always do when greatly move , " I fear I have be behave very foolishly . many a time I have wish to speak out to you plainly , but a sort of delicacy a wrong kind of delicacy , I think prevent I . I can not   keep this attitude any long . I must tell you how thing be go on , and you must give I what help you can . and perhaps I shall be tell you what you already know ? " 

 " I have suspect . " 

 " where be the blame ? " Julian break out , with sudden vehemence . " I can not think that ever husband be more patient and more indulgent than I have be . I have refuse she nothing that my mean could possibly obtain . I have give up all the old quiet habit of my life that she might not   think I slight she ; I scarcely ever open a book at home , know that it irritate she to see I read ; I do my good to amuse she at all time . how do she reward I ? for ever she grumble that I can not   perform impossibility , take she to theatre , buy her new dress , procure for her friend and acquaintance . my wish , express or understand , weigh with she less than the least of her own caprice . she wantonly do thing which she know will cause I endless misery . her companion be gross and depraved people , who constantly drag she low and low , to their own level . the landlady have tell I that , in my absence , woman have call to see she who certainly ought not to enter any decent house . when I entreat she to give up such associate , her only answer be to accuse I of selfishness , since I have friend myself , and yet will not   permit she to have any . and thing have go from bad to bad . several night of late , when I have get home , she have be away , and have not return till much after midnight . hour after hour I have sit there in the extreme misery , waiting , wait , feel as though my brain would burst with its strain ! I have no idea where she go to . if I ask , she only retort by ask I where I spend the night when I be with you , and laugh contemptuously when I tell she the truth . her suspicion and jealousy be incessant , and torture I past endurance . once or twice , I confess , I have lose patience , and have speak angrily , too angrily ; then she have accuse I of brutal disregard of her suffering . it would hurt I less if she pierce I with a knife . only this morning there be a terrible scene ; she madden I past endurance by her wretched calumny accuse I of I know not what disgraceful secret and when word burst from I involuntarily , she fall into hysteric , and shriek till all the people in the house run up in alarm . can you understand what this mean to one of my temperament ? to have my private affair force upon stranger in this way torture I with the pain of hell . I be naturally reticent and retire too much so , I dare say and no misery could have be devise for I more dreadful than this . her accusation be atrocious , such as could only come from a grossly impure mind , or at the suggestion of vile creature . you she hat with a rabid hatred God only know why . she would hate any one who be my friend , and whose society relieve I for a moment from my ghastly torment ! " 

 he cease for very exhaustion , so terribly do the thing he describe work upon he . 

 " what be I to do , Waymark ? can you give I advice ? " 

 Waymark have listen with his eye cast down , and he be silent for some time after Julian cease . 

 " you could not   well ask for advice in a more difficult case , " he say at length . " there be nothing for it but to strengthen yourself and endure . force yourself into work . try to forget she when she be out of sight . " 

 " but , " break in Julian , " this amount to a sentence of death ! what of the life before I , of the year I shall have to spend with she ? work , forget myself , forget she , that be just what I can not do ! my nerve be get weak every day ; I be begin to have fit of trembling and horrible palpitation ; my dream be hideous with vague apprehension , only to be realise when I wake . work ! half my misery be cause by the thought that my work be at an end for ever . it be all forsake I , the delight of imagine great thing , what power I have of put my fancy into word , the music that use to go with I through the day 's work . it be long since I write a line of verse . quietness , peace , a calm life of thought , these thing be what I must have ; I think I should have they in a high degree than ever , and I find they be irretrievably lose . I feel my own weakness , as I never could before . when you bid I strengthen myself , you tell I to alter my character . the resolution need to preserve the well part of my nature through such a life as this , will never be within my reach . it be fearful to think of what I shall become as time go on . I dread myself ! there have be reveal to I depth of passion and misery in my own heart which I have not suspect . I shall lose all self - control , and become as selfish and heedless as she be . " 

 " no , you will not , " say Waymark encouragingly . " this crisis will pass over , and strength will be develop . we have a wonderful faculty for accommodate ourselves to wretchedness ; how else would the world have hold together so long ? when you begin to find your voice again , maybe you will not   sing of the dead world any long , but of the living and suffering . your thought be fine ; they show you to be a poet ; but I have never hide from you how I wish that you have be on my side . art , nowadays , must be the mouthpiece of misery , for misery be the key - note of modern life . " 

 they talk on , and Julian , so easily mould by a strong will , become half courageous . 

 " one of her reproach , " he say , " be just ; I can not   meet it . if I object to her present companion it be my duty to find she more suitable one . she live too much alone . no doubt it be every husband 's duty to provide his wife with society . but how be I to find it ? I be so isolated , and always have be . I know not a soul who could be a friend to she . " 

 Waymark grow thoughtful , and keep silent . 

 " one person I know , " he say presently , and in a cautious way , " who might perhaps help you . " 

 " you do ? " cry Julian eagerly . 

 " you know that I make all sort of queer acquaintance in my wandering . well , I happen to know a girl of about your wife 's age , who , if she be willing , would be just the person you want . she be quite alone , parentless , and almost without friend . she live by herself , and support herself by work in a laundry . for all this , she be by no mean the ordinary London work - girl ; you can not   call she educate , but she speak purely , and have a remarkably good intelligence . I meet she by chance , and keep up her acquaintance . there have be nothing wrong bah ! how conventional one be , in spite of oneself ! I mean to say there have be nothing more than a pleasant friendship between we ; absolutely nothing . we see each other from time to time , and have a walk , perhaps a meal , together , and I lend her book . now , do you think there would be any way of get your wife to accept her society , say of an evening now and then ? do not   do anything rash ; it be of course clear that you must have no hand in this . I must manage it if it be to be do . naturally , I can not   answer at once for the girl 's readiness ; but I believe she would do what I ask she to . do you think it be worth entertain , this idea ? " 

 " I do , indeed ; it would be salvation , I really believe . " 

 " do not   be too sanguine , Casti ; that be another of your fault . still , I know very well that this girl could cure your wife of her ill propensity if any live creature could . she be strong in character , admirably clear - head , mild , gentle , womanly ; in fact , there be perhaps no one I respect so much , on the whole . " 

 " respect , only ? " ask Julian , smile . 

 " Ye - es ; yes , I believe I be perfectly honest in say so , though I could not   have be so sure about it some little time ago . our relation , no doubt , be peculiar ; on her side there be no more warmth than on mine " Waymark try so to believe " and indeed her clear sight have no doubt gauge I fairly well at my true value . " 

 " what be her name ? " 

 " Ida Starr . " 

 " what ! " cry Julian startle . " that be a strange thing ! you have notice the scar on Harriet 's forehead ? " 

 " well ? " 

 " why , it be a wound give she at school by a girl of that very name ! I remember the name as well as possible . it be a blow with a slate deal in passion some quarrel or other . they be both child then , and Ida Starr leave the school in consequence . " 

 " be it possible that it be the same person ? " ask Waymark , wonder and reflect . 

 " if so , that put a new difficulty in our way . " 

 " remove one , I should have think " 

 " Harriet be not of a very forgiving nature , " say Julian gravely . 

 " I should not   have suppose she be ; but a long time have go by since then , and , after all , one be generally glad to see an old school - fellow . " 

 at this point the conversation be interrupt by a knock at the door , follow by the announcement that a gentleman name O'Gree wish to see Mr. Waymark . Waymark smile at Julian . 

 " do not   run away , " he say . " you ought to know O'Gree in the flesh . " 

 the teacher come into the room with a rush , and be much take aback at the sight of a stranger present . perspiration be stream profusely from his face , which be aglow with some great intelligence . after be introduce to Casti , he plunge down on a chair , and mop himself with his handkerchief , uttering incoherency about the state of the weather . Waymark make an effort to bring about a general conversation , but fail ; O'Gree be so preoccupied that any remark address to he have to be repeat before he understand it , and Julian be in no mood for make new acquaintance . so , in a few minute , the latter take his hat and leave , Waymark go with he to the door to speak a few word of encouragement . 

 " the battle 's won ! " cry O'Gree , with much gesticulation , as soon as Waymark return . " the campaign be at an end ! I be sorry if I have   drive your friend away , but I be bind to tell you . " 

 " all right . let I have a description of the manoeuvre . " 

 " look here , my boy , " say O'Gree , with sudden solemnity , " you have   never be very willing to talk to I about she . now , before I tell you anything , I want to know this . why would not   you tell I how you first get to know she , and so on ? " 

 " before I answer , I want to know this : have you find out why I would not ? " 

 " yes , I have that is , I suppose I have and from her own lip , too ! you know she when she live near the Strand there , eh ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " well now , understand , my boy . I do not   want to hear anything disagreeable ; in fact , I will not   listen to anything disagreeable ; all I want to know be , whether I may safely tell you what she have tell I . if you do not   know it already , there be no need to talk of it . " 

 " I understand , and I do not   think you can tell I anything I be not well aware of . " 

 " sure , then , I will tell you , and if there be another girl as brave and honest as Sally in all this worruld , I will be oblige if you will make I acquainted with she ! well , you know she have a Saturday afternoon off every month . it have not   be a very cheerful day , but it could not   be miss ; and , as it be too rainy to walk about , I could not   think of any well place to go to than the British Museum . of course I want to find a quiet corner , but there be people about everywhere , and the good we could manage be in the mummy - room . we look at all the mummy , and I tell she all I know about they , and I keep think to myself : now , how can I work round to it ? I have   try so often , you know , and she be always escape I , somehow , and I could not   help think it be because I have not   go about it in the proper way . well , we would be star at a mummy for about a quarter of an hour , and neither of we say anything , when all at once a rare idea come into my head . ' Sally , ' I say , glance round to see that there be no one by , ' that mummy be very likely a pretty girl like you , once . ' ' do you think so ? ' she say , with that look of hers which make I feel like a galvanic battery . ' I do , ' I say , ' and what be more , there may once have be another mummy , a man - mummy , stand by she just as I be stand by you , and want very much to ask she something , and shake in his shoe for fear he should not   get the right answer . ' ' do the mummy wear shoe when they be alive ? ' she ask , all at once . ' wear shoe ! ' I cry out . ' I can not   tell you , Sally ; but one thing I feel very sure of , and that be that they have heart . now , suppose , ' I say , ' we be those two mummy ' ' I be sure it be bad luck ! ' interrupt Sally . ' oh no , it be not , ' say I , see something in her face which make I think it be the opposite . ' let I go on . now , suppose the one mummy say to the other , " Sally " ' ' be the girl - mummy call Sally ? ' she interrupt again . ' sure I can not   say , ' say I , ' but we will suppose so . well , suppose he say , " Sally if I can hit on some mean of make a comfortable home here by the Nile , that be to say , the Thames , you know , will you come and keep it in order for I , and live with I for all the rest of our life ? ' now what do you think the girl - mummy would have answer : ' " 

 Waymark laugh , but O'Gree have become solemn . 

 " she do not   answer at once , and there be something very queer in her face . all at once she say , ' what have Mr. Waymark tell you about I ? ' ' why , just nothing at all , ' I say , rather puzzle . ' and do you know , ' she ask then , without look at I , ' what sort of a girl I be ? ' well , all at once there come something into my head that I have never think of before , and I be stagger for a moment ; I could not   say anything . but I get over it . ' I do not   want to know anything , ' I say . ' all I know be , that I like you well than I ever shall any one else , and I want you to promise to be my wife , some day . ' ' then you must let I tell you all my story first , ' she say . ' I will not   answer till you know everything . ' and so she tell I what it seem you know . well , if I think much of she before , I think a thousand time as much after that ! and do you know what ? I believe it be on my account that she want and take that place in the shop . " 

 " precisely , " say Waymark . 

 " you think so ? " cry the other , delighted . 

 " I guess as much when she meet I that day and say I might let you know where she be . " 

 " ha ! " exclaim O'Gree , with a long breath . 

 " and so the matter be settle ? " 

 " all but the most important part of it . there be no chance of my be able to marry for long enough to come . now , can you give I any advice ? I have   quite make up my mind to leave Tootle . the position be not   worthy of a gentleman ; I be lose my self - respect . the she - Tootle get bad and bad . if I do not   electrify she , one of these day , with an outburst of ferocious indignation , she will only have my patience to thank . let she beware how she drive the lion to bay ! " 

 " could not   you get a non - resident mastership ? " 

 " I must try , but the pay be so devilish small . " 

 " we must talk the matter over . " 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 DIPLOMACY 

 Waymark have a good deal of frank talk with himself before meet Ida again on the Sunday . such conversation be , as we know , habitual . under the circumstance , however , he feel that it behove he to become especially clear on one or two point ; never mind what course he might ultimately pursue , it be always needful to he to dissect his own motif , that he might at least be act with full consciousness . 

 one thing be clear enough . the fiction of a mere friendship between himself and Ida be impossible to support . it have be impossible under the very different circumstance of a year ago , and be not likely to last a week , now that Ida could so little conceal how her own feeling have change . what , then , be to be their future ? could he accept her love , and join their life without legal bond , think only of present happiness , and content to let thing arrange themselves as they would in the year to come ? 

 his heart strongly oppose such a step . clearly Ida have change her life for his sake , and be undergo hardship in the hope of win his respect as well as his love . would she have do all this without something of a hope that she might regain her place in the every - day world , and be hold by Waymark worthy to become his wife ? he could not certainly know , but there be little doubt that this hope have lead she on . could he believe she capable of yet nobler idea ; could he think that only in reverence of the sanctity of love , and without regard to other thing , she have act in this way ; then , regard she as indeed his equal , he would open his heart to she and speak somewhat in this way . " yes , I do love you ; but at the same time I know too well the uncertainty of love to go through the pretence of bind myself to you for ever . will you accept my love in its present sincerity , neither hop nor fear , know that whatever happen be beyond our own control , feel with I that only an ignoble nature can descend to the affectation of union when the real link be break ? " could Waymark but have feel sure of her answer to such an appeal , it would have go far to make his love for Ida all - engrossing . she would then be his ideal woman , and his devotion to she would have no bound . 

 but he feel too strongly that in thus speak he would sadden she by the destruction of her great hope . on the other hand , to offer to make she his legal wife would be to do she a yet great injustice , even have he be willing to so sacrifice himself . the necessity for legal marriage would be a confession of her inferiority , and the sense of be thus bind would , he well know , be the sure mean of weaken his affection . this affection he could not trust . how far be it mere passion of the sens , which gratification would speedily kill ? 

 in the case of his feeling towards Maud Enderby there be no such doubt . never be his blood so calm as in her presence . she be to he a spirit , and in the spirit he love she . with Maud he might look forward to union at some distant day , a union outwardly of the conventional kind . it would be so , not on account of any inferiority to his ideal in Maud , for he feel that there be no height of his own thought whither she would not in time follow he ; but simply because no point of principle would demand a refusal of the yoke of respectability , with its attendant social advantage . and the thought of thus bind himself to Maud have nothing repulsive , for the link between they be not of the kind which easily yield , and loyalty to a high and nobler nature may well be deem a duty . 

 so far logical arguing . but the fact remain that he have not the least intention of break off his intercourse with Ida , despite the certainty that passion would grow upon he with each of their meeting , render their mutual relation more and more dangerous . of only one thing could he be sure : marriage be not to be think of . it remain , then , that he be in danger of be lead into conduct which would be the source of grievous unrest to himself , and for Ida would lay the foundation of much suffering . Waymark be honest enough in his self - communing to admit that he could not trust himself . gross deception he be incapable of , but he would not answer for it that , the temptation press he too hard , he might not be guilty of allow Ida to think his love of more worth than it really be . she know his contempt of conventional tie , and her faith in he would keep she from press he to any step he dislike ; she would trust he without that . and such trust would be unmerite . 

 it be significant that he do not take into account loyalty to Maud as a help in resist this temptation . he be too sure of himself as regard that purer love ; let what might happen , his loyalty to Maud would be unshaken . it be independent of passion , and passion could not shake it . 

 then come the subject of the propose acquaintance between Ida and Mrs. Casti . an impulse of friendship have lead to his conceiving the idea ; together , perhaps , with the recollection of what Ida have say about her loneliness , and the question she have ask about Mrs. Casti . Waymark have little doubt that those question indicate a desire to become acquainted with his friend ; the desire be natural , under the circumstance . still , he regret what he have do . to introduce Ida to his friend would be almost equivalent to avow some conventional relation between she and himself . and , in the next place , it would be an obstacle in the way of those relation become anything but conventional . well , and be not this exactly the kind of aid he need in pursue the course which he feel to be right ? truly ; yet 

 at this point Waymark break into that half contemptuous , half indulgent laugh which so frequently interrupt his self - communing , and , it be nearly one o'clock , set out to call for Ida . the day be fine , and , when they leave the steamer at Putney , they walk on to the heath in good spirit and with cheerful talk . to be with Ida under these circumstance , in the sunlight and the fresh breeze , be very different from sit with her yonder in the little room , with the lamp burn on the table , and the quietness of night around . the calm pleasure of passionless intercourse be realise and sufficing . Ida , too , seem content to enjoy the moment ; there be not that wistfulness in her eye which have be so new to he and so strong in its influence . it be easy to find indifferent subject of conversation , and to avoid the seriousness which would have be fatal . 

 when they have find a pleasant spot to rest awhile before turn back , Waymark make up his mind to fulfil his promise to Julian . 

 " it be rather strange , " he say , " that you should have be ask I question about Mrs. Casti . since then I have   discover that you probably know she , or once do . " 

 Ida look surprised . 

 " do you remember once have a schoolfellow call Harriet smale ? " 

 " be that her name ? " 

 " it be , before her marriage . " 

 Ida become grave , and think for some moment before speak again . 

 " yes , I remember she , " she say , " and not pleasantly . " 

 " you would not   care to renew her acquaintance then ? " say Waymark , half glad , in spite of himself , that she speak in this way . 

 Ida ask , with earnestness , how he have make this discovery . Waymark hesitate , but at length tell the truth . he explain that Mrs. Casti suffer from the want of companionship , and that he have mention Ida 's name to Julian ; whence the discovery . 

 " have she be tell about I ? " ask Ida . 

 " nothing be to be say till I have speak to you . " 

 Waymark pause , but presently continue in a more serious tone . in recur to that conversation with Julian , his friend 's trouble speak strongly to he once more , and overcome selfish thought . 

 " I say that I have come to know you by chance , and that strange as it might sound we be simply friend . " he glance for an instant at Ida ; her eye be turn to the ground . " you will believe I , " he go on quickly , " when I tell you that I really say nothing more ? " 

 " I never doubt a word of your , " be Ida 's quiet reply . 

 " Casti be overjoy at the thought of find such a friend for his wife . of course I tell he that he must not certainly count either on your consent or on his wife 's . Hers I think to be perhaps more doubtful than your . " 

 " could I really be of any use to she , " ask Ida , after a silence , " with so little free time as I have ? " 

 " suppose she would welcome you , I really believe you could be of great use . she be a strange creature , miserably weak in body and mind . if you could get to regard this as a sort of good work you be call upon to undertake , you would very likely be little less than an angel of mercy to both of they . Casti be fall into grievous unhappiness why , you will understand sufficiently if you come to know they . " 

 " do you think she bear malice against I ? " 

 " of that I know nothing . Casti say she have never speak of you in that way . by - the - by , she still have a scar on her forehead , I often wonder how it come there . " 

 Ida wince . 

 " what a little termagant you must have be ! " exclaim Waymark , laugh . " how hard it be to fancy you at that age , Ida . what be the quarrel all about ? " 

 " I can not   speak of it , " she reply , in a low , sad voice . " it be so long ago ; and I want to forget it . " 

 Waymark keep silence . 

 " do you wish I to be her friend ? " Ida ask , suddenly look up . 

 " certainly not if you dislike the thought . " 

 " no , no . but you think it would be do good ? you would like I to help your friend if I can ? " 

 " yes , I should , " be Waymark 's reply . 

 " then I hope she will be willing to let I go and see she . I will do my very well . let we lose no time in try . it be such a strange thing that we should meet again in this way ; perhaps it be something more than chance . " 

 Waymark smile . 

 " you think I be superstitious ? " she ask quickly . " I often feel so . I have all sort of hope and faith that you would laugh at . " 

 Ida 's thought be busy that night with the past and the future . the first mention of Harriet 's name have give she a shock ; it bring back with vividness the sad moment of her life ; it awake a bitter resentment which mere memory have no long keep the power to revive . that be only for a moment , however . the more she accustom herself to the thought , the easy it seem to be to bury the past in forgiveness . Harriet must have change so much since those day . possibly there would never be a mention between they of the old trouble ; practically they would be new acquaintance , and would be very little help to an understanding of each other by the recollection of childhood . and then Ida feel there be so much to be glad of in the new prospect . she long for a world more substantial than that of her own imagination , and here , as she think , it would be open to she . above all , by introduce she to his friend , Waymark have strengthen the relation between she and himself . he be give she , too , a chance of show herself to he in a new light . for the first time he would see she under the ordinary condition of a woman 's life in a home circle Ida have pass from one extreme to the other . at present there be nothing she desire so much as the simple , conventional , every - day existence of the woman who have never swerve from the beat track . she never see a family group anywhere without envy the happiness which to she seem involved in the mere fact of a home and relation . her isolation weigh heavily upon she . if there be but some one who could claim her service , as of right , and in return render she the simple hum - drum affection which go for so much in ease the burden of life . she be weary of her solitary heroism , though she never regard it as heroism , but merely as the path in which she be naturally lead by her feeling . Waymark could not but still think of she very much in the old light , and she wish to prove to he how completely she be change . the simple act of make tea for he when he come to see she have be a pleasure ; it be domestic and womanly , and she have often glance at his face to see whether he notice it at all . then the fact of Harriet 's be an invalid would give she many opportunity for show that she could be gentle and patient and serviceable . Casti would observe these thing , and doubtless would speak of they to Waymark . think in this way , Ida become all eagerness for the new friendship . there be of course the possibility that Harriet would refuse to accept she offer kindness , but it seem very unlikely , and the disappointment would be so great that she could not bear to dwell on the thought . Waymark have promise to come as soon as he have any news . the time would go very slowly till she see he . 

 Waymark have meet Harriet very seldom of late . Julian spend regularly one evening a week with he , but it be only occasionally that Waymark pay a visit in turn . he know that he be anything but welcome to Mrs. Casti , who of course have neither interest nor understanding for the conversation between himself and Julian . formerly he have now and then try his good to find some common subject for talk with she , but the effort have be vain ; she be hopelessly stupid , and more often than not in a surly mood , which make her mere presence difficult to be endure . of late , whenever he come , she make she illness an excuse for remain in her bed - room . and hence arise another trouble . the two room be only divide by fold door , and when Harriet get impatient with what she conceive to be the visitor 's undue stay , she would rap on the door , to summon Julian to she . this rapping would take place sometimes six or seven time in half an hour , till Waymark hasten away in annoyance . and indeed there be little possibility of converse in Julian 's own room . Julian sit for ever in a state of nervous apprehension , dread the summon which be sure to come before long . when he leave the room for a moment , in obedience to it , Waymark could hear Harriet 's voice speak in a peevish or ill - temper tone , and Julian would return pale with agitation , unable to utter consecutive word . it be a little well when the meeting be at Waymark 's , but even then Julian be anything but at his ease . he would often sit for a long time in gloomy silence , and seldom could even affect his old cheerfulness . the change which a year have make in he be painful . his face be grow haggard with ceaseless anxiety . the slight unexpected noise make he start nervously . his old enthusiasm be die away . his daily work be a burden which grow more and more oppressive . he always seem weary , alike in body and mind . 

 Harriet 's ailment be not of that unreal kind which hysterical woman often affect , for the mere sake of demand sympathy , though it be certain she make the most of they . the scrofulous taint in her constitution be declare itself in many way . the most serious symptom take the form of convulsive fit . on Julian 's return home one evening , he have find she stretch upon the floor , unconscious , foam at the mouth , and struggle horribly . since then , he have come back every night in agony of miserable anticipation . her illness , and his own misery , be of course much intensify by her self - willed habit . when she remain away from home till after midnight , Julian be always in fear lest some accident have happen to she , and once or twice of late she have declare   whether truly or not it be impossible to say   that she have have fit in the open street . Weather make no difference to she ; she would leave home on the pretence of make necessary purchase , and would come back drench with rain . protest avail nothing , save to irritate she . at time her conduct be so utterly unreasonable that Julian look at she as if to see whether she have lose her sens . and all this he bear with a patience which few could have rival . moment there be when she soften , and , in a burst of hysterical weeping , beg he to forgive she for some unusual violence , plead her illness as the cause ; and so sensible be he to compassion , that he always vow in his mind to bear anything rather than deal harshly with she . love for she , in the true sense , he have never feel , but his pity often lead he to effusion of tenderness which love could scarcely have exceed . he be give up everything for she . through whole evening he would sit by she , as she lie in pain , hold her hand , and talk in a way which he think would amuse or interest she . 

 " you be sorry you marry I , " she would often say at such time . " it be no good say no ; I be sure you be . " 

 that always make julian think of her father , and of his own promise always to be a friend to the poor , weak , ailing creature ; and he strengthen himself in his resolution to bear everything . 

 Waymark decide that he would venture on the step of go to see Harriet during the daytime , whilst Julian be away , in order to speak of Ida . this he do on the Monday , and be lucky enough to find she at home . she be evidently surprised at his visit , and perhaps still more so at the kind and friendly way in which he begin to speak to she . in a few minute he have work round to his subject . he have , he say , a friend , a young lady who be very lonely , and for whom he want to find an agreeable companion . it have occur to he that perhaps he might ask to be allow to introduce she . Waymark have conclude that this would probably be the good way of put it ; Harriet would perhaps be flatter by be ask to confer the favour of her acquaintance . and indeed she seem so ; there be even something like a momentary touch of colour in her pale cheek . 

 " do Julian know she ? " she ask , fix her eye on his with the close scrutiny . 

 " no , he do not . " 

 he would leave she to what conclusion she like about his relation to Ida ; in reality that matter little . 

 " she be some one , " he go on , " for whom I have a great regard . as I say , she have really no friend , and she earn her own living . I feel sure you would find her company pleasant ; she be sensible and cheerful , and would be very grateful for any kindness you show she . her name , by - the - by , be Ida Starr . " 

 " Ida Starr ? " 

 " be the name familiar to you ? " 

 " I use to know some one call that . " 

 " indeed ? how strange it would be if you know she already . I have speak to she of you , but she do not   tell I she know your name . " 

 " oh no , she would not . it be year and year ago . we use to go to school together if it be the same . " 

 the way in which this be speak be not very promising , but Waymark would not be discourage , have once bring himself to the point of carry the scheme through . Harriet go on to ask many question , all of which he answer as satisfactorily as he could , and in the end she express herself quite willing to renew Ida 's acquaintance . Waymark have watch her face as closely as she do his , and he be able to read pretty accurately what be pass in her mind . Curiosity , it be clear , be her main incentive . good will there be none ; its growth , if at all possible , would depend upon Ida herself . there be even something very like a gleam of hate in her dark eye when Ida 's name be first speak . 

 " when may I bring she ! " Waymark ask . " perhaps you would like to talk it over with julian first ? by - the - by , perhaps he remember she as your schoolfellow ? " 

 " I do not   know , I be sure , " she say , with a pretence of indifference . " I do not   see what he can have to say against it . bring she as soon as you like . " 

 " she be not free till seven at night . perhaps we have well leave it till next Sunday ? " 

 " why ? why could not   she come to - morrow night ? " 

 " it be very good of you . I have no doubt she would be glad . " 

 with this understanding Waymark take his departure . 

 " do you remember Ida Starr ? " be Harriet 's first question to her husband when he return that evening . 

 " certainly I do , " reply Julian , with complete self - control . " why ? " 

 " when do you see she last ? " follow quickly , whilst she examine he as keenly as she have do Waymark . 

 " see she ? " repeat Julian , laugh . " do you mean the girl you go to school with ? " 

 " of course I do . " 

 " I do not   know that I ever see she in my life . " 

 " well , she be come here to - morrow night . " 

 an explanation follow . 

 " have not   he ever speak to you about she ? " Harriet ask . 

 " no , " say Julian , smile . " I suppose he think it be a private affair , in which no one else have any interest . " 

 " I hope you will like she , " he say presently . " it will be very nice to have a friend of that kind , will not   it ? " 

 " yes , if she do not   throw one of my own plate at I . " 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 under - current 

 " well , how do you like she ? " Julian ask , when their visitor have leave they . 

 " oh , I dare say she be all right , " be the reply . " she be get a good deal to say for herself . " 

 Julian turn away , and walk about the room . 

 " what do she work at ? " say Harriet , after glance at he furtively once or twice . 

 " I have no idea . " 

 " it be my belief she do not   work at all . " 

 " why should Waymark have say so , then ? " ask Julian , stand still and look at she . he speak very quietly , but his face betray some annoyance . 

 Harriet merely laugh , her most ill - natured and maliciously suggestive laugh , and rise from her seat . Julian come up and face she . 

 " Harriet , " he say , with perfect gentleness , though his lip tremble , " why do you always prefer to think the bad of people ? I always look for the good rather than the evil in people I meet . " 

 " we be different in a good many thing , you see , " say Harriet , with a sneer . her countenance have darken . Julian have learn the significance of her look and tone only too well . under the circumstance it would have be well to keep silence , but something compel he to speak . 

 " I be sure of this , " he say . " if you will only meet she in her own spirit , you will find she a valuable friend just such a friend as you need . but of course if you begin with all manner of prejudice and suspicion , it will be very hard for she to make you believe in her sincerity . certainly her kindness , her sympathy , her whole manner , be perfect to - night . " 

 " you seem to notice she a good deal . " 

 " naturally I do , be so anxious that you should find a friend and companion . " 

 " and who be she , I should like to know ? " say Harriet , with perfection of subdue acrimony . " how can I tell that she be a proper person to be a friend to I ? I know what her mother be , at all event . " 

 " her mother ? what do you know of her mother ? " 

 Julian have never know the whole story of that scar on his wife 's forehead . 

 " never mind , " say Harriet , nod significantly . 

 " I have no idea what you mean , " Julian return . " at all event I can trust Waymark , and I know very well he would not have bring she here , if she have not   be a proper person for you to know . but come , " he add quickly , make an effort to dismiss the disagreeable tone between they , " there be surely no need for we to talk like this , Harriet . I be sure you will like she , when you know she well . promise I that you will try , dear . you be so lonely , and it would rejoice I so to feel that you have a friend to help you and to be a comfort to you . at all event you will judge she on her own merit , will not   you , and put aside all kind of prejudice ? " 

 " I have not   say I should not ; but I suppose I must get to know she first ? " 

 ominous as such a commencement would have be under any other circumstance , Julian be so prepared for more decided hostility , that he be even hopeful . when he meet Waymark next , the change in his manner be obvious ; he be almost cheerful once more . and the improvement hold its ground as the next two or three week go by . Ida come to Beaufort Street often , and Julian be able to use the freedom he thus obtain to spend more time in Waymark 's society . the latter notice the change in he with surprise . 

 " thing go well still ? " he would ask , when Julian come in of an evening . 

 " very well indeed . Harriet have not   be out one night this week . " 

 " and you think it will last ? " 

 " I have good hope . " 

 they do not speak much of Ida , however . it be only when three week have go by that Julian ask one night , with some hesitation in put the question , whether Waymark see she often . 

 " pretty often , " be the reply . " I be her tutor , in a sort of way . we read together , and that kind of thing . " 

 " at her lodging ? " 

 " yes . do it seem a queer arrangement ? " 

 " she seem very intelligent , " say Julian , let the question pass by , and speak with some constraint . " be not   it a pity that she can not   find some employment well suit to she ? " 

 " I do not   see what be open . could you suggest anything ? " 

 Julian be silent . 

 " in any case , it will not   last very long , I suppose ? " he say , look up with a smile which be rather a trembling of the lip . 

 " why ? " 

 they gaze at each other for a moment . 

 " no , " say Waymark , shake his head and smile . " it be not   as you think . it be perfectly understand between we that we be to be agreeable company to each other , and absolutely nothing beyond that . I have no motive for lead you astray in the matter . however thing be , I would tell you frankly . " 

 there be another silence . 

 " do you think there be anything like confidence between your wife and she ? " Waymark ask . 

 " that I hardly know . when I be present , of course they only talk about ordinary woman 's interest , household affair , and so on . " 

 " then you have no mean of well , of know whether she have speak about I to your wife in any particular way ? " 

 " nothing of the kind have ever be hint to I " 

 " Waymark , " Julian continue , after a pause , " you be a strange fellow . " 

 " in what respect . " 

 " do you mean to tell I honestly that that you " 

 " well ? you mean to say , that I be not in love with the girl ? " 

 " no , I be not   go to say that , " say Julian , with his usual bashfulness , heighten in this case by some feeling which make he pale . " I mean , do you really believe that she have no kind of regard for you beyond mere friendship ? " 

 " why ? have you form any conclusion of your own on the point ? " 

 " how could I help do so ? " 

 " and you look on I , " say Waymark , after think for a moment , " as an insensible dog , with a treasure throw at his foot which he be quite incapable of appreciate or make use of ? " 

 " no . I only feel that your position must be a very difficult one . but perhaps you have rather not speak of these thing ? " 

 " on the contrary . you be perfectly right , and the position be as difficult as it well could be . " 

 " you have make your choice , I suppose , before you know Ida at all ? " 

 " so far from that , I have not   even make it yet . I be not at all sure that my chance of ever marry Maud Enderby be not so utterly remote , that t ought to put aside all thought of it . in that case " 

 " but this be a strange state of mind , " say Julian , with a force laugh . " be it possible to balance feeling in this way ? " 

 " you , in my position , would have no doubt ? " 

 " I do not   know Miss Enderby , " say Julian , redden . 

 Waymark walk up and down the room , with his hand behind his back , his brow bent . he have never tell his friend anything of Ida 's early history ; but now he feel half - tempt to let he know everything . to do so , might possibly give he that additional motive to a clear and speedy decision in the difficulty which grow ever more pressing . yet be it just to Ida to speak of these thing even to one who would certainly not repeat a word ? once or twice he all but begin , yet in the end a variety of motif keep he silent . 

 " well , " he exclaim shortly , " we will talk about this another time . perhaps I shall have more to tell you . do not   be gloomy . look , here I be just upon the end of my novel . if all go smoothly I shall finish it in a fortnight , and then I will read it to you . " 

 " I hope you may have well luck with it than I have , " say Julian . 

 " oh , your time be yet to come . and it be very likely I shall be no well off . there be thing in the book which will scarcely recommend it to the british parent . but it shall be publish , if it be at my own expense . if it come to the bad , I shall sell my mining share to Woodstock . " 

 " after all , " say Julian , smile , " you be a capitalist . " 

 " yes , and much good it do I . " 

 since that first evening Julian have refrain from speak to his wife about Ida , beyond casual remark and question which could carry no significance . Harriet likewise have be silent . as far as could be observe , however , she seem to take a pleasure in Ida 's society , and , as Julian say , with apparently good result to herself . she be more at home than formerly , and her health even seem to profit by the change . still , there be something not altogether natural in all this , and Julian could scarcely bring himself to believe in the happy turn thing seem to be take . in Harriet herself there be no corresponding growth of cheerfulness or good - nature . she be quiet , but with a quietness not altogether pleasant ; it be as though her thought be constantly occupy , as never hitherto ; and her own moral condition be hardly likely to be the subject of these meditation . Julian , when he sit reading , sometimes become desperately aware of her eye be fix on he for many minute at a time . once , on this happening , he look up with a smile . 

 " what be it , dear ? " he ask , turn round to she . " you be very quiet . shall I put away the book and talk ? " 

 " no ; I be all right . " 

 " you have   be much well lately , have not   you ? " he say , take her hand playfully . " let I feel your pulse ; you know I be half a doctor . " 

 she draw it away peevishly . but Julian , whom a peaceful hour have make full of kindness , go on in the same gentle way . 

 " you do not   know how happy it make I to see you and Ida such good friend . I be sure it would be so . do not   you feel there be something soothe in her society ? she speak so gently , and always bring a sort of sunshine with she . " 

 Harriet 's lip curl , very slightly , but she say nothing . 

 " when be you go to see she again ? it be hardly fair to let the visit be always on her side , be it ? " 

 " I shall go when I feel able . perhaps to - morrow . " 

 Julian presently go back to his book again . if he could have see the look Harriet turn upon he when his face be avert , he would not have read so calmly . 

 that same evening Harriet herself be the subject of a short conversation between Ida and Waymark , as they sit together in the usual way . 

 " I fear there will never be anything like confidence between we , " Ida be say . " do you know that I be sometimes almost afraid of she ; sometimes she look and speak as if she hat I . " 

 " she be a poor , ill - condition creature , " Waymark re plied , rather contemptuously . 

 " can you explain , " ask Ida , " how it be that Mr. Casti marry she ? " 

 " for my life , I can not ! I half believe it be out of mere pity ; I should not   wonder if the proposal come from her side . Casti might once have do something ; but I be afraid he never will now . " 

 " and he be so very good to she . I pity he from my heart whenever I see they together . often I have be so discouraged by her cold suspicious way , that I half - think I should have to give it up , but I feel it would be cruel to desert he so . I meet he in the street the other night just as I be go to she , and he thank I for what I be do in a way that almost make I cry . " 

 " by - the - by , " say Waymark , " you know she too well to venture upon anything like direct criticism of her behaviour , when you talk together ! " 

 " indeed , I scarcely venture to speak of herself at all . it would be hard to say what we talk about . " 

 " of course , " Waymark say , after a short silence , " there be limit to self - devotion . so long as it seem to you that there be any chance of do some good , well , persevere . but you must not   be sacrifice to such a situation . the time you give she be so much absolute loss to yourself . " 

 " oh , but I work hard to make up for it . you be not dissatisfied with I ? " 

 " and what if I be ? would it matter much ? " 

 this be one of the thing that Waymark be ever and again say , in spite of himself . he could not resist the temptation of prove his power in this way ; it be so sweet to be assure of love , even though every voice within cry out against the temptation to enjoy it , and condemn every word or act that could encourage it to hope . Ida generally meet such remark with silence ; but in this instance she look up steadily , and say 

 " yes , it would matter much . " Waymark draw in his breath , half turn away and speak of some quite different matter . 

 Harriet carry out her intention of visit Ida on the following day . in these three week she have only be to Ida 's lodging once . the present visit be unexpected . she wait about the pavement for Ida 's return from work , and shortly see she approach . 

 " this be kind of you , " Ida say . " we will have some tea , and then , if you be not too tired , we might go into the park . it will be cool then . " 

 she dread the thought of sit alone with Harriet . but the latter say she must get home early , and would only have time to sit for half an hour . when Ida have light her fire , and put the kettle on , she find that the milk which she have keep since the morning for Grim and herself have go sour ; so she have to run out to a dairy to fetch some . 

 " you will not   mind be leave alone for a minute ? " she say . 

 " oh , no ; I will amuse myself with Grim . " 

 as soon as she be alone , Harriet go into the bed - room , and begin to examine everything . Grim have follow she , and come up to rub affectionately against her foot , but she kick he , muttering , " get off ; you black beast ! " have scrutinise the article which lie about , she quickly search the pocket of a dress which hang on the door , but find nothing except a handkerchief . all the time she listen for any footfall on the stone step without . next she go to the chest of drawer , and be pleased to find that they be unlocked . in the first she draw out there be some book and paper . these she rummage through very quickly , and at length , underneath they , come upon a little bundle of pawn - ticket . on find these , she laugh to herself , and carefully inspect every one of they . " gold chain , " she mutter ; " bracelet ; seal - skin ; what be she do with all those thing , I wonder ? Ho , ho , Miss Starr ? " 

 she start ; there be a step on the stair . in a second everything be replace , and she be back in the sitting - room , stoop over Grim , who take her endearment with passive indignation . 

 " have I be long ? " pant Ida , as she come in . " the kettle will not   be a minute . you will take your thing off ? " 

 Harriet remove her hat only . as Ida go about , prepare the tea , Harriet watch she with eye in which there be a new light . she speak , too , in almost a cheerful way , and even show a well appetite than usual when they sit down together . 

 " you be well to - day ? " Ida say to she . 

 " perhaps so ; but it do not   last long . " 

 " oh , you must be more hopeful . try not to look so much on the dark side of thing . how would you be , " she add , with a good - humour laugh , " if you have to work all day , like I ? I be sure you have   a great deal to make you feel happy and thankful . " 

 " I do not   know what , " return Harriet coldly . 

 " but your husband , your home , your long , free day ? " 

 the other laugh peevishly . Ida turn her head away for a moment ; she be irritate by this wretched humour , and , as have often be the case of late , find it difficult to restrain some rather trenchant remark . 

 " it may sound strange , " she say , with a smile , " but I think I should be very willing to endure bad health for a position something like your . " 

 Harriet laugh again , and still more unpleasantly . 

 later in the evening Harriet go to call upon her friend Mrs. Sprowl . something of an amusing kind seem to be go forward in front of the house . on draw near and press into the crowd of loitering people , she behold a spectacle familiar to she , and one which bring a smile to her face . a man of wretched appearance , in vile semblance of clothing which barely clung together about he , be stand on his head upon the pavement , and , in that attitude , drawl out what be mean for a song , while those around make merry and indulge in practical joke at his expense . one such put a sudden end to the exhibition . a young ragamuffin draw near with a handful of rich mud , and carefully cast it right into the singer 's invert mouth . the man be on his foot in an instant , and pursue the assailant , who , however , succeed in escape down an alley hard by . return , the man go from one to another in the crowd , hold out his hand . Harriet pass on into the bar . 

 " Slimy 's up to his lark to - night , " exclaim Mrs. Sprowl , with a laugh , as she welcome her visitor in the bar - parlour . " he will be losin ' his sweet temper just now , see if he do not , an ' then one o ' they chap will get a bash I ' the eye . " 

 " I always like to see he sing on his head , " say Harriet , who seem at once thoroughly at her ease in the atmosphere of beer and pipe . 

 " it be funny , be not   it ? and ' ow be the world be a - usin ' you , Harriet ? see anything more o ' that affectionate friend o ' yourn ? " 

 this be say with a grin , and a significant wink . 

 " have you find out anything about she ? " ask Harriet eagerly . 

 " why yes , I have ; something as will amuse you . it be just as I think . " 

 " how do you mean ? " 

 " why , Bella , be in ' ere th ' other night , so I say to she , ' Bella , ' I say , ' do not   you never hear of a girl call Ida Starr ? ' I say . ' course I do , ' she say . ' one o ' the ' igh an ' ' aughty lot , an ' she live by herself somewhere in the Strand . ' so it be just as I tell you . " 

 " but what be she do now ? " 

 " you say she be turn modest . " 

 " I can not   make she out quite , " say Harriet , reflect , with her head on one side . " I have   be at her lodging tonight , and , whilst she be out of the room , I happen to get sight of a lot of pawn - ticket , for gold chain and sealskin , and I do not   know what . " 

 " spout them all when she throw up the job , I s'pose , " suggest Mrs. Sprowl . " you be sure she do go to work ? " 

 " yes , I have   have somebody to follow she and watch she . there be Waymark go to see she often , and I should not   wonder if she half keep he ; he be just that kind of fellow . " 

 " you have not   catch no one else go there ? " ask Mrs. Sprowl , with another of her intense wink . 

 " no , I have not , not yet , " reply Harriet , with sudden vehemence , " but I believe he do go there , or else see she somewhere else . " 

 " well , " say the landlady , with an air of generous wisdom , " I tell you from the first as I ' adn't   much opinion of man as be so anxious to have their wife friendly with other woman . there be always something at the bottom of it , you may bet . it be my belief he be one too many for you , Harriet ; you be too simple - minded to catch he . " 

 " I will have a good try , though , " cry the girl , deadly pale with passion . " perhaps I be not so simple as you think . I be pretty quick in tumble to thing no fear . if they think I do not   notice what go on , they must take I for a damned silly fool , that be all ! why , I have   see they wink at each other , when they think I be not   look . " 

 " you be not such a fool as to leave they alone together ? " say the woman , who seem to have a pleasure in work upon Harriet 's jealousy . 

 " no fear ! but they understand each other ; I can see that well enough . and he write to she ; I be dead sure he write to she . let I get hold of a letter just once , that be all ! " 

 " and he be orful good - natured to she , be not   he ? look after she when she have tea with you , and so on ? " 

 " I should think he do . it be all ' will not   Miss Starr have this ? ' and ' will not   Miss Starr have that ? ' he scarcely take his eye off of she , all the time . " 

 " I know , I know ; it be allus the same ! you keep your eye open , Harriet , and you will ' ave your reward , as the scripture say . " 

 when she reach home , Julian be in the uneasy condition always bring about by these late absence . to a remark he make about the time , she vouchsafe no answer . 

 " have you be with Ida all the evening ? " he ask . 

 " no , I have not , " be her reply . 

 she go into the bed - room , and be absent for a few minute , then reappear . 

 " do you know where my silver spoon be ? " she ask , look closely at he . 

 " your silver spoon ? " he return , in surprise . " have you lose it ? " 

 the article in question , together with a fork , hod be a wedding - present from Mrs. Sprowl , whose character have in it a sort of vulgar generosity , display at time in gift to Harriet . 

 " I can not   find it , " Harriet say . " I be show it to Ida Starr when she be here on Sunday , and now I come to look for it , it be go . " 

 " oh , it can not   be very far off , " say Julian . " you will find it if you look . " 

 " but I tell you I have   look everywhere . it be go , that be all I know . " 

 " well , but what do you mean ? how can it have go ? " 

 " I do not   know . I only know I be show it she on Sunday . " 

 " and what connection be there between the two thing ? " ask Julian , almost sternly . " you do not   wish I to understand that Ida Starr know anything about the spoon ? " 

 " how can I tell ? it be go . " 

 " come , " exclaim Julian , with a laugh , " this be too absurd , Harriet ! you must have take leave of your sens . if it be go , then some one in the house have take it . " 

 " and why not Ida Starr ? " 

 Julian star at she with mingled anger and alarm . 

 " why not ? simply because she be incapable of such a thing . " 

 " perhaps you think so , no doubt . you think a good deal of she , it seem to I . perhaps you do not   know quite as much about she as I do . " 

 " I fancy I know much more , " exclaim Julian indignantly . 

 " oh , do you ? " 

 " if you think she capable of steal your spoon , you show complete ignorance of her character . what do you know of she that you should have such suspicion ? " 

 " never mind , " say Harriet , nod her head obstinately . 

 there be again a long silence . Julian reflect . 

 " we will talk about this again to - morrow , " he say , " when you have have time to think . you be under some strange delusion . after all , I expect you will find the spoon , and then you will be sorry for have be so hasty . " 

 Harriet become obstinately silent . she cut a piece of bread and butter , and take it into the other room . Julian pace up and down . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 the OPPORTUNITY 

 one or two day after this , Ida Starr come home from work with a heavy heart . quite without notice , and without explanation , her employer have pay she a week 's wage and dismiss she . her first astonished question have be meet with silence by the honest but hard - grain woman who keep the laundry , Ida have not condescend to any further appeal . the fact be that the laundress have receive a visit from a certain Mrs. Sprowl , who , under pretence of make inquiry for the protection of a young female friend , reveal the damaging point of Ida 's story , and gain the end plot with Harriet Casti . 

 several circumstance unite to make this event disastrous to Ida . her wage be very little more than she need for her week to week existence , yet she have manage to save a shilling or two now and then . the great part of these small saving she have just lay out in some new clothing , the reason for the expense be not so much necessity , as a desire to be rather well dress when she accompany Waymark on those little country excursion which have reestablish themselves of late . by no means the small part of Ida 's heroism be that involve in this matter of external appearance . a beautiful woman can never be indifferent to the way in which her beauty be array . that Waymark be not indifferent to such thing she know well , and often she suffer from the thought that one strong mean of attraction be lose to she . if at one moment Ida be conscious of her claim to inspire a noble enthusiasm , at another she fall into the sad self - distrust , and , in her hunger for love , would gladly have seek every humble aid of grace and adornment . so she have yield to the need of her heart , and only this morning be gladden by the charm of some new clothing which become she well , and which Waymark would see in a day or two . it lie there before she now that she return home , and , in the first onset of trouble , she sit down and cry over it . 

 she suffer the more , too , that there have be something of a fall off of late in the good health she generally enjoy . the day 's work seem long and hard ; she feel an unwonted need of rest . and these thing cause trouble of the mind . with scarcely an hour of depression she have work on through those month of solitude , support by the sense that every day bring an accession of the strength of purity , that the dark time be leave one more stage behind , and that trust in herself be grow assure . 

 but it be hard than she have foresee , to maintain reserve and reticence when her heart be throb with passion ; the effect upon she of Waymark 's comparative coldness be so much hard to bear than she have imagine . her mind torture itself incessantly with the fear that some new love have take possession of he . and now there have befall she this new misfortune , which , it might be , would once more bring about a crisis in her life . 

 of course she must forthwith set about find new work . it would be difficult , see that she have now no reference to give . reflection have convince she that it must have be some discovery of her former life which have lead to her sudden dismissal , and this increase her despondency . yet she would not give way to it . on the follow morning she begin her search for employment , and day after day face without result the hateful ordeal . Hope fail as she see her painfully - eke - out coin become few and few . in a day or two she would have nothing , and what would happen then ? 

 when she return to London to begin a new life , now nearly a year ago , she have sell some and pawn the rest of such possession as would in future be useful to she . part of the money thus obtain have buy the furniture of her room ; what remain have go for a few month to supplement her weekly wage , thus make the winter less a time of hardship than it must otherwise have be . one or two article yet remain capable of be turn into small sum , and these she now dispose of at a neighbouring pawnbroker 's the same she have previously visit on the occasion of pawn one or two of the thing , the ticket for which Harriet Casti have so carefully inspect . she speak to no one of her position . yet now the time be quickly come when she must either have help from some quarter or else give up her lodging . in food she be already stint herself to the verge of starvation . and through all this she have to meet her friend as hitherto , if possible without allow any trace of her suffer to become visible . Harriet , strange to say , have be of late a rather frequent visitor , and be more pressing than formerly in her invitation . Ida dread her come , as it involve the unwarrantable expense of obtain luxury now unknown in her cupboard , such as tea and butter . and , on the other hand , it be almost impossible to affect cheerfulness in the company of the Castis . at time she catch Julian 's eye fix upon she , and feel that he notice some change in her appearance . she have a sense of guilt in their presence , as if she be there on false pretence . for , together with her daily work , much of her confidence have go ; an inexplicable shame constantly trouble she . she long to hide herself away , and be alone with her wretchedness . 

 if it come to ask for help , of whom could she ask it but of Waymark ? yet for some time she feel she could not bring herself to that . in the consciousness of her own attitude towards he , it seem to she that Waymark might well doubt the genuineness of her need , might think it a mere feint to draw he into nearer relation . she could not doubt that he know her love for he ; she do not desire to hide it , even have she be able . but he she could not understand . a struggle often seem go on within he in her presence ; he appear to repress his impulse ; he be afraid of she . at time passion urge she to break through this barrier between they , to bring about a situation which would end in clear mutual understanding , cost she what it might . at other time she be drive to despair by the thought that she have make herself too cheap in his eye . could she put off the last vestige of her independence , and , in so many word , ask he to give her money ? 

 this evening she expect Waymark , but the usual time of his come go by . she sit in the twilight , listen with painful intentness to every step on the stair ; again and again her heart leap at some footfall far below , only to be deceive . she have not even now make up her mind how to speak to he , or whether to speak to he at all ; but she long passionately to see he . the alternation of hope and disappointment make she feverish . illusion begin to possess she . once she hear distinctly the familiar knock . it seem to rouse she from slumber : she spring to the door and open it , but no one be there . she run half way down the stair , but see no one . it be now nearly midnight . the movement have dispel for a little the lethargy which be grow upon she , and she suddenly come to a resolution . take a sheet of note - paper , she write this : 


 " I have be without work for a fortnight . all my money be do , and I be in want . can you send I some , for present help , till I get more work ? do not bring it yourself , and do not speak a word of this when you see I , I beg you earnestly . if I shall fail to get work , I will speak to you of my own accord . 

 I. S. " 


 she go out and post this , though she have no stamp to put on the envelope ; then , return , she throw herself as she be on to the bed , and before long pass into unconsciousness . 

 Waymark 's absence that evening have be voluntary . his work have come to a standstill ; his wake hour be pass in a restless misery which threaten to make he ill . and to - night he have not dare to go to Ida ; in his present state the visit could have but one result , and even yet he hop that such a result might not come about . he leave home and wander about the street till early morning . all manner of project occupy he . he all but make up his mind to write a long letter to Ida and explain his position without reserve . but he fear lest the result of that might be to make Ida hide away from he once more , and to this loss he could not reconcile himself . yet he be further than ever from the thought of give himself wholly to she , for the intenser his feeling grow , the more clearly he recognise its character . this be not love he suffer from , but mere desire . to let it have its way would be to degrade Ida . love might or might not follow , and how could he place she at the mercy of such a chance as that ? her faith and trust in he be absolute ; could he take advantage of it for his own end ? and , for all these fine argument , Waymark see with perfect clearness how the matter would end . self would triumph , and Ida , if the fate so willed it , would be sacrifice . it be detestable , but a fact ; as good already as an accomplished fact . 

 and on the follow morning Ida 's note reach he . it be final . her entreaty that he would merely send money have no weight with he for a moment ; he feel that there be a contradiction between her word and her wish . this note explain the strangeness he have notice in she on their last evening together . he pity she , and , as be so often the case , pity be but fuel to passion . he sweep from his mind all obstinate debating . passion should be a law unto itself . let the future bring thing about as it would . 

 he have rise late , and by the time he have finish a hasty breakfast it be eleven o'clock . half an hour after he go up the stair of the lodging - house and knock at the familiar door . 

 but his knock meet with no answer . Ida herself have leave home an hour before . upon wake , and recall what she have do , she foresee that Waymark would himself come , in spite of her request . she could not face he . for all that her exhaustion be so great that walking be slow and weary , she go out and stray at first with no aim ; but presently she take the direction of Chelsea , and so come to Beaufort Street . she would go in and see Harriet , who would give she something to eat . she care little now for let it be know that she have leave her employment ; with the step which she have at last take , her position be quite change ; she have only keep silence lest Waymark should come to know . Harriet be at first surprised to see she then seem glad . 

 " I have   only a minute ago send a note , ask you to be sure to come round to - night . I want you to help I with this new hat ; you have such good taste in trim . " 

 Ida would have be astonish at another time ; for Harriet to be pay compliment be indeed something novel . there be a flush on the latter 's usually sallow face ; she do not sit down , and keep move aimlessly about . 

 " give I your hat and jacket , " she say , " and let I take they into the other room . " 

 she take they away , and return . Ida be not look at she ; otherwise she must surely have notice that weird pallor which have all at once succeed to the unhealthy flush , and the unwonted gleaming of her eye . of what pass during those next two hour Ida have afterwards no recollection . they eat together , and they talk , Ida as if in a dream , Harriet preoccupy in a way quite out of her habit . Ida explain that she be out of employment , news which could scarcely be news to the listener , who would in that case have hear it with far less composure . there be long silence , generally bring to an end by some outburst of force merriment from Harriet . Ida be without consciousness of time , but her restless imagination at length compel she to go forth again . Harriet do not urge she to stay , but rise and watch she as she go into the other room to put her thing on . in a few moment they have part . 

 the instant harriet , from the head of the stair , hear the front - door close , she run back into her bed - room , put on her hat , and dart down . open the door , she see Ida move away at a short distance . turn her eye in the opposite direction , she perceive a policeman come slowly down the street . she run towards he . 

 " I have   catch she at last , " she exclaim , as she meet he , point eagerly after Ida . " she be take a brooch of mine . I put it in a particular place in my bed - room , and it be go . " 

 " be she alone in the room ? " inquire the constable , look keenly at Harriet , then down the street . 

 " yes , she go in alone to put her thing on . be quick , or she will be off ! " 

 " I understand you give she in charge ? " 

 " of course I do . " 

 a brisk walk of two or three minute , and they have catch up Ida , who turn at the sound of the quick footstep , and stand in surprise . 

 " this lady charge you with steal some article of her , " say the constable , look from face to face . " you must come with I to the station . " 

 Ida blanch . when the policeman have speak , she turn to Harriet , and gaze at she fixedly . she could neither speak nor move . the constable touch her arm impatiently . her eye turn to he , and she begin to walk along by his side . 

 Harriet follow in silence . there be not many people on the way to the police - station in King 's Road , and they reach it speedily . they come before the inspector , and the constable make his report . 

 " have you get this brooch ? " ask the inspector , look at Ida . 

 Ida put her hand into one of her jacket - pocket , then into the other , and from the second bring out the object in question . it be of gold , and have be give by Julian to his wife just after their marriage . as she lay it before she on the desk , she seem about to speak , but her breath fail , and she clutch with her hand at the near support . 

 " look out , " exclaim the inspector . " do not   let she fall . " 

 five or six time , throughout the day and evening , Waymark have knock at Ida 's door . about seven o'clock he have call at the Castis ' , but find neither of they at home . return thence to Fulham , he have walk for hour up and down , in vain expectation of Ida 's come . there be no light at her window . 

 just before midnight he reach home , have on his way post a letter with money in it . as he reach his door , Julian stand there , about to knock . 

 " anything amiss ? " Waymark ask , examine his friend by the light of the street - lamp . 

 Julian only make a sign to he to open the door . they go upstairs together , and Waymark speedily obtain a light . Julian have seat himself on the couch . his face be ghastly . 

 " what be the matter ? " Waymark ask anxiously . " do you know anything about Ida ? " 

 " she be lock up in the police cell , " be the reply . " my wife have accuse she of steal thing from our room . " 

 Waymark star at he . 

 " Cacti , what be the matter with you ? " he exclaim , overcome with fear , in spite of his strong self - command . " be you ill ? do you know what you be say ? " 

 Julian rise and make an effort to control himself . 

 " I know what I be say , Waymark I have   only just hear it . she have come back home from somewhere only just now she seem to have be drink . it happen in the middle of the day , whilst I be at the hospital . she give she in charge to a policeman in the street , and a brooch be find on she . " 

 " a brooch find on she ? your wife 's ? " 

 " yes . when she come in , she rail at I like a fury , and charge I with the most monstrous thing . I can not   and will not   go back there to - night ! I shall go mad if I hear her voice . I will walk about the street till morning . " 

 " and you tell I that Ida Starr be in custody ? " 

 " she be . my wife accuse she of steal several thing . " 

 " and you believe this ? " ask Waymark , under his voice , whilst his thought picture Ida 's poverty , of which he have know nothing , and lead he through a long train of miserable sequence . 

 " I do not   know . I can not   say . she say that Ida confess , and , give the brooch up at once . but her devilish malice be equal to anything . I see into her character as I never do before . good God , if you could have see her face as she tell I ! and Ida , Ida ! I be afraid of myself , Waymark . if I have stay to listen another moment , I should have strike she . it seem as if every vein be burst . how be I ever to live with she again ? I dare not ! I should kill she in some moment of madness ! what will happen to Ida ? " 

 he fling himself upon the couch , and burst into tear . Sobs convulse he ; he writhe in an anguish of conflict passion . Waymark seem scarcely to observe he , standing absorb in speculation and the devising of a course to be pursue . 

 " I must go to the police - station , " he say at length , when the violence of the paroxysm have pass and leave Julian in the still exhaustion of despair . " you , I think , have well stay here . be there any danger of she come to seek you ? " 

 Julian make a motion with his hand , otherwise lie still , his pale face turn upwards . 

 " I shall be back very quickly , " Waymark add , take his hat . then , turn back for a moment , " you must not   give way like this , old fellow ; this be horrible weakness . dare I leave you alone ? " 

 Julian stretch out his hand , and Waymark press it . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 JUSTICE 

 Waymark receive from the police a confirmation of all that Julian have say , and return home . Julian still lie on the couch , calmer , but like one in despair . he beg Waymark to let he remain where he be through the night , declare that in any case sleep be impossible for he , and that perhaps he might try to pass the hour in reading . they talk together for a time ; then Waymark lie down on the bed and shortly sleep . 

 he be to be at the police court in the morning . Julian would go to the hospital as usual . 

 " shall you call at home on your way ? " Waymark ask he . 

 " no . " 

 " but what do you mean to do ? " 

 " I must think during the day . I shall come to - night , and you will tell I what have happen . " 

 so they part , and Waymark somehow or other while away the time till it be the hour for go to the court . he find it difficult to realise the situation ; so startling and bring about so suddenly . Julian have be the first to put into word the suspicion of they both , that it be all a deliberate plot of Harriet 's ; but he have not be able to speak of his own position freely enough to let Waymark understand the train of circumstance which could lead Harriet to such resoluteness of infamy . Waymark doubt . but for the unfortunate fact of Ida 's secret necessity , he could perhaps scarcely have entertain the thought of her guilt . what be the explanation of she be without employment ? why have she hesitate to tell he , as soon as she lose her work ? be there not some mystery at the bottom of this , argue a lack of complete frankness on Ida 's part from the first ? 

 the actual pain cause by Ida 's danger be , strange to say , a far less important item in his state of mind than the interest which the situation inspire . through the night he have think more of Julian than of Ida . what he have for some time suspect have now find confirmation ; Julian be in love with Ida , in love for the first time , and under circumstance which , as Julian himself have say , might well suffice to change his whole nature . Waymark have never behold such terrible suffering as that depict on his friend 's face during those hour of talk in the night . something of jealousy have be arouse in he by the spectacle ; not jealousy of the ordinary gross kind , but rather a sense of humiliation in the thought that he himself have never experience , be perhaps incapable of , such passion as rack Julian in every nerve . this be the passion which Ida be worthy of inspire , and Waymark contrast it with his own feeling on the previous day , and now since the calamity have fall . he have to confess that there be even an element of relief in the sensation the event have cause in he . he have be save from himself ; a position of affair which have become intolerable be get rid of without his own exertion . whatever might now happen , the old state of thing would never be restore . there be relief and pleasure in the thought of such a change , be it only for the sake of the opening up of new vista of observation and experience . such thought as these indicate very strongly the course which Waymark 's development be take , and he profit by they to obtain a clear understanding of himself . 

 the proceeding in the court that morning be brief . Waymark , from his seat on the public bench , see Ida bring forward , and hear she remand for a week . she do not see he ; seem , indeed , to see nothing . the aspect of her stand there in the dock , her head bow under intolerable shame , make a tumult within he . blind anger and scorn against all who surround she be his first emotion ; there be something of martyrdom in her position ; she , essentially so good and noble , to be drag here before these narrow - natured slave of an ignoble social order , in all probability to be condemn to miserable torment by man who have no shadow of understanding of her character and her circumstance . 

 Waymark be able , whilst in court , to make up his mind as to how he should act . when he leave he take his way northwards , have in view St. John Street Road , and Mr. Woodstock 's house . 

 when he have wait about half an hour , the old man appear . he give his hand in silence . something seem to be preoccupy he ; he go to his chair in a mechanical way . 

 " I have come on rather serious business , " Waymark begin . " I want to ask your advice in a very disagreeable matter a criminal case , in fact . " 

 Abraham do not at once pay attention , but the last word presently have their effect , and he look up with some surprise . 

 " what have you be up to ? " he ask , with rather a grim smile , lean back and thrust his hand in his pocket in the usual way . 

 " it only concern myself indirectly . it be all about a girl , who be charge with a theft she be perhaps quite innocent of . if so , she be be make the victim of a conspiracy , or something of the kind . she be remand to - day at Westminster for a week . " 

 " a girl , eh ? and what be your interest in the business ? " 

 " well , if you do not   mind I shall have to go a little into detail . you be at liberty ? " 

 " go on . " 

 " she be a friend of mine . no , I mean what I say ; there be absolutely nothing else between we , and never have be . I should like to know whether you be satisfied to believe that ; much depend on it . " 

 " age and appearance ? " 

 " about twenty not quite so much and strikingly handsome . " 

 " H'm . position in life ? " 

 " a year ago be on the street , to put it plainly ; since then have be get she live at laundry - work . " 

 " H'm . name ? " 

 " Ida Starr . " 

 Mr. Woodstock have be gaze at the toe of his boot , still the same smile on his face . when he hear the name he cease to smile , but do not move at all . nor do he look up as he ask the next question . 

 " be that her real name ? " 

 " I believe so . " 

 the old man draw up his foot , throw one leg over the other , and begin to tap upon his knee with the finger of one hand . he be silent for a minute at least . 

 " what do you know about she ? " he then inquire , look steadily at Waymark , with a gravity which surprise the latter . " I mean , of her early life . do you know who she be at all ? " 

 " she have tell I her whole story a rather uncommon one , full of good situation . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 the word be utter with such harsh impatience that Waymark start . 

 " what annoy you ? " he ask , with surprise . 

 " tell I something of the story , " say the other , regain his composure , and apparently wish to affect indifference . " I have a twinge of that damned rheumatism every now and then , and it make I rather crusty . do you think her story be to be depend upon ? " 

 " yes , I believe it be . " 

 and Waymark link briefly the chief point of Ida 's history , as he know it , the old man continually interrupt he with question . 

 " now go on , " say Abraham , when he have hear all that Waymark know , " and explain the scrape she be get into . " 

 Waymark do so . 

 " and you mean to tell I , " Abraham say , before the story be quite finish , " that there be be nothing more between you than that ? " 

 " absolutely nothing . " 

 " I do not   believe you . " 

 it be say angrily , and with a blow of the clench fist on the table . the old man could no long conceal the emotion that possess he . Waymark look at he in astonishment , unable to comprehend his behaviour . 

 " well if you do not   believe I , of course I can offer no proof ; and I know well enough that every presumption be against I . still , I tell you the plain fact ; and what reason have I for hide the truth ? if I have be live with the girl , I should have say so , as an extra reason for ask your help in the matter . " 

 " what help can I give ? " ask Woodstock , again cool down , though his eye have in they a most unwonted light . he speak as if simply ask for information . 

 " I think you might suggest something as to mode of defence , and the like . the expense I would somehow or other meet myself . it appear that she will plead not guilty . " 

 " and what be your belief ? " 

 " I can not   make up my mind . " 

 " in that case , it seem to I , you ought to give she the benefit of the doubt ; especially as you seem to have make up your mind pretty clearly about this Mrs. What's - her - name . " 

 Waymark be silent , look at Mr. Woodstock , and reflect . 

 " what be your intention with regard to the girl ? " Abraham ask , with a change in his voice , the usual friendliness come back . he look at the young man in a curious way ; one would almost have say , with apprehensive expectation . 

 " I have no intention . " 

 " you would have have , but for this affair ? " 

 " no ; you be mistaken . I know the position be difficult to realise . " 

 " have you intention , then , in any other quarter ? " 

 " well , perhaps yes . " 

 " I have   never hear anything of this . " 

 " I could scarcely talk of a matter so uncertain . " 

 there be silence . a sort of agitation come upon the old man ever and again , in talk . he now grow absorb in thought , and remain thus for several minute , Waymark look at he the while . when at length Abraham raise his eye , and they meet Waymark 's , he turn they away at once , and rise from the chair . 

 " I will look into the business , " he say , take out a bunch of key , and put one into the lock of a drawer in his desk . " yes , I will go and make inquiry . " he half pull out the drawer and rustle among some paper . 

 " look here , " he say , on the point of take something out ; but , even in speak , he alter his mind . " no ; it do not   matter . I will go and make inquiry . you can go now , if you like ; I mean to say , I suppose you have   tell I all that be necessary . yes , you would well go , and look in again tomorrow morning . " 

 Waymark go straight to Fulham . reach the block of tenement which have be Ida 's home , he seek out the porter . when the door open at his knock , the first face that greet he be that of Grim , who have push between the man 's leg and be peer up , as if in search of some familiar aspect . 

 from the porter he learn that the police have make that afternoon an inspection of Ida 's room , though with what result be not know . the couple have clearly form their own opinion as to Waymark 's interest in the accuse girl , but take the position in a very matter - of - fact way , and be eager to hear more than they succeed in get out of the police . 

 " my main object in come , " Waymark explain , " be to look after her cat . I see you have be good enough to anticipate I . " 

 " the poor thing take on sadly , " say the woman . " of course I should not   have know nothing if the hofficer have not   come , and it ' ud just have starve to death . it seem to know you , sir ? " 

 " yes , yes , I dare say . do you think you could make it convenient to keep the cat for the present , if I pay you for its food ? " 

 " well , I do not   see why not , sir ; we be not   get none of our own . " 

 " and you would promise I to be kind to it ? I do not   mind the expense ; keep it well , and let I know what you spend . and of course I should consider your trouble . " 

 so that matter be satisfactorily arrange , and Waymark go home . 

 Julian spend his day at the hospital as usual , find relief in fix his attention upon outward thing . it be only when he leave his work in the evening that he become aware how exhausted he be in mind and body . and the dread which he have hitherto keep off come back upon he , the dread of see his wife 's face and hear her voice . when he part with Waymark in the morning , he have think that he would be able to come to some resolution during the day as to his behaviour with regard to she . but no such decision have be form , and his overtaxed mind could do no more than dwell with dull persistency on a long prospect of wretchedness . fear and hatred move he in turn , and the fear be as much of himself as of the object of his hate . 

 as he approach the door , a man come out whom he do not know , but whose business he suspect . he have little doubt that it be a police officer in plain clothe . he have to stand a moment and rest , before he could use his latchkey to admit himself . when he enter the sitting - room , he find the table spread as usual . Harriet be sit with sewing upon her lap . she do not look at he . 

 he sit down , and close his eye . there seem to be a ringing of great bell about he , overpower every other sound ; all his muscle have become relaxed and powerless ; he half forget where and under what circumstance he be , in a kind of deadly drowsiness . presently this pass , and he grow aware that Harriet be prepare tea . when it be ready , he go to the table , and drink two or three cup , for he be parch with thirst . he could not look at Harriet , but he understand the mood she be in , and know she would not be the first to speak . he rise , walk about for a few minute , then stand still before she . 

 " what proof have you to offer , " he say , speak in a slow but indistinct tone , " that she be guilty of this , and that it be not   a plot you have lay against she ? " 

 " you can believe what you like , " she reply sullenly . " of course I know you will do your bad against I . " 

 " I wish you to answer my question . if I choose to suspect that you yourself put this brooch in her pocket and if other people choose to suspect the same , know your enmity against she , what proof can you give that she be guilty ? " 

 " it be not   the first thing she be steal . " 

 " what proof have you that she take those other thing ? " 

 " quite enough , I think . at all event , they have   find a pawn - ticket for the spoon at her lodging , among a whole lot of other ticket for thing she can not   have come by honestly . " 

 Julian become silent , and , as Harriet look up at he with eye full of triumphant spite , he turn pale . he could have crush the hateful face beneath his foot . 

 " you be a good husband , you be , " Harriet go on , with a sudden change to anger ; " take part against your own wife , and try to make she out all that be bad . but I think you have   have thing your own way long enough . you think I be a fool , do you , and could not   see what be go on ? you and your Ida Starr , indeed ! oh , she would be such a good friend to I , would not   she ? she would do I so much good ; you think so highly of she ; she be just the very girl to be my companion ; how lucky we find she ! I be much oblige to you , but I think I might have well friend than thief and street - walker . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Julian , start at the last word , and turn a ghastly countenance on she . 

 " I mean what I say . as if you do not   know , indeed ! " 

 " explain what you mean , " Julian repeat , almost with violence . " who have say anything of that kind against she ? " 

 " who have ? why I can bring half a dozen people who know she when she be on the street , before Waymark keep she . and you know it , well enough no fear ! " 

 " it be a lie , a cursed lie ! no one can say a word against her purity . only a foul mind could imagine such thing . " 

 " Purity ! oh yes , she be very pure you know that , do not   you ? no doubt you will be a witness , and give evidence for she , and against I ; let everybody know how perfect she be , and what a beast and a liar I be ! you and your Ida Starr ! " 

 Julian rush out of the room . 

 Waymark could not but observe peculiarity in Mr. Woodstock 's behaviour during the conversation about Ida . at first it have occur to he know a good deal of Abraham 's mode of life that there must be some disagreeable secret at the bottom , and for a moment the ever - recur distrust of Ida rise again . but he have soon observe that the listener be especially interested in the girl 's early year , and this point to possibility of a different kind . what be it that be be take from the drawer to show he , when the old man suddenly alter his mind ? Mr. Woodstock have perhaps know Ida 's parent . Waymark wait with some curiosity for the interview on the morrow . 

 accordingly , he be surprised when , on present himself , Mr. Woodstock do not at first appear to remember what he have call about . 

 " oh , ay , the girl ! " Abraham exclaim , on be remind . " what do you say her name be ? Ida something " 

 Waymark be puzzled and suspicious , and show both feeling in his look , but Mr. Woodstock preserve a stolid indifference which it be very difficult to believe feign . 

 " I have   be busy , " say the latter . " never mind ; there be time . she be remand for a week , you say ? I will go and see Helter about she . may as well come along with I , and put the case in ' artistic ' form . " 

 it be a word frequently on Waymark 's lip , and he recognise the unwonted touch of satire with a smile , but be yet more puzzled . they set out together to the office of the solicitor who do Abraham 's legal business , and hold with he a long colloquy . Waymark state all he know or could surmise with perfect frankness . he have hear from Julian the night before of the discovery which it be say the police have make at Ida 's lodging , and this have strengthen his fear that Harriet 's accusation be genuine . 

 " how do this girl lose her place at the laundry ? " ask Mr. Helter . 

 Waymark could not say ; for all he know it be through her own fault . 

 " and that be all you can tell we , Waymark ? " observe Mr. Woodstock , who have listen with a show of indifference . " well , I have no more time at present . look the thing up , Helter . " 

 on reach home , Waymark write a few line to Ida , merely to say that Grim be provide for , and assure she that she be not forget . in a day or two he receive a reply . the official envelope almost startle he at first . inside be write this : 


 " you have be kind . I thank you for everything . try to think kindly of I , whatever happen ; I shall be conscious of it , and it will give I strength . 

 I. S. " 


 the week go by , and Ida again appear in court . Mr. Woodstock go with Waymark , out of curiosity , he say . the statement of the case against the prisoner sound very grave . what Harriet have say about the discovery of the pawn - ticket for her silver spoon be true . Ida 's face be calm , but paler yet and thin . when she catch sight of Harriet Casti , she turn her eye away quickly , and with a look of trouble . she desire to ask no question , simply give her low and distinct " not guilty . " she be commit for trial . 

 Waymark watch Mr. Woodstock , who be examine Ida all the time ; he feel sure that he hear something like a catching of the breath when the girl 's face first become visible . 

 " and what be your opinion ? " ask Waymark . 

 " I could not   see the girl very well , " say the old man coldly . 

 " she have not   quite a fortnight to wait . " 

 " no . " 

 " you be sure Helter will do all that can be do ? " 

 " yes . " 

 Mr. Woodstock nod his head , and walk off by himself . 

 Julian Casti be ill . with difficulty he have drag himself to the court , and his suffering as he sit there be horribly evident on his white face . Waymark meet he just as Mr. Woodstock walk off ; and the two go home together by omnibus , not speak on the way . 

 " she will be convict , " be Julian 's first utterance , when he have sit for a few minute in Waymark 's room , whilst Waymark himself pace up and down . the latter turn , and see that tear be on his friend 's hollow cheek . 

 " do you sleep well last night ? " he ask . 

 " Good God , no ! I never close my eye . that be the third night without rest . Waymark , get I an opiate of some kind , or I shall kill myself ; and let I sleep here . " 

 " what will your wife say ? " 

 " what do I care what she say ! " cry Julian , with sudden excitement , his muscle quiver , and his cheek flame all at once . " do not   use that word ' wife , ' it be profanation ; I can not   bear it ! if I see she to - night , I can not   answer for what I may do . curse she to all eternity ! " 

 he sink beck in exhaustion . 

 " Julian , " say Waymark , use his friend 's first name by exception , " if this go on , you will be ill . what the deuce shall we do then ? " 

 " no , I shall not be ill . it will be all right if I can get sleep . " 

 he be silent for a little , then speak , with his eye on the ground . 

 " Waymark , be this true they say about she about the former time ? " 

 " yes ; it be true . " 

 Waymark in turn be silent . 

 " I suppose , " he continue presently , " I owe you an apology . " 

 " none . it be right of you to act as you do . " 

 he be go to say something else , but check himself . Waymark notice this , watch his face for a moment , and speak with some earnestness . 

 " but it be in that only I mislead you . do you believe I when I repeat that she and I be never anything but friend ! " 

 Julian look up with a gleam of gratitude in his eye . 

 " yes , I believe you ! " 

 " and be sure of this , " Waymark go on , " whether or not this accusation be true , it do not in the least affect the nobility of her character . you and I be sufficiently honest , in the true sense of the word , to understand this . " 

 Waymark only see Mr. Woodstock once or twice in the next fortnight , and very slight mention be make between they of the come trial . he himself be not to be involve in the case in any way ; as a witness on Ida 's side he could do no good , and probably would prejudice she yet more in the eye of the jury . it trouble he a little to find with what complete calmness he could await the result ; often he say to himself that he must be sadly lack in human sympathy . Julian Casti , on the other hand , have pass into a state of miserable deadness ; Waymark in vain try to excite hope in he . he come to his friend 's every evening , and sit there for hour in dark reverie . 

 " what will become of she ! " Julian ask once . " in either case what will become of she ! " 

 " Woodstock shall help we in that , " Waymark reply . " she must get a place of some kind . " 

 " how dreadfully she be suffer , and how dark life will be before she ! " 

 and so the day of the trial come . the pawnbroker 's evidence be damaging . the silver spoon have be pledge , he assert , at the same time with another article for which Ida possess the duplicate . the inscription on the duplicate support he in this , and he profess to have not the least doubt as to the prisoner 's identity . press in cross - examination , he certainly throw some suspicion on the trustworthiness of his assertion . " you positively swear that these two article be pledge by the prisoner , and at the same time ! " ask the cross - examiner . " well , " be the impatient reply , " there be the same date and name , and both in my writing . " but even thus much of doubt he speedily retract , and his evidence could not be practically undermined . 

 Harriet 's examination be long and search , but she bear it without the slight damage to her credit . plain , straightforward , and stubborn be all her reply and assertion ; she do not contradict herself once . Waymark marvel at her appearance and manner . the venom of malice have act upon she as a tonic , strengthen her intellect , and brace her nerve . once she look directly into Ida 's face and smile . 

 Mrs. Sprowl have be summon , and appear in all the magnificence of accumulate ring , bracelet , necklace , and watch - chain . Helter hop to make good use of she . 

 " do you on a certain occasion go to the person in whose employ the prisoner be , and , by mean of certain representation with regard to the prisoner 's antecedent , become the cause of her dismissal ? " 

 " I do . I tell all I know about she , and I consider I have a right to do so . " 

 Mrs. Sprowl be not to be rob of her self - assurance by any array of judicial dignity . 

 " what lead you to do this ? " 

 " a good enough one , I think . she would be impose on Mr. Casti and his wife as a respectable character , and she be cause trouble between they . she have to be get rid of somehow , and this be one step to it . " 

 " be Mrs. Casti aware of your intention to take this step ? " 

 " no , she be not . " 

 " but you tell she when you have do it ? " 

 " yes , I do . " 

 the frankness of all this have its effect , of course . the case be attract much interest in court , and the public seat be quite full . Mrs. Sprowl look round in evident enjoyment of her position . there be a slight pause , and then the examination continue . 

 " of what nature be the trouble you speak of , cause by the prisoner between this lady and her husband ? " 

 " Mr. Casti begin to pay a good deal too much attention to she . " 

 there be a sound of whisper and a murmuring . 

 " do Mrs. Casti impart to you her suspicion of the prisoner as soon as she miss the first of these article allege to be steal ? " 

 " yes , she do . " 

 " and do you give any advice as to how she should proceed ? " 

 " I tell she to be on the look - out . " 

 " no doubt you lay stress on the advantage , from a domestic point of view , of secure this prisoner 's detection ? " 

 " certainly I do , and I hop and pray as she might catch ! " 

 Mrs. Sprowl be very shortly allow to retire . for the defence there be but one witness , and that be the laundress who have employ Ida . personal fault with Ida she have one at all to find ; the sole cause of her dismissal be the information give by Mrs. Sprowl . perhaps she have act hastily and unkindly , but she have young girl work in the laundry , and it behove she to be careful of they . 

 Julian 's part in the trial have be limit to an examination as to his knowledge of Ida 's allege theft . he declare that he know nothing save from his wife 's statement to he . he have observe nothing in the least suspicious . 

 a verdict be return of " guilty . " 

 have the prisoner anything to say ? nothing whatever . there be a pause , a long pause than seem necessary . then , without remark , she be sentence to be imprison for six month with hard labour . 

 Waymark have be draw to the court in spite of himself . strangely quiet hitherto , a fear fall upon he the night be fore the trial . from an early hour in the morning he walk about the street , circle ever near to the hateful place . all at once he find himself face Mr. Woodstock . the old man 's face be darkly anxious , and he could not change its expression quickly enough . 

 " be you go in ? " he say sharply . 

 " be you ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " then I shall not , " say Waymark . " I will go to your place , and wait there . " 

 but when Abraham , whose eye have not move from the prisoner throughout the proceeding , rise at length to leave , a step or two bring he to a man who be lean against the wall , powerless from conflicting excitement , and deadly pale . it be Waymark . Mr. Woodstock take he by the arm and lead he out . 

 " why could not   you keep away ? " the old man exclaim hoarsely , and with more of age in his voice than any one have ever yet hear in it . 

 Waymark shake himself free , and laugh as one laugh under torment . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 ART and MISERY 

 one Monday afternoon at the end of October three month have go by since the trial Waymark carry his rent to St. John Street Road as usual . 

 " I be go to Tottenham , " say Mr. Woodstock . " you may as well come with I . " 

 " by the by , I finish my novel the other day , " Waymark say , as they drive northward . 

 " that be right . no doubt you be on your way to glory , as the hymn say . " 

 Abraham be in good spirit . one would have say that he have grow young of late . that heaviness and tendency to absent brooding which not long ago seem to indicate the tightening grip of age , be disappear ; he be once more active and loud and full of his old interest . 

 " how be Casti ? " Mr. Woodstock go on to ask . 

 " a good deal well , I think , but shaky . of course thing will be as bad as ever when his wife come out of the hospital . " 

 " pity she can not   come out heel first , " mutter Abraham . 

 Waymark find that the purpose of their journey be to inspect a large vacant house , with a good garden and some fine tree about it . the old man wish for his opinion , and , by degree , let it be know that he think of buy the property . 

 " I suppose you think I an old fool to want a house like this at my time of life , eh ? " 

 there be a twinkle in his eye , and a moment after he fairly burst into a laugh of pleasure . Waymark ask no question , and receive no more information ; but a thought rise in his mind which occupy he for the rest of the day . 

 in the evening Julian come . he look like one who have recover from a long illness , very pale and thin , and his voice have trembling and uncertainty of key . in fact , a feverish disorder have be upon he for some week , never severe enough to prevent his get about , but weaken he to a serious degree . it would doubtless have develop into some more pronounced illness , but for the period of comparative rest and quietness which have begin shortly after the misery of the trial . Harriet 's ailment have all at once take such a decided turn for the bad her fit become incessant , and other disorder traceable to the same source suddenly take hold upon she that Julian have obtain her admission to the hospital , where she still remain . he go to see she in the ward two or three time a week , though he dread the necessity . from little incident which occur at such time , he be convince that all her fellow - patient , as well as the ' sister " and nurse of the ward , have be prejudice against he by her report and accusation . to meet their look occasion he the most acute suffering . sometimes he sit by the bedside for half an hour without speak , then rise and hasten away to hide himself and be alone with his misery . 

 he be earnest and eager to - night in his praise of Waymark 's book , which he have just read in manuscript . 

 " it be horrible , " he exclaim ; " often hideous and revolt to I ; but I feel its absolute truth . such a book will do more good than half a dozen religious society . " 

 " if only people can be get to read it . yet I care nothing for that aspect of the thing . be it artistically strong ? be it good as a picture ? there be a time when I might have write in this way with a declare social object . that be all go by . I have no long a spark of social enthusiasm . art be all I now care for , and as art I wish my work to be judge . " 

 " one would have think , " say Julian , " that increase knowledge of these fearful thing would have have just the opposite effect . " 

 " yes , " exclaim the other , with the smile which always preface some piece of self - dissection , " and so it would in the case of a man bear to be a radical . I often amuse myself with take to piece my former self . I be not a conscious hypocrite in those day of violent radicalism , working - man's - club lecturing , and the like ; the fault be that I understand myself as yet so imperfectly . that zeal on behalf of the suffering mass be nothing more nor less than disguised zeal on behalf of my own starve passion . I be poor and desperate , life have no pleasure , the future seem hopeless , yet I be overflow with vehement desire , every nerve in I be a hunger which cry to be appease . I identify myself with the poor and ignorant ; I do not make their cause my own , but my own cause theirs . I rave for freedom because I be myself in the bondage of unsatisfiable longing . " 

 " well , " he go on , after regard his listener with still the same smile , " I have come out of all that , in proportion as my artistic self - consciousness have develop . for one thing , I be not so miserable as I be then , personally ; then again , I have find my vocation . you know pretty well the phase I have pass through . upon rant radicalism follow a period of philosophical study . my philosophy , I have come to see , be worth nothing ; what philosophy be worth anything ? it have its use for myself , however ; it make I by degree self - conscious , and bring I to see that in art alone I could find full satisfaction . " 

 " yet , " urge Julian , " the old direction still show itself in your choice of subject . grant that this be pure art , it be a kind of art only possible to an age in which the social question be predominant . " 

 " true , very likely . every strong individuality be more or less the expression of its age . this direction may be impose upon I ; for all that , I understand why I pursue it . " 

 after reflect , Julian speak in another tone . " imagine yourself in my position . could you appreciate the artistic effect of your own circumstance ? " 

 " probably not . and it be because I recognise that , that I grow more and more careful to hold aloof from situation that would threaten my peace of mind . my artistic egotism bid fair to ally itself with vulgar selfishness . that tendency I must resist . for the artist ought to be able to make material of his own suffering , even while the suffering be at its height . to what other end do he suffer ? in very deed , he be the only man whose misery find justification in apparent result . " 

 " I be not an artist , " sigh Julian . 

 " on the contrary , I firmly believe that you be . and it make I angry to see the impulse die in you . " 

 " what be I to do ? " Julian cry , almost with a voice of anguish . " I be so helpless , so hopelessly fetter ! release be impossible . no word could express the desperate struggle I go through when I recognise how my life be be waste and my power , whatever they may be , numb and crush . something I might do , if I be free ; I feel that ! but there be no hope of freedom . I shall fall into dark and dark depth of weakness and ruin , always conscious of what I be lose . what will be the end ? " 

 " what the end will be , under the present circumstance , be only too clear to I . but it might easily be avert ? " 

 " how ? give I some practical advice , Waymark ! let we talk of the matter freely . tell I what you would do ! " 

 Waymark think for a moment . 

 " do there seem any chance of her health be permanently improve ? " he ask . 

 " I can not   say . she say she be well . it be no use my ask the doctor ; they despise I , and would not think of treat I with any consideration . " 

 " why do not   you do this ? " begin Waymark , after another pause . " use all mean to find some convalescent home where she can be receive when she leave the hospital . then , if her fit and the rest of it still continue , find some permanent place for she . you can afford it . never mind if it reduce you for a time to a garret and a crust . " 

 " she would refuse to go to such place , " say Julian despondently . 

 " then refuse to take she back ! sell your furniture ; take one room for yourself ; and tell she she must live where she like on a sufficient allowance from you . " 

 " I dare not . it be impossible . she would never leave I in peace . " 

 " you will have to do this ultimately , if you be to continue to live . of that there be no doubt . so why not now ? " 

 " I must think ; it be impossible to make up my mind to such a thing at once . I know you advise what be good ; I have think of it myself . but I shall never have the courage ! I be so miserably weak . if only I could get my health back ! good God , how I suffer ! " 

 Waymark do his good to familiarise Julian with the thought , and to foster in he something of resoluteness , but he have small hope of succeed . the poor fellow be so incapable of anything which at all resemble selfishness , and so dread the result of any such severity on his part as that propose . there be moment when indignation almost nerve he to independence , but there return so soon the souse of pity , and , oftener still , the thought of that promise make to Harriet 's father , long ago , in the dark little parlour which smell of drug . the poor chemist , whose own life be full of misery , have be everything to he ; but for Mr. Smales , he might now have be an ignorant , coarse - handed work man , if not bad . be Harriet past all rescue ? be there not even yet a chance of save she from herself and those hateful friend of her ? 

 this be the natural reaction after listen to Waymark 's remorseless counsel . go home , Julian fight once more the battle with himself , till the usual troubled sleep sever his thought into fragment of horrible dream . the next day he feel differently ; Waymark 's advice seem more practical . in the afternoon he should have visit Harriet in the ward , but an insuperable repulsion keep he away , and for the first time . it be a bleak , cheerless day ; the air be cold with the breath of the nearing winter ; at night he find it impossible to sit in his own room , and dread to talk with any one . his thought be fix upon one place ; a great longing draw he forth , into the darkness and the rain of the street , onwards in a fix direction . it bring he to Westminster , and to the gate of Tothill Fields Prison . the fetter upon the great door be hideous in the light of the lamp above they ; the mean house around the gaol seem to be rot in its accursed shadow . a deadly stillness possess the air ; there be blight in the dropping of the rain . 

 he lean against the great , gloomy wall , and thought of Ida . at this hour she be most likely asleep , unless sorrow keep she waking . what unimagined horror do she suffer day after day in that accurse prison - house ? how do she bear her torment ? be she well or ill ? what brutality might she not be subject to ? he picture her face waste with secret tear , those eye which be the light of his soul fix on the wall of the cell , hour after hour , in changeless despair , the fire of passionate resentment feeding at her life 's core . 

 the night become calm . the rain cease , and a sudden gleam make he look up , to behold the moon break her way through billow of darkness . 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 stray 

 the Enderbys be at Brighton during the autumn . Mr. Enderby only remain with they two or three day at a time , business require his frequent presence in town . Maud would have be glad to spend her holiday at some far quieter place , but her mother enjoy Brighton , and throw herself into its amusement of the place with spirit which seem to grow young . they occupy handsome room , and altogether live in a more expensive way than when at home . 

 Maud be glad to see her mother happy , but could not be at ease herself in this kind of life . it be soon arrange that she should live in her own way , withhold from the social riot which she dread , and seek rest in out - of - the - way part of the shore , where more of nature be to be find and less of fashion . Maud fear lest her mother should feel this as an unkind desertion , but Mrs. Enderby be far from any such trouble ; it relieve she from the occasional disadvantage of have by her side a grow - up daughter , whose beauty so strongly contrast with her own . so Maud spend her day very frequently in explore the down , or in seek out retire nook beneath the cliff , where there be no sound in her ear but that of the wave . she would sit for hour with no companion save her thought , which be unconsciously lead from phase to phase by the moving light and shadow upon the sea , and the soft beauty of unstable cloud . 

 even before leave London , she have begin to experience a frequent sadness of mood , tend at time to weariness and depression , which foreshadow new change in her inner life . the fresh delight in nature and art have wear off in some degree ; she read less , and her thought take the habit of musing upon the people and circumstance about she , also upon the secret of the year to come . she grow more conscious of the mystery in her own early life , and in the condition which now surround she . a sense which at time beset all imaginative mind come upon she now and then with painful force ; a fantastic unreality would suddenly possess all she see and hear ; it seem as if she have be of a sudden transport out of the old existence into this new and unrealised position ; if any person speak to she , it be difficult to feel that she be really address and must reply ; be it not all a mere vision she be behold , out of which she would presently awake ! such moment be follow by dark melancholy . this life she be lead could not last , but would pass away in some fearful shock of soul . once she half believe herself endow with the curse of a hideous second - sight . sit with her father and mother , silence all at once fall upon the room , and everything be transfigure in a ghostly light . distinctly she see her mother throw her head back and raise to her throat what seem to be a sharp , glisten piece of steel ; then come a cry , and all be darken before her eye in a rush of crimson mist . the cry she have herself utter , much to her parent ' alarm ; what her mother hold be in reality only a paper - knife , with which she have be tap her lip in thought . a slight attack of illness follow on this disturbance , and it be some day before she recover from the shock ; she keep to herself , however , the horrible picture which her imagination have conjure up . 

 she begin to pay more frequent visit to her aunt Theresa , whom at first she have see very seldom . there be not the old confidence between they . Maud shrink from any direct reference to the change in herself , and Miss Bygrave speak no word which could suggest a comparison between past and present . Maud try once more to draw near to the pale , austere woman , whose life ever remain the same . she be not repel , but neither do any movement respond to her yearning . she always come away with a sad heart . 

 one evening in the week she look forward to with eagerness ; it be that on which Waymark be generally expect . in Waymark 's presence she could forget those dark spirit that hover about she ; she could forget herself , and be at rest in the contemplation of strength and confidence . there be a ring in his voice which inspire faith ; whatever might be his own doubt and difficulty and his face testify to his knowledge of both it be so certain that he have power to overcome they . this characteristic grow strong in he to her observation ; he be a far other man now than when she first know he ; the darkness have pass from his eye , which seem always to look straight forward , and with perception of an end he be near . why could she not make opportunity of speak freely with he , alone with he ? they be less near to each other , it seem , after a year of constant meeting , than in the time when , personally all but stranger , they have correspond so frankly and unconventionally . of course he come to the house for her sake ; it could not but be so ; yet at time he seem to pay so little attention to she . her mother often monopolise he through a whole evening , and not apparently to his annoyance . and all the time he have in his heart the message for which she long ; support and comfort be wait for she there , she feel sure , could he but speak unrestrainedly . in herself be no salvation ; but he have already overcome , and why could she not ask he for the secret of his confidence ? often , as the evening draw to an end , and he be prepare to leave , an impatience scarcely to be repress take hold upon she ; her face grow hot , her hand tremble , she would have follow he from the room and beg for one word to herself have it be possible . and when he be go , there come the weak moment her life have yet know ; a childish petulance , a tearful fretting , an irritable misery of which she be ashamed . she go to her room to suffer in silence , and often to read through that packet of his letter , till the night be far spend . 

 it have cost she much to leave London . she fear lest , during her absence , something should occur to break off the wonted course of thing , and that Waymark might not resume his visit on their return . after the feverish interval of those first week , she try sometimes to distract her thought by reading , and get from a library a book which Waymark have recommend to she at their last meeting Rossetti 's poem . these give she much help in restore her mind to quietness . their perfect beauty entrance she , and the rapturous purity of ideal passion , the mystic delicacy of emotion , which make every verse gleam like a star , hold she for the time high above that gloomy cloudland of her being , rife with weird shape and muffled voice . that Beauty be solace of life , and love the end of be , this faith she would cling to in spite of all ; she grasp it with the desperate force of one who dread lest it should fade and fail from she . beauty alone would not suffice ; too often it be perceive as a mere mask , veil horror ; but in the passion and the worship of love be surely a never - fail fountain of growth and power ; this the draught that would leave no bitter aftertaste , its enjoyment the final and all - sufficient answer to the riddle of life . Rossetti put into utterance for she so much that she have not dare to entrust even to the voice of thought . her spirit and flesh become one and indivisible ; the old antagonism seem at an end for ever . 

 such dreaming as these naturally heighten Maud 's dislike for the kind of life her mother lead , and she long unspeakably for the time of her return to London . they have be at Brighton already nearly a month , when a new circumstance be add to her discomfort . as she walk with her mother one day , they meet their acquaintance , Mr. Budge . this gentleman din with they that evening at Mrs. Enderby 's invitation , and persuade the latter to join a party he have make up for an excursion on the following day . Maud excuse herself . she do not like Mr. Budge , and his demeanour during the evening only strengthen her prejudice . he be unduly excited and fervent , and allow himself a certain freedom in his conversation with Mrs. Enderby which Maud resent strongly . 

 when they be once more in London , Maud do not win back the former quiet of mind . Waymark come again as usual , but if anything the distance between he and herself seem more hopeless . he appear preoccupy ; his talk , when he speak with she , be of a more general kind than formerly ; she be conscious that her presence do not affect he as it have do . she sink again into despondency ; book be insipid , and society irritate she . she begin the habit of take long walk , an aimless wandering about the street and park within her reach . one evening , wend wearily homeward , she be attract by the light in a church in Marylebone Road , and , partly for a few minute ' rest , partly out of a sudden attraction to a religious service , she enter . it be the church of our Lady of the Rosary . she have not notice that it be a roman catholic place of worship , but the discovery give she an unexpected pleasure . she be soothe and fill with a sense of repose . sink into the attitude of prayer , she let her thought carry she whither they would ; they show she nothing but image of beauty and peace . it be with reluctance that she arise and go back into the dark street , where the world meet she with a chill blast , sleet - laden . 

 our Lady of the Rosary receive she frequently after this . but there be day when the thought of repose be far from she . at one such time , on an evening in November , a sudden desire possess her mind ; she would go out into the street of the town and see something of that life which she know only in imagination , the traffic of highway and byway after dark , the masque of pleasure and misery of sin of which a young girl can know nothing , save from hint here and there in her reading , or from the occasional whisper and head - shaking of society 's gossip . her freedom be complete ; her absence , if notice , would entail no question ; her mother doubtless would conclude that she be at her aunt Theresa 's . so she clothe herself in walk attire of a kind not likely to attract observation , and set forth . the tumult which have be in her blood all day receive fresh impulse from the excitement of the adventure . she have veil her face , but the veil hinder her observation , and she throw it back . first into Edgware Road , then down Oxford Street . her thought point to an eastern district , though she fear the distance would be too great ; she have frequently talk with Waymark of his work in Litany Lane and Elm Court , and a great curiosity possess she to see these place . she enter an omnibus , and so reach the remote neighbourhood . here , by inquiry of likely people , she find her way to Litany Lane , and would have penetrate its darkness , but be arrest by a sudden event characteristic of the locality . 

 forth from the alley , just before she , rush a woman of hideous aspect , pursue by another , young , but , if possible , yet more foul , who shriek curse and threat . in the way of the fugitive be a costermonger 's stall ; unable to check herself , the woman rush against this , overturn it , and herself fall among the ruin . the one in pursuit , with a yell of triumph , spring upon her prostrate enemy , and attack she with fearful violence , leap on her body , dash her head against the pavement , seemingly bent on murder . in a moment there be a thick crowd rush round , amid which Maud be crush and sway without possibility of disengage herself . the scream of the one woman , and the terrific objurgation of the other , echo through the street . from the word of those about she , Maud understand that the two woman be mother and daughter , and that it be no rare occurrence for the young woman to fall just short of kill her parent . but only for a moment or two could Maud understand anything ; horror and physical oppression overcome her sens . her fainting cause a diversion in the crowd , and she be drag without much delay to the near doorstep . 

 she be not long unconscious , and presently so far recover as to know that she be be help to enter a cab . the cab begin to drive off . then she see that some one be sit opposite she . " who be it ? " she ask , try to command herself , and to see clearly by the light of the street lamp . at the sound of the voice which answer , she start , and , look again , at length recognise Waymark . 

 " do you feel well ? " he ask . " be you able to go on homeward ? " 

 " quite able , " she answer , lean back again , and speak with strange calmness . 

 " what on earth be the meaning of this ? " be Waymark 's next inquiry . " how come you here at this time ? " 

 " Curiosity bring I , " Maud answer , with the same unnatural composure . 

 " have you be there long ? " 

 " no ; I have ask my way to Litany Lane , and all at once find myself in the crowd . " 

 " thank goodness I happen to be by ! I have just be look up a default tenant . I could not   believe my eye when I see you lie in that doorway . why do not   you ask I to come with you , and show you these place ? " 

 " it would have be well , " she say , with her eye close . Waymark lean back . conversation be difficult in the noise of the vehicle , and for a long time neither speak . 

 " I tell the man to drive to Edgware Road , " Waymark say then . " shall he go on to the house ? " 

 " no ; I have rather walk the last part . " 

 they talk brokenly of the Lane and its inhabitant . when at length Maud alight Waymark offer his arm , and she just lay her hand upon it . 

 " I have see dreadful thing to - night , " she say , in a voice that still tremble ; ' see and hear thing that will haunt I . " 

 " you give too much weight to the impression of the moment . that world be far removed from yours than the farth star ; you must forget this glimpse of it . " 

 " oh , I fear you do not know I ; I do not know myself . " 

 he make no reply , and , on their come near to the house , Maud pause . 

 " Mother 's send you a note this evening , " she say , as she hold out her hand , " to ask you to come on Thursday instead of to - morrow . she will be from home to - morrow night . " 

 " shall you also be from home ? " 

 " I ? no . " 

 " then may I not come and see you ? not if it would be troublesome . " 

 " it would not , at all . " 

 " it be good of you . I will come . " 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 the WILL to live 

 Waymark make his way to Paddington at the usual time on the follow evening , and find Maud alone . there be agitation in her manner as she welcome he , and she resume her seat as if the attitude of rest be needful to she . in reply to his inquiry about her health , she assure he she be well , and that she feel no painful result from the previous evening . Waymark also show an unusual embarrassment . he stand for some moment by the table , turn over the leaf of a book . 

 " I do not   know you have Rossetti , " he say , without look up . " you never mention he . " 

 " I seem to have have no opportunity . " 

 " no . I too have many thing that I have want to speak to you about , but opportunity be want . I have sometimes be on the point of ask you to let I write to you again . " 

 he glance inquiringly at she . her eye fall , and she try to speak , but fail . Waymark go to a seat at a little distance from she . 

 " you do not look as well as when I meet you in the summer , " he say . " I have fear you might be study too hard . I hope you throw away your book whilst you be at the sea - side . " 

 " I do , but it be because I find little pleasure in they . it be not rest that take the place of reading . " 

 " be your difficulty of a kind you could speak of to I ? " he ask , with some hesitation . 

 she keep her eye lower , and her finger writhe nervously on the arm of the chair . 

 " my only fear would be lest you should think my trouble unreal . indeed it be so hard to make they appear anything more than morbid fancy . they be traceable , no doubt , to my early year . to explain they fully , I should have to tell you circumstance of my life which could have little interest for you . " 

 " tell I do , " Waymark reply earnestly . 

 " will you let I ? " she say , with a timid pleasure in her voice . " I believe you could understand I . I have a feeling that you must have experience something of these trouble yourself , and have overcome they . perhaps you could help I to understand myself . " 

 " if I think I could , it would give I great happiness . " 

 she be silent a little , then , with diffidence which lessen as she go on , she relate the history , as far as she know it , of her childhood , and describe the growth of her mind up to the time when she have leave home to begin life as a governess . it be all very simply , but very vividly , tell ; that natural command of impressive language which have so strike Waymark in her letter display itself as soon as she have gain confidence . glimpse of her experience Waymark have already have , but now for the first time he understand the full significance of her early year . whilst she speak , he do not move his eye from her face . he be put himself in her position , and imagine himself to be tell his own story in the same way . his relation , he know , would have be a piece of more or less clever acting , howsoever true ; he would have be consider , all the time , the effect of what he say , and , indeed , could not , on this account , have allow himself to be quite truthful . how far be this the case with Maud Enderby ? could he have surprise the faint touch of insincerity in look or accent , it would have make a world 's difference in his position towards she . his instinct be unfailing in the detection of the note of affected feeling ; so much the strong the impression produce upon he by a soul unveil itself in the naivete of genuine emotion . that all be sincere he could have no doubt . gradually he lose his critical attitude , and at moment surprise himself under the influence of a sympathetic instinct . then he would lose consciousness of her word for an interval , during which he ponder her face , and be work upon by its strange beauty . the pure and touching spirituality of Maud 's countenance have never be so present to he as now ; she be pale with very earnestness , her eye seem large than their wo not , there be more than womanly sweetness in the voice which so unconsciously modulate itself to the perfect expression of all she utter . towards the end , he could but yield himself completely to the spell , and , when she cease , he , like Adam at the end of the angel 's speech , do not at once perceive that her voice be silent . 

 " it be long , " she say , after tell the outward circumstance of her life with her aunt , " before I come to understand how differently I have be bring up from other child . partly I begin to see it at the school where we first meet ; but it only grow quite clear to I when I share in the home life of my pupil in the country . I find I have an entirely different view of the world from what be usual . that which be my evil , I discover to be often other ' good ; and my good , their abhorrence . my aunt 's system be hold to be utterly unchristian . little thing which I sometimes say , in perfect innocence , excited grave disapproval . all this frighten I , and make I even more reserved than I should have be naturally . 

 " in my letter to you I begin to venture for the first time to speak of thing which be make my life restless . I do little more than hint my opinion ; I wonder , in look back , that I have the courage to do even that . but I already know that your mind be broad and rich than mine , and I suppose I catch with a certain desperation at the chance of be understand . it be the first opportunity I have ever have of discuss intellectual thing . with my aunt I have never venture to discuss anything ; I reverence she too much for that ; she speak , and I receive all she say . I think that from you I should obtain confirmation where I need it , but your influence be of the opposite kind . your letter so abound with suggestion that be quite new to I , refer so familiarly to belief and interest of which I be quite ignorant , show such a boldness in judge all thing , that I drift far and far from certainty . the result of it all be that I fall ill . 

 " you see now what it be that have burden I from the day when I first begin to ask myself about my belief . I be teach to believe that the world be sin , and that the soul only free itself from sin in proportion as it learn to live apart from and independently of the world . everything be dark because of sin ; only in the still , secret place of the soul be the light of purity and salvation . 

 " I think I have pass out of this . when I return to London , and begin this new life , the burden seem all at once lift from I . I could look here and there with freedom ; the sky be bright above I ; human existence be cheerful and noble and justify in itself . I begin to learn a thousand thing . above all , my mind fix on Art ; in that I think I have find a support that would never fail I . 

 " oh , why could it not last ? the cloud begin to darken over I again . I hear voice once which I have hop be for ever silence . that sense of sin and horror come upon I last night in the street . I suffer dreadfully . " 

 she be silent , and , meet Waymark 's eye so fix on her own , become conscious of the eagerness and fervour with which she have speak . 

 " have you any experience of such thing ? " she ask nervously . " do you ever suffer in the same way ? " 

 " it be all very strange , " he say , without answer her question . " this overpower consciousness of sin be an anachronism in our time . but , from the way in which you express yourself , I should have think you have be study Schopenhauer . I suppose you know nothing of he ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " some of your phrase be precisely his . your doctrine be simply Pessimism , with an element of dogmatic faith add . with Schopenhauer , the will to live be the root of sin ; mortify this , deny the first instinct of your being , and you approach righteousness . Buddhism have the same system . and , in deduce all this from the plain teaching of Christianity , I be disposed to think you be right and consistent . Christianity be pessimism , so far as this world be concern ; we see that in such thing as the thanksgiving for a ' person 's death in the burial service , and the prayer that the end of the world may soon come . " 

 he pause , and think for a moment . 

 " but all this , " he resume , rise from his seat , and go to stand with one arm upon the mantelpiece , " be of course , with I , mere matter of speculation . there be two allegory , which define Pessimism and optimism . first that of Adam and Christ . Adam fall through eating of the tree of knowledge ; in other word , sin only come with self - consciousness , sin be the conscious enjoyment of life . and , accord to this creed , it can only be overcome by abnegation , by the denial of the will to live . accordingly , Christ enter the world , and , represent Humanity , as Adam have do , save the world by denial , of himself , even to death . the other allegory be that of Prometheus . he also represent mankind , and his stealing of the fire mean man 's acquirement of a conscious soul , whereby he make himself capable of sin . the god put he in bondage and torment , represent the subjection to the flesh . but Prometheus be save in a different way from Adam ; not by renunciation , but by the prowess of Hercules , that be to say , the triumphant aspiration of Humanity . man triumph by assert his right to do so . self - consciousness he claim as a good thing , and embrace the world as his birthright . here , you see , there be no room for the crush sense of sin . sin , if anything , be weakness . let we rejoice in our strength , whilst we have it . the end of course will come , but it be a wise man 's part not to heed the inevitable . let we live whilst it be call to - day ; we shall go to sleep with all the well conscience for have use the hour of daylight . " 

 Maud listen with head bent . 

 " my own temperament , " Waymark go on , " be , I suppose , exceptional , at all event among man who have an inner life . I never know what go by the name of religious feeling ; impulse of devotion , in the common sense of the phrase , have always be strange to I . I have know fear at the prospect of death ; religious consolation , never . sin , above all , have be a word without significance to I . as a boy , it be so ; it be so still , now that I be self - conscious . I have never be a deep student of philosophy , but the doctrine of philosophical necessity , the idea of Fate , be with I an instinct . I know that I could not have act otherwise than I do in any juncture of my life ; I know that the future be beyond my control . I shall do this , and avoid that , simply owe to a preponderance of motif , which I can gauge , but not control . certain thing I hate and shrink from ; but I try to avoid , even in thought , such word as vice and crime ; the murderer could not help himself , and the saint have no merit in his sanctity . do all this seem horrible to you ? " 

 Maud raise her eye , and look steadily at he , but do not speak . it be the gaze of one who try humbly to understand , and long to sympathise . but there be a shadow of something like fear upon her face . 

 Waymark speak with more earnestness . 

 " you will not think I incapable of what we call noble thought and feeling ? I have in I the element of an enthusiast ; they might have lead I to strange development , but for that cold , critical spirit which make I so intensely self - conscious . this restless scepticism have often be to I a torment in something the same way as that burden of which you speak . often , often , I would so gladly surrender myself to my instinct of passion and delight . I may change ; I may perhaps some day attain rest in an absolute ideal . if I do , it will be through the help of one who shall become to I that ideal personify , who shall embody all the pure element of my nature , and speak to I as with the voice of my own soul . " 

 she hang upon his word , and an involuntary sigh , bear of the intensity of the moment , tremble on her lip . 

 " I have speak to you , " he say , after what seem a long silence , " with a sincerity which be the due return for your own . I could have show myself in a more pleasing light . you see how little able I be to help you ; the centre - thought of your being be wholly strange to I . and for all that may I speak my thought ? we be near to each other than before . " 

 " yes , nearer , " she repeat , under her breath . 

 " you think that ? you feel that ? I have not repel you ? " 

 " you have not " 

 " and if I stand before you , now , as you know I egotistic , sceptical , calm and tell you that you be the only be in whom I have ever feel complete confidence , whose word and think I feel to be one ; that you exercise more power over I than any other ever do or shall ; that life in your companionship might gain the unity I long for ; that in your presence I feel myself face to face with a high and nobler nature than my own , one capable of sustain I in effort and lead I to great result " 

 he become silent , for her face have turn deadly pale . but this pass , and in her eye , as they meet his , trouble grow to a calm joy . without speak , she hold her hand to he . 

 " you be not afraid , " Waymark say , " to link your fate with mine ? my life be make up of uncertainty . I have no position ; it may be a long time before I can see even the promise of success in my work . I have choose that work , however , and by it I stand or fall . have you sufficient faith in I to wait with confidence ? " 

 " I have absolute faith in you . I ask no great happiness than to have a share in your aim . it will give I the strength I need , and make my life full of hope . " 

 it have come then , and just as he have foresee it would . it be no result of deliberate decision , he have give up the effort to discover his true path , know sufficiently that neither reason nor true preponderance of inclination be likely to turn the balance . the gather emotion of the hour have unite with opportunity to decide his future . the decision be a relief ; as he walk homeward , he be lighthearte . 

 on the way , he think over everything once more , review former doubt from his present position . on the whole , he feel that fate have work for his happiness . 

 and yet there be discontent . he have never know , feel that perhaps he might never know , that sustain energy of imaginative and sensual longing which ideal passion demand . the respectable make - believe which take the form of domestic sentiment , that everyday love , which , become the servant of habit , suffice to cement the ordinary household , be not the state in which such man as Waymark seek or find repose ; the very possibility of fall into it unawares be a dread to they . if he could but feel at all time as he have feel at moment in Maud 's presence . it might be that the growth of intimacy , of mutual knowledge , would make his love for she a more real motive in his life . he would endeavour that it should be so . yet there remain that fatal conviction of the unreality of every self - persuasion save in relation to the influence of the moment . to love be easy , inevitable ; to concentrate love finally on one object might well prove , in his case , an impossibility . clear enough to he already be the likelihood of a strong revulsion of feeling when Ida once more come back , and the old life if it could be be resume . compassion would speak so loudly for she ; her face , pale and illuminate with sorrow , would throw a strong spell than ever upon his sens . well , there be no help . whatever would be , would be . it avail nothing to foresee and scheme and resolve . 

 and , in the same hour , Maud be upon her knee , in the silence of her own chamber , shed tear which be at once both sweet and bitter , in her heart a tumult of emotion , joy and thanksgive at strife with those dark power which shadow her existence . she have do doubt of the completeness and persistency of her love . but be not this love a sin , and its very strength the testimony of her soul 's loss ? 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 SLIMY 's DAY 

 Waymark have write to Ida just after her imprisonment begin , a few word of such comfort as he could send . no answer come ; perhaps the prison rule prevent it . when the term be draw to a close , he write again , to let she know that he would meet she on the morning of her release . 

 it would be on a Tuesday morning . as the time draw near , Waymark do his good to think of the matter quietly . the girl have no one else to help she ; it would have be brutality to withdraw and leave she to her fate , merely because he just a little fear the effect upon himself of such a meeting . and the feeling on her side ? well , that he could not pretend to be ignorant of , and , in spite of everything , there be still the same half - acknowledge pleasure in the thought . he try to persuade himself that he should have the moral courage to let she as soon as possible understand his new position ; he also try to believe that this would not involve any serious shock to Ida . for all that , he know only too well that man be " ein erbarmlicher Schuft , " and there be always the possibility that he might say nothing of what have happen , and let thing take their course . 

 on the Monday he be already look forward to the meeting with restlessness . could he have foresee that anything would occur to prevent his keep his promise , it would have cause he extreme anxiety . but such a possibility never enter his thought , and , shortly before mid - day , he go down to collect his rent as usual . 

 the effect of a hard winter be see in the decrease of the collector 's weekly receipt . the misery of cold and starvation be grow familiar to Waymark 's eye , and scarcely excite the same feeling as formerly ; yet there be some case in which he have not the heart to press for the payment of rent , and his representation to Mr. Woodstock on behalf of the poor creature be more frequently successful than in former time . still , in the absence of then but eviction , and Waymark more than once know what ideal philanthropy , there be nothing for it every now and it be to be curse to his face by suffer wretch whom despair make incapable of discrimination . " where be we to go ? " be the oft - repeat question , and the only reply be a shrug of the shoulder ; impossible to express oneself otherwise . they cling desperately to habitation so vile that brute would have forsake they for clean and warm retreat in archway and by roadside . one family of seven , a man and wife   both ill   with five child , could not be get out , even when a man have be send by Mr. Woodstock to remove the window - frame and take the door away , furniture have already be seize ; only by force at length be they throw into the street , to find their way to perdition as good they might . Waymark do not relish all this ; it cost he a dark hour now and then . but it be rich material ; every item be store up for future use . 

 among other , the man name Slimy just manage to hold his footing . time be hard with Slimy , that be clear ; still , he somehow contrive to keep no more than a fortnight behind with his rent . Waymark be study this creature , and find in he the strange matter for observation ; in Slimy there be depth beyond Caliban , and , at the same time , curious point of contact with average humanity , unexpectedly occur . he be not ungrateful for the collector 's frequent forbearance , and , when able to speak coherently , try at time to show this . Waymark have get into the habit of sit with he in his room for a little time , whenever he find he at home . of late , Slimy have seem not quite in his usual health ; this exhibit itself much as it would in some repulsive animal , which suffer in captivity , and try to find a remote corner when pain come on . at time Waymark experience a certain fear in the man 's presence ; if ever he meet the dull glare of that one blear blood - shot eye , a chill run through he for a moment , and he draw back a little . personal uncleanliness make Slimy 's proximity at all time unpleasant ; and occasionally his gaunt , grimed face grow to an expression suggestive of disagreeable possibility . 

 on the present day , Waymark be tell by a woman who live on the ground - floor that Slimy have go out , but have leave word with she , in case the collector call , that he should be back in less than half - an - hour . Doubtless this mean that the rent be not forthcoming . the people who live on the first floor be out as usual , but have leave their rent . of the two room at the top , one be just now vacant . Waymark go on to the two or three house that remain . on turn back , he meet Slimy at the door ; the man nod in his wonte way , grin like a grisly phantom , and beckon Waymark to follow he upstairs . the woman below have close her door again , and in all probability no one observe the two enter together . 

 Waymark sit down amid the collection of nondescript article which always fill the room , and wait for the tenant to produce his rent . Slimy seem to have other thing in mind . after close the door , he too have take a seat , upon a heap of filthy sacking , and be run his finger through the shock of black hair which make his beard . Waymark examine he . there be no sign of intoxication , but something be evidently work in the man 's mind , and his breath come quickly , with a kind of asthmatic pant , from between his thin lip , still part in the uncanny grin . 

 " Mr. Waymark , " he begin at length . 

 " well ? " 

 " I be not   get no rent . " 

 " that be bad . you be two week behind , you know . " 

 " Mr. Waymark . " 

 the single eye fix itself on Waymark 's face in a way which make the latter feel uncomfortable . 

 " well ? " 

 " I be not   a - gem ' to pay you no more rent , nor yet no one else , maybe . " 

 " how be that ? " 

 " 'cos I be not , and 'cos I be tired o ' payin ' rent . " 

 " I be afraid you will find it difficult to get on without , though , " say Waymark , try to get into the jocular tone he sometimes adopt with Slimy , but scarcely succeed . 

 " Mr. Waymark . " 

 there be clearly something wrong . Waymark rise to his foot . Slimy rise also , and at the same time take up a heavy piece of wood , look like a piece of a cart - shaft , which have lie on the floor beside he . his exclamation elicit no answer , and he speak again , hoarsely as always , but with a calmness which contrast strangely with the word he utter . 

 " do you believe in the devil and hell ? " 

 " why ? " return Waymark , try hard to command himself , and to face down the man as a wild beast have be know to be out - gazed . 

 " 'cos , by the devil himself , as will have I before many week be over , and by the fire of hell , as will burn I , if you stir a step , or speak a word above your breath , I will bring you down just like they do the bullock . Y ' understand ! " 

 Waymark see that the threat be no idle one . he could scarcely have speak , have he wish . Slimy grin at the effect he have produce , and continue in the same matter - of - fact way . 

 " it take you back a bit , do not   it ! never mind ; you will get over it . I do not   mean you no ' arm , Mr. Waymark , but I will have to put you to a little ill - convenience , that be all . see now ; here be a bit o ' stout rope . with this ' ere , I be a - go jist to tie you up , ' and an ' foot , you see . as I say before , if you give I any trouble , well , I will ' ave to knock the sens out o ' you fust , that be all . " 

 Vain to think of grapple with the man , whose strength Waymark know to be extraordinary . for a moment , the shock of alarm have deprive he of thought and power of movement ; but this pass , and he be able to consider his position . he look keenly into Slimy 's face . have the man go mad ! his manner be scarcely consistent with that supposition . as the alternative before he be of such a kind , Waymark could but choose the less evil . he allow Slimy to remove from his shoulder the satchel which contain the sum of money he have just collect . it be quietly put aside . 

 " now , " say Slimy , with the same deliberation , " I have to arst you just to lay down on the floor , just ' ere , see . it be well to lay down quiet than to be knock down , you see . " 

 Waymark mentally agree that it be . his behaviour might seem cowardly , but to say nothing of the loathsomeness of a wrestle with Slimy he know very well that any struggle , or a shout for help , would mean his death . he hesitate , feel ashamed , but look at Slimy 's red eye , and lie down . in take the position indicate , he notice that three very large iron hook have be drive firmly into the floor , in a triangular shape . just beside the low one of these his foot have to rest ; his head lie between the other two . Slimy now proceed to bind his captive 's foot together with strong cord , and then attach they firmly to the hook ; then bid he sit up for a moment , he make his hand fast behind his back ; lastly , Waymark be again recumbent , a rope be pass once round his neck , and each end of it firmly fasten to one of the remain hook . this be not a pleasant moment , but , the operation complete , Waymark find that , though he could not move his head an inch , there be no danger of strangulation as long as he remain quiet . in short , he be bind as effectually as a man could be , yet without much pain . the only question be , how long he would have to remain thus . 

 Slimy examine his work , and nod with satisfaction . then he take up the satchel again , open it , and for a few moment keep dive his long black finger into the coin , whilst his face be transform to an expression of grim joy . presently , have satisfy himself with the feel of the money , he transfer it all to a pocket inside his ragged coat . 

 " now , Mr. Waymark , " he recommence , seat himself on the chair Waymark have previously occupy , " I be not   quite do with ill - conveniencin ' you . I be sorry to say I will ' ave jist to put a bit of a gag on , to prevent you from ' ollerin ' out too soon ; but before I do that , I have   jist get a word or two to say . let us spend our last time together in a friendly way . " 

 in spite of his alarm , Waymark observe with astonishment the change which have come over the man 's mode of speech . in all their previous intercourse , Slimy have show himself barely articulate ; for the most part it be difficult to collect meaning from his grunt and snarl . his voice be still dreadfully husky , and indeed seem unused to the task of utter so many word , but for all that he speak without hesitation , and with a reserve of force which make his utterance all the more impressive . have bespeak his hearer 's attention in this deliberate way , he become silent , and for a while sit brooding , his finger still busy among the coin in his pocket . 

 " I do not   rightly know how old I may be , " he begin at length , " but it be most like about fifty ; we will say fifty . for fifty year I have   live in this world , and in all that time I can not   remember not one single ' appy day , not one . I never know neither father nor mother ; I never know not a soul as belong to I . friend I ' ave have ; four of them ; and their name be Brandy , Whisky , Rum , an ' Gin . but they have   cost I a good deal , an ' somehow they be not   quite what they use to be . they use to make I merry for a while , now and then ; but they have   take now to burnin ' up my inside , an ' fill my ' ead with devil ; an ' I be gettin ' afeard of them , an ' they will ' ave to see I through to the end . 

 " fifty year , " he resume , after another interval of brooding , " an ' not one ' appy day . I be a - thinkin ' of it over to myself , and , say I , ' what be the reason on it ? ' the reason be , 'cos I be not   never ' ad money . money mean ' appiness , an ' they as never ' as money , will never be ' appy , live as long as they may . well , I go on a - sayin ' to myself , ' be not   I to ' ave not one ' appy day in all my life ? ' an ' it come to I all at once , with a flash like , that money be to be ' ad for the trouble o ' takin ' it money an ' ' appiness . " 

 the bleared eye roll with a sort of self - congratulation , and the coin jingle more loudly . 

 " a pound be not   no use ; nor yet two pound ; nor yet five pound . an ' five pound be what I never ' ad in fifty year . there be a good deal more than five pound ' ere now , Mr. Waymark ; I have   reckon it up in my ' cad . what d ' you think I be a - go for to do with it ? " 

 he ask this question after a pause , with his head bend forward , his countenance screw into the most hideous expression of cunning and gratified desire . 

 " I be a - go , " he say , with the emphasis of a hoarse whisper , " I a - go to drink myself dead ! that be what I be a - go to do , Mr. Waymark . my four friend be not   what they use for to be , an ' 'cos I be not   get enough of them . it be unsatisfaction , that be what it be , as bring the burnin ' I ' th ' inside , an ' the devil in the ' cad . now I have   get money , an ' for wunst in my life I will be satisfied an ' ' appy . and then I will go where there be real burnin ' , an ' real devil an ' let them make the most o ' Slimy ! " 

 Waymark feel his blood chill with horror . for year after , the face of Slimy , as it thus glare at he , haunt he in dreamful night . Dante see nothing more fearful in any circle of hell . 

 " well , I have   say my say , " Slimy remark , rise from his seat . " an ' now , I be sorry I will ' ave to ill - convenience you , Mr. Waymark . you have   behave well to I than most have , and I would not   pay you in ill - convenience , if I could help it . but I must have time enough to get off clear . I will ' ave jist to keep you from ' ollerin ' this way , see but I will not   hurt you ; the nose be good enough for breathin ' . I will see as some one come to let you out before to - morrow mornin ' . an ' now I will say good - bye , Mr. Waymark . you will not   see Slimy in this world again , an ' if I only know ' ow to say a prayer , why , I would pray as you might not   never see he in the next . " 

 with one more look , a look at once of wild anticipation and friendly regret , Slimy disappear . 

 the relief consequent upon the certainty that no bad could happen have bring Waymark into a state of mind in which he could regard his position with equanimity . the loss of the money seem now to be the most serious result of the affair . Slimy have promise that release should come before the morning , and would doubtless keep his word Waymark have a certain confidence in this , which a less interested person would perhaps have deem scarcely warrantable . in the meantime , the discomfort be not extreme to lie gag and bind on a garret - floor for some few hour be , after all , a situation which a philosopher might patiently endure , and to an artist it might well be suggestive of hint . breathing , to be sure , be not easy , but become more so by degree . 

 but with the complete recollection of his faculty come back the thought of what be involve in the question of release before the following day . early in the morning he have to be at the door of Tothill Fields ' Prison . how if his release be delay , through Slimy 's neglect or that of the agent he might employ ? as the first hour pass slowly by , this become the chief anxiety in Waymark 's mind . it make he forgetful of the aching in his arm , cause by the bind ing together of his hand behind he , and leave no room for anticipation of the other suffering which would result from his be leave thus for an indefinite period . what would Ida do , if she come out and find no one to meet she ? 

 his absence would make no one anxious , at all event not till more than a day have go by . Hitherto he have always take his rent at once to Mr. Woodstock 's office , but the old gentleman be not likely to be disturb by his non appearance ; it would be account for in some simple way , and his come expect on the following morning . then it be as good as certain that no one would come to Slimy 's room . and , by the by , have not there be a sound of the turning of a key when Slimy take his departure ? he could not be quite sure of this ; just then he have notice all thing so imperfectly . be it impossible to free a limb , or to ungag his mouth ? he try to turn his head , but it be clear that throttling would be the only result of any such effort ; and the bond on hand and foot be immoveable . no escape , save by Slimy 's aid . 

 he determine not to face the possibility of Slimy 's failing in his word ; otherwise , anxiety would make he desperate . he recognise now , for the first time fully , how much it mean to he , that meeting with Ida . the shock he have experience on hear her sentence and behold her face as she leave the court have not , apparently , produce last result ; his weakness surprise he when he look back upon it . in a day or two he have come to regard the event as finally sever he from Ida , and a certain calm ensue hereupon lead to the phase which ultimately bring he to Maud once more . but Waymark 's introspection be at fault ; he understand himself less in proportion as he feel that the ground be grow firm under his foot . even when he write the letter to the prison , promise to meet Ida , he have act as if out of mere humanity . it need a chance such as the present to open his eye . that she should quit the prison , and , not find he , wander away in blank misery and hopelessness , most likely embitter by the thought that he have carelessly neglect to meet she , and so drive to despair such a possibility be intolerable . the fear of it begin to goad he in flesh and spirit . with a sudden violent stringing of all his sinew , he wrench at the bond , but only with the effect of exhaust himself and make the wall and ceiling reel before his eye . the attempt to utter cry result in nothing but muffle moaning . then , master himself once more , he resolve to be patient . Slimy would not fail he . 

 he try not to think of Ida in any way , but this be beyond his power . again and again she come before his mind . when he endeavour to supplant she by the image of Maud Enderby , the latter 's face only irritated he . till now , it have be just the reverse ; the thought of Maud have always bring quietness ; Ida he have recognise as the disturbing element of his life , and have learn to associate she with his least noble instinct . think of this now , he begin to marvel how it could have be so . be it true that Maud be his good angel , that in she he have find his ideal ? he have force himself to believe this , now that he be in honour bind to she ; yet she have never make his pulse quicken , as it have often do when he have approach Ida . true , that warmth of feeling have come to represent merely a temptation to he ; but be not that the consequence of his own ambiguous attitude ? suppose he have not know Maud Enderby , how would he then have regard Ida , and his relation to she ? be these in very deed found on nothing but selfish feeling ? then he review all his acquaintanceship with she from the first , and every detail of the story grow to a new aspect . 

 Thinking of Ida , he find himself wonder how it be that Mr. Woodstock appear to take so much interest in her fate . several time during the past six month the old man have refer to she , generally inquire whether Waymark have write to or hear from she . and , only two day ago , he have show that he remember the exact date of her release , in ask whether Waymark mean to do anything . Waymark reply that he intend to meet she , and give she what assistance he could , the old gentleman have signify his strong approval , and have even go on to mention a house in the neighbourhood of the office , where Ida could be lodge at first . a room have accordingly be secure beforehand , and it be arrange that Waymark should take she directly thither on the Tuesday morning . in review all this , Waymark find it more significant than he have imagine . why , he wonder , have Mr. Woodstock grow so philanthrophic all at once ? why have he be so particular in make sure that Waymark would meet the girl ? indeed , from the very beginning of this affair , he have behave with regard to it in a manner quite unlike himself . Waymark have leisure now to ponder these thing , but could only conjecture explanation . 

 the hour go by ; a church clock keep he aware of their progress . the aching in his arm become severe ; he suffer from cold . the floor be sweep by a draught which seem strong and keen as a blast of east wind ; it make his eye smart , and he keep they closed , with some slight hope that this might also have the effect of induce sleep . Sleep , however , hold far aloof from he . when he have weary his brain with other thought , his attention begin to turn to sound in the court below . there , just as it grow dusk , some child be play , and he try to get amusement from their game . one of they be this . a little girl would say to the rest : " I send my daughter to the oil - shop , and the first thing she see be c ; " and the task be to guess for what article this initial stand . " carrot ! " cry one , but be laugh to scorn . " candle ! " cry another , and triumph . then there be game which consist in the saying of strange incantation . the child would go round and round , as be evident from the sound of their foot , chant the while : " Sally , Sally Wallflower , Sprinkle in a pan ; rise , Sally Wallflower , and choose your young man . choose for the fairest one , choose for the good , choose for the rare one , that you love well ! " upon this follow word and movement only half understand ; then at length break out a sort of hymeneal chorus : " here stand a young couple , just married and settle : their father and mother they must obey . they love one another like sister and brother . so pray , young couple , come kiss together ! " lastly , laughter and scream and confusion . this go on till it be quite dark . 

 pitch dark in Slimy 's room ; only the faint reflection on a portion of the ceiling of lamplight from without . Waymark 's suffering become extreme . the rope about his neck seem to work itself tighter ; there be moment when he have to struggle for the scant breath which the gag allow he . he fear lest he should become insensible , and so perhaps be suffocate . his arm be entirely numb ; he could not feel that he be lie on they . surely Slimy 's emissary would come before midnight . 

 " one , two , three , four twelve ! " how be it that e have lose all count of the hour since eight o'clock ? whether that have be sleep or insensibility , Waymark could not decide . intensity of cold must have bring back consciousness ; his whole body seem to be freeze ; his eye ache insufferably . continuous thought have somehow become an impossibility ; he know that Ida be constantly in his mind , and her image clear at time in the dark before he , but he could not think about she as he wish and try to do . who be it that seem to come between she and he ? some one he know , yet could not identify . then the hour sound uncertainly ; some he appear to have miss . there , at length , be seven . why , this be morning ; and Slimy have promise that he should be set free before this . what be it that torture his struggle brain so ? a thought he strove in vain for a time to grasp . the meaning flash upon he . by a great effort he regain complete consciousness ; mind alone seem to be leave to he , his body be dead . be he , then , really to be prevent from keep his promise to Ida ? all the suffering of his previous life amass be nothing to what Waymark endure during the successive quarter of this hour . his brain burn : his eye have no power to gather the grow daylight . that one name be his single perception ; the sound of it , utter incessantly in thought , alone seem to keep he conscious . he could feel something slightly warm on his cheek , but do not know that it be the streaming of tear from his darken eye . then he lose consciousness once more . 

 the clock strike eight . 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 FREEDOM 

 Mr. Woodstock be not so indifferent with regard to Waymark 's failure to bring the rent as the young man suppose . under ordinary circumstance he probably would have wait without any anxiety till the following day ; already on a previous occasion Waymark have collect on Tuesday instead of Monday , though not without notice of his intention to do so . but Mr. Woodstock have quite special reason for wish to see his agent before the follow morning ; he desire to assure himself once more that Waymark would not fail to be at the prison punctually . when the afternoon pass without the usual visit , he grow uneasy ; he be incapable of attend to matter of business , and walk up and down his office with impatient step . such a mood be extraordinary in Mr. Woodstock ; he have often wax restive in this or that business difficulty ; be , indeed , anything but remarkable for equanimity under trial ; but his state of mind be quite different at present , and exhibit itself in entirely different way . he neither swear nor look black ; his be the anxiety of a man who have some grave interest at stake wherein the well part of his nature be concern . 

 at five o'clock he take a cab , and go off to Waymark 's lodging in Chelsea . here he learn that Waymark have leave home at the usual time , and have not yet return . just as he be speak with the landlady at the door , another gentleman come up on the same errand . Mr. Woodstock remember Julian Casti , and hold out his hand to he . Casti look ill ; his handsome feature have waste , and his fair complexion be turn to a dull , unhealthy , yellowish hue . it be a comparatively warm day for the season , but his thin frame be closely muffle up , and still he seem to be shrink under the air . 

 " have you any idea where he can be ? " Mr. Woodstock ask , as they turn away together . 

 " none whatever . I must see he to - night , though , if possible . " 

 " ha ! and I too . " 

 as he speak Mr. Woodstock look at the other keenly , and something seem to suggest itself to he . 

 " I be go to see if he be be for the rent as usual . would you care to come with I ? " 

 Julian look surprised , but assent . they get into the cab together , and alight at the end of Litany Lane , have scarcely speak on the way . inquiry here show that the collector have go his round , and depart , it be say , in the ordinary way . 

 " have you an hour to spare , Mr. Casti ? " ask the old gentleman , turn suddenly after a moment 's reflection . 

 " certainly . " 

 " then I wish you would just come on with I to St. John 's Street Road . it be possible you may have it in your power to do I a great service , if Waymark do not   turn up . and yet , ten to one , I shall find he wait for I . never mind , come along if you can spare the time ; you will find he the soon . " 

 Mr. Woodstock try to pooh - pooh his own uneasiness ; yet , totally improbable as it seem that Waymark should disappear at such a juncture , the impatience of the afternoon have work he into a most unwonted fit of nervousness . doubt and suspicion which would ordinarily never have occur to he fill his mind . he be again quite silent till his office be reach . 

 Waymark have not be . they walk upstairs together , and Mr. Woodstock ask his companion to be seat . he himself stand , and begin to poke the fire . 

 " do you live in Chelsea still ? " he suddenly ask . 

 " yes . " 

 " I have leave word at Waymark 's lodging that he be to come straight here whenever he return . if he be not here by midnight , should I find you up if I call say at half - past twelve or so ? " 

 " I would in any case wait up for you , with pleasure ? " 

 " really , " say Mr. Woodstock , who could behave with much courtesy when he choose , " I must apologise for take such liberty . our acquaintance be so slight . and yet I believe you would willingly serve I in the matter in hand . perhaps you guess what it be . never mind ; I could speak of that when I come to you , if I have to come . " 

 Julian 's pale cheek have flush with a sudden warmth . he look at the other , and face steadily the gaze that meet his own . 

 " I be absolutely at your disposal , " he say , in a voice which he try to make firm , though with small success . 

 " I be oblige to you . and now you will come and have something to eat with I ; it be my usual time . " 

 Julian decline , however , and almost immediately take his leave . he walk all the way to Chelsea , regard nothing that he pass . when he find himself in his lodging he put a match to the ready - lay fire , and presently make himself some tea . then he sit idly through the evening , for the most part star into the glow coal , occasionally take up a book for a few minute , and throw it aside again with a sigh of weariness . as it get late he shiver so with cold , in spite of the fire , that he have to sit in his overcoat . when it be past midnight he begin to pace the room , make impatient gesture , and often rest his head upon his hand as if it ache . it must have be about a quarter to one when there be the sound of a vehicle pull up in the street below , follow by a knock at the door . Julian go down himself , and admit Mr. Woodstock . 

 " what can it mean ? " he ask anxiously , when they have walk up to the room together . " what have become of he ? " 

 " do not   know . I stop at his place on the way here . " 

 " do not   you fear some mischance ? with all that money " 

 " Pooh ! it be some absurd freak of his , I will warrant . he do not   care how much anxiety he give other people . " 

 Mr. Woodstock be excited and angry . 

 " but he will certainly go go there in the morning , wherever he be , " say Julian . 

 " I be not so sure of that . I believe it be on that very account that he be keep out of the way ! " 

 he smite his fist on the palm of the other hand with the emphasis of conviction . Julian look at he with an expression of wonder . there be a short silence , and then Mr. Woodstock begin to speak more calmly . the conversation last only about a quarter of an hour . Mr. Woodstock then return to his cab , which have wait , and julian bid he good night at the door . 

 at six o'clock Julian arise . it be still quite dark when he leave the house , and the air be pierce . but he do not mind the weather this morning . his step have a vigour very different from the trail weariness of the night before , and he look straight before he as he walk . there be a heat on his forehead which the raw breath of the morning could not allay . before he have go half a mile , he fling open his overcoat , as if it oppress he . it be in the direction of Westminster that he walk . out of Victoria Street he take the same turn as on one miserable night , one which he have take on many a night since then . but he be far too early at the prison gate . he stray about the little street of the neighbourhood , his eye gaze absently in this or that direction , his hot breath steam up in the grey light . when it be draw near the time , he make some inquiry from a policeman whom he pass . then he go to the spot whither he be direct , and watch . two or three people , of poor appearance , be also stand about , wait . Julian keep apart from they . first , a miserable old woman , huddle herself in a dirty shawl ; look on all side with a greedy eye ; hasten off no one know whither . then two young girl , laugh aloud at their recover liberty ; they repair at once to the near public - house . then a figure of quite different appearance , come quickly forward , hesitate , gaze around ; a beautiful face , calm with too great self - control , sad , pale . towards her Julian advance . 

 " Mr. Waymark be unavoidably prevent from come , " he say quickly . " but he have take room for you . you will let I go with you , and show you the house ? " 

 " thank you , " be Ida 's only reply . 

 they walk together into the main street , and Julian stop the first empty cab that pass . as he sit opposite to she , his eye , in spite of himself , keep stray to her face . gaze at she , Casti 's eye grow dim . he force himself not to look at she again till the cab stop . 

 " they be prepared for you here , " he say , as they stand on the pavement . " just give your name . and you will not go away ? you will wait till some one call ? " 

 Ida nod . 

 " no ; but your word , " Julian urge anxiously . " promise I . " 

 " I promise . " 

 she go up to the door and knock . Julian walk quickly away . at the end of the street Mr. Woodstock be wait . 

 " what be the matter ? " he ask , examine the young man anxiously . 

 " nothing nothing ! " 

 " do she seem well ? " 

 " I think so ; yes , " Casti reply , in a stifle voice . then he ask hurriedly , " where can Waymark be ? what do it all mean ? " 

 Mr. Woodstock shake his head , look annoy . 

 " I be convince , " Julian say , " that something be wrong . surely it be time to make inquiry . " 

 " yes , yes ; I will do so . but you look downright ill . do you feel able to get home ? if I have think it would upset you like this " 

 Mr. Woodstock be puzzle , and keep scrutinise the other 's face . 

 " I shall go home and have a little rest , " Julian say . " I do not   get much sleep last night , that be all . but I must hear about Waymark . " 

 " you shall . I will warrant he turn up in the course of the day . do not   be anxious : I will get to work as soon as possible to find he ; but , depend upon it , the fellow 's all right . " 

 they shake hand , and Julian take his way homeward . Mr. Woodstock go to the house which Ida have just enter . he knock lightly , and a woman open to he and lead he into a sitting - room on the ground - floor . 

 " I will just have a cup of coffee , Mrs. Sims , " he say . " do she seem to care for her breakfast ? " 

 " I be afraid not , sir ; she look tired out , and poorly like . " 

 " yes , yes ; the long journey and her trouble . make she as comfortable as you can . I will make myself at home with the paper here for an hour or so . just see if she care to lie down for a little ; if so I will not   disturb she . " 

 Abraham do not devote much attention to the news . he sit before the fire , a cup of coffee within reach on the mantel piece , his leg fully stretch out before he , his favourite attitude when think . in spite of his fresh complexion and active limb , you would have see , have you watch he in his present mood , that Mr. Woodstock be begin to age . outwardly he be well - preserve few man of his year anything like so well . but let the inner man become visible during a fit of brooding , and his feature make evident the progress of year . his present phase of countenance be a recent development ; the relaxed line bring to light a human kindliness not easily discoverable in the set expression of wide - awake hour . at present there be even tenderness in his eye , and something of sad recollection . his strong mouth twitch a little at time , and his brow contract , as if in self - reproach . when he return to himself , it be with a sigh . he sit for about an hour ; then the woman present herself again , and tell he that Miss Starr have be persuade to lie down . it seem likely she might sleep . 

 " very well , " say Mr. Woodstock , rise . " I will go to the office . send some one round when she be stir , will you ? " 

 Ida , to get rid of her troublesome though well - mean attendant , have promise to lie down , but she have no need of sleep . alone , she still keep her chair by the fire , sit like one wear out with fatigue , her hand upon her lap , her head droop , her eye fix on vacancy . she be try to think , but thought refuse to come consecutively , and a dull annoyance at this inability to reason upon her position fret her consciousness . not with impunity can the human mind surrender itself for half a year to unvarie brood upon one vast misery ; the neglect faculty revenge themselves by rusting , and will not respond when at length summon . for month Ida 's thought have go round and round about one centre of anguish , like a wail bird circle over a ravage nest . the image of her mental state have be present by an outward experience with which she become familiar . wake long before daylight , she would lie with her eye direct to the little bar window , and watch till there come the first glimmer of dawn . even so be it her sole relief in the deep night of her misery to look forward for that narrow gleam of hope her ultimate release . as the day approach , she make it the business of her thought to construct a picture of the event it would bring . even before hear from Waymark , she have be sure that he would meet she ; Waymark and freedom grow identical image ; to be free mean to see he await she and to put herself absolutely in his hand . now that everything have turn out differently from what she have grow to anticipate with certainty , she find herself powerless to face the unexpected . why have Waymark fail she ? she could do no more than repeat the question a thousand time , till the faculty of self - communing forsook she . it be as though the sun should fail one morning to rise upon the world , and man should stand hopeless of day for ever . 

 she wonder vaguely whither she have be bring . at one moment she seem to have be wait an eternity in this unknown room , Julian 's face and voice unspeakably remote ; then again she would look round and wonder that she no long see the hare wall and bar window of her cell , the present seem only a dream . all the process of her mind be slow , sinewless . she try to hope for something , to expect that something would happen , but could not summon the energy . resentment , revolt , bitterness of spirit , of these thing she know just as little . they have be strong enough within she at first , but how long ago that seem ! she have no thought of time in the present ; to sit wait for an hour mean as little as to wait five minute ; such be the habit that have become impressed upon she by interminable day and night . when at length she hear a knock at the door it fill she with fear ; she start to her foot and look with unintelligent eye at the woman who again present herself . 

 " do you feel well , ' m ? " the landlady ask . " have you rest yourself ? " 

 " yes , thank you . " 

 the woman go away ; then come another knock , and Mr. Woodstock enter the room . he close the door behind he , and draw near . she have again start up , and do not move her eye from his face . 

 " have you any recollection of I ? " Abraham ask , much embarrassed in her presence , his voice fail to be as gentle as he wish through his difficulty in command it . 

 Ida have recognise he at once . he have undergo no change since that day when she see he last in Milton Street , and at this moment it be much easy for she to concentrate her thought upon bygone thing than to realise the present . 

 " you be Abraham Woodstock , " she say very coldly , the resentment associate with the thought of he be yet strong than the dead habit which have but now oppress she . 

 " yes , I be . and I be a friend of Osmond Waymark . I should like to talk a little with you , if you will let I . " 

 the old man find it so hard to give expression to the feeling that possess he . Ida conclude at once that he come with some hostile purpose , and the name of Waymark be an incentive to her numbed faculty . 

 " how can you be a friend of Osmond Waymark ? " she ask , with cold suspicion . 

 " do not   he ever mention my name to you ? " 

 " never . " 

 Waymark have in truth always keep silence with Ida about his occupation , though he have speak so freely of they to Maud . he could not easily have explain to himself why he have make this difference , though it have a significance . Mr. Woodstock be almost at a loss how to proceed . he cough , and move his foot uneasily . 

 " I have know he all his life , for all that , " he say . " and it be through he I find you . " 

 " find I ? " 

 " it will seem very strange , what I have to tell you . you be a little girl when I see you last , and you refuse to come with I . have you any idea why I ask you ? " 

 " I have not   then . " 

 " but you have think of it since ? " 

 Ida look at he sternly , and turn her eye away again . the belief that he be her father have always increase the resentment with which she recall his face . 

 " I be your grandfather , " Abraham say gravely . " your mother be my daughter . " 

 a change come over her countenance ; she gaze at he with wonder . 

 " who do you think I be ? " he ask . 

 she hesitate for a moment , then , instead of reply , say : 

 " you behave cruelly to my poor mother . " 

 " I will not   deny it , " the old man return , master his voice with difficulty . " I ought to have be more patient with she . but she refuse to obey I , and I can not   help my nature . I repent it when it be too late . " 

 Ida could not know what it cost he to utter these abrupt sentence . he seem harsh , even in confine his harshness . she be as far from he as ever . 

 " I can not   do anything for she , " Mr. Woodstock continue , try to look she in the face . " but you be her child , and I want to do now what I ought to have do long ago . I have   come here to ask you if you will live in my house , and be like a child of my own . " 

 " I do not   feel to you as a child ought , " Ida say , her voice change to sadness . " you have   leave it too late . " 

 " no , it be not   too late ! " exclaim the other , with emotion he could not control . " you must not   think of yourself , but of I . you have all your life before you , but I be draw near to the end of mine . there be no one in the world belong to I but you . I have a right to " 

 " no right ! no right ! " Ida interrupt he almost passionately . 

 " then you have a duty , " say Abraham , with lowered voice . " my mind be not   at ease , and it be in your power to help I . do not   imitate I , and put off do good till it be too late . I do not   ask you to feel kindly to I ; all I want be that you will let I take you to my home and do all I can for you , both now and after I be go . " 

 there be pathos in the speech , and Ida feel it . 

 " do you know where I come from this morning ? " she ask , when both have be silent for some moment . 

 " I know all about it . I be at the trial , and I do my good for you then . " 

 " do you believe that I rob that woman ? " Ida ask , lean forward with eager eye and quicken breath . 

 " believe it ! not I ! no one believe it who know anything about she . Waymark say he would not   have believe it if all the court in England find you guilty . " 

 " he say that ? " she exclaim . then , as if suddenly become clear about her position : " where be Mr. Waymark ? why do not   he meet I as he promise ? " 

 Abraham hesitate , but speedily make up his mind that it would be good to speak the truth . 

 " I know as little as you do . he ought to have come to I yesterday , but he do not , and I can not   discover he . I get Mr. Casti to meet you instead . " 

 the keen trouble manifest itself on Ida 's countenance . she ask question in rapid succession , and thus elicit an explanation of all the circumstance hitherto unknown to she . 

 " have you be through the house ? " she inquire , all her native energy restore by apprehension . " have not   you think that he may have be rob and " 

 she stop , overcome by sudden weakness , and sink into the chair . 

 " come , come , it be not   so bad as all that , " say the old man , observe she closely . " he may turn up at any moment ; all sort of unexpected thing may have happen . but I will go again to his lodging , and if I can not   hear anything there , I will set the police to work . will you promise I to wait here quietly ? " 

 " no , that I can not   do . I want to move about ; I must do something . let I go with you to look for he . " 

 " no , no ; that will never do , Ida . " 

 the power of speak tenderly seem to have be give to he all at once ; this and his call she " Ida , " strike so upon the girl 's agitated feeling that she begin to sob . 

 " let I , let I go with you ! I will forget everything I will be your child I will try to love you . " 

 she be as weak as water , and would have sink to the ground if Abraham have not give she his support just in time . he could not find word to soothe she , but pass his hand very tenderly over her head . 

 " we be lose time ! " she exclaim , force herself into an appearance of calmness . " come at once . " 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 ELM court 

 in Beaufort Street they only learn that Waymark have not yet be home . thence they drive to the east , and stop at a police - station , where Abraham see the inspector . the latter suggest that Mr. Woodstock should go through all the house which Waymark would have visit ; if that search prove fruitless , the police would pursue the matter . Ida insist on be allow to accompany he when the cab stop at the end of Litany Lane . she gaze about she like one who have be suddenly set down in a new country ; this squalor and vileness , so familiar to she of old , affect she strangely under the present condition . the face of people at whom she look remain fresh in her memory for year after ; the long confinement and the excitement which now possess she result in preternatural acuteness of observation . Abraham speak first with several people whom he have already question about Waymark , but they have hear nothing since . 

 " be you strong enough for this ? " he ask Ida . " had not   you well go back to the cab and wait for I ! " 

 " do not   ask I to do that ! " she entreat earnestly . " I must be active . I have strength now for anything . " 

 just as she speak , Mr. Woodstock become aware of a disturbance of some kind in a duty little tobacconist 's shop close at hand . there be a small crowd at the door , and the sound of wrangling voice come from within . such an occurrence be too ordinary to suggest any special significance , but Abraham would not pass without make some inquiry . beg Ida to stand where he leave she , he push his way into the shop and listen to what be go on . a lad , well know in these part as " Lushy Dick , " be , it appear , charge the tobacconist with cheat he ; he allege that he have deposit half a sovereign on the counter in payment for a cigar , and the shopman have give he change as if for sixpence , maintain stoutly that sixpence have be the coin give he , and no half - sovereign at all . when Mr. Woodstock enter , the quarrel have reach a high pitch . 

 " arf a quid ! " the tobacconist be exclaim contemptuously . " I would like to know where such as you be likely to git arf a quid from . " 

 Lushy Dick , sting to recklessness by a succession of such remark , break out in vehement self - justification . 

 " would yer like to know , y ' old ! then yer shall , soon ! I be if I do not   tell jist the truth , an ' take the consequence . it be Slimy as give it I , an ' if yer want to know where Slimy get it , yer will ' ave to well find out , 'cos I do not   know myself . " 

 " and how come Slimy to give you half a sovereign ? " Mr. Woodstock at once interpose , speak with authority . 

 " be that you , Mr. Woodstock ? " exclaim the boy , turn round suddenly at the sound of the voice . " now , look ' ere , I be a - go to make a clean breast of it . this ' ere bloke be be a ringin ' the change on I ; I will show he up , an ' well chance it . Slimy give I a quid afore he take his hook . " 

 the lad have clearly be drink , but have not yet reach the incoherent stage . he speak in great excitement , repeat constantly his determination to be revenge upon the tobacconist at all cost . it be with difficulty that Mr. Woodstock keep he to the point . 

 " why Slimy give it I ? well , I will jist tell yer , Mr. Woodstock . it be to do a job for he , which I never do it after all . Slimy tell I as ' ow I be to go to your orffice at ten o'clock last night , ' an tell you from he as he have no more ' casion for his room , so he would send yer the key , an ' yer'd well come as soon as possible an ' see as he have leave everything square behind he , an ' 'cos he be afraid he would lock in a friend o ' yourn by mistake an ' in his hurry . " 

 " and why the devil do not   you come ? " exclaim Abraham , look at he in angry surprise . 

 " 'cos why , Mr. Woodstock ? well , I will tell yer just the bloomin ' truth , an ' charnce it . I loss the key out o ' my pocket , through ' avin ' a hole in it , so I think as ' ow I would well just say nothink about neither Slimy nor his room , an ' there y'ave it ! " 

 Abraham be out of the shop again on the instant . 

 " I have   find he , " he say to Ida . " a house round there in the court . " 

 she walk quickly by his side , a cluster of people follow they . fortunately , a policeman be just come from the opposite end of Litany Lane , and Mr. Woodstock secure his service to keep the mob from enter the house where Slimy have live . as soon as they get inside , the old man beg Ida to remain in a room on the ground floor whilst he go upstairs , and this she consent to do . reach the garret , he try the handle of the door , without effect . knock and call produce no response , and within all be perfectly quiet . hesitate no long , he draw back as far as the wall would allow he , and run with his foot against the door . the rotten woodwork crack , and a second onset force the lock away . in the middle of the floor Waymark lay , just as Slimy have leave he nearly twenty - four hour ago . Abraham scarcely venture to draw near ; there be no motion in the fettered body , and he dread to look closely at the face . before he could overcome this momentary fear , there be a quick step behind he , and , with a smother cry , Ida have rush into the room . she be on her knee beside Waymark , her face close down to his . 

 " he be alive ! " she cry . " his eye have open . a knife ! cut these cord ! " 

 that be soon accomplish , but Waymark lie motionless ; he show that he understand what be go on , but he be quite blind , his voice have all but go , and a dead man could as soon have rise . Ida still kneel by he , chafe one of his hand ; when he try to speak , she gently raise his head and let it rest upon her lap . in a few minute Abraham have procure a glass of spirit , and , after drink this , Waymark be able to make himself understand . 

 " who be touch I ? " he ask in a hoarse whisper . " it be all dark . whose hand be this ? " 

 " it be Ida , " Abraham say , when she herself remain silent . " she and I have have a rare hunt for you . " 

 " Ida ? " 

 he endeavour to raise himself , but in vain . all he could do be to press her hand to his heart . in the meantime the policeman have come up , and with his help Waymark be carry downstairs , out into the court , and thence to the end of Litany Lane , where the cab still wait . 

 four day after this the follow paragraph appear in the morning paper : 

 " the man want on a charge of robbery with violence in the East End , and who appear to be know only by the nickname of Slimy , be yesterday afternoon discover by the police in a cellar in Limehouse . he seem to have be in hiding there since the perpetration of the crime , only go out from time to time to purchase liquor at public - house in the neighbourhood . information give by the landlord of one of these house lead to his arrest . he be find lie on the stone floor , with empty bottle about he , also a quantity of gold and silver coin , which appear to have roll out of his pocket . he be carry to the police - station in an insensible state , but on be take to the cell , come to himself , and exhibit symptom of delirium tremen . two officer remain with he , but the assistance of a third shortly become necessary , owe to the violence of his struggle . towards midnight his fury lessen , and , after a very brief interval of unconsciousness , the wretched creature expire . " 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 new prospect 

 Mr. Woodstock 's house at Tottenham be a cheerful abode when the month of early summer come round , and there be thick leafage within the shelter of the old brick wall which shut it off from the road . 

 for the first time in his life he understand the attraction of domesticity . during the early month of the year , slipper and the fireside after dinner ; now that the sunset - time be grow warm and fragrant , a musing saunter about the garden walk ; these be the thing to which his imagination grow fond of turning . nor to these only ; blend with such vision of bodily comfort , perchance lend to they their chief attraction , be the light of a young face , grave always , often sad , speak with its beautiful eye to those simple and tenderer instinct of his nature which have hitherto sleep . in the presence of Ida   who be now know , by his wish , as Miss Woodstock   Abraham 's hard voice find for itself a more modest and musical key . 

 he begin novel sensation to look upon himself as a respectable old gentleman ; the grey patch on his head be grateful to he from that point of view . if only he have be able to gather round his granddaughter and himself a circle of equally respectable friend and acquaintance , he would have enjoy complete satisfaction . two or three at most there be , whom he could venture to bring over with he from the old life to the new . for Ida he could as yet provide no companionship at all . 

 but Ida do not feel the want . since the day of she come to the new house her life have be very full ; so much be pass within , that she desire to escape , rather than discover , new distraction in the world around she . for the week or so during which Waymark have lain ill , her courage have triumph over the suffering to which she be herself a prey ; the beginning of his recovery bring about a reaction in her state , and for some day she fall into a depressed feebleness almost as extreme as on the first morning of her freedom . it distress she to be speak to , and her own lip be all but mute . Mr. Woodstock sometimes sit by she whilst she sleep , or seem to be sleep ; when she stir and show consciousness of his presence , he leave she , so great be his fear of annoy she , and thus lose the ground he have gain . once , when he be rise to quit the room , Ida hold out her hand as if to stay he . she be lie on a sofa , and have enjoy a very quiet sleep . 

 " Grandfather , " she murmur , turn to face he . it be the first time she have address he thus , and the old man 's eye brighten at the sound . 

 " be you well for the sleep , Ida ? " he ask , take the hand she have extend . 

 " much ; much well . how the sun shin ! " 

 " yes , it be a fine day . do not   you think you could go out a little ? " 

 " I think I should like to , but I can not   walk very far , I be afraid . " 

 " you need not   walk at all , my dear . your carriage shall be here whenever you like to order it . " 

 " my carriage ? " 

 the exclamation be like a child 's pleased wonder . she colour a little , and seem ashamed . 

 " how be Mr. Waymark ? " be she next question . 

 " nothing much amiss now , I think . his eye be painful , he say , and he must not   leave the room yet , but it will not   last much long . shall we go together and see he ? " 

 she hesitate , but decide to wait till he could come down . 

 " but you will go out , Ida , if I order the carriage ? " 

 " thank you , I should like to . " 

 that first drive have be to Ida a joy unspeakable . to - day for the first time she be able to sweep her mind clear of the dread shadow of brooding , and give herself up to simple enjoyment of the hour . 

 Abraham go and tell Waymark of all this as soon as they get back . in the exuberance of his spirit he be half angry with the invalid for be gloomy . Waymark have by this time shake off all effect of his disagreeable adventure , with the exception of a weakness of the eye ; but convalescence do not work upon he as in Ida 's case . he be morose , often apparently sink in hopeless wretchedness . when Abraham speak to he of Ida , he could scarcely be get to reply . above all , he show an extreme impatience to recover his health and go back to the ordinary life . 

 " I shall be able to go for the rent next Monday , " he say to Mr. Woodstock one day . 

 " I should have think you would have enough of that . I have   find another man for the job . " 

 " then what on earth be I to do ? " Waymark exclaim impatiently . " how be I to get my living if you take that work away from I ? " 

 " never mind ; we will find something , " Abraham return . " why be you in such a hurry to get away , I should like to know ? " 

 " simply because I can not   always live here , and I hate uncertainty . " 

 there be something in the young man 's behaviour which puzzle Mr. Woodstock ; but the key to the puzzle be very shortly give he . on the evening of the same day he present himself once more in Waymark 's room . the latter could not see he , but the first sound of his voice be a warning of trouble . 

 " do you feel able to talk ? " Abraham ask , rather gruffly . 

 " yes . why ? " 

 " because I want to ask you a few question . I have   just have a call from that friend of your , Mr. Enderby , and something come out in talk that I be not   exactly prepare for . " 

 Waymark rise from his chair . 

 " why do not   you tell I , " pursue Mr. Woodstock , " that you be engage to his daughter ? " 

 " I scarcely think it necessary . " 

 " not when I tell you who Ida be ? " 

 this disclosure have be make whilst Waymark be still confine to his bed ; partly because Abraham have a difficulty in keep the matter to himself ; partly because he think it might help the other through his illness . Waymark have say very little at the time , and there have be no conversation on the matter between they since . 

 " I do not   see that it make any difference , " Waymark reply gloomily . 

 the old man be silent . he have be , it seem , under a complete delusion , and could not immediately make up his mind whether he have indeed ground of complaint against Waymark . 

 " why do Mr. Enderby call ? " the latter inquire . 

 " very naturally , it seem to I , to know what have become of you . he do not   see the report in the paper , and go search for you . " 

 " do Ida know of this ? " he ask , after a pause , during which Waymark have remain stand with his arm cross on the back of the chair . 

 " I have never tell she . why should I have do ? perhaps now you will believe what I insist upon before the trial , that there have be nothing whatever " 

 he speak irritably , and be interrupt by the other with yet more irritation . 

 " never mention that again to I as long as you live , Waymark if you do , we shall quarrel , understand ! " 

 " I have no more pleasure in refer to it than you have , " say Waymark , more calmly ; " but I must justify myself when you attack I . " 

 " how long have this be go on ? " ask the other , after a silence . 

 " some three month perhaps more . " 

 " well , I think it would have be well if you have be straightforward about it , that be all . I do not   know that I have   anything more to say . we know what we be about , and there be an end of it . " 

 so say , the old man go out of the room . there be a difference in he henceforth , something which Ida notice , though she could not explain it . on the follow day he speak with she on a matter she be surprised to hear he mention , her education . he have be think , he say , that she ought to learn to play the piano , and be teach foreign language . would not   she like he to find some lady who could live in the house and teach she all these thing ? Ida 's thought at once run to the conclusion that this have be suggest by Waymark , and , when she find that her grandfather really wish it , give a ready assent . a week or two later the suitable person have be discover a lady of some thirty year of age , by name Miss Hurst . she be agreeable and refine , endow , moreover , with the tact which be desirable in one undertake an office such as this . Ida find her companionship pleasant , and Mr. Woodstock con gratulate himself on have take the right step . 

 at the same time that the governess come to the house , Waymark leave it . he return to his old lodging , and , with an independence which be partly his own impulse , partly the natural result of the slight coolness towards he which have show itself in Mr. Woodstock , set to work to find a mean of earn his living . this he be fortunate enough to discover without any great delay ; he obtain a place as assistant in a circulating library . the payment be small , but he still have his evening free . 

 Ida do not conceal her disappointment when Abraham convey this news to she ; she have be hop for well thing . her intercourse with Waymark between his recovery and his leave the house have be difficult , full of evident constraint on both side . it be the desire of both not to meet alone , and in Mr. Woodstock 's presence they talk of indifferent thing , with an artificiality which it be difficult to support , yet impossible to abandon . they shun each other 's eye . Waymark be even less at his ease than Ida , know that Mr. Woodstock observe he closely at all time . with her grandfather Ida try to speak freely of their friend , but she too be trouble by the consciousness that the old man do not seem as friendly to Waymark as formerly . 

 " this will of course only be for a time ? " she say , when tell of Waymark 's new employment . 

 " I do not   know , " Abraham reply indifferently . " I should think it will suit he as well as anything else . " 

 " but he be clever ; he write book . do not   you think he will make himself know some day ? " 

 " that kind of thing be not   much to be depend on , it seem to I . it be a doubtful business to look forward to for a living . " 

 Ida keep silence on the subject after that . she do not seem to brood any long over sad thought , yet it be seldom she behave or speak light - heartedly ; her face often indicate an absent mind , but it be the calm musing of one whose thought look to the future and strengthen themselves with hope . time there be when she draw away into solitude , and these be the interval of doubt and self - questioning . with her grandfather she be reconcile ; she have become convinced of his kindness to she , and the far - off past be now seldom in her mind . the trouble originate in the deep working of her nature . when she find herself compare her position now with that of former day , it excite in she a restive mood to think that chance alone have thus raise she out of misery , that the conscious strength and purity of her soul would never have avail to help she to the thing which be now within her grasp . the old sense of the world 's injustice excited anger and revolt in her heart . Chance , chance alone befriend she , and the reflection injure her pride . what of those numberless struggle creature to whom such happy fortune could never come , who , be their aspiration and capability what they might , must struggle vainly , agonise , and in the end despair ? she have be lift out of hell , not rise therefrom by her own strength . sometimes it half seem to she that it would have be the nobler lot to remain as she be , to share the misery of that dread realm of darkness with those poor disinherit one , to cherish that spirit of noble rebellion , the consciousness of which have be as a pure fire on the altar of her be . what be to be her future ? would she insensibly forget her past self , let her strength subside in refinement it might be , even lose the passion which have make she what she be ? 

 but hope predominate . forget ! could she ever forget those face in the slum on the day when she bid farewell to poverty and all its attendant wretchedness ? Litany Lane and Elm Court be name which already symbolise a purpose . if ever she still look at her grandfather with a remnant of distrust , it be because she think of he as draw money from such a source , enjoy his life of ease in disregard of the responsibility lay upon he . the day would come when she could find courage to speak to he . she wait and prepare herself . 

 prepare herself , for that , and for so much else . Waymark 's behaviour would have cost she the bitter misery , have she not be able to explain it to her own satisfaction . there could be but one reason why he hold aloof from she , and that an all - sufficient one . in her new position , it be impossible for he to be more than just friendly to she . if that have be his attitude in the old day , how could his self - respect allow he to show the slight change ? in his anxiety not to do so , he have even fall short of the former kindness . no forgiveness be need , when she feel that she understand he so well . but all the more do it behove she to make herself worthy of he in all thing . she have still so much to learn ; she be so far his inferior in culture and understanding . her study with Miss Hurst be fruitful . nor be her domestic duty forget . Mr. Woodstock have supply she with a good housekeeper , to help her inexperience , but Ida take an adequate burden on her own shoulder . this again be a new and keen joy . 

 Waymark din with they one Sunday in June , and , in the course of the evening , go with Abraham to the smoking - room for some private conversation . 

 " do you remember , " he begin , " once offer to buy those share of mine ? " 

 " yes , I do , " reply Mr. Woodstock , narrow his eye . 

 " do the offer still hold good ? " 

 " yes , yes ; if you be anxious to realise . " 

 " I be . I want money for two purpose . " 

 " what be they ? " Abraham ask bluntly . 

 " one be a private matter , which I do not   think I need speak of ; but the other I can explain . I have find a courageous publisher who have offer to bring my book out if I take a certain risk . this I have make up my mind to do . I want to get the thing out , if only for the sake of hear Mrs. Grundy lift up her voice ; and if it can not   be otherwise , I must publish at my own expense . " 

 " will it repay you ? " Mr. Woodstock ask . 

 " ultimately , I have no doubt ; but I do not   care so much about that . " 

 " H'm . I should think that be the chief matter to be consider . and you will not   tell I what the other speculation be ? " 

 " I be go to lend a friend some money , but I do not   wish to go into detail . " 

 the old man look at he shrewdly . 

 " very well , " he say presently . " I will let you have the cash . could you manage to look in at the office to - morrow at mid - day ? " 

 this be arrange , and Waymark rise , but Mr. Woodstock motion to he to resume his seat . 

 " as we be talk , " he begin , " I may as well have over something that be on my mind . why have not   you tell Ida yet about that engagement of your ? " 

 " have not   you do so ? " Waymark ask , in surprise . 

 " do you think I have ? " 

 " why , yes , I do . " 

 " I have   do nothing of the kind , " Abraham return , pretend to be surprised at the supposition , though he know it be a perfectly natural one . 

 Waymark be silent . 

 " do not   you think , " the other pursue , " it be about time something be say to she ? " 

 " I can not   see that it matter , and " 

 " but I can see . as long as that be not   know you be here , to speak plainly , on false pretence . " 

 " then I will not   come here at all ! " 

 " very good , " exclaim the old man irritably , ' so long as you explain to her first . " 

 Waymark turn away , and stand gaze gloomily at the floor . Abraham regard he , and a change come over his hard face . 

 " now , look here , " he say , " there be something in all this I can not   make out . be this engagement a serious one ? " 

 " serious ? " return the other , with a look of misery . " how can it be otherwise ? " 

 " very well ; in that case you be bind to let Ida know about it , and at once . damn it all , do not   you know your own mind ? " 

 Waymark collect himself , and speak gravely . 

 " I , of course , understand why you press so for this explanation . you take it for grant that Ida regard I as something more than a friend . if so , my manner since she have be here must have clearly show she that , on my side , I have not the least thought of offer more than friendship . you yourself will grant so much , I believe . for all that , I do not   deny that our relation have always be unusual ; and it would cost I very much to tell she of my engagement . I ask you to relieve I of the painful task , on the understanding that I never come here again . I can not   make you understand my position . you say my behaviour have not be straightforward . in the ordinary sense of the word it have not ; there let it rest . tell Ida what you will of I , and let I disappear from her world . " 

 " the plain English of all which , " cry Abraham angrily , " be , that , as far as you be concern , you would be quite willing to let the girl live on false hope , just to have the pleasure of her society as long as you care for it . " 

 " not so , not so at all ! I value Ida 's friendship as I value that of no other woman , and I be persuade that , if I be free with she , I could reconcile she entirely to our connection remain one of friendship , and nothing more . " 

 Waymark , in his desperate strait , all but persuade himself that he tell the truth . Mr. Woodstock gaze at he in doubt . he would give he to the end of July to make up his mind ; by that time Waymark must either present himself as a free man , or allow Ida to be inform of his position . in the meanwhile he must come to Tottenham not oftener than once a week . to this Waymark agree , glad of any respite . 

 he return to his lodging in a state of nervous misery . fortunately , he be not leave to his thought ; in a few minute a knock at his door announce a visitor in the person of Mr. O'Gree . the Irishman exhibit his wonted liveliness , and at once begin to relate an incident to the disadvantage of his archenemy . 

 " faith , " he cry , " I would have give a trifle if ye could have hear the conversation between Tootle and I , just after breakfast yesterday . the boy be file out of the room , when , ' Mr. O'Gree ! ' cry Pendy . ' Sir ! ' I reply . ' the boy be call late this morning , I hear . ' ' no such thing , sir , ' I assure ' um . ' half - past six to the minute , by my watch . ' ' oh , your watch , Mr. O'Gree , ' cry the old reprobate . ' I fear your watch do not   keep very good time . ' ' sure , you be in the right , sir , ' say I ; ' it be be lose a little of late ; so only last night I stop it at half - past six , to make sure it would show I the right call - time this morning . ' and , when I have say that , I just nod my head , as much as to say , ' there be one for ye , I boy ! ' and walk off as jaunty as a Limerick bantam . " 

 then , after a burst of merriment , O'Gree suddenly fix his face in a very grave expression . 

 " I be resolve , Waymark , I be resolve ! " he exclaim . " at midsummer I break my chain , and stand erect in the dignity of a free man . I have   say it often , but now I mean it . Sally urge I to do ut , and Sally never utter a worrud that be not   pure wisdom . " 

 " well , I think she be right . I myself should prefer a scavenger 's existence , on the whole . but have you think any far of the other scheme ? " 

 " the commercial undertaking ? we be talk it over the other night . Sally say : borrow the money and risk ut . and I think she be in the right . if you enter the world of commerce , you must be prepare for speculation . we look over the advertisement in a newspaper , just to get an idea , and we calculate the concern could be set afloat for seventy - five pound . out of that we could pay a quarter 's rent , and stock the shop . Sally 's be behind the counter a good bit of late , and she be get an insight into that kind of thing . wonderful girl , Sally ! put she in Downing Street for a week , and she would be competent to supplant the Premier ! " 

 " you have decide for a chandler 's ? " 

 " yes ; we neither of we know much about tobacco , and tobacco perhaps be not   quit the thing for a man of education . but to be a chandler be something worthy of any man 's ambition . you supply at once the solid and the luxury of life ; you range from boil ham and pickle to mixed biscuit and preserve . you be the focus of a whole street . the father come to you for his mid - day bread and cheese , the mother for her half - ounce of tea , the child for its farthing's - worth of sweet . for year I have   be lead a useless life ; once let I get into my shop , and I become a column of the social system . faith , it be as good as do ! " 

 " from whom shall you borrow the cash ? " 

 " Sally be go to think about that point . I suppose we shall go to a loan office , and make some kind of arrangement . I be rather vague on these thing , but Sally will find it out . " 

 " I understand , " say Waymark , check his amusement , that you be perfectly serious in this plan ? " 

 " as serious as I be in the moment of my birth ! there be no other chance . " 

 " very well , then , suppose I offer to lend you the money . " 

 " you , Waymark ? " 

 " no less a person . " 

 and he go on to explain how it be that he be able to make the offer , add that any sum up to a hundred pound be at his friend 's disposal . 

 " ye mean it , Waymark ! " cry O'Gree , leap round the room in ecstasy . " Bedad , you be a man and a brother , and no mistake ! Ye're the first that ever offer to lend I a penny ; ye're the first that ever have faith in I ! you shall come with I to see Sally on Saturday , and tell she this yourself , and I should not   be surprised if she give you a kiss ! " 

 O'Gree exhaust himself in capering and vociferation , then sit down and begin to exercise his luxuriant imagination in picture unheard - of prosperity . 

 " we will take a shop in a new neighbourhood , where we shall have the monopoly . the people will get to know Sally ; she will be like a magnet behind the counter . I shall go to the wholesale house , and impress they with a sense of my financial stability ; I flatter myself I shall look the prosperous shopkeeper , eh ? who know what we may come to ? why , in a few year we may transfer our business to Oxford Street or Piccadilly , and call ourselves italian warehouseman ; and bedad , we will turn out in the end another Crosse and Blackwell , see if we do not ! " 

 at the utmost limit of the time allow he by the rule of the Academy , the future man of business take his leave , in spirit extravagant even for he . 

 " faith , " he exclaim , when he be already at the door , " who d'ye think I see last Sunday ? as I be free in the afternoon , I take a walk , and , come back , I go into a little coffee - shop for a cup of tea . a man in an apron come up to serve I , and , by I soul , if it be not   poor old Egger ! I have   hear not a word of he since he leave last Christmas . he be ashamed of himself , poor devil ; but I do my good to make he easy . after all , he be well off than in the scholastic line . " 

 Waymark laugh at this incident , and stand watch O'Gree 's progress down the street for a minute or two . then he go to his room again , and sit down with a sigh , fall into deep brooding . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 a vision of sin 

 Maud Enderby 's life at home become ever more solitary . such daily intercourse as have be establish between her mother and herself grow less and less fruitful of real intimacy , till at length it be feel by both to be mere form . Maud strove against this , but there be no corresponding effort on the other side ; Mrs. Enderby show no dislike for her daughter , yet unmistakably shun she . if she chance to enter the sitting - room whilst Maud be there , she would , if possible , retreat unobserve ; or else she would feign to have come in quest of something , and at once go away with it . Maud could not fail to observe this , and its recurrence strike a chill to her heart . she have not the courage to speak to her mother ; a deadweight of trouble , a restless spirit of apprehension , make her life one of passive endurance ; she fear to have the unnatural condition of their home openly recognise . very often her thought turn to the time when she have find refuge from herself in the daily occupation of teaching , and , have she dare , she would gladly have go away once more as a governess . but she could not bring herself to propose such a step . to do so would necessitate explanation , and that be what she dread most of all . whole day , with the exception of meal - time , she spend in her own room , and there no one ever disturb she . sometimes she read , but most often sit in prolong brooding , heedless of the hour . 

 her father be now constantly away from home . he tell she that he travel on business . it scarcely seem to be a relief to he to rest awhile in his chair ; indeed , Paul have grow incapable of rest . time be deepen the line of anxiety on his sallow face . his mind seem for ever rack with painful calculation . Mrs. Enderby , too , spend much time away from the house , and Maud know nothing of her engagement . one thing , however , Maud could not help notice , and that be that her mother be clearly very extravagant in her mode of living . new and costly dress be constantly be purchase , as well as article of luxury for the house . Mrs. Enderby have of late provide herself with a femme de chambre , a young woman who array herself with magnificence in her mistress castoff dress , and whose appearance and demeanour have something the reverse of domestic . Maud almost fear she . then there be a hire brougham constantly in use . whenever Mrs. Enderby spend an evening at home , company be sure to be entertain ; noisy and showy people fill the drawing - room , and remain till late hour . Maud do not even see their face , but the voice of one or two man and woman become only too familiar to she ; even in the retirement of her room she could not avoid hear these voice , and they make her shudder . especially she be conscious of Mr. Rudge 's presence ; she know his very step on the stair , and wait in feverish apprehension for the first note of an accompaniment on the piano , which warn she that he be go to sing . he have a good voice , and it be often in request . sometimes the inexplicable dread of his singing be more than she could bear ; she would hurry on her walking - attire , and , steal like a shadow down the stair , would seek refuge in pace about the street of the neighbourhood , heedless of weather or the hour . 

 Mrs. Enderby never come down to breakfast . one morning , when Paul happen to be at home , he and Maud have finish that meal in silence , and Maud be rise to leave the room , when her father check she . he lean over the table towards she , and speak in an anxious undertone . 

 " have you notice anything a little a little strange in your mother lately , Maud ? anything in her way of speak , I mean her general manner ? " 

 the girl meet his look , and shake her head . the approach to such a conversation affect she as with a shock ; she could not speak . 

 " she have very bad night , you know , " Paul go on , still in a tone just above a whisper , " and of late she have be take chloral . it be against my wish , but the relief make it an irresistible temptation . I fear I be afraid it be have some deleterious effect upon she ; she seem to be a little just a little delirious in the night , I think . " 

 there be something horrible in his voice and face as he utter these word ; he shudder slightly , and his tongue seem to labour for utterance , as though he dread the sound of his own speech . 

 Maud sit unmoving and silent . 

 " I think , also , " Paul go on , " that she appear a little strange last evening , when the people be here . you be not   in the drawing - room ? " 

 Maud shake her head again . 

 " do you do you think , " he ask , ' she be have too much excitement ? I know she need a life of constant variety ; it be essential to she . I be sure you understand that , Maud ? you you do not   misjudge she ? " 

 " no , no ; it be necessary to she , " say the girl mechanically . 

 " but , " her father pursue , with still low voice , " there be always the danger lest she should over - exert herself . last night I I think I notice but it be scarcely worth speak of ; I be so easily alarmed , you know . " 

 Maud try to say something , but in vain . 

 " you you will not   desert she quite maud ? " say her father in a tone of plead . " I be oblige to be so muck away God know I can not   help it . and then I I wonder whether you have notice ? I seem to have little influence with she . " 

 he stop , but the next moment force himself to utter what be in his mind . 

 " can not   you help I a little more , Maud ? could not   you induce she to live a little more more restfully at time ? " 

 she rise , push the chair back behind she . 

 " Father , I can not ! " she cry ; then burst into a passion of tear . 

 " God help we ! " her father breathe , rise and look at she in blank misery . but in a moment she have recover herself . they face each other for an instant , but neither venture to speak again , and Maud turn and leave he . 

 Waymark come as usual , but now he seldom see Mrs. Enderby . Maud receive he alone . there be little that be lover - like in these hour spend together . they kiss each other at meeting and parting , but , with this exception , the manner of both be very slightly different from what it have be before their engagement . they sit apart , and talk of art , literature , religion , seldom of each other . it have come to this by degree ; at first there have be more warmth , but passion never . Waymark 's self - consciousness often weigh upon his tongue , and make his conversation but a string of commonplace ; Maud be often silent for long interval . their eye never meet in a steady gaze . 

 Waymark often ask himself whether Maud 's be a passionless nature , or whether it be possible that her reserve have the same origin as his own . the latter he feel to be unlikely ; sometimes there be a pressure of her hand as their lip just touch , the indication , he believe , of feeling hold in restraint for uncertain reason . she welcome he , too , with a look which he in vain endeavour to respond to a look of sudden relief from weariness , of gentle illumination ; it smite he like a reproach . when the summer have set in , he be glad to change the still room for the open air ; they walk frequently about Regent 's Park , and linger till after sunset . 

 one evening , when it be dull and threatened rain , they return to the house soon than usual . Waymark would have take his leave at the door , as he ordinarily do , but Maud beg he to enter , if only for a few minute . it be not quite nine o'clock , and Mrs. Enderby be from home . 

 he seat himself , but Maud remain stand irresolutely . Waymark glance at she from under his eyebrow . he do not find it easy to speak ; they have both be silent since they leave the park , with the exception of the few word exchange at the door . 

 " will you let I sit here ? " Maud ask suddenly , push a footstool near to his chair , and kneel upon it . 

 he smile and nod . 

 " when will they begin the printing ? " she ask , refer to his book , which be now in the hand of the publisher who have undertake it . 

 " not for some month . it can not   come out till the winter season . " 

 " if it should succeed , it will make a great difference in your position , will not   it ? " 

 " it might , " he reply , look away . 

 she sit with her eye fix on the ground . she wish to continue , but something stay she . 

 " I do not   much count upon it , " Waymark say , when he could no long endure the silence . " we must not   base any hope on that . " 

 he rise ; the need of change his attitude seem imperative . 

 " must you go ? " Maud ask , look up at he with eye which speak all that her voice fail to utter . 

 he move his head affirmatively , and hold out his hand to raise she . she obey his summon , and stand up before he ; her eye have fix themselves upon his ; he could not avoid their strange gaze . 

 " good - bye , " he say . 

 her free hand rise to his shoulder , upon which it scarcely rest . he could not escape her eye , though to meet they torture he . her lip be move , but he could distinguish no syllable ; they move again , and he could just gather the sense of her whisper . 

 " do you love I ? " 

 an immense pity thrill through he . he put his arm about she , hold she closely , and press his lip against her cheek . she redden , and hide her face against he . Waymark touch her hair caressingly , then free his other hand , and go from the room . 

 Maud sit in thought till a loud ring at the door - bell make her start and flee upstairs . the room in which she and Waymark sit when they be by themselves be in no danger of invasion , but she fear the possibility of meet her mother to - night . her father be away from home , as usual , but the day of his return be always uncertain , and Mrs. Enderby might perchance open the door of the little sit - room just to see whether he be there , as it be here he ordinarily employ himself when in the house . from her bedroom Maud could hear several people ascend the stair . it be ten o'clock , but an influx of visitor at such an hour be nothing remarkable . she could hear her mother 's laugh , and then the voice of a man , a voice she know but too well that of Mr. Budge . 

 her nerve be excited . the night be close , and there be muttering of thunder at time ; the cloud whence they come seem to she to spread its doleful blackness over this one roof . an impulse seize she ; she take paper and sit down at her desk to write . it be a letter to Waymark , a letter such as she have never address to he , and which , even in write it , she be conscious she could not send . her hand tremble as she fill the page with burn word . she pant for more than he have give she ; this calm , half - brotherly love of his be just now like a single drop of water to one die of thirst ; she cry to he for a deep draught of the joy of life . the word come to she without need of thought ; tear fall hot from her eye and blot what she write . 

 the tear bring her relief ; she be able to throw her writing aside , and by degree to resume that dull , vacant mood of habitual suffering which at all event could be endure . from this , too , there be at time a retreat possible with the help of a book . she have no mind to sleep , and on look round , she remember that the book she have be read in the early part of the day be downstairs . it be after midnight , and she seem to have a recollection of hear the visitor leave the house a little while ago ; it would be safe to venture as far as the sit - room below . 

 she begin to descend the stair quietly . there be still a light in the hall , but the quietness of the house reassure she . on turn an angle of the stair , however , she see that the door of the drawing - room be open , and that just within stand two figure her mother and Mr. Rudge . they seem to be whisper together , and in the same moment their lip meet . then the man come out and go downstairs . Mrs. Enderby turn back into the drawing - room . 

 Maud stand fix to the spot . darkness have close in around she , and she cling to the banister to save herself from the gulf which seem to yawn before her foot . the ringing of a bell , the drawing - room bell summon Mrs. Enderby 's maid , bring she back to consciousness , and with tremble limb she regain her room . it be as though some ghastly vision of the night have shake her soul . the habit of her mind overwhelm she with the conviction that she know at last the meaning of that mystery of horror which have of late be strengthen its hold upon her imagination . the black cloud which lower above the house have indeed its significance ; the voice which wail to she of sin and woe be the true expression of thing amid which she have be move unconsciously . that instinct which make her shrink from her mother 's presence be not without its justification ; the dark power which circle her existence have not vainly force their influence upon she . her first impulse be to flee from the house ; the air breathe pestilence and death , death of the soul . look about she in the anguish of conflict thought , her eye fall upon the page she have write . these now come before she as a proof of contagion which have seize upon her own nature ; she tear the letter hastily into fragment , and , strike fire with a match , consume they in the grate . as she watch the spark go out , there come a rustling of dress past her door . she fling herself upon her knee and seek refuge in wild , wordless prayer . 

 a fortnight after this Maud go late in the evening to the room where she know her father be sit alone . Paul Enderby look up from his paper in surprise ; it be some time since Maud have seek private conversation with he . as he meet her pale , resolute face , he know that she have a serious purpose in thus visit he , and his look change to one of nervous anticipation . 

 " do I disturb you , father ? " Maud ask . " could you spare I a few minute ? " 

 Paul nod , and she take a seat near he . 

 " Father , I be go to leave home , go to be a governess again . " 

 he draw a sigh of relief ; he have expect something bad than this . yet the relief be only for a moment , and then he look at she with eye which make her soul fail for very compassion . 

 " you will desert I , Maud ? " he ask , try to convey in his look that which he could not utter in word . 

 " Father , I can be of no help , and I feel that I must not remain here . " 

 " have you find a place ? " 

 " this afternoon I engage myself to go to Paris with a french family . they have be in England some time , and want to take back an english governess for their child . " 

 Paul be silent . 

 " I leave the day after to - morrow , " she add ; at first she have fear to say how soon she be to go . 

 " you be right , " her father say , shift some paper about with a tremulous hand . " you be right to leave we . you at least will be safe . " 

 " safe ? " she ask , under her breath . 

 he look at she in the same despairing way , but say nothing . 

 " Father , " she begin , her lip quiver in the intensity of her inward struggle , " can you not go away from here ? can you not take mother away ? " 

 they gaze at each other , each try to divine what it be that make the other so pale . do her father know ? Maud ask herself . do Maud know something more than he himself ? be the doubt in Paul 's mind . but they be think of different thing . 

 " I can not , I can not ! " the wretched man exclaim , spread out his arm on the desk . " perhaps in a few month but I doubt . I can do nothing now ; I be helpless ; I be not my own master . o God , if I could but go and leave it all behind I ! " 

 Maud could only guess at the meaning of this . he have already hint to she of business trouble which be crush he . but this be a matter of no moment in her sight . there be something more terrible , and she could not force her tongue to speak of it . 

 " you fear for she ? " Paul go on . " you have notice her strangeness ? " he lower his voice . " what can I do , Maud ? " 

 " you be so much away , " she say hurriedly , lay her hand on his arm . " her visitor she have so many temptation " 

 " Temptations ? " 

 " Father , help she against herself ! " 

 " my help be vain . there be a curse on her life , and on mine . I can only stand by and wait for the bad . " 

 she could not speak . it be her duty , clearly her imperative duty , yet she durst not fulfil it . she have come down from her room with the fix purpose , attain after night of sleepless struggle , of tell he what she have see . she find herself alone again , the task unfulfille . and she know that she could not face he again . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 a GARDEN - PARTY 

 Waymark receive with astonishment Maud 's letter from Paris . he have see she only two day before , and their conversation have be of the ordinary kind ; Maud have give he no hint of her purpose , not even when he speak to she of the come holiday season , and the necessity of she have a change . she confess she be not well . sometimes , when they have both sit for some minute in silence , she would raise her eye and meet his gaze steadily , seem to search for something . Waymark could not face this look ; it drive he to break the suspense by any kind of remark on an indifferent subject . he remember now that she have gaze at he in that way persistently on the last evening that they be together . when he be say good - bye , and as he bend to kiss she , she hold he back for a moment , and seem to wish to say something . Doubtless she have be on the point of tell he that she be go away ; but she let he leave in silence . 

 it be not a long letter that she write ; she merely say that change have become indispensable to body and soul , and that it have seem good to make it suddenly . 

 " I hope , " she write in conclusion , " that you will see my father as often as you can ; he be very much in need of friendly company , and I should like you to be able to send I news of he . do not fear for I ; I feel already well . I be always with you in spirit , and in the spirit I love you ; God help I to keep my love pure ! " 

 Waymark put away the letter carelessly ; the first sensation of surprise over , he do not even care to speculate on the reason which have lead Maud to leave home . it be but seldom now that his thought busy themselves with Maud ; the unreal importance which she have for a time assume in his life be only a recollection ; her very face be ghostlike in his mind 's eye , dim , always vanish . if the news of her departure from England move he at all , it be with a slight sense of satisfaction ; it would be so much easy to write letter to she than to speak face to face . yet , in the day that follow , the ghostlike countenance hover more persistently before he than be its wo not ; there be a far - off pleading in its look , and sometimes that shadow of reproach which our uneasy conscience will cast upon the face of those we have wrong . this pass , however , and another image , one which have ever grow in clearness and persistency of presentment in proportion as Maud 's fade away , glide before he in the hour of summer sunlight , and shine forth with the beauty of a rise star against the clouded heaven of his dream . 

 Waymark 's mood be bitter , but , in spite of himself , it be no long cynical . he could not indulge himself in that pessimistic scepticism which have aid he in bear his poverty , and the restless craving of sense and spirit which have accompany it . his enthusiasm for art be fall away ; as a faith it have fail he in his hour of need . in its stead another faith have come to he , a faith which he feel to be all - powerful , and the sole stay of a man 's life amid the shifting shadow of intellectual creed . and it have be reveal too late . lead by perverse motif , now no long intelligible , he have reach a goal of mere frustration ; between he and the true end of his be there be a great gulf fix . 

 to Ida , in the meanwhile , these week of early summer be bring health of body and cheerfulness of mind . she spend very much of her time in the open air . whenever it be possible she and Miss Hurst take their book out into the garden , and let the shadow of the rose - bush mark the hour for they . Ida 's natural vigour throve on the strength - give property of sun and breeze the last trace of unwholesome pallor pass from her face , and exercise send her home flush like the dawn . 

 one afternoon she go to sit with her grandfather on a bench beneath an apple - tree . the old man have his pipe and a newspaper . Ida be quiet , and glance at she presently , Abraham find her eye fix upon he . 

 " Grandfather , " she say , in her gentle voice , " will you let I give a garden - party some day next week ? " 

 " a party ? " Mr. Woodstock raise his brow in astonishment . " who be you go to invite ? " 

 " you will think it a strange notion . I wonder whether I can make it seem as delightful to you as it do to I . suppose we go to those house of your , and get together as many poor little girl as we could , and bring they all here to spend an afternoon in the garden . think what an unheard - of thing it would be to they ! and then we would give they some tea , and take they back again before dark . " 

 the proposal fill Mr. Woodstock with dismay , and the habitual hardness of his face suggest a displeasure he do not in reality feel . 

 " as you say , it be a strange notion , " he remark , smile very slightly . " I do not   know why you should not   have your own way , Ida , but it will cost you a good deal of trouble , you know . " 

 " you be mistake I , grandfather . you think this a curious whim I have get into my head , and your kindness would tempt you to let I do a silly thing just for the sake of have my way . it be no foolish fancy . it be not for my sake , but for the child 's . " 

 her eye be aglow with earnestness , and her voice tremble . 

 " do you think they would care for it ? " ask her grandfather , impress by something in she which he have never see before . 

 " care for it ! imagine a poor little thing that have be bear in a wretched , poverty - stricken , disorderly home , a home that be no home , and grow up with no knowledge of anything but those four hateful wall and the street outside . no toy , no treat , no change of air ; play in the gutter , never see a beautiful thing , never hear of the pleasure which rich people 's child would pine and die without and a child for all that . " 

 Mr. Woodstock clear his throat and smooth the newspaper upon his knee . 

 " how will you get they here , Ida ? " 

 " oh , leave that to I ! let we choose a day ; would not   Saturday be good ! I will go there myself , and pick out the child , and get their mother to promise to have they ready . then I will arrange to have one of those cart you see at Sunday - school treat . why , the ride here , that alone ! and you will let I have tea for they , just bread and butter and a bun , it will cost not half as much as my new dress this week , not half as much " 

 " come , come , I can not   stand this ! " growl out Abraham , get up from the seat . " I would give they the garden , for good and all , rather than see you like that . say Saturday , if it be fine ; if not , Monday , or when you like . " 

 on the following morning the detail be arrange , and the next day Ida go to Litany Lane . she prefer to go alone , and on this errand Mr. Woodstock would have find a difficulty in accompany she . Ida know exactly the nature of the task she have take in hand , and find it easy than it would have be to the ordinary young lady . she jot down the name of some twenty little girl , select such as be between the age of eight and twelve , and obtain promise that all should be ready at a fixed hour next Saturday . she meet with doubt and objection and difficulty enough , but only fail in one or two instance . then follow fresh talk with her grandfather , and all the detail be arrange . 

 there be rain on the Thursday and Friday , but when Ida draw up her blind at six o'clock on Saturday morning , the sky give promise of good thing . she be walk in the garden long before breakfast - time , and gladden to rapture as she watch the sun gain power , till it stream gloriously athwart cloudless blue . by one o'clock she be at the end of Litany Lane , where the cart with long seat be already wait ; its arrival have become know to the little one , and very few need summoning . of course there be disappointment now and again . in spite of mother ' promise , half the child have their usual dirty face , and show no sign of any preparation . five or six of they have nothing to put on their head ; two have bare foot . it be too late to see to these thing now ; as they be , the child clamber , or be lift , on to the cart , and Ida take her seat among they . then a crack of the driver 's whip , and amid the shout of envious brother and sister , and before the wonder stare of the rest of the population , off they drive away . 

 " who would like an apple ? " Ida ask , as soon as they be well clear of the narrow street . there be a general scream of delight , and from a hamper by her side she bring out apple and distribute they . only for a minute or two have there be anything like shyness in Ida 's presence ; she know how to talk and behave to these poor little waif . her eye fill with tear as she listen to their chatter among themselves , and recognise so many a fragment of her own past life . one child , who sit close by she , have be spend the morning in wash vegetable for the Saturday - night market . do not that call to mind something ? so far off ; so far , yet near to she than many thing which have intervene . how they all laugh , as the big , black house give way to bright street , and these again begin to open upon glimpse of field or garden ! not one of they have the slight conception of whither they be be take , or what be to happen to they at length . but they have confidence in " the lady . " she be a sorceress in their eye ; what limit could there be to her power ? something good and joyous await they ; that be all they know or care ; league of happiness , stretch away to the remote limit of the day 's glory ; a present rapture beyond knowledge , and a memory for ever . 

 Mr. Woodstock stand within the gate of the garden , his hand in his pocket , and as the vehicle come in sight he draw just a little back . 

 they stream along the carriage - drive , and in a minute or two be all cluster upon the lawn behind the house . what be expect of they ? have an angel take they by he hand and lead they straight from Litany Lane through the portal of paradise , they could not have be more awed and bewilder . tree and rose - bush , turf and bed of flower , seat in the shade , skipping - rope throw about on the open and there , hark , a hand - organ , a well one than ever they dance to on the pavement , strike up to make they merry . that be the happy thought ! it be something not too unfamiliar ; the one joyful thing of which they have experience meet they here to smooth over the first introduction to a new world . Ida know it well , the effect of that organ ; have it not lighten her heart many and many a time in the by - go darkness ? two of the girl have catch each other by the waist at the first sound . might they ? would " the lady " like it ? 

 Miss Hurst have come out as soon as the music begin , and Ida run to talk with she . there be whispering between they , and point to one and another of the child , and then the governess , with a pleased face , disappear again . she be away some time , but on her return two of the child be call into the house . Bare - footed they go in , but come forth again with shoe and stocking on , hardly able to comprehend what have happen to they . then be summon those who have nothing on their head , and to each of these a straw hat be give , a less wonderful possession than the shoe and stocking , but a source of gladness and pride . 

 in the meantime , however , marvel have accumulate on the lawn . whilst yet the organ be play , there appear two man , one of they carry a big drum , the other hide under a Punch and Judy show . of a sudden there sound a shrill note , high above the organ , a fluting from the bottom to the top of the gamut , the immemorial summon to child , the overture to the primitive drama . it be drown in a scream of welcome , which , in its turn , be outdo by thunderous peal upon the drum . 

 Mr. Woodstock say little during the whole afternoon . perhaps he think the more . 

 table have be fix in one part of the garden , and as the drama of Punch draw to an end , its interest find a serious rival in the spectacle of pile plate of cake . but there be to intervene nearly half - an - hour before the tea - urn be ready to make an appearance . the skipping - rope come into requisition outside , but in the house be proceed simultaneously a rather more serious pastime , which fall to Ida 's share to carry out . choose the little girl whose face be the dirty and hair the untidy of any she could see , she lead she gently away to a place where a good bowl of warm water and plenty of soap be at hand , and , with the air of bestow the great kindness of all , fall to work to such purpose that in a few minute the child go back to the garden a resplendent being , positively clean and kempt for the first time in her life . 

 " I know you will feel uncomfortable for a little , dear , " Ida say , dismiss the astonished maiden with a kiss , " but the strangeness will wear off ; and you will see how much nice it be . " 

 one after another , all be deal with in this way , presently with a good - natured servant - girl 's assistance , as time press . the result be that a transformed company sit down to tea . the feeling wear off , as Ida say , but at first cleanliness mean positive discomfort , take the form of loss of identity and difficulty of mutual recognition . they look at their hand , and be amazed at the whiteness that have come upon they ; they keep feel their face and their ordered hair . but the appetite of one and all be improve by the process . 

 " how I wish Mr. Waymark be here ! " Ida say to her grandfather , as they stand together , watch the feast . " he would enjoy it . we must give he a full account to - morrow , must not   we ? " 

 " I forgot , " reply the other . " I have a note from he this morning , say he think he should not   be able to come . " 

 the first shadow of disappointment which this day have bring fall upon the girl 's countenance . she make no reply , and presently go to help one or the young child , who have spill her tea and be in evident distress . 

 after tea the organ strike up again , and again there be dance on the lawn . then a gathering of flower by Ida and Miss Hurst , and one give to each of the child , with injunction to put it in water on reach home , and keep it as long as possible in memory of the day . already the sun be westere , and Litany Lane must be reach before dusk . 

 " poor child ! " Ida sigh to herself . " if they have but home to go to ! " and add , in her thought , " we shall see , we shall see ! " 

 every bit as joyous as the ride out be the return to town . with foresight , Ida make the two young sit on each side of she ; soon the little head be droop in her lap , subdue by the very weariness of bliss . Miss Hurst have offer to accompany Ida , that she might not have to come back alone , but Ida want her friend all to herself , and be reward by the familiarity with which they gossippe to she all the way . 

 " hand up , all those who have not   enjoy themselves ! " she exclaim , just as they be enter the noisy street . 

 there be a moment 's doubt , then a burst of merry laughter . 

 " hand up , all those who would like to come again ! " 

 all hold up both arm except the two child who be asleep . 

 " well , you have   all be good , and I be very pleased with you , and you shall come again ! " 

 it be the culmination of the day 's delight . for the first time in their life the child of Litany Lane and Elm Court have something to look forward to . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 a late revenge 

 Ida clung to the possibility of Waymark 's pay his usual visit on the Sunday , but she be disappoint . this absence have no reason beyond Waymark 's choice . it be the last Sunday but one of the month ; a week more , and he must keep his word with Mr. Woodstock . the evil day have be put off , and to what purpose ? there have be some scarcely confess hope . Maud 's sudden departure from England , and her strange letter , might perhaps mean a change in she which would bring about his freedom ; he himself might possibly be drive by his wretchedness to the point of write to she in a way which would hasten her decision , if indeed she be doubt . 

 all be over between Ida and himself , so why undergo the torment of still see she . in send his note to Mr. Woodstock , he be on the point of surrender the week that remain , and beg that Ida might be tell at once , but his hand refuse to write the word . through the week that ensue he have no moment 's rest . at night he go to place of amusement , to seek distraction ; he wish and dread the coming of the Sunday . how would Ida receive the revelation ? should he write to she and try to make she understand he ? yet in that he could scarcely succeed , and failure would bring upon he her contempt . the only safety lie in never see or communicate with she again . 

 even on Saturday night he have not make up his mind how to act . he go to the theatre , but leave before the play be half over , and walk slowly homeward . as he draw near to his lodging , some one hasten towards he with both hand hold out . it be Maud Enderby . 

 " oh , I have wait so long ! I want to see you to - night . " she be exhaust with fatigue and distress , and still hold his hand , as if need their support . to Waymark , in his then state of mind , she come like an apparition . he could only look at she in astonishment . 

 " last night , " she say , " I have a telegram from father . he tell I to come back at once ; he have have to leave , and mother be alone . I be to call for a letter at a place in the city . I be in time to catch the night boat , and when I get his letter it tell I dreadful thing . something have happen which compel he to leave England at once . he could do nothing , make no arrangement . mother , he say , have a little money ; we must sell everything and manage to live somewhere for a little ; he would try to send we what he could . then I go home . there be a police - officer in the house , and mother have go away , I can not   tell where . Father have do something , and oh , what shall I do ? you can help I , can not   you ? " 

 Waymark , whom this news overwhelm with blank despair , could at first say nothing ; but the very greatness of the blow gradually produce in he the strength to bear it . he see that fate have take the future out of his hand ; there be no long even the appearance of choice . to Maud he must now devote himself , aid she with all his strength in the present and through the day to come . 

 " shall I go back home with you ? " he ask , press her hand to comfort she , and speak with the calmness of one who have make up his mind . 

 " yes ; perhaps mother will have return . but what shall we do ? what will happen to father ? do you know anything of all this ? " 

 " nothing whatever . walk with I to the top of the street , and we will take a cab . " 

 she hang upon his arm , tremble violently ; and during the drive to Paddington , she lie back with her eye close , hold Waymark 's hand in her own , which burn with fever . on alight , they find that Mrs. Enderby have indeed return ; the servant tell they so , and at the same time whisper something to Maud . they go up into the drawing - room , and there find Mrs. Enderby lie upon the couch . she could not understand when she be speak to , but nod her head and look at they with large , woebegone , wander eye . every effort to rouse she be vain . 

 it be a dreadful night . 

 the early dawn be in the sky when Waymark reach Beaufort Street . with no thought of sleep , he sit down at once and write to Mr. Woodstock , relate what have happen . " so , you see , " he conclude , " with the end of July have come the decision of my fate , as we agree it should . if I have see you to - morrow , as I propose , I know not what folly I might have be guilty of . tell Ida everything at once ; I shall never see she again . but do you , if you can , be my friend still . I need your help in this horrible situation . meet I will you ? at the office to - morrow night , say at eight o'clock . " 

 this letter would reach Tottenham on Monday morning . Waymark go to the office at the hour he have mention , and wait till ten o'clock . but Mr. Woodstock have not be in St. John Street Road that day , and the waiting be in vain . 

 the garden - party have not be without its effect upon Mr. Woodstock . on the follow day , when he be sit again with Ida in the garden , he recur to the conversation of a week ago , and seem desirous of lead the girl to speak freely on the subject which have such power to stir she . Ida have be wait for this ; she rejoice at the promise it hold out , and unburden her heart . would he not do yet more for the poor people in his house I could not their home in some way be make more fit for human being ? with careful observation of his mood , she lead he on to entertain thought he have never dream of , and before they part she have all but obtain a promise that he would go over the whole of his property and really see what could be do . Ida 's influence over he have by this time become very great ; the old man be ready to do much for the sake of please she . 

 on the following Tuesday he go down into Litany Lane in company with a builder , and proceed to investigate each of the house . in many instance the repair , to be of any use , would have to be considerable ; there would be a difficulty in execute they whilst the tenant remain in possession . one possibility occur to he in the course of examination , and he determine to make use of it ; he would create room by get rid of the bad tenant , all those , in fact , whose presence be pollution to the neighbourhood , and whom it be hopeless to think of reform . in this way he would be able to shift about the remain lodger without too great a loss to himself , and avoid the necessity of turn helpless people into the street . 

 Mr. Woodstock have considerably more knowledge of the state of his property , and of the tenant inhabit it , than be usual with landlord of his kind ; for all that , the present examination bring to light not a few thing which be startling even to he . since Waymark have cease to act as his collector , the office have be fill by an agent of the ordinary kind , and Mr. Woodstock have , till just now , take less interest in the property than formerly . thing have get bad on the whole . whereas Waymark have here and there be successful in suppress the gross form of uncleanliness by threat of expulsion , and at time by the actual enforcement of his threat , no such supervision have of late be exercise . there be very few house in which the air be at all tolerable ; in many instance the vilest odour hang about the open door - way . to pass out of Elm Court into the wide street around be like a change to the freshness of wood and field . and the source of this miasma be only too obvious . 

 the large house which make up Litany Lane have underground cellar ; in the court there be fortunately no such retreat . on enter one of these former house , the two be aware of an especially offensive odour rise from below the stair . pursue , however , their plan of begin at the garret , they go up together . in the room at the top they come upon a miserable spectacle . on something which , for want of another name , be probably call a bed , there lie a woman either already dead or in a state of coma , and on the floor sit two very young child , amuse themselves with a dead kitten , their only toy . Mr. Woodstock bend over the woman and examine she . he find that she be breathe , though in a slow and scarcely perceptible way ; her eye be open , but express no consciousness . the slightly - part lip be almost black , and here and there on her face there seem to be a kind of rash . Mr. Woodstock 's companion , after take one glance , draw hastily back . 

 " look like small - pox , " he say , in an alarmed voice . " I would not   stand so near , sir , if I be you . " 

 " be not   there any one to look to she ? " say Abraham . then turn to one of the child , " where be your father ? " he ask . 

 " Dono , " be the little fellow 's indifferent reply . 

 " be you alone ? " 

 " Dono . " 

 they go down to the floor below , and there find a woman stand at her door . 

 " what be the matter with she up there ? " ask Mr. Woodstock . 

 " she be very bad , sir . her Susan 's go to get a order for the parish doctor , I b'lieve . I be just a - go to look after the child when you come up . I have   only just come ' ome myself , you see . " 

 " what be that horrible stench down below ? " 

 " I do not   notice nothink , sir , " say the woman , look over the banister as if the odour might be see . 

 " any one live in the kitchen ? " 

 " there be some one , I b'lieve , sir , but I do not   exac'ly know if they be there yet . " 

 presently they reach the region below . in absolute darkness they descend step which be cover with a sort of slime , and then , by strike a light , find themselves in front of a closed door . open this , they enter a vile hole where it could scarcely be say to be daylight , so thickly be the little window patch with filth . grope about in the stifle atmosphere , they discover in one corner a mass of indescribable matter , from which arise , seemingly , the bad of the effluvia . 

 " what be it ? " ask Mr. Woodstock , hold a lighted match . 

 " rotten fish , it seem to I , " say the other , hold his nose . 

 Abraham turn away ; then , as if his eye have suddenly catch something , stride to another corner . there lie the body of a dead child , all but naked , upon a piece of sack . 

 " we would well get out of this , sir , " say the builder . " we shall be poison . wonder they have not   the plague here . " 

 " seem to I they have , " return Mr. Woodstock . 

 they go out into the street , and hail the first policeman in sight . then , give up his investigation for that morning , Mr. Woodstock repair to the police - station , and after a good deal of trouble , succeed in get the attendance of a medical man , with the result that the woman they have see up in the garret be find to be in truth die of small - pox . if the contagion spread , as probably it have by this time begin to , there would be a pleasant state of thing in Litany Lane . 

 in the evening , before go home , Abraham have a bath . he be not a nervous man , but the possibility of the risk he have run be not agreeable to contemplate . two or three day go by without any alarming symptom , but as he learn that another case of small - pox have declare itself in the Lane , he postpone his personal activity there for the present , and remain a good deal at home . on the Sunday morning when Waymark 's letter have already be post he awake with a headache , continue from the night before . it grow bad during the day , and he go to bed early with a dull pain across the forehead , which prevent he from sleep . on the following morning the headache still remain ; he feel a disinclination to rise , and now , for the first time , begin to be trouble with vague fear , which blend themselves with his various pre - occupation in a confusing way . the letter which arrive from Waymark be take up to he . it cause he extreme irritation , which be follow by uneasy dozing , the pain across his forehead grow bad the while . a doctor be summon . 

 the same day Ida and Miss Hurst leave the house , to occupy lodging hard by ; it be do at Mr. Woodstock 's peremptory bidding . Ida at once write to Waymark , beg he to come ; he arrive early next morning , and learn the state of thing . 

 " the doctor tell I , " say Ida , " there be a case in Litany Lane . it be very cruel . Grandfather go to make arrangement for have the house repair . " 

 " there I recognise your hand , " Waymark observe , as she make a pause . 

 " why have you so desert we ? " Ida ask . " why do we see you so seldom ? " 

 " it be so late every evening before I leave the library , and I be busy with all sort of thing . " 

 they have little to say to each other , Waymark promise to communicate at once with a friend of Mr. Woodstock 's , a man of business , and to come again as soon as possible , to give any help he could . whether Ida have be tell of his position remain uncertain . 

 for Ida they be sad , long day . trouble which she have previously manage to keep in the background now again beset she . she have attach herself to her grandfather ; gratitude for all that he be do at her wish strengthen her affection , and she await each new day with fear . Waymark seem cold to she in these day than he have ever be formerly . the occasion ought , she feel , to have bring they near together ; but on his side there appear to be no such feeling . the time hang very heavily on her hand . she try to go on with her study , but it be a mere pretence . 

 soon , she learn that there be no hope ; the sick man have sink into a state of unconsciousness from which he would probably not awake . she haunt the neighbourhood of the house , or , in her lodging , sit like one who wait , and the waiting be for she know not what . there be once more to be a great change in her life , but of what kind she could not foresee . she wish her suffering have be more acute ; her only relative be die , yet no tear would come to her eye ; it be heartless , and to weep would have bring relief to she . she could only sit and wait . 

 when Waymark come , on the evening of the next day , he hear that all be over . Ida see he , but only for a few minute . in go away , he pause by the gate of the silent house . 

 " the slum have avenge themselves , " he say to himself sadly , " though late . " 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 HOUSE - WARMING 

 on a Sunday afternoon in October , when Abraham Woodstock have lie in his grave for three month , Waymark meet Julian Casti by appointment in Sloane Square , and they set forth together on a journey to Peckham . they be go thither by invitation , and , to judge from the laughter which accompany their talk , their visit be likely to afford they entertainment . the merriment on Julian 's side be not very natural ; he look indeed too ill to enjoy mirth of any kind . as they stand in the Square , wait for an omnibus , he keep glance uneasily about he , especially in the direction whence they have come . it have the appearance of a habit , but before they have stand much more than a minute , he start and exclaim in a low voice to his companion 

 " I tell you so . she be just behind there . she have come round by the back street , just to see if I have tell she the truth . " 

 Waymark glance back and shrug his shoulder . 

 " Pooh ! never mind , " he say . " you be use to it . " 

 " use to it ! yes , " Julian return , his face flush suddenly a deep red , the effect of extraordinary excitement ; " and it be drive I mad . " 

 then , after a fit of cough 

 " she find my poem last night , and burn it . " 

 " burn it ? " 

 " yes ; simply because she could not understand it . she say she think it be waste paper , but I see , I see . " 

 the ' bus they wait for come up , and they go on their way . on reach the neighbourhood of Peckham , they strike off through a complex of small new street , apparently familiar to Waymark , and come at length to a little shop , also very new , the window of which display a fresh - look assortment of miscellaneous good . there be half a large cheese , mark by the incision of the tasting - knife ; a boil ham , garlanded ; a cone of brawn ; a truncated pyramid of spice beef , release from its american tin ; also german sausage and other dainty of the kind . then there be canister of tea and coffee , tin of mustard , a basket of egg , some onion , box of bake - powder and of black ; all arrange so as to make an impression on the passer - by ; everything clean and bright . above the window stand in impose gilt letter the name of the proprietor : O'Gree . 

 they enter . the shop be very small and do not contain much stock . the new shelf show a row of biscuit - tin , but little else , and from the ceiling hang ball of string . on the counter lie an invite round of boil beef . odour of provision and of fresh paint be strong in the air . every thing gleam from resent scrubbing and polishing ; the floor only emphasise its purity by a little track where a child 's shoe have bring in mud from the street ; doubtless it have be wash over since the Sunday morning 's custom have subside . wherever the wall would have confess their bareness the enterprise tradesman have hang gorgeous advertising card . at the sound of the visitor ' footstep , the door lead out of the shop into the parlour behind open briskly , a head have previously appear over the red curtain , and Mr. O'Gree , in the glory of Sunday attire , rush forward with eager hand . his welcome be obstreperous . 

 " Waymark , you be a brick ! Mr. Casti , I be rejoice to receive you in my establishment ! you be neither a minute too soon nor a minute too late . Mrs. O'Gree only this moment call out from the kitchen that the kettle be boil and the crumpet at the point of perfection ! I know your punctuality of old , Waymark . Mr. Casti , how do it strike you ? roar trade , Waymark ! do two shilling and threepence three farthing this Sunday morning . look here , I boy , ho , ho ! " 

 he draw out the till behind the counter , and jingle his hand in copper . then he rush about in the wild fervour from object to object , open tin which he have forget be empty , make pass at the beef and the ham with a formidable carving - knife , demonstrate the use of a sugar - chopper and a coffee - grinder , and , lastly , call attention with infinite glee to a bad halfpenny which he have detect on the previous afternoon , and have forthwith nail down to the counter , in terrorem . then he lift with much solemnity a hinged portion of the counter , and request his visitor to pass into the back - parlour . here there be the same perfect cleanliness , though the furniture be scant and very simple . the round table be lay for tea , with a spotless cloth , plate of a very demonstrative pattern , and knife and fork which seem only just to have leave the ironmonger 's shop . 

 " we pass , you observe , Mr. Casti , " cry the ex - teacher , " from the region of commerce to that of domestic intimacy . here Mrs. O'Gree reign supreme , as indeed she do in the other department , as far as preside genius go . she be in all place at once , like a birrud ! Mr. Casti , " in a whisper , " I shall have the pleasure of introduce you to one of the most remarkable woman it be ever your lot to meet ; a phenomenon of " 

 the inner door open , and the lady herself interrupt these eulogy . Sally be charming . her trim little body attire in the trim of homely dress , her sharp little face shin and just a little red with excitement , her quick movement , her laugh eye , her restless hand grace with the new wedding - ring all make up a picture of which her husband might well be proud . he stand and gaze at she in frank admiration ; only when she spring forward to shake hand with Waymark do he recover himself sufficiently to go through the ceremony of introduce Julian . it be do with all stateliness . 

 " an improvement this on the master ' room , eh , Waymark ? " cry Mr. O'Gree . then , suddenly interrupt he self , " and that remind I ! we have   get a lodger . " 

 " already ? " 

 " and who d'ye think ? who d'ye think ? you would not   guess if you go on till Christmas . Ho , ho , ho ! I be hang if I tell you . wait and see ! " 

 " shall I call he down ? " ask Sally , who in the meantime have bring in the tea - pot , and the crumpet , and a dish of slice from the round of beef on the counter , and boil egg , and sundry other dainty . 

 O'Gree , unable to speak for mirth , nod his head , and presently Sally return , follow by Mr. Egger . Waymark scarcely recognise his old friend , so much have the latter change : instead of the old woe - begone look , Egger 's face wear a joyous smile , and his outer man be so vastly improve that he have evidently fall on a more lucrative profession . Waymark remember O'Gree 's chance meeting with the Swiss , but have hear nothing of he since ; nor indeed have O'Gree till a day or two ago . 

 " how do thing go ? " Waymark inquire heartily . " find a well school ? " 

 " no , no , my friend , " return Egger , in his very bad English . " at the school I make my possible ; I do till I could no more . I have make like Mr. O'Gree ; it be to say , quite a change in my life . I be waiter at a restaurant . and see I ; be I not the well quite ? no fear ! " this cockneyism come in with comical effect . " I have enough to eat and to drink , and money in my pocket . the school may go to " 

 o'gree cough violently to cover the last word , and look reproachfully at his old colleague . poor Egger , who have be carry away by his joyous fervour , be abash , and glance timidly at Sally , who reply by give he half a dozen thick round of german sausage . on his request mustard , she fetch some from the shop and mix it , but , in do so , have the misfortune to pour too much water . 

 " there ! " she exclaim ; " I have   doubt the miller 's eye . " 

 O'Gree laugh when he see Waymark look for an explanation . 

 " that be a piece of Weymouth , " he remark . " Mrs. O'Gree come from the south - west of England , " he add , lean towards Casti . " she be constantly teach I new and interesting thing . now , if I be to spill the salt here " 

 he put his Ii and on the salt - cellar , as if to do so , but Sally rap his knuckle with a fork . 

 " none of your nonsense , sir ! give Mr. Casti some more meat , instead . " 

 it be a merry party . the noise of talk grow so loud that it be only the keenness of habitual attention on Sally 's part which enable she to observe that a customer be knock on the counter . she dart out , but return with a disappointed look on her face . 

 " pickle ? " ask her husband , frown . 

 Sally nod . 

 " now , look here , Waymark , " cry O'Gree , rise in indignation from his seat . " look here , Mr. Casti . the one drop of bitterness in our cup be pickle ; the one thing that threaten to poison our happiness be pickle . we be always be ask for pickle ; just as if the people know about it , and come on purpose ! " 

 " know about what ? " ask Waymark , in astonishment . 

 " why , that we may not   sell them ! a few door off there be a scoundrel of a grocer . now , his landlord 's the same as ours , and when we take this shop there be one condition attach . because the grocer sell pickle , and make a good thing of they , we have to undertake that , in that branch of commerce , we would not   compete with he . pickle be forbid . " 

 Waymark burst into a most unsympathetic roar of laughter , but with O'Gree the grievance be evidently a serious one , and it be some few moment before he recover his equanimity . indeed it be not quite restore till the entrance of another customer , who purchase two ounce of butter . when , in the dead silence which ensue , Sally be hear weigh out the order , O'Gree 's face beam ; and when there follow the chink of coin in the till , he bring his fist down with a triumphant crash upon the table . 

 when tea be over , O'Gree manage to get Waymark apart from the rest , and show he a small photograph of Sally which have recently be take . 

 " Sally 's great ambition , " he whisper , " be to be take cabinet - size , and in a snow - storm . you have   see the kind of thing in the shop - window ? we will manage that before long , but this will do for the present . you do not   see a face like that every day ; eh , Waymark ? " 

 Sally , her housewifery duly accomplish in the invisible region , come back and sit by the fireside . she have exchange her work - a - day costume for one rather more ornate . noticeable be a delicate gold chain which hang about her neck , and Waymark smile when he presently see she take out her watch and seem to compare its time with that of the clock on the mantelpiece . it be a wedding present from Ida . 

 Sally catch the smile , and almost immediately come over to a seat by Waymark ; and , whilst the other be engage in loud talk , speak with he privately . 

 " have you see she lately ? " she ask . 

 " not for some week , " the other reply , shake his head . 

 " well , it be the queer thing I ever know , s'nough ! but , there , " she add , with an arch glance , ' some man be that stupid " 

 Waymark laugh slightly , and again shake his head . 

 " all a mistake , " he say . 

 " yes , that be just what it be , you may depend upon it . I more'n half believe you be tell fib . " 

 tumbler of whisky be soon smoke on the table , and all except Casti laugh and talk to their heart 's content . Casti be no kill - joy ; he smile at all that go on , now and then put in a friendly word ; but the vitality of the other be lack in he , and the weight which crush he night and day could not so easily be throw aside . O'Gree be abundant in reminiscence of academic day , and it would not have be easy to resist altogether the comical vigour of his story , all without one touch of real bitterness or malice . 

 " Bedad , " he cry , " I send old Pendy a business prospectus , with my compliment write on the bottom of it . I think he might perhaps be dispose to give I a contract for victual the Academy . I wish he have , for the boy ' sake . " 

 then , to bring back completely the old time , Mr. Egger be prevail upon to sing one of his Volkslieder , that which have be Waymark 's especial favourite , and which he have sing on an occasion memorable to Sally and her husband in the little dining - room at Richmond . 

 " die schwalb'n flieg'n fort , doch sie zieh'n wieder she ; Der Mensch wenn er fortgeht , er kommt nimmermehr ! " 

 Waymark be silent for a little after that . 

 when it be nearly eleven o'clock , Casti look once or twice meaningly at Waymark , and the friend at length rise to take their leave , in spite of much protest . O'Gree accompany they as far as the spot where they would meet the omnibus , then , with assurance that to - night have be but the beginning of glorious time , send they on their way . Julian be silent during the journey home ; he look very wearied . for lack of a timely conveyance the last mile or so have to be walk . Julian 's cough have be bad during the evening , and now the cold night - air seem to give he much trouble . presently , just as they turn a corner , a severe blast of wind meet they full in the face . Julian begin cough violently , and all at once become so weak that he have to lean against a palisading . Waymark , look close in alarm , see that the handkerchief which the poor fellow be hold to his mouth be cover with blood . 

 " we must have a cab , " he exclaim . " it be impossible for you to walk in this state . " 

 Julian resist , with assurance that the bad be over for the time . if Waymark would give the support of his arm , he would get on quite well . there be no overcome his resolution to proceed . 

 " there be no misunderstanding this , old fellow , " he say , with a laugh , when they have walk a few pace . 

 Waymark make no reply . 

 " you will laugh at I , " Julian go on , " but be not   there a certain resemblance between my case and that of Keats ? he too be a drug - pounder ; he like it as little as I do ; and he die young of consumption . I suppose a die man may speak the truth about himself . I too might have be a poet , if life have deal more kindly with I . I think you would have like the thing I be write ; I would finish some three hundred line ; but now you will never see it . well , I do not   know that it matter . " 

 Waymark try to speak in a tone of hopefulness , but it be hard to give his word the semblance of sincerity . 

 " do you remember , " Casti continue , " when all my talk use to be about Rome , and how I plan to see it one day see it again . I should say ? strange to think that I really be bear in Rome . I use to call myself a Roman , you know , and grow hot with pride when I think of it . those be dream . oh , I be to do wonderful thing ! poetry be to make I rich , and then I would go and live in Italy , and fill my lung with the breath of the Forum , and write my great epic . how good that we can not   foresee our life ! " 

 " I wish to heaven , " Waymark exclaim , when they be part , " that you would be a man and shake this monstrous yoke from off your neck ! it be that that be kill you . give yourself a chance . defy everything and make yourself free . " 

 Julian shake his head sadly . 

 " too late ! I have not   the courage . my mind weaken with my body . " 

 he go to his lodging , and , as he anticipate , find that Harriet have not yet come home . she be almost always out very late , and he have learn too well what t expect on her return . in spite of her illness , of which she make the most when it suit her purpose , she be able t wander about at all hour with the acquaintance her husband do not even know by name , and Julian have no long the strength even to implore she to have pity on he . he absence rack he with nervous fear ; her presence torture he to agony . weakness in he have reach a criminal degree . once or twice he have all but make up his mind to flee secretly , and only let she know his determination when he have go ; but his poverty interpose such obstacle that he end by accept they as excuse for his hesitation . the mere thought of fulfil the duty which he owe to himself , of speak out with manly firmness , and tell she that here at length all end between they that be a terror to his soul . so he stay on and allow she to kill he by slow torment . he be at least carry out to the letter the promise he have make to her father , and this thought supply he with a flattering unction which , such be his disposition , at time even bring he a moment 's solace . 

 there be no fire in the room ; he sink upon a chair and wait . every sound in the street below send the blood back upon his heart . at length there come the fumbling of a latch - key he could hear it plainly and then the heavy foot ascend the stair . her glaze eye and red cheek tell the familiar tale . she sit down opposite he and be silent for a minute , half doze ; then she seem suddenly to become conscious of his presence , and the word begin to flow from her tongue , every one cut he to the quick , poison his soul with their venom of jealousy and vulgar spite . contention be the breath of her nostril ; the prime impulse of her heart be suspicion . little by little she come round to the wonte topic . have he be to see his friend the thief ? be she in prison again yet ? whom have she be steal from of late ? oh , she be innocence itself , of course ; too good for this evil - speak world . 

 tonight he could not bear it . he rise from his chair like a drunken man , and stagger to the door . she spring after he , but he be just in time to escape her grasp and spring down the stair ; then , out into the night . once before , not quite a month ago , he have be drive thus in terror from the sound of her voice , and have sleep at a coffeehouse . now , as soon as he have get out of the street and see that he be not be pursue , he discover that he have give away his last copper for the omnibus fare . no matter ; the air be pleasant upon his throb temple . it be too late to think of knock at the house where Waymark lodge . nothing remain but to walk about the street all night , rest on a stone when he become too weary to go far , shelter a little here or there when the wind cut he too keenly . rather this , oh , a thousand time rather , than the hell behind he . 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 no way but this 

 in the early day of October , Waymark 's book appear . it excite no special attention . here and there a reviewer be find who venture to hint that there be powerful writing in this new novel , but no one dare to heartily recommend it to public attention . by some it be class with the " unsavoury production of the so - call naturalist school ; " other pass it by with a few line of unfavourable comment . clearly it be destine to bring the author neither fame nor fortune . 

 Waymark be surprised at his own indifference . have give a copy to Casti , and one to Maud , he think very little more of the production . it have cease to interest he ; he feel that if he be to write again it would be in a very different way and of different people . even when he pride himself most upon his self - knowledge he have be most ignorant of the direction in which his character be develop . unconsciously , he have struggle to the extremity of weariness , and now he care only to let thing take their course , stand aside from every shadow of new onset . above all , he keep away as much as possible from the house at Tottenham , where Ida be still live . to go there mean only a renewal of torment . this be in fact the commonplace period of his life . he have no energy above that of the ordinary young man who be make his living in a commonplace way , and his high faculty lie dormant . 

 in one respect , and that , after all , perhaps the most important , his position would soon be change . Mr. Woodstock 's will , when affair be settle , would make he rich by one thousand pound ; he might , if he choose , presently give up his employment , and either trust to literature , or look out for something less precarious . a year ago , this state of thing would have file he with exultation . as it be , he only see in it an accident compel he to a certain fateful duty . there be now no reason why his marriage should be long delay . for Maud 's sake the step be clearly desirable . at present she and her mother be live with Miss Bygrave in the weird old house . of Paul there have come no tiding . their home be of course break up , and they have no income of their own to depend upon . maud herself , though of course aware of Waymark 's prospect , seem to shrink from speak of the future . she grow more and more uncertain as to her real thought and desire . 

 and what of Ida ? it be hard for she to realise her position ; for a time she be conscious only of an overwhelming sense of loneliness . the interval of life with her grandfather be dreamlike as she look back upon it ; yet hard to grasp be the situation in which she now find herself , surround by luxury which have come to she as if from the cloud , her own mistress , free to form wish merely for the sake of satisfy they . she care little to realise the minor possibility of wealth . the great purpose , the noble end to which her active life have shape itself , be sternly present before she ; she would not shirk its demand . but there be lack the inspiration of joy . could she harden herself to every personal desire , and forget , in devotion to other , the sickness of one great hope defer ? do her ideal require this of she ? 

 would he come , now that she be free to give herself where she would , now that she be so alone ? the distance between they have increase ever since the beginning of her new life . she know well the sort of pride he be capable of ; but be there not something else , something she dread to observe too closely , in the manner of his speech ? do he think so meanly of she as to deem such precaution necessary against her misconstruction ? Nay , could he have guard himself in that way if he really love she ? would it not have be to degrade she too much in his own eye ? 

 he love she once . have she in any way grow less noble in his eye , by those very thing which she regard as help and strengthening ? do he perchance think she have too readily accept ease when it be offer she , sacrifice the independence which he most regard ? if so , all the more would he shrink from lose for her his own independence . 

 she imagine herself wed to he ; at liberty to stand before he and confess all the thought which now consume she in the silence of vain longing . " why do I break free from the fetter of a shameful life ? because I love , and love you . what give I the strength to pass from idle luxury , poison the energy of the soul , to that life of lonely toil and misery ? my love , and my love for you . I keep apart from you then ; I would not even let you know what I be endure ; only because you have speak a hasty , thoughtless word to I , which show I with terrible distinctness the meaning of all I have escape , and fill I with a determination to prove to myself that I have not lose all my well nature , that there be still enough of purity in my be to save I finally . what be it that afflict I with agony beyond all word when I be make the victim of a cruel and base accusation ? not the fear of its consequence ; only the dread lest you should believe I guilty , and no long deem I worthy of a thought . it be no arrogance to say that I be become a pure woman ; not my own merit , but love of you have make I so . I love you as a woman love only once ; if you ask I to give up my life to prove it , I be capable of do no less a thing than that . flesh and spirit I lie before you all your ; do you still think the offering unworthy ? " 

 and yet she know that she could never thus speak to he ; her humility be too great . at moment she might feel this glow of conscious virtue , but for the most part the weight of all the past be so heavy upon she . 

 fortunately , her time do not long remain unoccupied . as her grandfather 's heiress she find herself owner of the East - end property , and , as soon as it be assure that she would incur no danger , she go over the house in the company of the builder whom Abraham have choose to carry out his propose restoration . the improvement be proceed with at once , greatly to the astonishment of the tenant , to whom such change inevitably suggest increase of rent . these fear Ida do she good to dispel . dress in the simple possible way , and with that kind , quiet manner which be natural to she , she go about from room to room , and do she good to become intimately acquaint with the woman - kind of the Lane and the Court . it be not an easy end to compass . she be receive at first with extreme suspicion ; her appearance arouse that distrust which with the uneducated attache to everything novel . in many instance she find it difficult to get it believe ' that she be really the " landlord . " but when this idea have be gradually master , and when , moreover , it be discover that she bring no tract , speak not at all of religious matter , be not impertinently curious , and show indeed that she know a good deal of what she talk about , something like respect for she begin to spring up here and there , and she be speak of as " the right sort . " 

 Ida be excellently fit for the work she have undertake . she know so well , from her own early experience , the nature of the people with whom she be bring in contact , and have that instinctive sympathy with their life without which it be so vain to attempt practical social reform . she start with no theory , and as yet have no very definite end in view ; it simply appear to she that , as owner of these slum , honesty and regard for her own credit require that she should make they decent human habitation , and give what other help she could to people obviously so much in need of it . the good be that she understand how and when such help could be afford . to native practicality and prudence she add a keen recollection of the want and difficulty she have struggle through in childhood ; there be no danger of she be foolishly lavish in charity , when she could foresee with sympathy all the evil result which would ensue . her only temptation to imprudence be when , as so often happen , she see some little girl in a position which remind she strongly of her own dark day ; all such she would have like to take home with she and somehow provide for , save they from the wretched alternative which be all that life have to offer they . so , little by little , she be bring to think in a broad way of problem puzzle enough to wiser head than her . social misery , which she have previously regard as mere matter of fact , have never enjoy the opportunity of comparison which alone can present they in any other light , begin to move she to indignation . often it be with a keen sense of shame that she take the weekly rent , a sum scrap together Heaven know how , represent so much deduction from the food of the family . she know that it would be impossible to remit the rent altogether , but at all event there be the power of reduce it , and this she do in many case . 

 the child she come to regard as her peculiar care . her strong common sense teach she that it be with these that most could be do . the parent could not be reform ; at good they might be keep from that darkest depth of poverty which corrupt soul and body alike . but might not the girl be somehow put into the way of earn a decent livelihood ? Ida know so well the effect upon they of the occupation to which they mostly turn , occupation degrade to womanhood , blight every hope . even to give they the mean of remain at home would not greatly help they ; there they still breathe a vile atmosphere . to remove they altogether be the only efficient way , and how could that be do ? 

 the month of late summer and autumn see several more garden - party . these , Ida know , be very useful , but more enduring thing must be devise . Miss Hurst be the only person with whom she could consult , and that lady 's notion be not very practical . if only she could have speak freely with Waymark ; but that she could no long on any subject , least of all on this . as winter set in , he have almost forsake she . he show no interest in her life , beyond ask occasionally what she be read , and take the opportunity to talk of book . throughout November she neither see he nor hear from he . then one evening he come . 

 she be alone when the servant announce he ; with she sit her old companion , Grim . as Waymark enter , she look at he with friendly smile , and say quietly 

 " I think you would never come again " 

 " I have not keep away through thoughtlessness , " he reply . " believe that ; it be the truth . and to - night I have only come to say good - bye . I be go to leave London . " 

 " you use to say nothing would induce you to leave London , and that you could not   live anywhere else . " 

 " yes ; that be one of my old fancy . I be go right away into the country , at all event for a year or two . I suppose I shall write novel . " 

 he move uneasily under her gaze , and affect a cheerfulness which could not deceive she . 

 " have your book be a success ? " Ida ask . 

 " no ; it fall dead . " 

 " why do not   you give I a copy ? " 

 " I think too little of it . it be poor stuff . well you should not   read it . " 

 " but I have read it . " 

 " got it from the library , do you ? " 

 " no ; I buy it . " 

 " what a pity to waste so much money ! " 

 " why do you speak like that ? you know how anything of yours would interest I . " 

 " oh yes , in a certain way , of course . " 

 " for its own sake , too . I can not   criticise , but I know it hold I as nothing else ever do . it be horrible in many part , but I be the well for read it . " 

 he could not help show pleasure , and grow more natural . Ida have purposely refrain from speak of the book when she read it , more than a month ago , always hop that he would be the first to say something about it . but the news he have bring she to - night put an end to reticence on her side . she must speak out her heart , cost she what it might . 

 " who should read it , if not I ? " she say , as he remain silent . " who can possibly understand it half so well as I do ? " 

 " yes , " he remark , with wilful misunderstanding , " you have see the place and the people . and I hear you be go on with the work your grandfather begin ? " 

 " I be try to do something . if you have be able to give I a little time now and then , I should have ask you to advise and help I . it be hard to work there single - handed . " 

 " you be too good for that ; I should have like to think of you as far apart from those vile scene . " 

 " too good for it ? " her voice tremble . " how can any one be too good to help the miserable ? if you have say that I be not worthy of such a privilege can you , know I as no one else do or ever will , think that I could live here in peace , whilst those poor creature stint and starve themselves every week to provide I with comfort ? do I seem to you such a woman ? " 

 he only smile , his lip torture to hold their peace . 

 " I have hop you understand I well than that . be that why you have leave I to myself ? do you doubt my sincerity ? why do you speak so cruelly , say I be too good , when your real thought must be so different ? you mean that I be incapable of really do anything ; you have no faith in I . I seem to you too weak to pursue any high end . you would not even speak to I of your book , because you feel I should not appreciate it . and yet you do know I " 

 " yes ; I know you well , " Waymark say . 

 Ida look steadily at he . " if you be speak to I for the last time , will not   you be sincere , and tell I of my fault ? do you think I could not bear it ? you can say nothing to I nothing from your heart that I will not   accept in all humility . be we no long even friend ? " 

 " you mistake I altogether . " 

 " and you be still my friend ? " she utter warmly . " but why do you think I unfit for good work ? " 

 " I have no such thought . you know how my ideal oppose each other . I speak on the impulse of the moment ; I often find it so hard to reconcile myself to anything in life that be not , still and calm and beautiful . I be just now bent on forget all the thing about which you be so earnest . " 

 " Earnest ? yes . but I can not give my whole self to the work . I be so lonely . " 

 " you will not be so for long , " he answer with more cheerfulness . " you have every opportunity of make for yourself a good social position . you will soon have friend , if only you seek they . your goodness will make you respect . indeed I wonder at your remain so isolated . it need not be ; I be sure it need not . your wealth I have no thought of speak cynically your wealth must " 

 " my wealth ! what be it to I ? what do I care for all the friend it might bring ? they be nothing to I in my misery . but you ... I would give all I possess for one kind word from you . " 

 flush over forehead and cheek , she compel herself to meet his look . it be her wealth that stand between she and he . her position be not like that of other woman . conventionality be meaningless , set against a life . 

 " I have try hard to make myself ever so little worthy of you , " she murmur , when her voice would again obey her will . " be I still still too far beneath you ? " 

 he stand like one detect in a crime , and stammer the word . 

 " Ida , I be not free . " 

 he have rise . Ida spring up , and move towards he . 

 " this be your secret ? tell I , then . look I be strong ! tell I about it . I might have think of this . I think only of myself . I might have know there be good reason for the distance you put between we . forgive I oh , forgive the pain I have cause you ! 

 " you ask for forgiveness ? how you must despise I . " 

 " why should I despise you ? you have never say a word to I that any friend , any near friend , might not have say , never since I myself , in my folly , forbid you to . you be not bind to tell I " 

 " I have tell your grandfather , " Waymark say in a broken voice . " in a letter I write the very day he be take ill , I beg he to let you know that I have bind myself . " 

 as he speak he know that he be excuse himself with a truth which imply a falsehood , and before it be too late his soul revolt against the unworthiness . 

 " but it be my own fault that it be leave so long . I would not let he tell you when he wish to ; I put off the day as long as I could . " 

 " since you first know I ? " she ask , in a low voice . 

 " no ! since you come to live here . I be free before . " 

 it be the part of his confession which cost he most to utter , and the hearing of it chill Ida 's heart . whilst she have be live through her bitter shame and misery , he have give his love to another woman , forgetful of she . for the first time , weakness overcome she . 

 " I think you love I , " she sob , bow her head . 

 " I do and I do . I can not   understand myself , and it would be bad than vain to try to show you how it come about . I have bring a curse upon my life , and bad than my own despair be your misery . " 

 " be she a good woman you be go to marry ? " Ida ask simply and kindly . 

 " only less noble than yourself . " 

 " and she love you no , she can not love as I do but she love you worthily and with all her soul ? " 

 " worthily and with all her soul the great my despair . " 

 " then I dare not think of her one unkind thought . we must remember she , and be strong for her sake . you will leave London and forget I soon , yes , yes , you will try to forget I . you owe it to she ; it be your duty . " 

 " Duty ! " he break out passionately . " what have I to do with duty ? be it not my duty to be true to you ? be it not my duty to confess my hateful weakness , when I have take the fatal step ? Duty have no meaning for I . I have set it aside at every turn . even now there would be no obligation on I to keep my word , but that I be too great a coward to revoke it . " 

 she stand near to he . 

 " dear , I will call you so , it be for the last time , you think these thing in the bad moment of our suffering ; afterwards you will thank I for have be strong enough , or cold enough , to be your conscience . there be such a thing as duty ; it speak in your heart and in mine , and tell we that we must part . " 

 " you speak so lightly of parting . if you feel all that I " 

 " my love be no shadow less than your , " she say , with earnestness which be well nigh severity . " I have never waver from you since I know you first . " 

 " Ida ! " 

 " I mean no reproach , but it will perhaps help you to think of that . you do love she , if it be only for a day , and that love will return . " 

 she move from he , and he too rise . 

 " you shame I , " he say , under his breath . " I be not worthy to touch your hand . " 

 " yes , " she return , smile amid her tear , " very worthy of all the love I have give you , and of the love with which she will make you happy . I shall suffer , but the thought of your happiness will help I to bear up and try to live a life you would not call ignoble . you will do great thing , and I shall hear of they , and be glad . yes ; I know that be before you . you be one of those who can not rest till they have win a high place . I , too , have my work , and " 

 her voice fail . 

 " shall we never see each other again , Ida ? " 

 " perhaps . in a few year we might meet , and be friend . but I dare not think of that now . " 

 they clasp hand , for one dread moment resist the lure of eye and lip , and so part . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 forbid 

 December be half through , and it be the eve of Maud Enderby 's marriage - day . everything be ready for the morrow . Waymark have be away in the South , and the house to which he would take his wife now await their coming . 

 it be a foggy night . Maud have be for an hour to our Lady of the Rosary , and find it difficult to make her way back . the street lamp be mere luminous blur upon the cling darkness , and the suspension of the wonted traffic make the air strangely still . it be cold , that kind of cold which wrap the limb like a cloth soak in icy water . when she knock at the door of her aunt 's house , and it be open to she , wreath of mist sweep in and hang about the lighted hall . it seem cold within than without . footstep echo here in the old way , and voice lose themselves in a muffle resonance along the bare white wall . the house be more tomb - like than ever on such a night as thin to Maud 's eye the intruding fog shape itself into ghostly visage , which look upon she with weird and woeful compassion . she shudder , and hasten upstairs to her mother 's room . 

 after her husband 's disappearance , Mrs. Enderby have pass her day in a morbid apathy , contrast strangely with the restless excitement which have so long possess she . but a change come over she from the day when she be tell of Maud 's approach marriage . it be her delight to have Maud sit by her bed , or her couch , and talk over the detail of the wedding and the new life that would follow upon it . her interest in Waymark , which have fall off during the past half - year , all at once revive ; she converse with he as she have be use to do when she first make his acquaintance , and the publication of his book afford her endless matter for gossip . she begin to speak of herself as an old woman , and of spend she last year happily in the country . to all appearance she have dismiss from her mind the calamity which have befall she ; her husband might have be long dead for any thought she seem to give he . she be wholly take up with childish joy in trivial matter . the dress in which Maud should be marry give her thought constant occupation , and she fret at any opposition to her idea . still , like a child , she allow herself to be bring round to other ' view , and be ultimately lead to consent that the costume should be a very simple one , merely a new dress , in fact , which Maud would be able to wear subsequently with little change . even thus , every detail of it be as important to she as if it have be the most elaborate piece of bridal attire . in talk with Maud , too , she have lose that kind of awe which have formerly restrain she ; it be as though she have be an affectionate mother ever since her daughter 's birth . she call she by pet name , often caress she , and wish for love word and act in return . of Miss Bygrave 's presence in the house she appear scarcely conscious , never refer to she , and suffer a vague trouble if her sister enter the room where she be , which Theresa do very seldom . 

 the new dress have come home finish this evening whilst Maud be away . on the latter 's return , her mother insist on see she at once in it , and Maud obey . a strange bride , rather as one who be about to we d herself to Heaven beneath the veil , than prepare to be lead to the altar . 

 have resume her ordinary dreg , Maud go downstairs to the parlour where her aunt be sit . Miss Bygrave lay down a book as she enter . 

 " we shall not see each other after tonight , " Theresa say , break the stillness with her grave but not unkind voice . " be there anything more you would like to say to I , Maud ? " 

 " only that I shall always think of you , and grieve that we be part . " 

 " you be go into the world , " say the other sadly , " my thought can not follow you there . but your purer spirit will often be with I . " 

 " and your spirit with I . if I have be permit to share your life , that would have be my great joy . I be consciously choose what my soul would set aside . for a time I think I have reconcile myself to the world ; I find delight in it , and come to look on the prompting of the spirit as morbid fancy . that have pass . I know the high , but between I and it there be a gulf which it may be I shall never pass . " 

 " it be only to few , " say Theresa , look at Maud with her smile of assured peace , " that it be give to persevere and attain . " 

 as they sit once more in silence , there suddenly come a light knock at the house - door . at this moment Maud 's thought have wander back to a Christmas of her childhood , when she have sit just as to - night with her aunt , and have for the first time listen to those teaching which have mould her life . the intervene year be sweep away , and she be once more the thoughtful , wonder child , conscious of the great difference between herself and her companion ; in spite of herself learn to regard the world in which they move as something in which she have no part . of those school companion a few come back to her mind , and , before all , the poor girl name Ida Starr , whom she have love and admire . what have become of Ida , after she have be send away from Miss Rutherford 's school ? she remember that last meeting with she in the street , on the evening of Christmas Day , and could see her face . 

 the house door be open , and Maud hear a voice outside which hold she to the spot where she stand . then Theresa re - enter the room , and after she come Paul Enderby . 

 he seem to be wear a disguise ; at all event his clothing be that of a work man , poor and worn , and his face be change by the growth of a beard . he shiver with cold , and , as Miss Bygrave close the door behind he , stand with eye sink to the ground , in an attitude of misery and shame . Maud , recover quickly from the shock his entrance have cause she , approach he and take his hand . 

 " Father , " she say gently . her voice overcome he ; he burst into tear and stand hide his face with the rough cap he hold . Maud turn to her aunt , who remain at a little distance , unmoving , her eye cast down . before any other word be say , the door open quickly , and Mrs. Enderby run in with a smothered cry . throw her arm about her husband , she cling to he in a passion of grief and tenderness . in a moment she have be change from the listless , childish woman of the last few month to a creature instinct with violent emotion . her mingled excess of joy and anguish could not have display itself more vehemently have she be sorrow night and day for her husband 's loss . Maud be terrify at the scene , and shrink to Theresa 's side . without heed either , the distracted woman lead Paul from the room , and upstairs to her own chamber . draw he to a chair , she fall on her knee beside he and weep agonisingly . 

 " you will stay with I now ? " she cry , when her voice could form word . " you will not   leave I again , Paul ? we will hide you here . no , no ; I be for get . you will go away with we , away from London to a safe place . Maud be go to be married to - morrow , and we will live with she in her new home . you have suffer dreadfully ; you look so change , so ill . you shall rest , and I will nurse you . oh , I will be a good wife to you , Paul . speak to I , do speak to I : speak kindly , dear ! how long be it since I lose you ? " 

 " I dare not   stay , Emily , " he reply , in a hoarse and broken voice . " I should be discover . I must get away from England , that be my only chance . I have scarcely leave the house where I be hide all this time . it would not   have be safe to try and escape , even if I have have any money . I have hunger for day , and I be weak than a child . " 

 he sob again in the extremity of his wretchedness . 

 " it be all for my sake ! " she cry , cling around his neck . " I be your curse . I have bring you to ruin a second time . I be a bad , wretched woman ; if you drive I from you with blow it would be less than I deserve ! you can never forgive I ; but let I be your slave , let I suffer something dreadful for your sake ! why do I ever recover from my madness , only to bring that upon you ! " 

 he could speak little , but lean back , hold she to he with one arm . 

 " no , it be not your fault , Emily , " he say . " only my own weakness and folly . your love repay I for all I have undergo ; that be all I ever want . " 

 when she have exhaust herself in passionate consolation , she leave he for a few moment to get he food , and he eat of it like a famished man . 

 " if I can only get money enough to leave the country , I be save , " he say . " if I stay here , I shall be find , and they will imprison I for year . I have rather kill myself ! 

 " Mr. Waymark will give we the money , " be the reply , " and we will go away together . " 

 " that would betray I ; it would be folly to face such a risk . if I can escape , then you shall come to I . " 

 " oh , you will leave I ! " she cry . " I shall lose you , as I do before , but this time for ever ! you do not   love I , Paul ! and how can I expect you should ? but let I go as your servant . let I dress like a man , and follow you . who will notice then ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " I love you , Emily , and shall love you as long as I breathe . to hear you speak to I like this have almost the power to make I happy . if I have know it , I should not   have stay so long away from you ; I have not   the courage to come , and I think the sight of I would only be misery to you . I have live a terrible life , among the poor people , get my bread as they do ; oftener starve . not one of my acquaintance be to be trust . I have not see one face I know since I first hear of my danger and escape . but I have rather live on like that than fall into the hand of the police ; I should never know freedom again . the thought madden I with fear . " 

 " you be safe here , love , quite safe ! " she urge soothingly . " who could know that you be here ? who could know that Maud and I be live here ? " 

 there be a tap at the door . Mrs. Enderby start to it , turn the key , and then ask who be there . 

 " emily , " say Miss Bygrave 's voice , " let I come in or let Paul come out here and speak to I . " 

 there be something unusual in the speaker 's tone ; it be quick and nervous . Paul himself go to the door , and , put his wife 's hand aside , open it . 

 " what be it ? " he ask . 

 she beckon he to leave the room , then whisper : 

 " some one I do not   know be at the front door . I open it with the chain on , and a man say he must see Mr. Enderby . " 

 " can not   I go out by the back ? " Paul ask , all but voiceless with terror . " I dare not   hide in the room ; they will search they all . how do they know that I be here ? o God , I be lose ! " 

 they could hear the knock below repeat . Paul hurry down the stair , follow by his wife , whom Theresa in vain try to hold back he know the way to the door which lead into the garden , and open this , spring into the darkness . Scarcely have he take a step , when strong arm seize he . 

 " hold on ! " say a voice . " you must come back with I into the house . " 

 at the same moment there be a shriek close at hand , and , as they turn to the open door , Paul and his captor see Emily prostrate on the threshold , and Miss Bygrave stoop over she . 

 " well open the front door , ma'am , " say the police officer , " and ask my friend there to come through . we have   get all we want . " 

 this be do , and when Emily have be carry into the house , Paul be lead thither also by his captor . as they stand in the hall , the second officer draw from his pocket a warrant , and read it out with official gravity . 

 " you will go quietly with we , I suppose ? " he then say . 

 Paul nod , and all three depart by the front door . 

 it be midnight and before Mrs. Enderby show any sign of return consciousness . Miss Bygrave and Maud sit by her bed together , and at length one of they notice that she have open her eye and be look about she , though without move her head . 

 " Mother , " Maud ask , bend over she , " be you well ? do you know I ? " 

 Emily nod . there be no touch of natural colour in her face , and its muscle seem paralysed . and she lie thus for hour , conscious apparently , but pay no attention to those in the room . early in the morning a medical man be summon , but his assistance make no change . the fog be still heavy , and only towards noon be it possible to dispense with lamp - light ; then there gleam for an hour or two a weird mockery of day , and again it be nightfall . with the darkness come rain . 

 Waymark have come to the house about ten o'clock . but this be to be no wedding - day . Maud beg he through her aunt not to see she , and he return as he come . Miss Bygrave have tell he all that have happen . 

 Mrs. Enderby seem to sleep for some hour , but just after nightfall the previous condition return ; she lie with her eye open , and just nod when speak to . from eight o'clock to midnight Maud try to rest in her own room , but sleep be far from she , and when she return to the sick - chamber to relieve her aunt , she be almost as worn and ghastly in countenance as the one they tend . she take her place by the fire , and sit listen to the sad rain , which fall heavily upon the soak garden - ground below . it have a lulling effect . weariness overcome she , and before she could suspect the inclination , she have fall asleep . 

 suddenly she be awake again , wide awake , it seem to she , without any interval of half - consciousness , and star horror - strike at the scene before she . the shaded lamp stand on the chest of drawer at one side of the room , and by its light she see her mother in front of the look - glass , her raise hand hold something that glisten . she could not move a limb ; her tongue be powerless to utter a sound . there be a wild laugh , a quick motion of the raise hand then it seem to Maud as if the room be fill with a crimson light , follow by the eternal darkness . 

 a fortnight later Miss Bygrave be sit in the early morning by the bed where Maud lie ill . for some day it have be fear that the girl 's reason would fail , and though this bad possibility seem at length avert , her condition be still full of danger . she have recognise her aunt the precede evening , but a relapse have follow . now she unexpectedly turn to the watcher , and speak feebly , but with perfect self - control . 

 " Aunt , be madness hereditary ? " 

 Miss Bygrave , who have think her asleep , bent over she and try to turn her mind to other thought . but the sick girl would speak only of this subject . 

 " I be quite myself , " she say , " and I feel well . yes , I remember read somewhere that it be hereditary . " 

 she be quiet for a little . 

 " Aunt , " she then say , " I shall never be marry . it would be wrong to he . I be afraid of myself . " 

 she do not recur to the subject till she have rise , two or three week after , and be strong enough to move about the room . Waymark have call every day during her illness . as soon as he hear that she be up , he desire to see she , but Maud beg he , through her aunt , to wait yet a day or two . in the night which follow she write to he , and the letter be this : 

 " if I have see you when you call yesterday , I should have have to face a task beyond my strength . yet it would be wrong to keep from you any long what I have to say . I must write it , and hope your knowledge of I will help you to understand what I can only imperfectly express . 

 " I ask you to let I break my promise to you . I have not cease to love you ; to I you be still all that be good and dearest in the world . you would have make my life very happy . but happiness be now what I dare not wish for . I be too weak to make that use of it which , I do not doubt , be permit we ; it would enslave my soul . with a nature such as mine , there be only one path of safety : I must renounce all . you know I to be no hypocrite , and to you , in this moment , I need not fear to speak my whole thought , the sacrifice have cost I much to break my faith to you , and to put aside for ever all the world 's joy the strength for this have only come after hour of bitter strive . try to be glad that I have win ; it be all behind I , and I stand upon the threshold of peace . 

 " you know how from a child I have suffer . what to other be pure and lawful joy become to I a temptation . but God be not unjust ; if he so frame I , he give I at the same time the power to understand and to choose . all those warning which I have , in my blindness , speak of so lightly to you , I now recall with humbler and truer mind . if the shadow of sin darken my path , it be that I might look well to my step , and , alas , I have fail so , have go so grievously astray ! God , in his righteous anger , have terribly visit I . the most fearful form of death have rise before I ; I have be cast into abyss of horror , and only save from frenzy by the mercy which bring all this upon I for my good . a few month ago I have also a warning . I do not disregard it , but I could not overcome the love which bind I to you . but for that love , how much easy it would have be to I to overcome the world and myself . 

 " you will forgive I , for you will understand I . do not write in reply ; spare I , I entreat you , a renewal of that dark hour I have pass through . with my aunt I be go to leave London . we shall remain together , and she will strengthen I in the new life . may God bless you here and hereafter . MAUD ENDERBY . " 

 after an interval of a day Waymark write as follow to Miss Bygrave : 

 " Doubtless you know that Maud have write desire I to release she . I can not but remember that she be scarcely yet recover from a severe illness , and her letter must not be final . she entreat I not to write to she or see she . accordingly I address myself to you , and beg that you will not allow Maud to take any irrevocable step till she be perfectly well , and have have time to reflect . I shall still deem her promise to I bind . if after the lapse of six month from now she still desire to be release , I must know it , either from herself or from you . write to I at the old address . " 




 CHAPTER xxxviii 

 order of RELEASE 

 Waymark and Casti spend their Christmas Eve together . they speak freely of each other 's affair , save that there be no mention of Ida . Waymark have of course say nothing of that parting between Ida and himself . of the hope which support he he could not speak to his friend . 

 a month have tell upon Julian as month do when the end draw so near . in spite of his suffering he still discharge his duty at the hospital , but it be plain that he would not be able to do so much long . and what would happen then ? 

 " Casti , " Waymark exclaim suddenly , when a hint of this thought have bring both of they to a pause , " come away with I . " 

 Julian look up in bewilderment . 

 " where to ? " 

 " anywhere . to some place where the sun shin . " 

 " what an impossible idea ! how be I to get my living ? and how be she to live ? " 

 " look here , " Waymark say , smile , " my will be a little strong than your , and in the present case I mean to exercise it . I have say , and there be an end of it . you say she will be away from home to - morrow . good . we go together , pack up your book and thing in half an hour or so , bring they here , and then off ! sic volo , sic jubeo , sit pro ratione volunta ! " 

 and it be do , though not till Waymark have overcome the other 's opposition by the most determined effort . Julian understand perfectly well the full significance of the scheme , for all Waymark 's kind endeavour to put a hopeful and commonplace aspect on his proposal . he resist as long as his strength would allow , then put himself in his friend 's hand . 

 it be some time before Julian could set his mind at rest with regard to the desertion of his wife . though no one capable of judge the situation could have cast upon he a shadow of blame , the first experience of peace mingle itself in his mind with self - reproach . Waymark show he how utterly baseless any such feeling be . Harriet have prove herself unworthy of a moment 's consideration , and it be certain that , as long as she receive her weekly remittance pay through an agent in London , she would trouble herself very little about the rest ; or , at all event , any feeling that might possess she would be wholly undeserving of respect . gradually Julian accustom himself to this thought . 

 they be in the Isle of Wight ; comfortably house , with the sea before their eye , and the boon of sunshine which Casti have so long for . 

 Waymark give himself wholly to the invalid . he have no impulse to resume literary work ; anything be welcome which enable he to fill up the day and reach the morrow . whilst Julian lie on the couch , which be draw up to the fireside , Waymark read aloud anything that could lead they to forget themselves . at other time , Julian either read to himself or write verse , which , however , he do not show to his friend . before springtime come he find it difficult even to maintain a sit attitude for long . his cough still rack he terribly . Waymark often lie awake in the night , listen to that fearful sound in the next room . at such time he try to fancy himself in the die man 's position , and then the sweat of horror come upon his brow . deeply he sympathise with the misery he could do so little to allay . yet he be do what he might to make the end a quiet one , and the consciousness of this bring he many a calm moment . 

 however it might be in those fearful vigil , Julian 's day do not seem unhappy . he be resign himself to the inevitable , in the strength of that quiet which sometimes ensue upon despair . now and then he could even be , to all appearance , light - hearted . 

 with the early May he have a revival of inspiration . strangely lose sight of his desperate condition , he speak once more of begin the great poem plan long ago . it be live within his mind and heart , he say . Waymark listen to he whilst he unfold book after book of glorious vision ; listen , and wonder . 

 there be a splendid sunset one evening at this time , and the two watch it together from the room in which they always sit . sea of molten gold , strand and promontory of jasper and amethyst , illimitable mountain - range , city of unimagined splendour , all be there in that extent of evening sky . they watch it till the vision waste before the breath of night . 

 " what shall I read ? " Waymark ask , when the lamp be light . 

 " read that passage in the georgic which glorify Italy , " Julian reply . " it will suit my mood to - night . " 

 Waymark take down his Virgil . 

 " sed neque Medorum silvae , ditissima terra , Nec pulcher Ganges atque auro turbibus Hermus Laudibus Italiae certent , non Bactra , neque Indi , totaque turiferis Panchaia pinguis arenis . " 

 Julian 's eye glisten as the melody roll on , and when it cease , both be quiet for a time . 

 " Waymark , " Julian say presently , a gentle tremor in his voice , " why do we never speak of she ? " 

 " can we speak of she ? " Waymark return , know well who be mean . 

 " a short time ago I could not ; now I feel the need . it will give I no pain , but great happiness . ' , 

 " that be all go by , " he continue , with a solemn smile . " to I she be no long anything but a remembrance , an ideal I once know . the noble and sweetest woman I have know , or shall know , on earth . " 

 they talk of she with subdued voice , reverently and tenderly . Waymark describe what he know or divine of the life she be now lead , her beneficent activity , her perfect adaptation to the new place she fill . 

 " in a little while , " Julian say , when they have fall into thought again , " you will have your second letter . and then ? " 

 there be no answer . Julian wait a moment , then rise and , clasp his friend 's hand , bid he good night . 

 Waymark awake once or twice before morning , but there be no coughing in the next room . he feel glad , and wonder whether there be indeed any improvement in the invalid 's health . but at the usual breakfast - time Julian do not appear . Waymark knock at his door , with no result . he turn the handle and enter . 

 on this same day , Ida be visit her house . litany lane and Elm Court now wear a changed appearance . at present it be possible to breathe even in the inmost recess of the Court . there the front of the house be fresh white - washed ; in the Lane they be new - paint . even the pavement and the road - way exhibit an improvement . if you penetrate into garret and cellar you no long find squalor and dilapidation ; poverty in plenty , but at all event an attempt at cleanliness everywhere , as far , that be to say , as a landlord 's care could ensure it . the stair - case have cease to be rotten pit - fall ; the ceiling show trace of recent care ; the wall no long drip with moisture or be foul with patch of filth . not much change , it be true , in the appearance of the inhabitant ; yet close inquiry would have elicit comfort assurance of progress reform , result of a supervision which be never offensive , never thoughtlessly exaggerated . especially in the condition of the child improvement be discernible . lodger in the Lane and the Court have come to understand that not even punctual payment of weekly rent be sufficient to guarantee they stability of tenure . under this singular lady - landlord something more than that be expect and require , and , whilst those who be capable of adjust themselves to the new regime find , on the whole , that thing go vastly well with they , such as could by no mean overcome their love of filth , moral and material , trouble themselves little when the notice to quit come , together with a little sum of ready money to cover the expense of removal . 

 among those whom Ida call upon this afternoon be an old woman who , in addition to her own voluminous trouble , be always in a position to give a compte - rendu of the general distress of the neighbourhood . People have discover that her eloquence could be profitably make use of in their own service , and not infrequently , when speak with Ida , she be in reality hold a brief from this or that neighbour , marked , not indeed in guineas , but in " twos " of strong beverage , obtainable at her favourite house of call . to - day she hold such a brief , and be more than usually urgent in the representation of a deserving case . 

 " oh , Miss Woodstock , mem , there be a poor young ' oman a - lyin ' at the Clock ' Ouse , as it really make one 's ' art bleed to tell of she ! for all she be so young , she be a widder , an ' pr'aps it be as well she should be , seein ' how shockin ' her ' usband treat she afore he be take where no doubt he be bein ' do as he do by . it be fair cruel , Miss Woodstock , mem , to see her sufferin 's . she have fit , an ' fall down everywhere ; it be a mercy as she ' asn't   be run over in the public street long ago . they be hepiplectic fit , I be tell , an ' law o ' I ! the way she foam at the mouth ! no doubt as they be bring on by she ' usband 's etrocious treatment . I understand as he be a man as call hisself a gentleman . he be allus that jealous of the pore innocent thing , mem castin ' in her tooth thing as I could not   bring myself not even to ' int at in your presence , Miss Woodstock , mem . many be the time he be beat her black an ' blue , when she jist go out to get a bit o ' somethink for his tea at night , 'cos he would ' ave it she have be a - do what she ' adn't   ought " 

 " where be she ? " Ida ask , think she have now gather enough of the feature of the case . 

 " I say at the Clock ' Ouse , mem . Mrs. Sprowl 's take she in ' mem , and be be'avin ' to she like a mother . she know she , do Mrs. Sprowl , in the pore thing 's ' appy day , before ever she marry . but of course it be not   likely as Mrs. Sprowl can keep she as long as her pore life last ; not to speak of the expense ; its a terrible responsibility , owin ' to the hepiplectic ailment , mem , as of course you understand . " 

 " can not   she get into any hospital ! " 

 " she only just come out , mem , not two week ago . they could not   do no more for the pore creature , and so she have to go . an ' she ' asn't   not a friend in the world , ' ceptin ' Mrs. Sprowl , as be no less than a mother to she . " 

 " do you know her name ? " 

 " Mrs. Casty , mem . it be a irish name , I b'lieve , an ' I can not   say as I be partial to the irish , but " 

 " very well , " Ida break in hastily . " I will see if I can do anything . " 

 pay no attention to the blessing shower upon she by the counsel in this case , blessing to which she be accustom , and of which she well understand the value , Ida go out into the Lane , and walk away quickly . she do not pause at the Clock House , but walk as far as a quiet street some little distance off , and then pace the pavement for a while , in thought . who this " Mrs. Casty " be she could have little doubt . the calumny against her husband be just such as Harriet Casti would be likely to circulate . 

 for a moment it have seem possible to go to the public - house and make personal inquiry , but reflection show she that this would be a needless imprudence , even have she be able to overcome herself sufficiently for such an interview . she go home instead , and at once despatch Miss Hurst to the Clock House to discover whether it be indeed Harriet Casti who lie there , and , if so , what her real condition be . that lady return with evidence establish the sick woman 's identity . Harriet , she report , be indeed in a sad state , clearly incapable of support herself by any kind of work . her husband Miss Hurst be tell have desert she , leave she entirely without mean , and now , but for Mrs. Sprowl 's charity , she would have be in the workhouse . this story sound very strangely to Ida . it might mean that Julian be dead . she write a few line to Waymark , at the old address , and have a speedy reply . yes , Julian Casti be dead , but the grave have not yet close over he . Harriet have be in receipt of money , and need have want for nothing ; but now she must expect no more . 

 the result of it all be that , in the course of a week , Harriet be inform by Miss Hurst that a place be open to she in a hospital near London , where she could remain as long as her ailment render it necessary ; the expense would be provide for by a lady who have be tell of the case , and wish to give what aid she could . the offer be reject , and with insult . when next she visit Litany Lane , Ida learn that " pore Mrs. Casty , " after a quarrel with her friend Mrs. Sprowl , have fall downstairs in a fit and break her neck . 

 Waymark live on in the Isle of Wight , until a day when there come to he a letter from Miss Bygrave . it tell he that Maud 's resolve be immutable , and add that aunt and niece , have become member of " the true Church , " be about to join a sisterhood in a midland town , where their life would be devoted to work of charity . 

 not many day after this , Ida , in London , receive a letter , address in a hand she know well . there be a flush on her face as she begin to read ; but presently come the pallor of a sudden joy almost too great to be bear . the letter be a long one , contain the story of several year of the writer 's life , relate with unflinche sincerity , bad and good impartially set down , and all lead up to word which dance in golden sunlight before her tear - dim eye . 

 for an hour she sit alone , scarce move . yet it seem to she that only a few minute be allow to pass before she take her pen and write . 

